Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
REPORT NO.
238
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on th August, )10 2016
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on ) 201610th August,
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in its Two Hundred and Thirty First Report on the
Demands for Grants (2016-17) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT
August, 2016/Sravana, 1938 (Saka)

31
Website : http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail : rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
TWO HUNDRED THIRTY EIGHTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
contained in its Two Hundred and Thirty First Report on the
Demands for Grants (2016-17) of Ministry of Civil Aviation
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 10th August, 2016)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2016)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
August, 2016/Sravana, 1938 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ....................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. A CRONYMS ............................................................................................................................ ( IV)-(V)
4. R EPORT ............................................................................................................................... .. 1-23
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS –– A T A G LANCE .................................... 24-26
6. M INUTES ............................................................................................................................... 27-30

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE
(2015-16)
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi
4. Dr. Prabhakar Kore
5. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
6. Kumari Selja
7. Shri Rajeev Shukla
@8. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
$9. Shri Bhupender Yadav
10. V acant
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Ram Charitra
12. Shri Vinod Chavda
13. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
14. Km. Arpita Ghosh
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan
16. Shri P . Kumar
*17. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
18. Yogi Aditya Nath
19. Shri  Kristappa Nimmala
20. Shri Rajesh Pandey
21. Shri Rajesh Ranjan
22. Shri P . Srinivasa Reddy
23. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma
24. Shri Prathap Simha
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
27. Shri Rakesh Singh
(i)
@ Nominated on 15th March, 2016.
$ Nominated on 28th July, 2016.
* Nominated in place of Shri Mohammed Faizal PP. w.e.f. 14 th March, 2016.

(ii)
28. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
29. Shri Dasrath Tirkey
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari
31. Shri K.C. V enugopal
SECRETARIAT
Shri J.G . Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism
and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this
Two Hundred and Thirty Eighth Report on “Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred Thirty First Report on the Demands for
Grants (2016-17) of Ministry of Civil Aviation”.
2. The Two Hundred Thirty First Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee
on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the 29th April, 2016 to the Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred
Thirtieth Report was received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 11th July, 2016.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 8th August, 2016.
DR. KANWAR DEEP SINGH
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
8, August 2016 Department-related Parliamentary
Sravana 17,  1938 (Saka) Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
Rajya Sabha
(iii)

ACRONYMS
AAI : Airports Authority of India
AIC : Aeronautical Information Circular
AOG : Aircraft on Ground
A TC : Air Traffic Control
A TF : Aviation Turbine Fuel
BCAS : Bureau of Civil Aviation Security
B E : Budget Estimate
C A : Civil Aviation
CAR : Civil Aviation Requirement
CA T : Category
DDG : Deputy Director General
DG : Director General
DGCA : Director General of Civil Aviation
EFC : Expenditure Finance Committee
F AA : Federal Aviation Administration
FOIs : Flight Operation Inspectors
F Y : Financial Year
GBS : Gross Budgetary Support
GHA : Ground Handling Agency
GoUP : Government of Uttar Pradesh
HCI : Hotel Corporation of India
ICAO : International Civil Aviation Organization
IEBR : Internal and Extra Budgetary Resource
IGRUA : Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi
ILS : Instrument Landing System
IT : Information Technology
(iv)

Jt.DG : Joint Directorate General
JVC : Joint Venture Corporation
KWp : Kilo Watt Peak
MoU : Memoranda of Understanding
MRO : Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul
MTDC : Maharashtra Tourism Development Corporation
NDMA : National Disaster Management Authority
NPC : National Productivity Council
OMDA : Operation, Management and Development Agreement
PHL : Pawan Hans Limited
PPP : Public Private Partnership
RE : Revised Estimates
RESA : Runway End Safety Area
RRs : Recruitment Rules
SARPs : Standards and Recommended Practices
T AP : Turn Around Plan
UPSC : Union Public Service Commission
US : United States
V A T : Value Added Tax
VRS : V oluntary Retirement Scheme
(v)

1
1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations as contained in its Two Hundred and Thirty First Report on
Demands for Grants 2016-17 of the Ministry of Civil Aviation which was presented to both the
Houses of Parliament on 29 th April, 2016.
2. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on the 11 th  July, 2016 in
respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have been
categorized as follows:–
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government:
Total: 8
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of
the Government replies:–
 Total: 11
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Government have not been
accepted by the Committee:
Paragraph Nos. : Total: Nil
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Government are still
awaited.
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those recommendations/observations
which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished at the earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of Action Taken/proposed to be taken by the Ministry. The recommendations of the Committee
contained in the Two Hundred and Twenty Second Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry
and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken has been given in
the succeeding paragraphs:
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
5. The Committee notes that more than 85% of the GBS given to the Ministry under Plan has
gone to Air India and that the Ministry and various organizations under it will get about 15% only.
      (Para 5A)
Reply of the Government
6. Noted
Paragraph  Nos.  5A,  32,  35A,  36A,  41,  47,  116  &  124
Paragraph  Nos:  8,  11,  12B,  15,  24,  48,  53A,  55,  64,  69,  75,  76,  77,  85,  90,  91,  93,  96,
103,  105,  119,  126,  128,  129, 130, 133,  134  &  135 Total:  28
Paragraph  Nos.  12A,  23,  26,  56,  62,  79,  100,  107,  110,  116A  &  122

2
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
7. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
8. The Committee also notes that of the Non-Plan allocation for the Ministry, 76% is for Haj
Subsidy leaving 14% only for the Ministry and the organizations under it.  The Ministry has
clarified that the schemes mentioned at Serial (b) & (c) above were earlier under Plan Budget and
on the advice of Department of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance all these schemes have been
shifted to non-Plan Budget.  The Committee feels that Ministry of Finance needs to be reminded
about the meager amount left with the Ministry and the need to enhance it at RE stage.
(Para 8)
Reply of the Government
9. Noted for taking up the issue with Ministry of Finance at RE Stage.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
10. The Committee may be apprised of the further development with regard to allocation
of additional funds at RE stage.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
11. The Committee notes that ` 2590.72 crores has been allocated for the Ministry of Civil
Aviation for 2016-17 against the allocation of ` 4198.25 crores at RE stage in 2015-16. This would
amount to only 61.7% of RE (2015-16) which would not be sufficient to meet the expenses of a
vital Ministry such as Civil Aviation for 2016-17. Even Non-Plan allocation has seen a reduction of
` 58 crore as compared to RE last fiscal, overlooking the fact that so many Plan schemes have
been shifted to Non-Plan category from 2016-17 onwards. Therefore, the Committee strongly
recommends that the Ministry should pursue for enhanced allocation at the RE stage, with the
Ministry of Finance.
(Para 11)
Reply of the Government
12. Noted for taking up the issue with Ministry of Finance at RE Stage.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
13. The Committee may be apprised of the response of the Ministry of Finance in this
regard.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
14. The Committee notes that out of the total IEBR of ` 2417 crores estimated by the  Ministry,
` 1966 crores i.e., 81% would come from AAI alone and 99 crores from Pawan Hans against a BE
allocation of ` 10 lakhs to it.  The Committee hopes that Air India will be able to generate ` 352
crores as projected during 2016-17.
(Para 12A)

3
Reply of the Government
15. Yes, Air India Ltd. will be able to generate the IEBR of `352.00 crores as projected during
FY 2016-17 from Internal Resources/Bank Borrowings.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
16. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
17. The Committee observes from the table above that the allocations to the schemes relating to
aviation training, security training, purchase of security equipment, radiological detection
instruments and e-governance do not inspire the required confidence as these deserve high priority
in the existing Indian aviation scenario. The Committee recommends that these schemes need to be
given the required emphasis by making available additional funds for their faster and effective
implementation.
(Para 12B)
Reply of the Government
18. Based on the projections to meet the expenditure on Aviation Training, Security Training,
Purchase of Security Equipments, Radiological Detection Instruments and e-Governance  ` 65.00
Crore have been allocated for the current financial year. The fund position will be reviewed at RE
Stage and if required, Ministry of Finance will be requested to provide additional funds to meet the
expenditure on the above mentioned scheme.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
19. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard at RE stage.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
20. The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry that some of the schemes under Plan
Budget will be badly affected. In view of ever expanding civil aviation sector and various
challenges before it, the Committee strongly feels that the reduced allocation, especially for
important Organizations such as DGCA and BCAS is not desirable. Therefore, the Committee
desires that the Ministry of Finance may give additional allocation at the RE stage and expects the
Ministry of Civil Aviation to pursue the matter vigorously with the Ministry of Finance.
(Para 15)
Reply of the Government
21. Proposal regarding requirement of additional funds during the current financial year will be
taken up/considered at RE stage.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
22. The Committee may be apprised of the final outcome in this regard.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
23. The Committee finds that the fund allocation committed for 2016-17 as per the Turn

4
Around Plan has not been provided for Air India. This was the case in 2015-16 also where there
was a short fall of ` 977 crores. The Committee feels that this reduction in equity infusion might
adversely affect the financial and operational performance of the company since it may be forced
to take loans from banks and financial institutions at a higher interest rate to meet the short fall,
which was not contemplated under the Financial Restructuring Plan. The Committee, therefore, is
of the considered view that such short fall, at this stage when the company is presently placed at
a critical position in achieving the TAP targets, should be avoided. Since the committed financial
support from the Government is vital to sustain the momentum of performance of Air India, the
Committee strongly recommends that the full amount of equity infusion should be restored to Air
India. The Committee recommends as a matter of fact that in future, the amount committed under
the TAP should be allocated at the BE stage itself.
(Para 23)
Reply of the Government
24. Air India had sought an Equity Infusion of ` 3901.49 crores in the Annual Plan 2016-17
submitted to the Ministry of Civil Aviation. However, against this demand, an amount of only
` 1713.00 crores has been allocated as Equity Infusion for FY 2016-17. 
25. Accordingly, during FY 2016-17 there will be a shortfall in Equity Infusion of ` 2188.49
crores viz ` 3901.49 crores. This reduction in Equity Infusion would impact the financial and
operational performance of the company as the same will create liquidity issues for the company
whereby the company will be unable to meet it’s financial commitments and maintain the
operational efficiency of the company.
26. In order to meet the shortfall, a proposal for grant of additional funds of ` 2188.49 Crore
has been included in the first Batch of Supplementary Grant for 2016-17.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
27. The Committee desires that adequate care should be exercised to ensure that there
is no shortfall in Equity Infusion in Air India in the future.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
28. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation may take up this
matter with the Ministry of Finance for the restoration of the full amount of Equity Infusion of
` 3901.49 crores as requested for in the Annual Plan for the Financial Year 2016-17 by Air India Ltd.
(Para 24)
Reply of the Government
29. Matter will be taken up with Ministry of Finance at appropriate stage.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
30. The Committee may be informed of the response of the Ministry of Finance in this
regard.

5
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
31. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that availability of spares will certainly improve
the aircraft utilization to the optimal level.
(Para 26)
Reply of the Government
32. Noted for compliance.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
33. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
34. The Committee appreciates Air India for making operating profits from December, 2015
after a gap of 10 years. The Committee hopes that Air India will continue its journey of registering
further profits in the coming months.  The Committee at the same time would expect Air India to
factor in its social obligations also to serve some unprofitable routes also in the large national
interest.
(Para 32)
Reply of the Government
35. Noted for compliance.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
36. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
37. The Committee is happy to note that earning from ground handling is increasing and
emphasizes the fact that the activity needs to be further expanded/strengthened.
(Para 35A)
Reply of the Government
38. Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
39. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
40. The setting up of MRO facilities in India is long overdue which is not only profitable but
essential facilities to provide repair, maintenance etc. to aircrafts within short time.  It should be in
fact one of the top priorities of the country.
(Para 36A)
Reply of the Government
41. Noted.

6
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
42. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
43. The Committee takes notes of the steps taken by Air India for induction of new aircrafts to
make Aviation sector more viable and profitable by adding a new sector.
(Para 41)
Reply of the Government
44. Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
45. The Committee hopes that induction of new aircrafts would help Air India in its
journey of registering profits.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
46. The Committee takes note of the steps being taken to train and recruit pilots in Air India
alongwith the induction of new aircrafts.
(Para 47)
Reply of the Government
47. Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
48. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
49. Another area, apart from Ground Handling and MRO facilities, which can earn significant
non-passenger revenue for Air India could be having its own helicopter wing to provide seamless
travel from smaller towns and inaccessible areas to the major and tier two cities and famous tourist
spots that are yet to be put on air map. It has tremendous potential which Air India must exploit.
Pawan Hans has its own financial as well as operational issues that limit its operational abilities.  As
a result, this gap is being taken over by private operators who do not have required facilities and
experience and sometimes do not even own helicopters and take on lease from Pawan Hans and
operate. Air India, being the company that it is, can acquire helicopters for operating on hub-spoke
model.  By doing so, it would not only be convenient to passengers as seamless travel but also
increases connectivity to smaller and inaccessible hilly areas.
(Para 48)
Reply of the Government
50. Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
51. The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken to begin a helicopter wing in Air
India.

7
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
52. The Committee still feels that in view of high threat perception at our most vulnerable
airports and need to modernize and strengthen it, these increase are inadequate. The Committee
recommends to enhance BCAS allocation adequately.
(Para 53A)
Reply of the Government
53. The requirement of additional funds for BCAS will be considered at RE stage.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
54. The Committee may be informed of the outcome in this regard.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
55. The Committee notes that the senior level positions in BCAS are occupied by deputationists.
The Committee is given to understand that the BCAS officials acquire a lot of operational
experience during their services in the organization. However, the senior level positions are given to
novices with little or no experience in aviation security on deputation basis ignoring the experience
and qualifications of BCAS officials. The Committee has been given to understand that by doing so,
we are endangering the entire civil aviation security of the country as the deputationists leave the
organization after a brief stint of 3 years in the organization. The Committee, therefore, in principle
agrees with the view that the senior positions of BCAS may be held exclusively for career officials
of BCAS. The Committee, therefore, wants the Ministry to submit a note on this aspect for
consideration of the Committee.
(Para 55)
Reply of the Government
56. After the approval of ‘re-structuring of BCAS’, one additional post of Joint Director General
(formerly known as Joint Commissioner of Security (CA) is being created, with the approval of the
Cabinet. Further, the re-structuring plan provides for an additional post of Deputy Director General
(the erstwhile post of Additional Commissioner of Security (CA) in BCAS. These senior level posts,
including that of the Director General, BCAS (Head of the Organisation), are filled up purely on the
basis of ‘deputation’. In view of this, the post of DDG and Jt. DG cannot be treated to be a
‘feeder post’ to the post of Jt. DG and DG , respectively.
57. This Ministry have already taken note of the representations received in the matter,
requesting for creation of further promotional avenues to the cadre officers of an organisation (at
senior level) for their promotion to the level of DDG , JDG and DG. The suggestion/viewpoint of the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture in this
regard has also been taken on record.
58. It is submitted for information of the Committee that the matter relating to amendment of
Recruitment Rules  of various posts in BCAS, which has been initiated pursuant to the approval of
‘restructuring of BCAS’, is presently under consideration of this Ministry in consultation with
BCAS. The said suggestions and viewpoints will be kept in view while amending the RRs, and
decision on the same would be finalized after due consultation with relevant stakeholders.

8
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
59. The Committee desires that while amending the Recruitment Rules, it should be
ensured that BCAS officials would occupy the senior level positions.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
60. The Committee hopes that the restructuring of BCAS will improve the functioning of BCAS.
The Committee understands that the post of Commissioner of Security, BCAS has been lying
vacant for the last many years. The Committee strongly recommends that the post may be filled up
without further delay.
(Para 56)
Reply of the Government
61. Shri Kumar Rajesh Chandra, IPS, have already assumed the office of the post of Director
General (formerly known as Commissioner of Security (Civil Aviation)) in BCAS on 17.05.2016.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
62. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
63. The Committee feels concerned about the huge amount of outstanding dues of AAI for a
long time. Steps being taken for recovery appear to be routine with little impact. AAI  being highest
revenue generator has to be actively helped by the Ministry of Civil Aviation in this regard by taking
it up with concerned Organisations and Ministries including legal recourse. The Committee
recommends that consistent steps should be taken by AAI to recover the outstanding dues.
(Para 62)
Reply of the Government
64. The recommendations of the Committee are noted. Consistent steps are being taken to
recover outstanding dues, as follows:-
(a) The dues are monitored on regular basis.
(b) In case of delay, AAI issues notice to airlines to settle the dues.
(c) Penal interest is being charged on account of delay in settlement of bills.
(d) In case where delay persists, besides encashing the security deposit, the defaulting
airline is put on “Cash and Carry basis”.
(e) Further legal course of action is followed in case of defaulting parties and Ministry
of Civil Aviation is being kept informed.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
65. The Committee hopes that the above stated steps would enable AAI to recover the
outstanding dues.

9
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
66. The Committee takes note of the vacancies existing in AAI. The Committee is aware that
operations of AAI have been drastically reduced due to the handing over of Delhi, Mumbai,
Hyderabad and Bangalore airports to Private airport operators. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the existing vacancies may be analyzed and studied in the light of the privatization
of airports and the position must be reviewed and a realistic view may be taken in the matter.
(Para 64)
Reply of the Government
67. The recommendation of the Committee is noted. The existing vacancies are analysed in
view of privatization and VRS granted while filling up the vacancies in AAI. The details of
vacancies in AAI is as under:-
Level V acant Recruitment V acancy Net vacancies Recruitment
post as complete/Abolition/rationalisation need to be action in
per filled up hand
original
sanction
Executive 3221 Recruitment complete-348 2799 2400 1727
Gp A&B Abolished consequent to
VRS-74
Non- 2369 Abolished consequent to 1698 600 348
Executive VRS-671
Gp-C
Non- 1659 Abolished consequent to 1657 Nil Nil
Executive VRS-02
Gp-D
TOTAL: 7249
68. The reason for non-filling of vacant posts and the action plan is indicated hereunder:-
(a) Vacancies could not be filled up/remained vacant, for a considerable period on
account of the following :-
(i) Pursuant to handing over of Delhi and Mumbai Airport to JVCs, a sizable
number of officers and staff returned to AAI on completion of operation
support period under OMDA and these officials were re-deployed by AAI.
(ii) Due to vigilance issues and court cases, there was an Order from the
Hon’ble Court to hold the recruitment process in certain cadres.
(b) Large number of Group D posts had been filled up as per the APEX Court
judgement on 06/12/1996 engaged earlier by contractor, were regularized and since
their separation on account of superannuation, the posts are unfilled and not being
recruited.

10
(c) AAI has also engaged National Productivity Council (NPC) for study and
rationalisation of manpower requirement of Non-Executive in view of
commencement of operations from new greenfield airports (Cochin, Hyderabad and
Bangalore), changing environment and handling over some of major airports under
PPP (Delhi, Mumbai), as well as change of working environment in view of IT and
Automation.
(d) The report of NPC is likely to be received by August, 2016 and further requirement
of induction shall be reviewed after that.
(e) 1727 posts of Executives and 348 posts of Non-Executives are being filled up for
which recruitment process is on and shall be completed in 2016.
69. For balance vacancies, inductions shall be done in the year 2017 based on the outcome of
the study by NPC and M/s McKinsy, to whom consultancy work has been assigned on 14.03.2016
for organisational Re-structuring and Capability Enhancement.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
70. The Committee desires that steps should be taken to fill up the existing vacancies in
AAI and intimate thereof to the Committee for its information.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
71. The Committee agrees with the views of the Ministry of Civil Aviation that IGRUA needs an
immediate infusion of funds to replace the old aircrafts and to cope up with the new challenges the
Indian Civil Aviation Sector has thrown open.  But it fails to understand why IGRUA has been
allocated only a token allocation of `10 lakhs during the BE 2016-17. The Committee directs the
Ministry to prepare/ approve a concrete plan for modernization of IGRUA and recommends that
`60 crores may be allocated to IGRUA without delay for fleet replacement and augmentation.
(Para 69)
Reply of the Government
72. As no budget was allocated to IGRUA on account of lack of a firm proposal from IGRUA
and approval of the competent authority for the procurement of aircraft, a token provision was
made at the BE Stage. After the proposal is approved, Ministry of Finance shall be requested for
the requisite funds.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
73. The Committee desires that the Ministry may prepare/approve a concrete plan for
modernization of IGRUA. It recommends that ````` 60 crores may be allocated to IGRUA
without delay for fleet replacement and augmentation.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
74. The Committee notes that Pawan Hans is a profit making Organization and does not depend
upon GBS. It was earning a profit of around ` 40 crores. This profit alone will not be adequate for
its own fleet expansion and fleet replacement. The Committee, therefore, recommends that giving

11
` 600 crores to Pawan Hans as one time grant for its ambitious expansion plan needs to be
seriously considered. Keeping in view the urgent need for fleet replacement and augmentation, the
Committee recommends that adequate provisions may be made in the budget for Pawan Hans to
cater to its imminent requirements.
(Para 75)
Reply of the Government
75. Pawan Hans Limited has made a proposal for replacement of 09 Medium Helicopters with
the total approximate cost of ` 700.00 Crore. EFC Memo is being considered/examined in the
Ministry and after approval by EFC, a proposal for allocation of funds would be taken up with
Ministry of Finance either at RE Stage or through Supplementary Grant.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
76. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
77. The Committee is of the view that there is a great scope for tourists opting for helicopter
services to reach tourist destinations and that this potential has to be further explored and utilised.
The Committee recommends that Air India and Pawan Hans can work together to ensure seamless
travel on hub and spokes basis- bringing passengers from smaller places to various tourist spots. In
this way, smaller cities/ towns can be provided much needed connectivity with minimum
investments in terms of money and time.
(Para 76)
Reply of the Government
78. Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
79. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in pursuance of the Committee’s
recommendation.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
80. The Committee hopes that the construction of the heliport at Rohini, Delhi will be completed
without further delay. The Committee feels that the helocopter industry has great potential to
expand and provide services in the tourism sector, disaster management etc. The Committee desires
that Pawan Hans may explore setting up of more heliports at popular tourist destinations to cater to
the needs of the high end tourists.
(Para 77)
Reply of the Government
81. Pawan Hans is making efforts to complete construction of the Heliport at Rohini and will be
operationalize soon.
82. Pawan Hans is making efforts to provide helicopter services in tourist places in association

12
with the State Governments and its agencies and has also submitted a proposal to National Disaster
Management Authority (NDMA) for providing helicopters on long term lease.
83. Pawan Hans is approaching State Governments for providing land and funds for setting up
of Heliport/ Helipads by the State Governments for providing air connectivity in the respective
States and PHL can provide service consultancy and services for the purpose.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
84. The Committee desires that the construction of the Heliport at Rohini, Delhi may be
completed without further delay.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
85. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take necessary steps to ensure that
the vacancies are filled up in time to meet the shortage of Pilots/staff.
(Para 79)
Reply of the Government
86. Pawan Hans has taken up steps for filling up of vacancies of pilots and issued
advertisements in the newspapers for walk-in interview. Further, PHL has also approached Air
Force for providing experienced pilots. PHL is also filling up vacancies of staff wherever there is a
shortage. 
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
87. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
88. The Committee notes that though HCI had requested for a budgetary support of ` 75 crores
during the Twelfth Five Year Plan for renovation/up-gradation of all its properties, only ` 35 crores
was sanctioned in 2013 and only ` 22 crores has been released out of the sanctioned amount. The
Committee deplores such a situation. The Committee feels that without giving the required budget,
HCI cannot be expected to improve its performance. Therefore, the Committee recommends that
sufficient budgetary support should be given to HCI at the RE stage.
(Para 85)
Reply of the Government
89. The total approved cost of renovation/upgradation of HCI properties is ` 35.29 Crore, out
of which ` 27.00 Crore have already been released. A proposal for ` 8.29 Crore for inclusion in the
first batch of Supplementary Grant has been sent to Ministry of Finance.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
90. The Committee may be apprised of the response of the Ministry of Finance in this
regard.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
91. The Committee notes that DGCA extends various services to airlines and air operators after

13
charging certain fees. The activities of DGCA may be organized in such a way that it should be a
revenue neutral organization.
(Para 90)
Reply of the Government
92. Suggestions of the Committee have been noted and ways shall be explored.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
93. The Committee may be  informed of the steps taken to ensure that DGCA may be a
revenue neutral organization.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
94. The Committee desires that the Government may explore the possibility that the fees
charged by DGCA for inspection etc. may be retained by the Organization itself, rather than
crediting it to the Consolidated Fund of India.
(Para 91)
Reply of the Government
95. Suggestions will be explored.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
96. The Committee may be apprised of the final outcome in this regard.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
97. The Committee notes with dismay that for the last several years, the Government is trying
to construct the DGCA Bhawan and BCAS Headquarter, but in vain. The Committee desires that
effective steps should be taken to initiate the construction of the building at Safdarjung Airport at
the earliest.
(Para 93)
Reply of the Government
98. The proposal for construction of DGCA Bhawan and BCAS Headquarter for ` 303.80 Crore
has been approved by the Standing Finance Committee on 22
nd June, 2016. The building is to be
constructed at Safdarjung Airport by Airport Authority of India. Regarding fund requirements for
the building, ` 37.00 Crore are required for the current financial year for which a proposal has
been sent to Ministry of Finance for its inclusion in the first batch of Supplementary Grant.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
99. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
100. The Committee notes that the Indian Civil Aviation Sector is growing at the rate of more
than 20% per annum. In order to cope up with this growth, the regulatory agency needs to be
strengthened and modernized appropriately. The Committee feels that a premier Organization such

14
as DGCA cannot afford to have shortage of manpower. In the past, due to lack of highly trained
manpower in it, US Federal aviation agencies had downgraded India in the concerned list.  It had
put Indian aviation at a disadvantage in international community. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that strategic steps should be taken to fill up the vacancies at the earliest. The
Committee desires that the suggestion of DGCA to exempt their recruitment from UPSC is a step in
the right direction and is a need of the hour.
(Para No. 96 of ibid)
Reply of the Government
101. DGCA is actually pursuing with various agencies for early filling up of vacant posts and
with the result the number of vacant posts have been reduced considerably. DGCA has taken the
matter with UPSC for exemption from their consultation in the recruitment of Group ‘A ’ posts in
so far as deputation and promotion cases are concerned.
102. Regarding recruitment of Flight Operations Inspector, it is to state that with the approval of
Cabinet, 75 posts in various categories of FOIs have been created in the Flight Standard
Directorate. As the main objective at that time was to get an up-gradation for India to category 1
status, it was found feasible to appoint FOIs immediately on short term contract basis. At present
51 FOIs are working under various categories in DGCA. The recruitment process for the remaining
vacancies is also underway for appointment on contract basis.
103. DGCA India has already been restored as category 1 nation by Federal Aviation
Administration (FAA) in April, 2015.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
104. The Committee would like to know the response of UPSC to the suggestion of DGCA
to exempt their recruitment from UPSC.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
105. The Committee urges Pawan Hans Ltd. to explore the possibility of introducing helicopter
services in other States also, besides the North Eastern region, for promotion of tourism among
high end tourists.
(Para No. 100  of ibid)
Reply of the Government
106. Pawan Hans is exploring the possibilities for launching Helicopter Services in various other
States.  In this direction, Pawan Hans has submitted its proposals to State Governments of J&K,
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Odisha, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana.
107. For promotion of tourism, Pawan Hans has signed MoU with Government of Maharashtra
(MTDC) to operate Helicopter Services in Mumbai, Aurangabad, Ajanta, Ellora, MurudJanjira,
Matheran and other major tourist destinations.
108. Pawan Hans has also launched Helicopter Services in Goa in January, 2016 providing Aerial
Joy Rides and connecting important tourist places in Goa.  

15
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
109. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
110. The Committee notes that Kushinagar airport has a great potential to attract a large number
of tourists and for overall economic development of the surrounding region. It can prove to be a
game changer for the development of the region. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
Government of India should take every possible step to ensure that the Kushinagar airport is ready
for operationalisation soon.
(Para 103)
Reply of the Government
111. Central Government granted ‘in-principle’ approval to the project subject to certain
conditions for setting up of Greenfield airport at Kushinagar in September, 2010. Government of
Uttar Pradesh (GoUP) had invited applications from prospective developers for developing the
airport in PPP mode. However, the project could not attract the interests of developers. GoUP and
Airports Authority of India (AAI) are in talks for implementation of the project.
112. AAI team along with State Government officials visited kushinagar on 6
th November, 2015
to assess the quantum of land required for the development of Kushinagar Airport. The minimum
land requirement was assessed and the Revenue Officials were asked to examine the feasibility of
acquiring the land. The Revenue Officials after carrying out the detailed field study has forwarded
the revenue map showing the tentative land which can be acquired. Based on this, AAI has
prepared the draft Master Plan and forwarded to the State Government for acquisition of land.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
113. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
114. The Committee notes that the renovation work of the Calicut airport is dragging on for a
long time causing tremendous inconvenience to the travelling public. The Committee desires that the
renovation work at the Calicut airport may be completed at the earliest and that the senior officers
of AAI should continuously monitor the progress of the work.
(Para 105)
Reply of the Government
115. Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
116. The Committee desires that the renovation work at the Calicut airport may be
completed within a definite timelimit.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
117. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by AAI to ensure green airports/offices. The

16
Committee notes that there are lots of vacant lands in the numerous airports of the country where
no other construction could be carried out. The Committee observes that such vacant land needs to
be utilized for generating solar energy which can be used for the functioning of the airports as well
as the nearby areas if there is surplus level. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all the
airports of the country should endeavour to develop solar power plants with a futuristic plan.
(Para 107)
Reply of the Government
118. AAI endeavours to maximum installation of solar power plants by utilizing vacant land at
various airports for generating Solar Energy. For  ground Mounted Solar Power Plants at
available land of AAI airports, AAI has already initiated action and works are in progress at Kolkata
(15000 KWp), Jaipur (1800 KWp) and Chandigarh (3000 KWp) Airports. For other Airports, AAI
shall be taking up solar projects subject to availability of “Net Metering” facility. At present most of
the States are not having solar policy for Ground mounted solar plants.  Policy is available for roof
top solar power plants that too for a small limited capacity.
119. In view of above, AAI is taking  up ground mounted solar power plants only where “Net
Metering” facility is available and AAIs captive load also exists.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
120. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
121. The Committee welcomes the incentives agreed to be provided for MRO activities as
mentioned above. Given the huge growth/expansion, Indian Civil Aviation Sector is going to be the
world’s largest civil aviation sector within a few years. We need to tap the opportunity of related
sectors to become an aviation giant of the 21
st century. The Committee observes that India has the
human resources and conducive environment for development of state of the art MROs. The
Government should aim at exploiting the ` 5000 crores MRO business so that not only Indian
carriers but foreign aircrafts also get this facility within India only. The Committee feels that India
has the potential to be an MRO hub given the demand as well as the availability of skilled
manpower in the country. The Committee desires that immediate steps should be taken to set up
and expand the MRO infrastructure presently available in the country by providing conducive
business environment and legal framework.
(Para 110)
Reply of the Government
122. Approval of MRO is granted by DGCA under the regulation CAR-145.
123. At present DGCA has approved 92 MROs in the country under the above regulation. Out of
these there are 8 number of large MROs, which can carry out maintenance of large aeroplane and
helicopter.
124. DGCA is also taking required actions for grant of approval of MRO’s  whenever request of
approval is received and the applicant is complying with the regulations.

17
125. The National Civil Aviation policy also provides for further incentives for MRO; in addition
to the financial incentives already announced in the Budget Speech of the Hon’ble Finance Minister
for the year 2016-17. The other incentives are as under:-
126. Service tax on output services of MRO will be zero-rated.
127. The tools and tool-kits used by the MRO are specific to aircraft industry. Aircraft
maintenance tools and tool-kits will be exempt from Customs duty. The exemption shall be given
on the basis of list the tools and tool-kits notified by the Directorate General of Civil Aviation from
time to time.
128. MROs are at present required to provide proof of their requirements of parts, or orders
from their client airlines. However, aircraft parts are used exclusively in the aircraft and are
designated  by part Numbers as given by aircraft and related Original Equipment Manufacturers.
Therefore, the process for the clearance of the parts shall be simplified by allowing for self-
attestation by the MROs.
129. To enable economies of scale, the period for which the spare parts  imported by MROs can
be stored tax-free shall be extended to 3 years.
130. To allow import of unserviceable parts by MROs for providing exchange /advance
exchange,  the concerned notification shall be reviewed and revised to also enable advance export
of serviceable parts.
131. Foreign aircraft brought to India for MRO work will be allowed to stay for the entire period
of maintenance or up to 6 months, whichever is lesser, provided it undertakes no commercial
flights during the stay period. The aircraft may, however, carry passengers in the flights at the
beginning and end of the stay period in India. For stay beyond 6 months, DGCA’s permission will
be required.
132. Foreign MRO experts will be provided visas promptly, especially in cases of an Aircraft on
Ground (AOG) situation.
133. Foreign Pilots operating an aircraft to and from India for the purpose of servicing at an
Indian MRO entity will be issued Temporary Landing Permits.
134. The provision under AIC 3 of 2010 of DGCA shall be reviewed to declare MRO (Aircraft
Servicing) as a separate category instead of clubbing with Ground Handling (GHA) for security
procedures and remove restrictions on foreign registered aircraft for MRO work.
135. MOCA will persuade State Governments to make V AT zero-rated on MRO services.
136. Provision for adequate land for MRO service providers will be made in all future airport
projects.
137. Airport royalty and additional levies on MRO service providers will be rationalised in
consultation with Airport Operators.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
138. The Committee takes notes of the reply furnished by the Ministry.

18
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
139. The Committee appreciates the vision and initiatives of the new Civil Aviation Policy. The
Committee hopes that the Policy will be finalized soon without delay.
(Para 116)
Reply of the Government
140. The Civil Aviation Policy has been finalized and notified after approval of the Cabinet.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
141. The Committee takes notes of the reply furnished by the Ministry.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
142. The Committee is happy that a comprehensive civil aviation policy is likely to be put in
place, which was long overdue. The proposed policy contains all the essential aspects that are
badly needed to be provided/expanded/strengthened to meet the demand in future. But the
Committee finds that most of these items included in the policy have not had the required emphasis
about which even this Committee had been pointing out regularly through its various reports. For
implementing these, apart from funds, several other bottlenecks/shortages will have to be tackled.
For example, concern for aspects each as aviation security, regional connectivity, safety, use of
helicopters, MRO facilities, aviation education and training and last but not the least, affordability of
air journeys has never been reflected in allocation during the previous years as well. If it remains
so, any policy is likely to remain on paper only, unless significant provisioning of funds etc. is done
for realizing the objectives contained in the Policy. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
Ministry of Finance to make adequate funds available for sustaining the sentiments that may be
generated due to adoption of new Civil Aviation Policy. It should realize that growth and expansion
of aviation facilities would have cascading effects for growth in other sectors of our economy as
well as job creation.
(Para 116A)
Reply of the Government
143. Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
144. The Committee understands that a new Civil aviation policy is in place. The
Committee hopes that this would give a boost to the civil aviation sector.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
145. The Committee appreciates the decision taken by the Government of India for reviving
various unserved and underserved airports to make them functional.  The Committee is aware that
the revival plan is a long drawn one which needs a lot of preparation, still the Committee feels that
an initial corpus should have been earmarked for the revival of such airports.  The Committee
hopes that the revival of these airports would boost the Indian economy and therefore,
recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Airports Authority of India may be given
adequate funding for starting the revival of unserved and underserved airports, at the RE stage.
(Para 119)

19
Reply of the Government
146. As per the announcement made by the Hon’ble Finance Minister in the Budget Speech 2016,
for revival of airports and airstrips, Ministry is in the process of formulating a scheme for revival
of unused airstrips with those State Government where they commit to provide certain concessions
to make the operations viable. An EFC Memo for revival of 50 unserved and underserved airstrips
in the next three years has also been circulated.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
147. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
148. The C ommittee feels that this issue requires immediate attention and hopes that the
concerned Ministries and the State Governments would take necessary steps to address the issue.
In this regard, the Committee urges that the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas may consider
reducing the basic price of ATF, the Ministry of Finance may consider reducing the excise duty
levied on A TF and the State Governments may consider reducing the V AT on A TF.
(Para 122)
Reply of the Government
149. Noted.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
150. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
151. In view of long pendency of height clearance cases in major cities, the Committee
appreciates this initiative and recommends that adequate publicity may be given among the people
regarding this initiative.
(Para 124)
Reply of the Government
152. Noted for compliance.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
153. The Committee takes notes of the reply furnished by the Ministry.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
154. The Committee is of the view that the Indian civil aviation sector has grown stupendously
and that it can be compared to any other developed nation.  The Committee also feels that it is high
time to set aside the sign of a colonial past and acquire a new call sign which appropriately denotes
the Indian civil aviation sector.
(Para 126)

20
Reply of the Government
155. As contracting state to International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO), India has to follow
the requirements of ICAO Annex 7, which deals with the aircraft nationality and registration mark.
156. As per Para 2.3 of Annex 7, nationality mark shall be selected from the series of nationality
symbols included in the radio call signs allocated to the State of Registry by the International
Telecommunication Union. The nationality mark shall be notified to the International Civil Aviation
Organisation.
157. India has been allocated three series (“ATA-AWZ”, “VTA-VWZ” and  “8TA-8YZ”) by the
international Telecommunication union and in accordance with the above paragraph 2.3 of Annexe
7, India can chose aircraft registration mark from these series and notify to International Civil
Aviation Organisation. The aircraft nationality and registration mark ‘VT’ is at present used from
the “VTA-VTZ” series allocated by International Telecommunication Union.
158. Additionally Rule 37 of Aircraft Rules, 1937 also specifies “the nationality mark of the
aircraft shall be the capital letters VT in Roman character”.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
159. The Committee desires that a new call sign which appropriately denotes the ever
growing Indian Civil  Aviation sector may be acquired.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
160. The Committee noted that those who are using the Gulf Sector from Kerala airports are
basically low paid workers. The exorbitant ticket fares are causing lot of financial troubles for
already troubled workers due to poor wages due to economic slowdown and other related issues.
The Committee, therefore, observes that Air India has a social responsibility towards its population,
that they are protected from predatory airfares. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the
Government of India should ensure that all the Indian carriers operating in Gulf Sector provide a
reasonably low fare for its citizens. The Committee desires that these issues may be looked into
and appropriate remedial action may be taken in this regard.
(Para 128)
Reply of the Government
161. Under the provisions of Rule 135, the Aircraft Rule 1937, every airline is required to
establish tariff having regard to all relevant factors including the cost of operation, characteristic of
service, reasonable profit and generally prevailing tariff. Generally, airlines offer low priced tickets
for booking made considerably in advance. Government normally does not interfere in a day to day
commercial aspects of airlines. In case of Indian carrier operating in Gulf sector, are asked to
provide much lower fare for Indian citizen, the issue may translate in to discriminatory or
predatory pricing practices and invite litigation by foreign carriers. Also, the issue of international
operations by domestic airlines are covered under bilateral agreements between Government of
India and foreign Governments. However, in case of extra ordinary situations such as natural
calamities, civic unrest etc. airlines have positively shared their social obligations in the past.

21
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
162. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry.  The
Committee may be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that the public is
protected from predatory airfares.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
163. The need for further development of Belgaum and Varanasi airports was highlighted by
some Members of the Committee.
(Para 129)
164. The Committee recommends that steps should be taken for further development of these
airports and for the improvement of facilities for passengers in these airports.
(Para 130)
Reply of the Government
165. The steps taken for development of Belgaum and Varanasi airports and improvement of
facilities for passengers are as follows:-
V aranasi: The following works were undertaking and completed:-
z Extension of runway from 7500 to 9000 ft. to cater for operation of B-767 type of
aircraft.
z Construction of a New Integrated Terminal Building for 1050 passengers (700
Domestic & 350 International).
z Expansion and re-alignment of apron to park 5 B767 and 4 AB-321 type of aircraft.
166. Further development of the airport Airports Authority of India has requested the State and
Government to provide 593 acres of land free of cost and free from all encumbrances and
requested State Government for either diversion or underpass of National highway.
Belgaum: Works undertaken/Planned by AAI (Phase-1) are as under:-
z Extension of runway from 1830mx45M to 2286mx45m for operation of A-320 type
of aircraft, construction of Turn pad, Blast pad, RESA 90m x 90m  at both the ends
of runway and isolation bay with Taxi link (completed).
z New Apron for parking 3 nos. code-C (A 321/320) with Taxi link (Completed).
z CAT-1 ILS at one end of runway. (Planning stage).
z Work in progress for construction of New Domestic Terminal Building  for handling
300 passengers.
z Work in progress for construction of new ATC Tower cum Technical block cum
fire station and Boundary wall perimeter road etc.
z Work of construction of Perimeter Boundary wall all around the newly acquired 364
acres of land has been completed.
Pending issues: 6 acres of Balance land is yet to be provided by State Government.

22
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
167. The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in the development of
Belgaum and Varanasi airports.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
168. The Committee also noticed that the airfares are exorbitant during the peak tourist seasons
which are also causing hindrance to passenger flow in the country. The Committee recommends
that in view of the high inflow of tourists from Middle East, especially during the summer holidays,
there should be more flights to accommodate the passenger rush. The Committee also recommends
that, in view of the predatory charges levied by the airlines during peak times, the Government
should fix an upper limit especially in the economy class of airfares so that there should not be
unhealthy practice of raising fares exorbitantly by the airlines.  The Prime Minister in one of his
visits to Middle East has already asked the Ministry of Civil Aviation to do something about such
prices.  The Committee would like to know about the efforts made in this regard so far.
(Para 133)
Reply of the Government
169. Number of flights and subsequent increase in flights to foreign destinations is subject matter
under bilateral issues between Government of India  and foreign Governments. Eligible airlines may
increase their flights to foreign destination depending  on their operational viability and grant of
traffic rights. Imposition of airlines fare restriction, may reduce ability of the competitiveness
among Indian carriers to their foreign competitors and also may attract litigation on predatory
pricing by foreign airlines.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
170. The Committee finds that the reply furnished by the Ministry is of routine nature.
The Committee desires that the Ministry should take appropriate action to ensure that the
public is protected from predatory airfares.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
171. The Committee is aware about the existing rules, regulations which are working in the way
of regulating airfare after the repeal of Air Corporation Act in 1994.  Predatory pricing of airfare is
hurting not only the individual passenger but country’s economy as well.  The explanation given by
the Ministry of Civil Aviation is purely technical suggesting that they are unable to do anything
under existing laws. The Committee observes that this is amounting to abdicating their basic
responsibilities of protecting the citizens of the country. The Committee fails to understand whose
interest is sought to be sub served by taking such a stand that too before a Parliamentary
Committee which is empowered to suggest necessary modification in our rules, regulations that are
coming in our way for correcting airfares. Let us not compare Indian case with any other country.
India has a specific case which needs a specific solution that is best suited to it in a given
situation.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation
should specify the limitations, legal and otherwise, which need to be amended or other measures to
be put in place to tackle this problem after consulting all the stakeholders.
(Para 134)

23
Reply of the Government
172. In the matter of civil aviation, governing regulations are generally framed in accordance
with ICAO Standard and Recommended Practices (SARPs). At present DGCA, India is in process
to harmonise the domestic regulations at par with standards and practice followed globally. Any
difference with ICAO SARPs is required to be notified to ICAO as India is a contracting member
and signatory to conventions of International Civil Aviation Organisation, it is binding on us to
promulgate regulations as per ICAO guidelines.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
173. The Committee finds that the reply has not specified the limitation, legal and
otherwise, which need to be amended or other measures to be put in place to tackle the
problem of predatory airfares.  The Committee desires that the Ministry may furnish a
detailed reply in this regard.
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
174. Further, the Committee notes that the price of ATF was ` 74204.74 per kilo litre at Delhi as
on 1
st December, 2013 and was ` 35127 per kilo litre as on 1 st March, 2016. The Committee could
understand that jet fuel constitutes 40% of an airline’s operating cost. The Committee, however,
notes that even after 50% reduction of the A TF prices over a period of time, the airlines have not
passed on the benefit of reduction in ATF prices to the consumers. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry should take effective steps to ensure that the airlines pass on the benefit to the
travelers by reducing the air fares and inform the Committee about the specific steps taken in this
regard and the outcome thereof.
(Para 135)
Reply of the Government
175. A comparison was carried out of the average fare in 23 Sectors during January-March,
2016 as compared to January-March, 2015 and it was observed that there was a fall of 18% in the
fares. From there it appears that the benefit has been passed on to the passengers.
Further Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
176. The Committee desires that the Ministry may inform the Committee about the
specific steps taken to pass on the benefit of reduction of ATF prices to the consumers and
the outcome thereof.

24
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS ––– AT A GLANCE
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 7)
The Committee may be apprised of the further development with regard to allocation
of additional funds at RE stage. (Para 10)
The Committee may be apprised of the response of the Ministry of Finance in this
regard. (Para 13)
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 16)
The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in this regard at RE stage.
(Para 19)
The Committee may be apprised of the final outcome in this regard. (Para 22)
The Committee desires that adequate care should be exercised to ensure that there
is no shortfall in Equity Infusion in Air India in the future. (Para 27)
The Committee may be informed of the response of the Ministry of Finance in this
regard. (Para 30)
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 33)
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 36)
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 39)
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 42)
The Committee hopes that induction of new aircrafts would help Air India in its
journey of registering profits. (Para 45)
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 48)
The Committee may be apprised of the steps taken to begin a helicopter wing in Air
India. (Para 51)
The Committee may be informed of the outcome in this regard. (Para 54)
The Committee desires that while amending the Recruitment Rules, it should be
ensured that BCAS officials would occupy the senior level positions. (Para 59)
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 62)
The Committee hopes that the above stated steps would enable AAI to recover the
outstanding dues. (Para 65)
The Committee desires that steps should be taken to fill up the existing vacancies in
AAI and intimate thereof to the Committee for its information. (Para 70)
24

25
The Committee desires that the Ministry may prepare/approve a concrete plan for
modernization of IGRUA. It recommends that ````` 60 crores may be allocated to IGRUA
without delay for fleet replacement and augmentation. (Para 73)
The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. (Para 76)
The Committee may be apprised of the action taken in pursuance of the Committee’s
recommendation. (Para 79)
The Committee desires that the construction of the Heliport at Rohini, Delhi may be
completed without further delay. (Para  84)
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 87)
The Committee may be apprised of the response of the Ministry of Finance in this
regard. (Para 90)
The Committee may be  informed of the steps taken to ensure that DGCA may be a
revenue neutral organization. (Para 93)
The Committee may be apprised of the final outcome in this regard. (Para 96)
The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. (Para 99)
The Committee would like to know the response of UPSC to the suggestion of DGCA
to exempt their recruitment from UPSC. (Para 104)
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 109)
The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. (Para 113)
The Committee desires that the renovation work at the Calicut airport may be
completed within a definite time limit. (Para 116)
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 120)
The Committee takes notes of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 138)
The Committee takes notes of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 141)
The Committee understands that a new Civil aviation policy is in place. The
Committee hopes that this would give a boost to the civil aviation sector. (Para 144)
The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in this regard. (Para 147)
The Committee takes notes of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 150)
The Committee takes notes of the reply furnished by the Ministry. (Para 153)
The Committee desires that a new call sign which appropriately denotes the ever
growing Indian Civil  Aviation sector may be acquired. (Para 159)
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry.  The
Committee may be apprised of the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that the public is
protected from predatory airfares. (Para 162)

26
The Committee may be apprised of the progress made in the development of
Belgaum and Varanasi airports. (Para 167)
The Committee finds that the reply furnished by the Ministry is of routine nature.
The Committee desires that the Ministry should take appropriate action to ensure that the
public is protected from predatory airfares. (Para 170)
The Committee finds that the reply has not specified the limitation, legal and
otherwise, which need to be amended or other measures to be put in place to tackle the
problem of predatory airfares.  The Committee desires that the Ministry may furnish a
detailed reply in this regard. (Para 173)
The Committee desires that the Ministry may inform the Committee about the
specific steps taken to pass on the benefit of reduction of ATF prices to the consumers and
the outcome thereof. (Para 176)

27
MINUTES

XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 8th August, 2016 in Committee Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh  —  Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee
3. Shri Prabhakar Kore
4. Shri Kiranmay Nanda
5. Kumari Selja
6. Shri Rajeev Shukla
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Swain
8. Shri Bhupender Yadav
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad
10. Shri Vinod Chavda
11. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama
12. Shri Rahul Kaswan
13. Shri Harish Chandra Meena
14. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh
15. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri J.G . Negi, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Director
Shri Arun Kumar, Assistant Director
Shrimati Catherine John L., Assistant Director
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the meeting and he also
welcomed Shri Bhupinder Yadav, a new member to the Committee.  After that, the Committee
considered the following draft reports for adoption:
(i) * * *
29
*** Relates to other matter.

30
(ii) Draft report on the Action Taken by the Government on the observations/
recommendations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Thirtieth
Report on Issues related to Security at Airports in India; and
(iii) * * *.
3. The Committee adopted the said reports with certain amendments and decided to present
the Reports in both the  Houses of Parliament on 10 th August, 2016. The Committee nominated
Chairman and in his absence Shri Ritabrata Banerjee, M.P. to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha.
The Committee also nominated Shri Ram Charitra Nishad, M.P . and in his absence Shri Rahul
Kaswan, M.P . to lay the Reports in the  Lok Sabha.
4. * * *.
5. * * *.
6. The meeting was adjourned at 4.00 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.