Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
June, 2013/Ashadha , 1935 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED NINETY SIXTH REPORT
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 26th June, 2013)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 26th June, 2013)
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch of the
Barak River) Bill, 2013
 
REPORT NO. 
196
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on ...................................., 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on ...................................., 2013)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED NINETY SIXTH REPORT
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch of the
Barak River) Bill, 2013
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 26th June, 2013)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 26th June, 2013)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on ...................................., 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on ...................................., 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
June, 2013/Ashadha, 1935 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ..................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................................... (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................ 1—3
4. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS — A T A G LANCE ...................................................... 4—5
5. A NNEXURES-I & II ............................................................................................................ 7—16
6. M INUTES .............................................................................................................................. 1 7—23

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2012-13)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
10. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
12. Yogi Adityanath
13. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
14. Shri Subrata Bakshi
15. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
16. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
17. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
18. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
19. Shri S. Pakkirappa
20. Shri Prabodh Panda
21. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
22. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
23. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
24. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
25. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Rakesh Singh
28. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
29. Shri K. Sudhakaran
30. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
31. Vacant
(i)

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Ninety Sixth Report on “The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013*.
2. In pursuance of rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees
the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha referred** the Bill as introduced in the Rajya Sabha on the
22
nd March, 2013 and pending therein, to the Committee on 25 th March, 2013 for examination and
report within three months.
3. The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Shipping and Chairman,
IWAI and other senior officers at its meeting held on the 18 th April, 2013 on various provisions of
the Bill.
4. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Shipping for
placing before the Committee the material and information desired in connection with the subject
and for clarifying the points raised by the Members.
5. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 20
th May, 2013.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI Chairman,
May 20 th, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary
Vaisakha 30, 1935 (Saka) Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
* Published in Gazette of India Extraordinary Part-II, Section-2, dated 22 nd March, 2013.
**Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No. 50787 dated 25 th March, 2013.

1
REPORT
The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013 was
introduced in the Rajya Sabha on 22 nd March, 2013. On 25 th March, 2013, the Hon’ble Chairman,
Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha referred the Bill to the
Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture for
examination and report. (Annexure-I)
2. The Bill seeks to provide for the declaration of the Lakhipur-Bhanga stretch of the Barak
river in the State of Assam to be a National Waterway and also to provide for the regulation and
development of the said stretch of the river for purposes of shipping and navigation on the said
waterway and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
3. The Government had introduced the same National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga stretch of
the Barak River) Bill in 2007 and the Bill was referred to the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture for examination and Report. The
Committee examined the Bill and presented its 130
th Report on 4 th March, 2008 to both the Houses
of Parliament. The Bill was passed by the Lok Sabha on 25 th February, 2009 and was sent to the
Rajya Sabha on 26 th February, 2009. The Bill, however, lapsed due to dissolution of the 14 th Lok
Sabha. As a result, the Government has brought again the same Bill before Parliament.
4. The Committee in its sitting held on the 18 th April, 2013, heard the views of the Secretary,
Ministry of Shipping, senior officials of the Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) and the
Ministry of Law and Justice on the provisions of the Bill.
5. The Ministry of Shipping informed that total length of the Barak river system is 900 km.,
out of which, 524 km. passes through India, 31 km. is common boundary and the rest of 345
km. is in Bangaldesh. Out of the 524 km. in India, 403 km. upstream of Lakhipur is hilly and not
navigable. The navigable stretch is between Lakhipur and Bhanga. The Ministry of Shipping
proposes to declare the Lakhipur-Bhanga stretch (121 km.) of the Barak River as a National
Waterway. The entire waterway falls in the State of Assam. Infrastructural facilities currently
available on this waterway are not adequate for safe, convenient and sustained shipping and
navigation by large mechanized vessels. Therefore, the waterway is required to be developed by
providing adequate infrastructure for safe, convenient and sustained shipping operations. The
regulation and development of the proposed National Waterway under the control of the Union
Government for the purposes of shipping and navigation is in the public interest and declaration
to that effect has also been made in this Bill.
6. The Ministry of Shipping further informed that Inland Water Transport is an economic, fuel
efficient, environment friendly and employment oriented mode of transport. The role of the Union
Government is to regulate shipping and navigation on Inland Waterways declared by Parliament by
Law to be National Waterways. The responsibility and executive authority for development and
maintenance of all waterways other than those declared as National Waterways rest with the State
Governments.
7.   The Ministry has estimated that cargo traffic to the tune of 12.45 lakh tonnes will be
carried on the proposed National Waterway after its full development by the year 2018-19. This
traffic is expected to be handled at 4 terminals namely, Lakhipur, Silchar, Badarpur and Karimganj.
The identified cargo are bamboo and bamboo products, cement, coal, edible oils, provisions and
household items, fertilizers, iron and steel, paper and paper products, pulses, rice, stone boulder
and chips, sugar, tea and coffee, wheat, timber, wood, etc.

2
8. The Ministry of Shipping further stated that development of the river includes development
of the waterways for navigation, channel marking, construction of terminals, transit sheds,
installation of handling equipment, etc. The likely expenditure on the development of the 121 km.
stretch of the waterway would be Rs.123.3 crore (Rs. 85.3 crore for fairway development +
Rs.37.6 crore for terminal + Rs. 0.4 crore for setting up of office). Under phase-I, the waterway
stretch between Bhanga and Silchar (70 km.) will be developed in three years and thereafter the
upstream stretch of Silchar – Lakhipur (51 km.) will be developed after realistic assessment of
cargo potential on that stretch. Besides, annual maintenance cost of Rs.3.16 crore has also been
estimated for the maintenance of the proposed waterway and terminals.
9. The Committee was informed that the proposed Waterway No.6 will facilitate movement of
upto 300 tonnes vessel in this river. It will provide an alternative mode of transportation for
movement of commodities between ports of Haldia/Kolkata through Indo-Bangladesh Protocol route
for Transit and Trade and various hinterland cities namely, Lakhipur, Silchar, Panchgram, Badarpur
and Karimganj. It will also provide inter-country movement of goods between these hinterland cities
and that of Bangladesh. It will provide all weather connectivity with ports of Haldia and Kolkata
for not only Assam but also Mizoram, Tripura and Mainpur. This will be an alternative connectivity
of the North Eastern Region through Bangladesh and avoid the rail and road movement through
Chicken’s neck.
10. The Committee inquired about the differences between the current Bill and the Bill that was
introduced in 2007. The Secretary, Shipping informed the Committee that contents of both the Bills
are the same and the only difference is that the cost of development of Barak River has increased
in the present Bill. The likely expenditure on the development of the stretch of the waterway would
be Rs.123.3 crore.
11. The Secretary, Shipping also stated that when the earlier Bill was introduced, the project
was not approved by the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) of the Ministry of Finance,
Government of India. This Parliamentary Committee had pointed out in its Report about this and
had asked the Ministry to obtain the required approval. Accordingly, this time, the approval has
already been obtained from the EFC.
12.  The Committee notes that, at present, a lot of time and resources are being wasted
in transporting oversized cargo to the North-East. Waterways provide a hassle-free
movement of such cargo. Therefore, to have a water protocol with Bangladesh would open
immense possibility of cargo movement from India particularly from North Eastern region.
The Committee feels that therefore the Waterway should be extended up to Chittagong.
13. The Committee observes that the current Bill is the replica of the earlier Bill that
was introduced in 2007. That Bill was examined by this Committee and its 130
th Report
thereon was presented to Parliament. The Committee is happy to find that the required
approval of the Expenditure Finance Committee of the Government has been obtained this
time in pursuant to the recommendations of this Committee. Since, there is hardly any
difference between this Bill and the earlier Bill that was brought before the Committee in
2007, the Committee reiterates its concerns expressed and recommendations made in its
130
th Report on the National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch of the Barak River) Bill,
2007. Those observations/recommendations of the Committee have been appended as
Annexure-II.
14. The Committee is surprised to see that even though the Committee had submitted
its Report on the previous Bill on 4
th March, 2008, the Ministry of Shipping has taken more
than 5 years to bring back the same Bill before Parliament. During this period, there has
been an escalation of about 34% in the project cost. The total estimated cost of
development of the waterway in the current Bill is Rs.123.30 crore as against Rs. 91.50

3
crore in the earlier Bill. The Committee expresses its anguish over this inexplicable delay
and hopes that the Ministry will give development of waterways the priority that it deserves.
15. While reiterating its recommendations contained in the 130 th Report, the Committee
adopts clauses 2, 3 and the Schedule of the Bill without suggesting any amendments
therein.
16. The Committee notes that the Parliament had passed the law to create Kakinada-
Puducherry canals with rivers Godavari and Krishna (1078 km.) as  National Waterway No.4
and the East Coast Canal with Brahmani river and Mahanadi delta rivers (588 km.) as
National Waterway No.5 in the year 2008. However, the Government is yet to take any
decision to operationalise these waterways despite the lapse of five years.
17. The Committee is at loss to find that two of our National Waterways No. 4 and 5 are
pending for the last five years to be operationalised mainly due to lack of funds. The
Government has brought a Bill for yet another waterway. It raises genuine apprehensions
about the operationalisation of this waterway.  The Committee, therefore, hopes that the
waterway No. 6, if passed, should not meet the fate of waterways Nos. 4 and 5. Funds for
waterways Nos. 4, 5, and 6 must be allocated at the earliest.
18. The Committee notes that out of the total 121 km. of the proposed National
Waterways No. 6, 70 km. (Bhanga-Silchar) will be developed under Phase-I, within three
years and the rest 51 km. (Silchar-Lakhipur) is proposed to be developed “after realistic
assessment of cargo potential on this stretch”. The Committee fails to understand why such
an assessment could not be made so far. Secondly, the estimated maintenance cost of
Rs.3.16 crore has not been factored into the estimated total expenditure of Rs. 123.3 crore
on the development of this waterway. This cost must also be provided by the Government
at the appropriate time.
19. The Committee notes that the Central Inland Water Transport Corporation (CIWTC)
has trained manpower and huge infrastructure meant for inland water transport. The
Committee is happy to note that the Government has taken a decision to merge CIWTC
and Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) so that the existing infrastructure of the
former can be effectively utilized by the latter. However, the Committee urges that the
terms and conditions of merger should be up to the satisfaction of the employees of
CIWTC. The Committee feels that the infrastructure generated at public cost should be
optimally used in the public interest and this should be the ultimate objective in the
Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch of the Barak River. The Committee recommends to get the
merger process expedited.

4
4
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
The Committee notes that, at present, a lot of time and resources are being wasted
in transporting oversized cargo to the North-East. Waterways provide a hassle-free
movement of such cargo. Therefore, to have a water protocol with Bangladesh would open
immense possibility of cargo movement from India particularly from North Eastern region.
The Committee feels that therefore the Waterway should be extended up to Chittagong.
(Para 12)
The Committee observes that the current Bill is the replica of the earlier Bill that
was introduced in 2007. That Bill was examined by this Committee and its 130
th Report
thereon was presented to Parliament. The Committee is happy to find that the required
approval of the Expenditure Finance Committee of the Government has been obtained this
time in pursuant to the recommendations of this Committee. Since, there is hardly any
difference between this Bill and the earlier Bill that was brought before the Committee in
2007, the Committee reiterates its concerns expressed and recommendations made in
its 130
th Report on the National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch of the Barak River)
Bill, 2007. Those observations/recommendations of the Committee have been appended as
Annexure-II. (Para 13)
The Committee is surprised to see that even though the Committee had submitted
its Report on the previous Bill on 4
th March, 2008, the Ministry of Shipping has taken more
than 5 years to bring back the same Bill before Parliament. During this period, there has
been an escalation of about 34% in the project cost. The total estimated cost of
development of the waterway in the current Bill is Rs.123.30 crore as against Rs. 91.50
crore in the earlier Bill. The Committee expresses its anguish over this inexplicable delay
and hopes that the Ministry will give development of waterways the priority that it deserves.
(Para 14)
While reiterating its recommendations contained in the 130
th Report, the Committee
adopts clauses 2, 3 and the Schedule of the Bill without suggesting any amendments
therein. (Para 15)
The Committee notes that the Parliament had passed the law to create Kakinada-
Puducherry canals with rivers Godavari and Krishna (1078 km.) as National Waterway No.4
and the East Coast Canal with Brahmani river and Mahanadi delta rivers (588 km.) as
National Waterway No.5 in the year 2008. However, the Government is yet to take any
decision to operationalise these waterways despite the lapse of five years. (Para 16)
The Committee is at loss to find that two of our National Waterways No. 4 and 5 are
pending for the last five years to be operationalised mainly due to lack of funds. The
Government has brought a Bill for yet another waterway. It raises genuine apprehensions
about the operationalisation of this waterway. The Committee, therefore, hopes that the
waterway No. 6, if passed, should not meet the fate of waterways Nos. 4 and 5. Funds for
waterways Nos. 4, 5, and 6 must be allocated at the earliest. (Para 17)
The Committee notes that out of the total 121 km. of the proposed National
Waterways No. 6, 70 km. (Bhanga-Silchar) will be developed under Phase-I, within three
years and the rest 51 km. (Silchar-Lakhipur) is proposed to be developed “after realistic
assessment of cargo potential on this stretch”. The Committee fails to understand why such

5
an assessment could not be made so far. Secondly, the estimated maintenance cost of
Rs.3.16 crore has not been factored into the estimated total expenditure of Rs. 123.3 crore
on the development of this waterway. This cost must also be provided by the Government
at the appropriate time. (Para 18)
The Committee notes that the Central Inland Water Transport Corporation (CIWTC)
has trained manpower and huge infrastructure meant for inland water transport. The
Committee is happy to note that the Government has taken a decision to merge CIWTC
and Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) so that the existing infrastructure of the
former can be effectively utilized by the latter. However, the Committee urges that the
terms and conditions of merger should be up to the satisfaction of the employees of
CIWTC. The Committee feels that the infrastructure generated at public cost should be
optimally used in the public interest and this should be the ultimate objective in the
Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch of the Barak River. The Committee recommends to get the
merger process expedited. (Para 19)

ANNEXURES

ANNEXURE-I
AS INTRODUCED  IN THE R AJYA S ABHA
22 MAR., 2013
Bill No. XXIII of 2013
THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (LAKHIPUR-BHANGA STRETCH OF
THE BARAK RIVER) BILL, 2013
A
BILL
to provide for the declaration of the Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch of the
Barak River to be a National Waterway and also to provide
for the regulation and development of the said Stretch of that
river for the purposes of shipping and navigation on the said
waterway and for matters connected therewith or incidental
thereto.
B
E it enacted by Parliament in the Sixty-fourth Year of the
Republic of India as follows:—
1. (1) This Act may be called the National Waterway
(Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch of the Barak River) Act, 2013.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central
Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, appoint.
2. The Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch of the Barak River, the limits
of which are specified in the Schedule, is hereby declared to be a
National Waterway.
3. It is hereby declared that it is expedient in the public
interest that the Union should take under its control the regulation
and development of Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch of the Barak River for
the purposes of shipping and navigation on the National Waterway
to the extent provided in the Inland Waterways Authority of India
Act, 1985.
9
Short title and
commencement.
Declaration of
Lakhipur-
Bhanga
Stretch of
Barak River to
be National
Waterway.
Declaration as
to expediency
of control by
the Union of
Lakhipur-
Bhanga
Stretch of
Barak River
for certain
purposes.
82 of 1985.

10
10
THE SCHEDULE
(See Section 2 )
LIMITS OF THE N ATIONAL W ATERWAY (L AKHIPUR-BHANGA S TRETCH OF
THE B ARAK R IVER)
The eastern limit of the waterway shall be a line drawn
across the Barak River in the State of Assam at Lakhipur ferry ghat
(at latitude 24° 47' 26" north and longitude 93° 00' 14" east) and
the western limit shall be a line drawn across the Barak River at a
distance of two hundred meters east of its bifurcation point at
Bhanga (at latidue 24° 52' 33" north and longitude 92° 29' 48" east).

11
11
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Inland Waterways Authority of India Act, 1985 (82 of
1985) constituted the Inland Waterways Authority of India for the
regulation and development of inland waterways for the purposes of
shipping and navigation. The Central Government has already
declared a number of stretches of various rivers or canals as
National Waterways.
2. Allahabad-Haldia stretch of the Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly
River, Sadiya-Dhubri stretch of the Brahmaputra River, Kollam-
Kottapuram stretch of West Coast canal and Champakaran and
Udyogmandal canals, Kakinada-Puducherry stretch of canals and the
Kaluvelly tank, Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry stretch of river Godavari
and Wazirabad-Vijayawada stretch of River Krishna and Talcher-
Dharmra stretch of rivers, Geonkhali-Charbatia stretch of east coast
canal, Charbatia-Dhamra stretch of Matai river and Mahanadi delta
rivers have already been declared as National Waterways and the
Inland Waterways Authority of India has taken up the development,
maintenance and management of these National Waterways.
3. It is now proposed to declare the Lakhipur-Bhanga stretch
of Barak River in Assam as a National Waterway. Infrastructure
facilities currently available on this waterway are not adequate for
safe, convenient and sustained shipping and nagivation by large
mechanised crafts. Therefore, the waterway is required to be
developed by providing adequate infrastructure for safe, convenient
and sustained shipping operations. The regulation and development
of the proposed National Waterway under the control of the Union
for the purposes of shipping and navigation is in the public interest
and declaration to that effect has also been made in this Bill.
4. The Bill seeks to achieve the above objects.
N
EW D ELHI; G . K. V ASAN
The 22 nd February, 2013.

12
12
FINANCIAL MEMORANDUM
It is estimated that inland water transport traffic to the tune
of 12.45 lakh tonnes is likely to be carried on the proposed National
Waterway after its full development by the year 2018-19. This
traffic is expected to be handled at four terminals, namely Lakhipur,
Karimganj, Silchar and Badarpur. The work will include development
of the river along with provisions of infrastructure facilities for the
purpose of shipping and navigation, channel marking, construction
of terminals, transit sheds, installation of handling equipment, etc. It
is estimated that the expenditure in respect of the said development
will be of the order of rupees one twenty-three crore and thirty lakh
at 2012 prices. This expenditure will be of a non-recurring nature.
2. It is also estimated that an expenditure of recurring nature
of the order of rupees three crores and sixteen lakh annually will be
incurred for maintenance dredging, maintenance of navigation aids,
terminals etc.
3. The provisions of the Bill do not involve any other
expenditure of a recurring or non-recurring nature.

13
13
RAJYA SABHA
A
BILL
to provide for the declaration of the Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch of the Barak River
to be a National Waterway and also to provide for the regulation and
development of the said Stretch of that river for the purposes of shipping
and navigation on the said waterway and for matters connected therewith
or incidental thereto.
(Shri G. K. Vasan, Minister of Shipping)

14
ANNEXURE-II
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
VIDE REPORT NO. 130 ON THE NATIONAL WATERWAY (LAKHIPUR-BHANGA
STRETCH OF THE BARAK RIVER) BILL, 2007
The Committee has consistently expressed its concern over the slow pace of
development of Inland Water Transport sector in the country. The Committee once again
notes that Inland Water Transport is one of the oldest, fuel efficient, cost-effective and
environment friendly mode of transport but unfortunately the potential of the sector
Inland Water Transport remains largely unexplored due to the indifferent attitude of the
Central and State Governments. The Committee observes that although the Department
of Shipping is committed to increase the share of Inland Water Transport in the country’s
total EXIM trade, still the waterways are not being utilized to their potential and remain
largely neglected and underdeveloped for want of required infrastructure namely fairways,
terminals and navigable aids, as a result, it has not reached at a threshold level to
become commercially viable. The Committee is of the view that with adequate
investments, policy framework and focused approach, the Inland Water Transport in the
country can be developed into a viable mode complementary to the rail and road modes.
The Committee is of the opinion that as the Government really intends to develop the
Inland Water Transport sector with fast pace to its full potential in the country it should
sincerely endeavor to provide institutional framework and minimize the procedural
bottlenecks besides providing adequate investments both from public and private
partnership primarily public investment in Inland Water Transport and to develop it to a
level where private sector feels confident to invest in this sector particularly in ownership
and operation of cargo and passenger vessels to Inland Water Transport mode. The
Committee, therefore, recommends the Government to provide institutional framework
and basic infrastructural facility for accelerated development of Inland Water Transport
sector in the country so as to increase the capacity of Inland Water Transport agencies,
commercialization of Inland Water Transport industries, increased cost recovery through
user charges and creation of a vibrant Inland W ater Transport sector in the country.
(Para 17)
The Committee notes with concern that Research and Development Studies facilities
especially in design of vessels and night navigation facilities and identification of
economically viable routes for development of Inland Water Transport sector has not been
given due consideration.  The Committee had already taken up the matter in its 121
st and
122nd Reports dealing with the National Waterway (Talcher-Dhamra Stretch of Rivers
Geonkhali-Charbatia Stretch of East Coast Canal, Charbatia-Dhamra Stretch of Matai River
and Mahanadi Delta Rivers) Bill, 2006 and the National Waterway (Kakinada-Pondicherry
Stretch of Canals and the Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam-Rajahmundry Stretch of River
Godavari and Wazirabad-Vijayawada Stretch of River Krishna) Bill, 2006 The Committee
again reiterates its view that Research and Development activities is the backbone for
success of any sector and recommends the Government to strengthen the Research and
Development facilities for the desired development of Inland Water Transport Sector in the
country by providing specific budgetary allocations. (Para 18)
14

15
The Committee notes that the proposed NW-6 can offer alternative mode of transport
vis-à-vis rail and road modes. The Committee also notes that the proposed NW will also
boost the rural economy and provide IWT connectivity for movement of commodities
between the Port of Haldia/Kolkata through Indo-Bangladesh protocol route for transit and
trade and various hinterland and Bangladesh besides decongestion of roads and fuel saving,
provide port-hinterland connectivity, better environment corridor and generate employment
among weaker sections and increase tourism activities in the region. The Committee
recommends that the existing Protocol routes connecting NW-1 & NW-6 and NW-2 & NW-
6 may be taken up with the Bangladesh on an expeditious way to convert these waterways
into international waterways for effective transportation of inter-country movement of goods
between hinterland cities and Bangladesh. But in the process the security concern should
not be compromised in any way. (Para 19)
The Committee observes that since waterways do not provide door-to-door service
independently, it is expedient that the waterways are connected with rail or road modes for
total transport linkages to the user. The Committee, therefore, recommends the
Government to improve the total modal mix of transport in the country and prepare the
road map for integrated transport policy to include IWT, Costal Shipping, Civil Aviation,
Road Transport and Highways and Railways. (Para 20)
The Committee notes with dismay about the inadequate repair facility being available
on the National Waterways. The Committee feels that IWT vessels once start plying in large
number on these waterways would require repair facilities on these waterways. The
Committee recommends the Department to prepare an action plan for meeting the growing
demands of repair and service facilities of IWT vessels on all the National Waterways.
(Para 21)
The Committee notes with anguish that no security personnel is being provided in
Sunderbans/Protocol routes in West Bengal by B.S.F./State Govt./IWAI. The Committee is of
the opinion that security is a prime concern and looked into seriously by making
commensurate security arrangement in Sunderbans/Protocol routes. The Committee
recommends the Department of Shipping to take up the matter of beefing-up of security
arrangement in the Sunderbans/Protocol routes with the Union Home Ministry so that
inadequacy of police deployment could be addressed in a big way. (Para 22)
The Committee is constrained to note that there is no updated Financial
Memorandum appended with the Bill and cost projections have been worked out based on
the year 2002. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Government that after
declaration of NW-6 by the Parliament, the budgetary provision takes place. The Committee
is of the view that comprehensive planning and knowing the financial implication is a must
for the Government to provide allocation for development of this waterway. The Committee
therefore, strongly recommends the Department of Shipping to append the updated
Financial Memorandum based upon the individual project component of NW-6 with the Bill.
(Para 23)
The Committee is constrained to note that cargo transportation by Inland Water
Transport mode has not shown significant improvement on these National Waterways. The
Committee also expresses its displeasure over the fact that no comparative cost-output
evaluation for transportation of cargo through this alternate mode of transport has been
carried out by the Department. The Committee is of the view that such evaluation would
further establish the support of Inland Water Transport over other mode of transports.
Therefore, the Committee recommends that a detailed study should be carried out by the

16
Department in this regard and Department of Shipping should fix some realistic physical
target for cargo transportation year-wise for entire Eleventh Plan. (Para 24)
The Committee notes with dismay about the discontinuance of the Centrally
Sponsored Scheme for IWT development in the country by the Planning Commission. The
Committee is of the view that the decision of the Planning Commission to convert the
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) for IWT development into central sector scheme will
adversely affect the pace of development of Inland Water Transport in the country. The
Committee recommends the Department of Shipping to impress upon the Planning
Commission for the revival of the central sponsored scheme for overall development of the
IWT Sector. (Para 25)
Subject to the recommendations in the foregoing paragraphs the Committee adopts
clauses 2, 3 and the schedule without suggesting any amendments therein. (Para 26)
In clause 1(1) for the figure “2007”, the figure “2008” be substituted, consequently
the figure “2007” appears in the short title of the Bill may also be substituted with “2008”.
(Para 27)
In the enacting formula the words ‘Fifty-eighth’ be substituted by ‘Fifty-ninth’.
(Para 28)
The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed in its present form with formal
amendments. However, the Committee hopes that while implementing the provisions of the
Bill, the recommendations made by the Committee in the foregoing paragraphs will be given
due weightage so that the purpose of declaration of the proposed National Waterway should
not be defeated. The Committee also recommends that whenever necessary due
consultations and concurrence of the State Government of Assam be also taken in preparing
developmental plans and on other related issues for the proposed National Waterway .
(Para 29)

17
MINUTES

18

19
X
TENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Thursday, the 18 th April, 2013 in Committee Room ‘B’,
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
5. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
6. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
7. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
9. Yogi Adityanath
10. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
11. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
12. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
13. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
14. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
15. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer
WITNESSES
Ministry of Shipping
1. Shri P.K. Sinha, Secretary
2. Mrs. T. Kumar, Additional Secretary and Financial Advisor
3. Shri M.C. Jouhari, Joint Secretary (S & Parl.)
19

20
4. Shri N. Muruganandam, Joint Secretary (Ports)
5. Shri C.B. Singh, Adviser
6. Ms. Divya Prasad, Joint Secretary (Coord.)
7. Shri Sunil Mishra, Joint Secretary (DGS)
8. Shri B. Poyaamozhi, DA (Ports)
9. Shri P. Sudhir Kumar, Pr. CCA
10. Shri M.M. Hasija, Dy. F.A.
11. Ms. Geetu Joshi, Director (GJ)
12. Shri Ashwani Kumar, Director (AK)
13. Shri R. Srinivasa Naik, Director (RSN)
14. Shri Sambit Tripathi, Director (ST)
Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI)
1. Shri Vishwapati Trivedi, Chairman,
2. Ms. Jayashree Mukherjee Vice Chairman
3. Shri R.P. Khare, Chief Engineer (Civil)
4. Shri A. Banerjee, Chief Ship Surveyor
Attached and Subordinate Offices
1. Shri Goutam Chatterjee, DG (Shipping)
2. Capt. A.M. Surej, DG (Light Houses and Light Ships)
3. Shri Bimal Sinha, Chief Engineer (ALHW)
Ports
1. Shri R.P.S Kahlon, Chairman, KoPT
2. Shri S.S. Mishra, Chairman, PPT
3. Shri Ajeya Kallam, Chairman, VPT
4. Shri Atulya Misra, Chairman, Ch. CPT
5. Shri S. Natarajan, Chairman I/c. V oCPT
6. Dr. P. Tamilvanan, Chairman, NMPT
7. Shri T.S.N. Murthy, Dy. Chairman, NMPT
8. Shri Paul Antony, Chairman, CoPT
9. Shri Rajeev Gupta, Chairman, MBPT
10. Shri S.K. Kaul, Secretary, JNPT
11. Shri A.J. Lokhande, Chief Engineer, JNPT
12. Shri P.D. Vaghela, Chairman, KPT
13. Shri P. Mara Pandian, Chairman, MoPT
14. Shri M.A. Bhaskarachar, CMD, EPL
15. Shri A. Janardhana Rao, MD, IPA
Public Sector Undertakings
1. Shri B.K. Mandal, CMD, SCI
2. Cmde. K. Subramaniam, CMD, CSL

21
3. Shri Manish Jain, CMD, CIWTC and HDPE
4. Capt. D.K. Mohanty, CMD, DCI
5. Capt. M. Baveja, VC I/c., IMU
Ministry of Law and Justice
1. Shri Satish Chandra, Joint Secretary and Legal Adviser
2. Shri Mahesh Tyagi, Dy. Legal Adviser
***
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee.
3. * * *
4. Thereafter, the Committee considered the two Bills referred to the Committee viz. (i) the
Merchant Shipping (Amendment) Bill, 2013 and (ii) The National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013. The Committee asked about the importance of the Bills and
its various aspects. The Secretary, Ministry of Shipping explained about the Bills with the help of
power point presentations. The Committee observed that the National Waterway (Lakhipur-Bhanga
Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013 is a repetition of the Bill the Committee examined and
reported to the Parliament vide its 130
th Report in the year 2008.
5. Members of the Committee also raised various queries. The Secretary replied to the points
raised by the Members of the Committee. The Chairman directed that written replies to the points
not answered, may be sent within a week.
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The meeting adjourned at 5.30 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

22
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 4.00 P.M. on Monday, the 20 th May, 2013 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury  — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
3. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
4. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
5. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
6. Shri Shashi Bhusan Behera
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
8. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
9. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
10. Shri S. Pakkirappa
11. Shri Prabodh Panda
12. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
13. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
14. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
15. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
16. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Dr. (Shrimati) Subhashree Panigrahi, Joint Director
Shrimati A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
***
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. Thereafter, the
Committee considered  the draft One Hundred and Ninety Sixth Report on “The National Waterway
(Lakhipur-Bhanga Stretch of the Barak River) Bill, 2013. The Committee after some discussion
22
*** Relate to other matters.

23
adopted the report with minor modification. The Committee authorized its Chairman to decide a
date for presentation of report to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, as the Parliament is not in
Session and the Report is to be submitted before 25
th June, 2013.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
6. The meeting adjourned at 5.00 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.