 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
September 
  
THREE HUNDRED 
‘Development and Expansion of Existing and New National 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi  
September , 2023 / Bhadra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY EIGHTH REPORT  
‘Development and Expansion of Existing and New National 
Inland Waterways’ 
 
resented to the Rajya Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
358 
  
‘Development and Expansion of Existing and New National 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTY EIGHTH REPORT  
‘Development and Expansion of Existing and New National 
Inland Waterways’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 21 st  September, 2023 ) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
September, 2023 / Bhadra, 1945 (Saka) 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii-iv 
 4. REPORT                                1-55 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   56-74  
6. ANNEXURES         75-104 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended 
105-114


i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2023-24) 
 
 (Constituted on 13 th  September, 2023) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha  
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
7. Shri A. A. Rahim 
8. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
9. (vacant ) 
10. (vacant ) 
 
Lok Sabha 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Shrey Kansal, Secretariat Assistant  
 
 

ii 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Fifty Eighth Repo rt on ‘Development and Expansion of 
Existing and New National Inland Waterways’. 
2. The Committee heard the views of the representat ives of the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping & Waterways and Inland Waterways Authority  of India (IWAI), on the subject, in 
its meeting held on 2 nd  August, 2023. The Committee also took up the issue  during its Study 
Visit to Mumbai and Goa from 5 th  to 8 th  July, 2023 and held discussions with the Ministry of 
Ports, Shipping & Waterways; Inland Waterways Autho rity of India; Jawaharlal Nehru Port 
Authority; Mumbai Port Authority; Mormugao Port Aut hority; and State Governments of 
Maharashtra & Goa. 
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to t he officers of the Ministry of Ports, 
Shipping and Waterways; Inland Waterways Authority of India; Jawaharlal Nehru Port 
Authority; Mumbai Port Authority; Mormugao Port Aut hority; and State Governments of 
Maharashtra & Goa, for placing before the Committee , the material and information desired 
in connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members.   
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 19
th  
September, 2023.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman,  
September 19, 2023                                                 Department-related Parliamentary Standing             
Bhadra 28, 1945 (Saka)                                     Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture,  
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS  
AIS  Automatic Identification System  
APSEZ  Adani Ports and Special Economic Zone  
ATDC  Assam Tourism Development Corporation  
BIWTA  Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Authority  
CAD  Computer-Aided Design 
CAR-D Cargo Data 
CARIS  Computer Aided Resource Information System 
CSEZ  Cochin Special Economic Zone 
DBFOT  Design-Build-Finance-Operate-Transfer  
DG  Director General 
DIB  Development Impact Bond  
DPR  Detailed Project Report  
EoI  Expression of Interest  
EPC  Engineering, Procurement and Construction  
ERDAS  Earth Resources Data Analysis System 
EU  European Union 
EWAC-TG  Eastern Waterways Connectivity Transport Grid 
EXIM  Export-Import 
FY  Financial Year 
GDP  Gross Domestic Product 
GIS  Geographic Information System 
GLIS  Government Land Information System  
GT  Gross Tonnage 
HAM  Hybrid Annuity Model  
HDC  Haldia Dock Complex 
IBP  Indo-Bangladesh Protocol  
ICLP  Industrial cum Commercial Logistics Park  
IIT  Indian Institute of Technology 
IMT  Inter Modal Terminal  
IT  Income Tax 
IW  Inland Waterway 
IWAI  Inland Waterways Authority of India 
IWT  Inland Water Transport 
IWTD  Inland Water Transport Department 
JMVP  Jal Marg Vikas Project  
KM  Kilometre 
KPMG  Klynveld Peat Marwick Goerdeler 
LAD  Least Available Depth  
LADIS  Least Available Depth Information System  
LOC  Line of Credit 
LSP  Logistics Service Provider 

iv 
 
MEA  Ministry of External Affairs 
MIRS  Management Information and Reporting Solution  
MIV  Maritime India Vision  
MMD  Mercantile Marine Department 
MMLP  Multi-Modal Logistics Park 
MMT  Multi-Modal Terminal 
MMTPA  Million Metric Tonnes Per Annum 
MoPS&W  Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways 
MRTS  Mass Rapid Transport System  
MT  Million Tonne 
MTPA  Million Tonne Per Annum 
MV  Motor Vessel 
NDMA  National Disaster Management Authority 
NER  North-Eastern Region 
NH  National Highway 
NRSC  National Remote Sensing Centre 
NTCPWC  National Technology Centre for Ports, Waterways and Coasts 
NW  National Waterway 
PANI  Portal for Navigational Information  
PDC  Project Development Consultant  
PHE  Public Health Engineering 
PIWT&T  Protocol on Inland Water Transit and Trade  
PPP  Public Private Partnership 
PSU  Public Sector Undertaking 
PWD  Public Works Department 
RIS  River Information System  
RSR  Rail-Sea-Rail 
RWG  Regional Waterway Grid  
SDCL  Sagarmala Development Company Limited 
SFC  Standing Finance Committee  
SOI  Survey of India  
SOP  Standard Operating Procedure  
SPV  Special Purpose Vehicle  
UP  Uttar Pradesh 
USA  United States of America 
UT  Union Territory 
WG  Working Group 
 

1 
 
REPORT 
 
Introduction  
 Navigation by inland waterways has always played a dominant role in development of 
trade and commerce along river banks and catchment areas of the navigable river s and canal 
systems. The advent of railways and  continued extension of its network marked a turning point 
for waterways transport in India. Initially, construction of main railway lines gave a spurt to river 
traffic as the two modes supplemented each other, with waterways providing feeder service to 
railways. Th is complementarity between Inland Waterways Transport (IWT) and railways, 
however, remained short-lived. With exponential increase in rail network, new centers of 
economic activity developed away from waterways , eventually leading to loss of  their 
prominence. Be that as it may, the growing road and railway congestion, traffic constraints and 
imperative need for  environmental sustainability in modes of transport have  highlighted the 
innate advantages of inland water transport and refocused attention on this mode of transport.   
2. IWTis the most enviro nment-friendly mode of transport with optimal fuel efficiency and 
lower emission levels. The cost of construction and maintenance of canals is also much less 
compared to other modes of transport  as are the operational costs of waterways. Therefore, IWT 
helps to achieve the  following Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) in 2030 Agenda that 
relate to sustainable transport:- 
 Goal3 - Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages 
 Goal 6 - Ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all 
 Goal 7 - Ensure access to affordable, reliable, sustainable and modern energy for all 
 Goal 9 - Build resilient infrastructure, promote inclusive and sustainable industriali zation 
and foster innovation 
 Goal 10 - Reduce inequality within and among countries 
 Goal 11 - Make cities and human settlements inclusive, safe, resilient and sustainable 
 Goal 13 - Take urgent action to combat climate change and its impacts 
 
 

2 
 
3. A comparis on of logistics cost of waterways against railways and road highways , on 
various parameters is as follows:- 
 
 
Comparative Cost for Movement of Freight 
Mode Railways Highways IWT 
Freight (Rs./Tkm)* 1.36 2.50 1.06 
 
Cheaper Operating Cost and Relatively Lesser Fuel Consumption 
Factors Considered 
Rates Considered 
Waterways Road Rail 
Energy Consumption 0.0048 Litre/TKm 0.0313 Litre/TKm 0.0089 Litre/TKm 
Vehicle Operating 
Cost 0.843 Rs./TKm 1.170 Rs./TKm 1.009 Rs./TKm 
 
More Environment Friendly  
Factors considered 
Rates Considered (Rs./TKm) 
Waterways Road Rail 
Air Pollution 0.03 0.202 0.0366 
Noise Pollution Negligible 0.0032 0.0012 
Soil and Water 
Pollution Negligible 0.005 Negligible 
*(Tonne km (Tkm) – a unit measure of freight transport)  
4. Optimum utilization of waterways is, therefore, essential to reduce logistics costs. India's 
expenditure on logistics costs amounts to approximately 13 -14% of its Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP), which is considerably higher than the global average of around 8%. This  affects the 
competitiveness of Indian businesses.  The logistics sector in India has so far been dominated by 
road and rail transport and freight transportation by waterways is highly underutilized in the 
country, as compared to developed countries . India has an extensive network of inland 
waterways in the form of rivers, canals, backwaters and creeks.  Of the total navigable length of 
20,236 km, 17,980 kms of the rivers and 2,256 km of canals can be used by mechani sed crafts. 
However, waterways have a share of a meager 2% in India’s modal mix whereas it is more than 
10% in most developed countries. The need for maximizing this mode of transportation has been 

3 
 
felt over the years and since 2016 the government has been making  it a mission to reinvigorate 
the inland waterways system. As per the Maritime India Vision (MIV) -2030, the Government 
intends to increase the modal share of IWT to 5% by 2030.  
5. IWT has the potential to supplement the over-burdened railways and congested roadways 
and serve as an economic lifeline for the integrated socio-economic development of the region in 
particular, adjoining the waterway network.  In addition to cargo movement, the carriage of 
vehicles on Roll-on-Roll-off (Ro-Ro) mode of cross ferry in IWT, also meets the convenience of 
the local community as also the tourists.  
6. In view of the  abiding significance of the subject, the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture decided to take up the subject  
‘Development and Expansion of Existing and New National Inland Waterways’ for examination 
and Report . The Committee heard the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways and Inland 
Waterways Authority of India on 2 ndAugust, 2023. During its Study Visit to Mumbai and Goa 
during 5 th-8th July, 2023, the Committee also held deliberations on the subject with the 
representatives of the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways; the State Governments of 
Mumbai and Goa; Jawaharlal Nehru Port Authority; Mumbai Port Au thority; and Mormugao 
Port Authority. Further, the Committee during its Study Visit to Kochi, Thiruvananthapuram and 
Bekal during 4th-8th September, 2023, held meeting with the representatives of the Ministry of 
Ports, Shipping & Waterways; Cochin Shipyard Limited; Inland Waterways Authority of India; 
and the State Government of Kerala, on the subject. 
Role of Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) 
7. IWAI, set up on 27 th October 1986 under the Inland Waterways Authority of In dia Act, 
1985, is entrusted with the regulation and development of Inland Waterways for the purpose of 
inland shipping and navigation. Its important functions are to: 
a) Carry out surveys and investigations for the development, maintenance, and better 
utilization of the National Waterways (NWs) and the appurtenant land for shipping and 
navigation by:   
 Providing infrastructural facilities, conservancy & river training works;   
 Controlling activities of dumping / removal of bed material; 
 Removing / altering any obstruction / impediment; 

4 
 
 Regulating traffic and structure across / under NWs; 
 Disseminating navigational meteorological information; 
 Coordinating with other modes of transport, providing pilotage; and  
 Entering into joint ventures concerning inland shipping by equity participation.  
 
National Waterways 
8. As per the constitutional provisions, the Central Government can undertake development 
and regulation of an inland waterway for navigation, only when it is declared as a National 
Waterway (NW) by an Act of Parliament in line with Entry no. 24 in List -I of the Seventh 
Schedule of the Constitution. Waterways and navigation thereon has been covered in all three 
Lists of the Constitution, Union List (List - 1), State List (List - 2), and Concurrent List (List - 3). 
The Entries relevant to navigation in these Lists are given at Annexure- I. The criteria for 
declaration of an inland waterway as a National Waterway, is given at Annexure-II. 
9. The Ministry of Port s, Shipping & Waterways (MoPS&W) informed the Committee that 
prior to 2016, 05 National Waterways (NWs) had been declared between 1986 and 2008, which 
are as follows:- 
S. No. 
National 
Waterway 
No. 
Length 
(km) Details of Waterways State(s)/UT 
1 National 
Waterway 1 1620 Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly River 
System (Haldia - Allahabad) 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Bihar, Jharkhand 
& West Bengal 
2 National 
Waterway 2 891 Brahmaputra River (Dhubri - Sadiya) Assam 
3 National 
Waterway 3 
205 
West Coast Canal (Kottapuram - 
Kollam), Champakara and 
Udyogmandal Canals Kerala 
170 West Coast Canal (Kottapuram - 
Kozhikode) 
4 National 
Waterway 4 50 Kakinada Canal (Kakinada to 
Rajahmundry) 
Andhra Pradesh, 
Telangana, 

5 
 
171 Godavari river (Bhadrachalam to 
Rajahmundry) 
Chhattisgarh, 
Karnataka, Tamil 
Nadu, Puducherry 
and Maharashtra 139 Eluru Canal (Rajahmundry to 
Vijayawada) 
157 Krishna river (Wazirabad to 
Vijayawada) 
113 Commamur Canal (Vijayawada to 
Peddaganjam) 
316 
North Buckingham Canal 
(Peddaganjam to Central Station of 
Chennai) 
110 South Buckingham canal (Central 
Station of Chennai to Marakanam) 
22 Marakanam to Puducherry through 
Kaluvelly tank 
1202 River Godavari (Bhadrachalam - 
Nashik) 
636 River Krishna (Wazirabad - Galagali) 
5 National 
Waterway 5 
256 East Coast Canal and Matai river 
Odisha and West 
Bengal 
265 Brahmani-Kharsua-Dhamra rivers 
67 
Mahanadi delta rivers (Consisting of 
Hansua river, Nunanala, Gobrinala, 
Kharnasi river and Mahanadi river) 
 
10. In April 2016, with the notification of the National Waterways Act, 2016, an additional 
106 n ew NWs have been declared, thus  increasing the number of Inland Waterways in the 
country from 05 NWs to 111 NWs, taking the total length of NWs from 4,382 km to 20,186 km 
as detailed at Annexure-III. Subsequent to declaration of the 106 new National Waterways, 
IWAI took up the First stage Feasibility Studies for the new NWs. Based on the findings of the 
Feasibility Studies, Second stage study- Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) of qualified NWs have 
been completed. As per the outcome of the above studies, contours of development of NWs have 
been drawn and all the 111 NWs have been categorized (Annexure-IV).  

6 
 
11. The Ministry further informed that out of these total 111 NWs , 23 NWs are  operational 
for shipping and navigation and cargo/passenger vessels are moving on them . One more NW is 
to be made operational by 2024. The details of the operational NWs are given in Annexure–V. 
Further, based on the outcome of techno -economic feasibility and Detail ed Project Reports 
(DPRs), 26 NWs have been found viable by Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) for 
cargo/ passenger movement (Annexure-VI). After technical interventions are undertaken to 
make the waterways navigable for tran sportation purpose, these new waterways will provide an 
alternate mode of transportation in respective areas. The remaining 63 NWs are presently not 
being taken up for want of huge financial and human resources. 
12. The Ministry further informed that there  are two major physical constraints faced in the 
development of IWT, the first being  diversion of water for irrigation, industrial and other needs. 
As per the National Water Policy, n avigation is the last priority in respect of water uses as it is a 
non-consumptive use of water. The second constraint is  excessive silt loads from erosion of 
uplands due to bad catchment management an d increased deforestation. Both the above  two 
factors decrease the flow in rivers, thus redu cing depth and shoal formation . Both constraints 
have been taken into consideration while taking up development of waterways. The prime factor 
of shoal formation and reduction of depth is mainly due to severe erosion of earthen banks of 
rivers and its deposition within 2 -3 km down -stream of such eroded banks. Accordingly, the 
following steps are taken to ensure smooth navigation of the barges without taking up huge 
interventions instead using the available water for navigation:  
 Hydrographic Survey: A longitudinal (Thalweg) survey is co nducted every fortnightly 
in the entire waterway to know the depth availability. Wherever less depth is observed 
during the thalweg survey, detailed survey in the particular location is conducted. As per 
the results of the detailed survey , conservancy  measures are decided. IWAI generally 
takes up fairway development in the deepest portion of 30 to 45 m with navigation 
channel for a depth of maximum 2 to 3 m without affecting the natural ecology and 
habitat of the river. 
 Conservancy measures:  After detailed survey, if it is observed that there is curren t in 
the range between 1 to 2 m / second then bandalling is adopted, which is constructed by 
using bamboos and bamboo - mats in a length of 15 and 30 m of chutes of about 20 in 
number, to divert the flow from the  secondary channel to the main channel. By this 

7 
 
method, deposition takes behind the bamboo -chutes and secondary channel is closed and 
depth naturally increases in the main channel for navigation. However, if the current is 
less than 1 m/second, maintenance dredging is carried out to deepen the channel to 2 to 3 
m.  
 Day and night navigational aids:  Earmarking the 30 to 45m width of the channel are 
also put in the waterway for safety and smooth sailing of the vessel in between the 
channel-marks during the voy age, as well for round the clock navigation in specific 
stretches of the NWs.  
13. The Ministry also informed that the costs/charges applicable on Inland Waterways is as 
per the Gazette Notification of IWAI (levy and collection of fee and charges) (Third amendment) 
Regulations 2021. However, presently, the waterways usage charges have be en kept as Niland 
other charges have been kept at lower level to promote IWT and  encourage the modal shift of 
cargo to Inland Water Transport mode. 
14. The Ministry also apprised the Committee about the budgetary allocations to Inland 
Waterways, the total allocation being Rs. 1007.46 cro re (Capital – Rs. 930.96 crore  and 
Revenue (Interest on EBRs/Bonds- Rs. 76.50 crore) which is sufficient for the present projects 
under development.  
15. The Committee observes that prior to 2016, the Inland Waterways sector  was neglected 
with only 05 National Waterways being developed between 1986 to 2016, despite universal 
acceptance that transportation through waterways is more economical and fuel efficient than rail 
and road. This scenario changed in 2016 with the Governm ent’s commitment to development of 
waterways and the notification of 106 new National Waterways. At the time of the passing of the 
National Waterways Act, 2016, the Committee had been informed that the development of a 
Waterway takes at least 6 -7 years, commencing from hydrographic and techno -economic 
feasibility studies, obtaining environmental, forests and  other clearances and financial approvals, 
to actual development of fairways, terminals, and aids to navigation . Due to the urgent need to 
develop this cost -effective and eco -friendly alternative means of transport, the Ministry had 
notified all 106 identified waterways as National Waterways, without the requisite preliminary 
work, to enable the government to undertake their development as and when the need arises.  
16. The Committee notes  that in the past 05 years, 1 8 more National Waterways have 

8 
 
been operationalized making a total of  23 Operational Waterways from the earlier 05 and 
one more Waterway is to be made operational by 2024 . The Committee appreciates that 
the pace of development of Inland  Waterways has gained considerable traction . The 
Committee has also been informed that presently development activities are being taken up 
only on 20 NWs out of the 23 Operational Waterways . The Committee desires to know the 
reason for lack of development activities on 03 of the 23 Operational NWs, notwithstanding 
the policy priority  to develop the Inland Waterways in the country . The Committee may 
also be informed about the action taken and  timeline chalked out fo r the development of 
the 26 potentially viable NWs.   
17. The Committee further notes that the IWAI has given the following reasons for the non -
operationalization of the remaining 63 waterways:- 
 Inadequate Man-power as manpower sanctioned in IWAI is for 03 NWs 
 varying and limited depths  during lean season due to the excessive upstream 
withdrawal/utilization resulting in lack of discharge of rivers 
  meandering and braiding of alluvial rivers and erosion of their banks causing excessive 
siltation 
 lack of cargo earmarked  for IWT  
 insufficient unloading facility at terminals hinder the use of IWT by shippers  
 lack of first &last  mile connectivity of IWT terminals with other modes  
  lack of vessel financing options ; and 
 apprehension of logistics and shipping market to shift in absence of policy support 
 
18. The Committee notes the IWAI’s submission that the manpower sanctioned in 
IWAI is for 3 National Waterways only. During the discussions with the IWAI at the time 
of deliberations on the National Waterways Bill, 2015, (223rd Report of the Committee) the 
Committee had been informed that the IWAI had a sanctioned strength of 419 with 
additional floating and contractual staff. Further, cadre reorganization in IWAI was 
underway. The Committee desires to know the present sanctioned manpower in IWAI, the 
number of vacancies  available and whether the sancti oned strength had been increased, 
after the said reorganization, at the time of notification of the new  106 waterways or 
anytime thereafter. The Committee would like to know the reas ons if such review was not 

9 
 
carried out, as it reflects on poor management skills on  the part of the Ministry and IWAI. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry and IWAI may take immediate steps to 
review the manpower  requirement for the 23 Operational Wa terways so that such 
constraints which are having a negative impact on  the waterways  development could be 
removed. The Committee is of the opinion that manpower constraints cannot be allowed to 
be the limiting conditions for the implementation of the  development projects that are 
crucial for ensuring the country’s economic prosperity. 
19. Regarding the lack of cargo earmarked for IWT and insufficient facilities, the 
Committee observes that after decades of dependence on road and rail transport, shifting 
from road and rail to waterways would entail redesignating entire supply chains . The 
factors such as the  slow pace of development of IWT, poor hinterland connectivity, high 
investment costs of vessels and equipments , etc.  all discourage companies and shipp ers 
from shifting to the inland waterways mode. The Committee notes the Ministry’s 
submission that waterway usage charges have been kept at Nil and other charges kept at a 
low level to prom ote inland water transport. The Committee , however, feels that 
substantial financial incentives rather than mere waiver of charges would be necessary to 
facilitate the modal shift to waterways. The Committee has been informed that no financial 
incentives are at present proposed by the IWAI. 
20. The Committee observes that  countries such as the N etherlands which already have a 
dense network of waterways still give incentives for enabling the modal shift to inland 
waterways. The European Union has recently adopted the Netherlands model, wherein aid given 
by the G overnment will take the form of non -refundable grants to shippers and logistics 
operators to reward them for the reduction in external costs (such as pollution, noise, congestion 
and accidents) achieved by using inland waterways and rail instead of road transport. 
21. The Committee recommends that given the long term and slow na ture of 
development of IWT, and the huge investments in the creation of requisite  infrastructure 
and facilities and the fact that a large number of waterways are being developed in the 
country simultaneously, the Ministry and IWAI may consider giving  certain financial 
incentives to shippers for the m odal shift to waterways.  The Committee is aware that 
Terminals for loading/unloading of cargo at various locations along the waterway s are one 
of the three essential requirements for successful navigation on Inland Waterways, apart 
from navigable fairways and aids to navigation. The Committee observes that while limited 

10 
 
depths of rivers, erosion and meandering are determined by the forces of nature and 
cannot be easily controlled, factors such as development of loading/unloading facilities at 
Terminals, increase of staff strength to deal with the expansion of operational waterways , 
connectivity to rail and road networks  are not insur mountable obstacles and should be 
taken up with priority in the usual course along with the development plans . The 
Committee observes that the CAG in its Performance Audit Report of Kerala Waterways 
(2015) had pointed out that several PSUs near the Kochi P ort were  transporting large 
volumes of cargo by road and were willing to shift to waterways mode if proper 
loading/unloading facilities were created . The Committee  recommends that the Ministry 
and IWAI should focus on creating adequate  terminal facilities at the loading and 
unloading points and ensure the availability of hinterland connectivity to  encourage 
potential users, manufacturers and shippers to prefer waterways to rail and road.  The 
Committee also observes that one of the proposed initiatives under  the Blue Economy 
Vision 2047 is mandating PSUs and Cooperative Companies to divert 10% of their cargo 
by coastal or inland waterways . The Committee desires to know  as to whether at  present, 
PSUs have been required to transport some percentage of their cargo by waterways.  
22. The Committee notes the other reasons given by IWAI for not taking up the remaining 63 
National Waterways for development at present  due to huge financial and human resource 
involved.  The Committee observes that the cost efficiency of a  waterway depends on a number 
of factors. A waterway having a depth of 2.5 -4.5 metres would be 60 -70% more co st effective 
than the Railways while waterways with less depth would be o nly marginally lower in costs. 
Unavailability of return cargo would further drive up the logistics costs. Cost effectiveness , 
therefore, depends on one waterway to the other.   
23. The Committee further notes that while Inland Waterways is und eniably the most 
environment friendly mode o f transport, development of waterways cannot be undertaken 
without its environmental costs as development activities change a river’s hydrology and 
morphology. Indian rivers support much biodiversity and aquatic life, many of which are 
already endangered due to high levels of pollution. Dredging of the river bed for providing  
requisite draft adversely affects the ecology of the river systems and fish breeding activities. 
While river systems could play a crucial role in cargo transportation and reduction in 
logistics costs especially in landlocked S tates and thus, could be an economic game -

11 
 
changer, the concerns of environmental sustainability should also be given equal 
importance. A case in point is India’s national aquatic animal, the endangered Gangetic 
Dolphin. The NW-1, passes through the Vikramshila dolphin sanctuary, India’s only 
dedicated protected area  for the Gangetic Dolphin , one of  the only three surviving 
freshwater dolphin species in the world . The Gangetic Dolphin s, essentially blind, rely 
heavily on  echolocation, i.e., using sound to navigate  and locate prey , and developmental 
activities such as capital dredging and construction interfere with their activities. The 
Committee observes that speed regulations, buffer zones and regulation of dredging were 
some of the measures proposed to be taken to minimize the deleterious impact on dolphins 
and other aquatic life and desires to know the status of implementation in this regard.   
24. The Committee opines that while development of waterways is crucial for reduction 
of logistics costs and boosting economic growth,  the environmental costs and the cost 
effectiveness of waterways on case to case basis have to  be assessed in tandem with the 
overall economic goals . Moreover, as stated by the Ministry, it takes close to a decade for 
the development and full utilization of a waterway. Out of the five NWs existing prior to 
2016, two NWs have still not been fully developed while development activities have only 
been started on 20 more waterways. In such a scenario, the Committee is in agreement with 
the IWAI that the 63 NWs which are not found to be viable, should at present not be taken 
up for development. The Committee also expresses its displeasure at the declaration of a 
huge number of NWs without making proper assessment about their viability. The 63 
NWs, which have been found to be non -viable have created a peculiar situation whereby 
declaration of a NW through enactment has generated massive popular expectation about 
the development of waterways by the Central Government thus absolving the State 
Government from its responsibility in the development and maintenance of the waterways 
in question, leaving the waterways in a state of perennial neglect and abandonment. 
25. Considering the constraints, t he Committee recommends that the IWAI should 
concentrate its efforts in developing the 23 Operational National Waterways . The 
Committee desir es to know whether all requisite hydrographic and techno -economic 
feasibility studies and environmental and forest clearanc es have been obtained for these 23  
Operational NWs as no such studies had been carried out prior to the notification of the 
new waterways. The Committee exhorts the IWAI to give due importance to environmental 

12 
 
studies along with techno -economic studies in the development projects on the 23 
Operational NWs . The Committee has been informed that the Least Available Depth  
(LAD) for a waterway to be made operational in a profitable way must be two meters. The 
Committee recommends that those waterways which have a naturally available depth of 
two meters and above may be given top priority for development . The Committee also 
recommends that wherever Inland Water Authority of India proposes to conduct feasibility 
study, the State’s representation should be ensured in the proposed feasibility study and 
the State should be given opportunity to be heard and its views on feasibility should be  
adequately taken into account.  
 
Cargo Traffic on National Waterways 
26. The IWAI informed that t otal traffic on National Waterways in 2021 -22 was approx. 
108.79 million tonne (MT) and increased to 126.15 MT in 2022 -23, registering an increase of 
about 16%. The key commodities being transported on waterways are Iron Ore, Coal & Coke, 
Fly Ash, Steel, Lime Stone, Construction material etc. It is targeted to enhance the present 
annual inland water cargo from 126 to 200 MTPA by 2030 as per Maritime India Vision  
2030.The present cargo moved as well as the Target for Cargo Traffic till 2029 -30 on the 24 
NWs is detailed at Annexure-VII. 

13 
 
 
Source: Annual Reports, the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways 
 
27. The Co mmittee observes that while  the quantum of cargo moved on the National 
Waterways shows a huge increase post the declaration of new Waterways in the year 2016, 
much of the cargo movemen t is still contributed by the state  of Maharashtra (63.15 
MMT)i.e., nearly 50% of the total carg o moved on National Waterways. Gujarat 
contributes 27.66 MMT that is  about 21% of the total cargo and the NW -1 contributes 
13.17 MMT that is about 10% of the total cargo moved on National Waterways . The states 
of Maharashtra (mainly NW-10 and NW-91) and Gujarat (mainly NW-100) and the NW-1 
combined contribute about 80% of the total c argo moved on NWs , whereas the balance is 
contributed by the NW-3, NW-4, NW-68 in Goa and the Sunderbans. The contribution of 
all the remaining NWs is  rather miniscule. Even prior to the notification of the NWs, the 
Maharashtra waterways had accounted for more than 50% of the cargo movement in the 
country and as such,  post notification of NWs , and this has led to increase in the cargo 
movement in NWs . While the Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s submission that it 
takes about a decade for proper development of a waterway, the targeted MMTP for 2029-
30 does not appear to be significant.   


14 
 
28. In the Targeted 200 MMTP of 2030, Maharashtra, Gujarat, and NW-1 account for about 
82% while NW-3, NW-4, NW -68 and Sunderbans account for about 15% with  the rest of the 
NWs contributing miniscule percentage. That is, in 2030, four NWs (NW-1, 10, 91 and 100) will 
be contributing 8 2% of the cargo on NWs and other four NWs  (NW-3, NW-4, NW-68 and the 
Sunderbans) will contribute about 15% and the remaining 3% will be contributed by the rest of 
the 16 NWs under development. The targeted MMT in 2030 for NW -14 (Baitarani River) and 
No.31 (Dhansiri) is Nil, as against the present 0.001 MMT  in both cases. The existing MMT for 
NW-16 (Barak River) is 0.01 and the targeted MMT for 2030 is 0.02. Similarly, the existing 
MMT for NW-9 (Alappuzha-Kottayam-Athirampuzha Canal) is 0.02 and the targeted MMT for 
2030 is 0.02.   
29. While the Committee accepts the fact that development of waterways is a long-term 
project, the targeted cargo throughput on 16 of the NWs presently under development 
seems too slow to be of much value . The Committee desires to know the reason for the Nil 
target for NW -14 and NW -31 for the year 2030. The Committee again recommends that 
the IWAI may concentrate on the 23 NWs presently operational  and review the impact of 
the investments on the cargo output  by 2030 before initiating development work on the 
remaining NWs . Any plan for d evelopment of more NWs at this juncture needs to be 
eschewed as the resources available are too thin for any tangible returns on investment.  
 
Inland Waterways under the Maritime India Vision 2030 & 2047 
Maritime India Vision 2030 
30. The theme for Maritime India Vision 2030 is to enhance cargo and passenger movement 
through Inland Waterways. Following initiatives /focus areas have been identified:- 
 Enhancement and development of infrastructure at 23 priority NWs 
 Regional Connectivity with Bangladesh, Nepal, Myanmar and Bhutan,  
 Development of terminal infrastructure for Ro-Ro & Ferry Services and 
 Policy interventions to incentivise development of the IW sector. 
 
Blue Economy Vision 2047 
31. The initiatives under the Blue Economy Vision 2047 are as follows:- 

15 
 
 Enhance regional connectivity through waterways with Bangladesh, Nepal, Myanmar and 
Bhutan – Initially known as EWAC -TG, now renamed as Regional Waterway Grid 
(RWG). 
 Complete Jal Marg Vikas Project (JMVP) and integrate it with Indo -Bangladesh Protocol 
(IBP) Route and Develop multimodal transportation hubs along waterways.  
 Develop first and last mile connectivity along the national waterways. Introduce low draft 
design vessels, mandating PSUs and cooperative companies to divert 10% of their cargo 
by coastal/ inland waterways. 
Key Targets 
32. The key targets of both Maritime India Vision 2030 and Blue Economy Vision 2047:- 
Maritime India Vision 2030 
S. No. Key performance indicators 
Current 
(Feb., 
2021) 
Target 
(2030) 
1. 
# of operational National waterways for Cargo and ferry 
movement 
16 23 
2. Annual cargo moved on National Waterways 73 MTPA 
>200 
MTPA 
3. Modal share of Inland cargo movement 2% 5% 
4. 
Annual passengers moved by ferry 
operations 
14 cr. 70 cr 
5. # of Operational waterways for river cruise movement 6 > 10 
Blue Economy Vision 2047 
S. No. Aspiration 
Present 
Scenario 
2024 2047 
1. Operational waterways 22 24 50+ 
2. 
Cargo handled by IWT (Million Metric Tons 
Per Annum)- MMTPA 
126.15 >130 >400 
 
Current Projects on the Operational Waterways  

16 
 
Project on NW-1  
33. The Ministry has informed that for capacity augmentation of navigation on NW -1, the 
Government is implementing the Jal Marg Vikas Project (JMVP) on the Haldia – Varanasi (1390 
km) stretch of Ganga -Bhagirathi-Hooghly River System with the technical and financial 
assistance of the Wo rld Bank, at a revised estimated cost of Rs. 4633.81 crore. The project is 
scheduled to be completed in December 2023. An expenditure of Rs. 2464.53 crore (approx.) has 
been incurred in the time period of four years after statutory clearances of the projec ts till 30 th 
June, 2023. 
 
34. The JMV project has achieved an ove rall financial progress of 53.92 % of revised cost 
(INR 4 ,634 crores) and physical progress of 54.20%, as on 31 st July, 2023. The Major sub -
projects of JMV Project implemented /under implementation are:- 
 Multimodal terminal at Varanasi, UP - Physical progress is 100%; and financial progress is 
Rs. 182.33 crore. Phase-I was completed and inaugurated by Hon’ble Prime Minister on 12 th 
November, 2018 


17 
 
 Multi modal terminal at Sahibganj - Physical progress is 100% and financial progress is Rs. 
275.66 crore. Phase -I was completed and inaugurated by Hon’ble Prime Minister on 12th 
September, 2019 
 Multimodal terminal at Haldia, West Bengal - Physical progress is 99.61%; and financial 
progress is Rs. 509.05 crore. The project was inaugurated by Hon’ble Prime Minister on 13th 
January, 2023. The terminal will connect not only to Varanasi, but through Bangladesh to 
India’s North Eastern side, the Brahmaputra, the Barak River and Gumti River. 
 Construction of New  Navigational Lock at Farakka - Physical progress is 97.75%; and 
financial progress is Rs. 366.27 crore. The civil work of lock gate is substantially completed. 
 Fairway development with Least Assured Depth in NW -1 ( Assured depth means a bid is 
given for th ree to five years in which the contractors have to dredge and maintain a fixed 
depth which is monitored by a third party ):Farakka-Kahalgaon stretch (146 Kms), 
Sultanganj-Mahendrapur stretch (74 kms) and Mahendrapur -Barh stretch (71 kms) through 
Performance Based Assured Dredging contracts. The contracts were awarded on 09 th April, 
2018, 12 th April, 2019 and 12th April, 2019 at costs of Rs.177.00 crore, 159.30 crore and 
182.9 crore, respectively. Financial Progress and physical progress of the said projects is as 
follows:- 
 (1) Farakka-Kahalgaon stretch: Rs. 174.21 crore. ; 100% physical progress 
 (2) Sultanganj- Mahendrapur stretch: Rs. 100.98 crore.; 78.34% 
 (3) Mahendrapur-Barh stretch: Rs. 97.38 crore ; 78.34% 
35. Major remaining Procurement: Tentative Timeline and Current Status for Fairway 
Development is attached at Annexure-VIII. 
 Construction of Inter Modal Terminal (IMT) at Kalughat - Notification of Award issued on 
10.09.2021, the contract was signed on 26.11.2021 and work is under progress. Presently, 
physical progress stands at 60.10% and financial progress at 40.76 %. Terminal  will connect 
North Bihar as well as Nepal.  
36. The Committee notes that the existing navigational lock at Farakka was constructed 
in 1987 and is in need of major repairs . Due to lack of proper maintenance of lock,  the 
waterways infrastructure is facing a  great deal of problems  which is causing inefficiencies 
in movement of vessels.  Development of a new lock would immensely enhance transport 
efficiency on NW -1 as it will reduce the turnaround time from the present 02 hours to 23 

18 
 
minutes only (for a two wa y traffic). The project was conceived in November, 2014 and 
received the Cabinet approval in January, 2018. The Committee is dismayed to note that 
the project which is so essential to JMV Project has been much delayed. The Committee 
recommends the IWAI to take all efforts to complete the project expeditiously in a time -
bound manner. 
37. The Committee  observes that the IWAI had received cargo commitments from 
various industries, shippers and manufacturers before the operationalization of the Haldia 
MMT mainly for fly-ash, edible oil, vegetable oil and gypsum. The Committee would like to 
be informed about the types of major cargos handled at these Terminals in the last three 
years, whether the targeted cargo handling capacity of the Multi -Modal Terminals at 
Varanasi, Sahibganj and Haldia have been achieved, and the total employment generated 
by the operationalization of these three MMTs. The Committee has also been informed that 
the Varanasi MMT is proposed to be linked by rail to the Eastern Dedicated Freight 
Corridor at Jeonathpur and the Sahibganj MMT is to be linked by rail to the Sakri Gali 
Station. The Committee understands that while both MMTs have  dependable road 
connectivity, rail connectivity is yet to be established. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may ensure that rail connectivity is established as per a targeted schedule for both 
MMTs.   
38. The Committee notes that Performance Based Dredging Contracts awarded pertain 
to only 3 stretches, Farakka -Kahalgaon, Sultanganj-Mahendrapur and Mahendrapur -
Barh out of which only the Farakka -Kahalgaon stretch has been physically completed.  
Dredging contracts are yet to be awarded in  the remaining seven stretches.  Bids received 
are being evaluated in the stretches perta ining to Varanasi -Ghazipur, Ghazipur-Majhaua, 
Majhaua-Digha, Digha-Barh, Farakka -Katwa, Farakka -Tribeni and the Haldia Access 
Channel. Out of the nearly 1217 kms, dredging contract has been awarded in a portion of 
291 kms and  completed in a small portion o f 146 kms. The remaining stretches have 
tentative completion dates mostly in 2026. The Committee finds that the work pertaining to 
dredging for development of the fairways has a sluggish pace and recommends that it may 
be completed in a time-bound schedule.   
 
39. In its interaction with the IWAI in 2013, the Committee had been informed that 
IWAI aimed to provide LAD of 3.0 m  in Haldia-Farakka, 2.5 m in Farakka -Barh and 2.0 

19 
 
m in Barh-Ghazipur. The Committee desires to know whether the IWAI has  been 
successful in maintaining the targeted LAD in the respective Fairways.   
 
40. Under JMV Project, a sustainable economic development model project JMVP -II (Arth 
Ganga) with an estimate cost of Rs. 746.00 crore envisaged for the activities in and around the  
hinterland of river Ganga i.e., NW-1, by providing opportunity to support the farmers, traders, 
small-scale industries, cultural integration through pa ssengers and tourist movements. The 
development of about 62 Nos. of community jetties under JMVP -II (Arth Ganga) would 
facilitate transport of passenger and goods/local produce thereby connecting the settlements 
alongside the river Ganga. 12 community jetties in Uttar Pradesh have been c ompleted and 
works on the same in Bihar, Jharkhand and West Bengal are under implementation.  
41. Also under JMVP -II on NW -1, five locations for Ro –Ro terminals have been identified 
[Rajmahal (Jharkhand) – Manikchak (West Bengal), Samdaghat (Jharkhand) – Manihari (Bihar), 
Bakhtiyarpur (Bihar) – Mahnar (Hasanpur) (Bihar), Kahalgaon (Bihar) – Tintanga (Bihar), 
Buxar (Bihar)- Sarai Kota (Uttar Pradesh)] to facilitate public for safe crossing of the river. 
 
Promotion of Economic Activities near Inland Waterways 
42. At present, the production and warehouse infrastructure in India is configured to take the 
advantages of rail, road, and port infrastructure, thereby making inland waterways less attractive 
to the industry. Further, the Ministry of Commerce and Indust ry has requested the Ministry of 
Ports, Shipping & Waterways, for policy support for promoting and establishing industrial 
production units along the waterways. IWAI has the following terminals/jetties, wherein most of 
these terminals have open and covered storage facilities, as detailed below:- 
 National Waterway (NW)-1:(i) Varanasi MMT, (ii) Gaighat Patna, (iii) Sahibganj MMT, 
(iv) Garden Reach Jetty I, Kolkata  (v) Garden Reach Jetty II, Kolkata (vi) Haldia MMT, 
(vii) Farakka Jetty (of Farakka Barrage Project) and (viii) Pakur Jetty (of Farakka 
Barrage Project)  
 National Waterway (NW)-2 :(ix) MMT Pandu, Guwahati and (x) Dhubri.  
 National Waterway (NW)-3:(xi) Kottapuram, (xii) Aluva, (xiii) CSEZ (Kakkanad), (xiv) 
Maradu, (xv) Vaikkom, (xvi) Thannermukkom, (xvii) Alappuzha, (xviii) 

20 
 
Thrikunnappuzha, (xix) Kayamkulam, (xx)  Chavara,  (xxi) Kollam, (xxii) Bolgatty and 
(xxiii) Willingdon Island.   
 National Waterway (NW)-16:(xxiv) Badarpur and (xxv) Karimganj. 
 
43. Further, Industrial cum Commercial Logistics Park (ICLP), Sahibganj is und er 
implementation and Freight Village at Varanasi is at planning stage. The Ministry also added 
that establishing permanent terminals on the waterfront of National Waterways are facilities 
crated on shore, providing facilities to vessels for berthing and l oading and un-loading of cargo. 
Although, significant operation of loading and unloading of cargo at these terminals is yet to be 
picked up, these have been constructed after studies and taking care of environmental guidelines/ 
legislations in this regard.  Creation of such facilities on NWs are not seen with any adverse 
impact of the river ecology. 
44. The Committee observes that Arth -Ganga is one of the pillars of “Namami Gange,” 
a sustainable economic model initiative to connect people and the river through the bridge 
of economy. Arth Ganga strives to boost economy and livelihood in the Ganga Basin  in such a 
way that 3% of GDP comes from the Ganga Basin. The Committee understands that there are 
six pillars under Arth Ganga, Zero Budget Natural Farming, Monetization of Reuse of Sludge 
& Wastewater, Livelihood Generation, Cultural Heritage and Tourism, Public Participation and 
Institution Buildin g, each of which will contribute to boosting economic development and 
employment generation in the Gangetic Basin. The development of community jetties and Ro-Ro 
Terminals by the Ministry and IWAI would make transportation of goods easier and more cost 
effective and give farmers a better return for their produce.   
45. The Committee has been informed that 12 Community Jetties have  been completed 
in UP and work is in  progress in the remaining Jetties in UP, Bihar, Jharkhand and West 
Bengal. The Committee observes that out of the 62 Community Jetties, 15 are in Uttar 
Pradesh, 22 in Bihar & Jharkhand and 22 in West Bengal  (ANNEXURE-IX). No 
Community Jetty has yet been completed in Bihar, Jharkhand, and West Bengal . NIT 
(Notice Inviting Tender) has been floated in 11 of the 22 proposed Community Jetties i n 
West Bengal and there is no work in progress in the remaining 11 Jetties. No Tenders have 
been floated as yet for any of the 22 Community Jetties in Bihar and Jharkhand as work is 
claimed to be in progress in all of them.   

21 
 
46. The Committee observes that the Ganga is a part of Indian identity and the very 
embodiment of Indian Culture . The extensive basin of the Ganga accounts for one -fourth 
of India’s water resources and is home to a third of India’s population . Life without the 
Ganga is unimaginable to the communities living beside the river and the entire concept of 
the Arth Ganga programme is to link people with the river through the bridge of economy . 
The development of Community Jetties and Ro -Ro Terminals are thus, essential for 
channelizing economic activity along the banks of the Ganges and the Committee is 
dismayed to observe the slow pace of construction of such essential infrastructure . The 
Committee desires to know  the reasons behind the lack of progress in con struction of 
community jetties and   RO-RO Terminals in Bihar and Jharkhand and West Bengal.   
 
Projects in NW-2 in the North Eastern Region   
47. The Ministry informed the Committee that the river Brahmaputra, having a length of 891 
km between Bangladesh Border and Sadiya (Assam), was declared as NW -2 in 1988. NW -2 
provides alternate connectivity to NER through 1,700 km Indo-Bangladesh Protocol routes. 
 


22 
 
48. The existing terminals include high and low level jetties at Pandu with railway 
connectivity with K amakhya Railway Station, Ro -Ro terminal at Dhubri, 09 floating terminals 
and Navigational aids.  A navigable fairway of 45 -meter width and 2.5 meter Least Available 
Depth (LAD) from Dhubri to Dibrugarh (768km) and 1.5 -meter LAD from Dibrugarh to Sadiya 
(123km) or Dibrugarh to Oriumghat (92km) is operational for movement of cargo. 
49. Least Available Depthof 2.5 m, 2.0 m and 1.5 m is being maintained on the stretches of 
Dhubri-Neamati (629km); Neamati -Dibrugarh; and Dibrugarh -Sadiya, respectively. Fortnightly / 
monthly Thalweg surveys, needed for analysis of bed forms and the movement of sand waves 
through rivers, have been carried out  in the entire waterway and based upon these hydrographic 
surveys, regular river notices and Least Available Depth (LAD) details are published on the 
IWAI website (iwai.nic.in) for dissemination to waterway users to plan and promote inland water 
transport movement. Channel marking for day navigation has been provided and maintained in 
the entire waterway. Night navigation aids have also been provided between Dhubri and Silghat 
(440 km) stretch and are being maintained. 
50. The Committee was further informed that the proposal for development of NW -2 has 
been approved at a revised Standing Finance Committee (SFC) cost of Rs. 474.00 cro re 
during 2020-21 to 2024-25.  
51. There are 18 activities approved by SFC and Development Impact Bond (DIB) for NW-2. 
Out of these 18 activities, 06 are of permanent nature viz., 
(i) Construction of Jogighopa terminal;  
(ii) Alternative Road to Pandu Port - Estimated Cost is Rs. 180.00 crore and scheduled to be 
completed by March, 2026) 
(iii) Ship repair facility at Pandu - Estimated Cost is Rs. 208.00 crore and scheduled to be 
completed by March, 2025 
(iv) Construction of Cargo cum Passenger terminal at Bogibeel, Dibrugarh (new component);  
(v)  Boundary wall at IWAI parcel of land at Pandu, Neamati and Nagaghuli; and  
(vi)  Improvement of existing approach road including study & land acquisition for Dhubri 
Terminal.  
The physical progress for alternate road to Pandu Port is 18% and Ship Repair 
Facility is 2%, respectively, as on 30.06.2023.  

23 
 
52. The remaining 12 activities are of recurring nature viz., (i) Fairway development; (ii) 
O&M of navigational aids; (iii) O&M of fixed & floating terminals; (iv) O&M of vessels; (v) 
Consultancy training; and (vi) Maintenance of e-portal, etc. These activities are carried out on an 
annual basis.  
53. A floating terminal at Sonamura (Tripura) is also being constructed for th e movement of 
cargo and ferry (Estimated Cost is Rs. 6.91 crore and it is scheduled to be completed by October, 
2023). The physical and financial progress of the project is 25% and 11%, respectively.   
54. The Committee notes that presently 80 MTPA cargo moves into and within the 
North Eastern Region and is handled by either rail or road.  The landlocked NER is 
connected with mainland by only the narrow 22 -km-long Siliguri corridor which along 
with the challenging geography and topography of the region crea tes road and rail 
congestion and hampers connectivi ty of the north -eastern states. Development of NW -2 as 
a Multi Modal Terminal, is therefore, important to augment the Logistics infrastructure of 
the North-Eastern Region, hitherto largely dependent on rail and road. Jogighopa, due to 
its geographical location, holds immense potential to serve the hinterlands of Upper Assam, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Meg halaya, Nagaland. The Committee appreciates the  initiative of  
IWAI and the Ministry as the Terminal proposed here would prove to be a game changer 
for the entire North Eastern Region as well as the neighbouring countries o f Bhutan, Nepal 
and Bangladesh. The Committee, however, expresses concern at the slow pace of the 
project. Besides, the NHIDCL is yet to appoint an Authority Engineer for the project.  The 
Committee desires to know the reasons for the same  and recommends that action may be 
taken at the earliest in this regard.   
55. The Committee understands that the ship repair facility at Pandu will enable repair 
of inland vessels with dry docking in the North-Eastern Region itself instead of having to go 
to Kolkata, which will result in less cost and shorter repair time. The Commit tee observes 
that the announcement of the Ship Repair Project at Pandu was made in August, 2021 and 
the construction was to commence from May, 2022 to be completed by 2024.  The project is 
now rescheduled for completion by 2025.  While some delay is unders tandably due to the 
Covid pandemic, the Committee notes  that as proposals for construction of a ship repair 
facilities at Guwahati were under consideration for many years before the finalization of 

24 
 
this project, the IWAI should take every measure to ensur e that the project is completed as 
per schedule.   
56. The Committee notes that an alternative road to Pandu port had been proposed 
since 2011 at a then estimated cost of Rs. 12.32 crores but due to various reasons, could not 
be constructed.  CAG in its Report No. 15 of 2016 had commented adversely that due to the 
lack of this alternate road, the available infrastructure at Pandu port was lying largely 
unutilised. The Committee observes that the proposal has been deferred for nearly more 
than a decade despi te CAG observations and the Alternate Road is now proposed to be 
built at a cost of Rs. 186 crores by 2026.  The Committee feels that this indicates apathy on 
the part of the Ministry and IWAI that an important infrastructure project which would 
have benefitted the region should have been allowed to be delayed for such a long time and 
recommends that the IWAI may ensure that there is no further delay in this project.  The 
Committee also desires to have the feedback from the IWAI on the reasons for the cost 
escalation of this project.  The Committee also desires to know whether the broad gauge 
rail siding between Pandu Terminal and Guwahati Railway station is no w fully operational 
as the CAG had in its report commented adversely on the same.   
 
57. The Committee had asked for information about any surveys done by the IWAI to 
tap the potential of developing waterways systems in the North Eastern Region beyond 
Dibrugarh but the IWAI has only replied that Regular Thalweg Surveys are being carried 
out up to Sadiya beyond Dibrugarh, i.e., up to the declared National Waterway No. 2 
stretch. The Committee notes that only the NW-2 is presently operational in the North-East 
region though four NWs  i.e., NW no. 2,16,31 and 57, all in Assam have been ident ified as 
viable.  Besides, the w ork on the development of NW -2 has also been going at a much 
slower pace.  The Committee recommends that the IWAI may give special consideration to 
the North-Eastern region and attach top priority to the development of waterways in that 
region.  
 
Development of NW-16 and Indo-Bangladesh Protocol (IBP)  
58. Declared as National Waterway -16 (NW-16), Barak River connects Silchar, Karimganj 
and Badarpur in Cacher valley of Assam through road/waterway with Haldia and Kolkata ports 
through Indo-Bangladesh Protocol (IBP) Route. This route at a cost of Rs. 148.00 cr ore during 

25 
 
2020-21 to 2024-25 was approved by SFC. There are 10 activities as approved by SFC for NW -
16 and IBP route. Out of these 10 activities, 03 are of permanent nature viz.,  
i. Construction of Terminal at Sonamura on Gumti river,  
ii. Construction of terminal at Maia on Ganga River and  
iii. Upgradation of Badarpur and Karimganj terminals, which are in consideration.  
 
59. The remaining 07 activities are of recurring nature viz., 
i. Fairway development, 
ii. O&M of navigational aids, 
iii. Consultancy training, 
iv. Cargo promotion and  
v. Amenities at Ports of Call, etc.  
 
60. The Committee notes that though the date of completion of the Sonamura Terminal 
is in October, 2023, yet the physical progress is merely 25%. The Committee also notes that 
the scheduled completion time of the upgradation of Badarpur and Karimganj Terminals 
was March, 2023 and desires to know whether the work on these projects could be 
accomplished as per schedule. 
 
 
Indo Bangladesh Protocol on Inland Water Transit and Trade 
 61. An Inland Water Transit and Trade Protocol exists between India and Bangladesh since 
1972. Under this Protocol, Inland vessels of one country can ply on the designated waterway 
routes of another country. There are specified inland water rou tes under this Protocol. In 
addition, there is as equal number of Ports of Call in each country for Export -Import (EXIM) 
trade through IWT. The existing protocol is valid upto June, 2025. The designated Inland Water 
Routes under this protocol are: 
1 & 2 Kolkata – Silghat& vice versa    : 1720 km 
3 & 4 Kolkata – Karimganj/Badarpur & vice versa   : 1339 km 
5 & 6 Dhulian – Aricha& vice versa     : 270 km 
7 & 8 Silghat – Karimganj/Badarpur & vice versa   : 1437 km 

26 
 
9 &10 Sonamura- Daudkandi& vice versa    : 93 km 
 
62. Ports of Call: Till May, 2020, there were six Ports of Call each in India and Bangladesh 
under the Protocol. Five more Ports of Call and two more extended Ports of Call have been 
added, increasing the number to eleven Ports of Call and two extended  Ports of Call in each 
country. 
63. Fairway Development by Dredging of IBP Route in Bangladesh : The estimated cost 
of the project is Rs. 305.84 crore, funded through the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) to 
adopt a cost -sharing ratio of 80:20 between India and Bangladesh. Initial dredging has 
commenced from March, 2019 in Ashuganj -Zakiganj stretch and April, 2019 in Sirajganj -
Daikhowa stretch and the same were  completed in April, 2021. The maintenance dredging for 
Ashuganj-Zakiganj and Sirajganj -Daikhowa stretch will be continued upto March, 2026 and 
April, 2026, respectively . The Standard Operating Procedure of MoU on Passenger and Cruise 
services on the Coastal and Proto col route between India and Bangladesh was signed on 25 th 
October, 2018. River cruises are operating from Kolkata – Dhaka - Guwahati stretch and vice -
versa successfully since March, 2019. 
 
Trade on the Indo-Bangladesh Protocol Route  
64. Upon a query of th e Committee regarding the operationalization of the Indo-Bangladesh 
Protocol route number 5 and 6, which will significantly lower travel time to Bangladesh and the 
North Eastern states, thereby boosting trade and improving connectivity , the Ministry stated that 
a joint survey has been conducted in the Dhuliyan – Aricha stretch (IBP route 5, 6)  but there has 
been no further progress.  The matter has been taken up at appropriate level between India and 
Bangladesh. The way forward for expeditious operationalisation of this route is that IWAI has to 
be entrusted responsibility to co -ordinate directly with Bangladesh Inland Water Transport 
Authority (BIWTA). 
65. Further, the Ministry stressed upon the benefits that will be achieved though this inl and 
waterway in terms of time  saving as also  cost saving. The operationalization of Rajshahi -
Dhulian-Rajshahi Routes and their extension up to Aricha (270 km) will help  exponentially the 
development of infrastructure in Bangladesh, as it would reduce the transportation cost of stone 
chips/aggregate to northern part of Bangladesh through this route. It will also decongest Land 

27 
 
Custom Stations in both sides. The cargo of 2.63 million to ns can be diverted at the proposed 
IWT terminal at Dhulian (Maia) with stone chips as the major commodity. Benefits by 
operationalisation of Dhulian -Aricha route is saving in waterway travel route of about 935 km 
for the cargo from NW -1-Jangipur Barrage th rough Farraka Feeder Canal destined to Aricha, 
Bangladesh and north-east avoiding the existing longer route via Kolkata-Sunderbans IBP route 
in Bangladesh. Accordingly, it may save about 78 hrs (average 12km/hr for cargo vessel) of 
sailing time and cost. 
66. The Committee also enquired into the details of other such inland waterway routes that 
have been proposed to improve trade and connectivity with other neighbouring countries like 
Bhutan and Nepal. The Ministry stated the following:- 
 Enabling Bhutan-Bangladesh trade via NW-2: Bhutan has been exporting significant 
quantity of stone aggregates through the land route for different construction projects in 
Bangladesh. Stone exporters have identified Inland waterways as an alternate mode of 
transportation considering the benefits a ssociated with waterways mode such as lower 
transportation cost, larger shipment size compared to road, avoiding congestion on land 
routes, etc. 
 In the first such movement of its kind, 1,005 tonne of crushed stone aggregates 
originating from Bhutan was tra nsported from IWAI's jetty at Dhubri (Assam) on NW -2 
to Narayanganj, Bangladesh on 11 th July, 2019. Stone aggregates were transported using 
trucks from Bhutan based stone quarries to IWAI's Dhubri jetty and subsequently loaded 
on IWAI's Motor Vessel (MV) AAI, using mechanized loading system. 
 With successful completion of five pilot movements for bulk and containerised cargo, 
more than 10 movements of Bhutanese stone chips to Bangladesh in Financial Year (FY) 
2019-2020 and development of critical stretches o n the IBP route, traffic on NW -2 is 
expected to increase in the coming years between Bhutan and Bangladesh. This 
movement evinced confidence in the Bhutanese exporters to increasingly shift to 
waterways mode and increase the trade of stone aggregates and o ther commodities 
between Bhutan and Bangladesh. As a result of th is, movement of stone aggregates has 
become regular between Dhubri and Chilmari (Bangladesh) and  a total of 221 vessels 
loaded with 31068.34 MT Stone Aggregates from Bhutan have sailed from D hubri to 
Chimari in Bangladesh during FY 2021-2022. 

28 
 
 Inclusion of IWT mode in the Indo Nepal trade treaty:  Inland waterways mode has 
been agreed for inclusion in the trade treaty between India and Nepal. This will allow 
Nepal bound cargo (coming from 3rd country via Kolkata port and India’s exports) to take 
waterway up to Sahibganj Multi -Modal Terminal (MMT) (Jharkhand), proposed 
Kalughat terminal near Patna (Bihar) and Varanasi MMT (UP) and further movement to 
Nepal via road. The IWT route will provide an a lternate option to the traffic, which 
currently faces significant challenges such as congestion and delays on the rail and road 
mode. 
 Trade between Bhutan and Bangladesh : Stone exporters from Bhutan have identified 
Inland waterways as an alternate mode of transportation considering the benefits 
associated with waterways mode such as lower transportation cost, larger shipment size 
compared to road, avoiding congestion on land routes , etc. The first movement under 
supervision of IWAI was successfully executed  in July 2019. This movement evinced 
confidence in the Bhutanese exporters to increasingly shift to waterways mode and 
increase the trade of stone aggregates and other commodities between Bhutan and 
Bangladesh. As a result of the success of the first movem ent, transportation of stone 
aggregates has become regular between Dhubri and Chilmari (Bangladesh) and more 
than 10 shipments of approx. 100 -300 tonne size have been completed in FY -20. This 
trade using the IWT mode is expected to continue and reach a sig nificant volume in the 
coming years. 
 
 Indo-Myanmar Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport Project:  The project is being 
implemented to provide an alternate connectivity to North East through Kaladan River &  
Sittwe Port in Myanmar. The project includes road connectivity from Mizoram to 
Paletwa (Myanmar), thereafter waterway connectivity from Paletwa to Sittwe (Myanmar) 
and coastal connectivity from Sittwe to any port in India and vice versa. IWAI is the 
Project Development Consultant (PDC) of the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) for 
implementation of Port and IWT components of Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport 
Project in Myanmar. The project is piloted and funded by  the MEA. An agreement 
between MEA and I WAI in this regard was signed on 19 th March, 2009 and 
supplementary agreement was signed on 28th April, 2016. 

29 
 
 Phase-I of the project which involved fairway development/Sea dredging in Sittwe port 
area; construction of Port and IWT terminals at Sittwe and P aletwa; fairway 
development/dredging at Sittwe -Paletwa stretch of Kaladan River; and construction of 
06 IWT vessels (300 ton each) is completed and handing over was also completed on 
31st January, 2020. Further, Sittwe Port constructed under this project h as been 
designated on 29 th November, 2022 as International Multi -Modal customs transit jetty 
by Government of Myanmar and is ready for operation. Trial run of Cargo Ship with 
2500T of Rice from Sittwe, Myanmar to Chittagong, Bangladesh was completed in 
January, 2023. Inaugural run of cargo vessel with 1000T cement from Kolkata to Sittwe 
Port in Myanmar was successfully completed and the Sittwe port was inaugurated on 
9th May, 2023.  
 
67. Further, the Government has taken the following steps to enter into more MoUs and 
partnerships with respect to the development of IWT:- 
 The 2nd addendum to Protocol on Inland Water Transit and Trade (PIWT&T - signed on 
06.06.2015) between India and Bangladesh has been signed on 20 th May, 2020 where in 
the number of Indo Ba ngladesh Protocol  routes are increased from 8 to 10 and new 
locations are also added to the existing routes. There were six Ports of Call each in India 
and Bangladesh under the PIWT&T. Five more Ports of Call and two more extended 
Ports of Call have been a dded increasing the number to eleven Ports of Call and two 
extended Ports of Call in each country. 
 The SoP of MoU on Passenger and Cruise services  on the Coastal and Protocol  route 
between India and Bangladesh was signed on 25 th October 2018. Ever since, o peration 
of river cruises has commenced their voyage from Kolkata -Dhaka - Guwahati stretch or 
vice-versa since then successfully. 
 Development of Ashuganj Port: BIWTA, Bangladesh has informed that the project for 
“Establishment of Inland Container River Port at Ashuganj at th e estimated cost of the 
project 129300/- (in lakh taka) under Line of Credit (LOC) is also under implementation. 
The Project implementation period is from July, 2018 to December, 2021. 
 

30 
 
68. The Committee observes that the North -Eastern Re gion is strategically and 
economically important being the gateway to the South East Asia but in the decades since 
independence, the region had to face connectivity hurdles with mainland India due to poor 
conditions of roads, fre quently washed away by floo ds. The River navigation system offers 
natural navigation channels connecting the entire NER region.   
69. The Committee observes that the “Act East Policy” (AEP) of the Government 
strives to promote economic cooperation and cultural ties with the countries in  the Asia-
Pacific region by providing enhanced connectivity to the North -Eastern States.  Regional 
connectivity initiatives   act as force multipliers for regional growth and development while 
enhancing people to people contact and enhancing economic coope ration. One of the 
important components of the Act East Policy is the Kaladan Multimod al Transit Project in 
Myanmar. The Committee appreciates the efforts made for the operationalisation of the 
Sittwe port which connects Kolkata with Myanmar over the Kalad an River, thus 
promoting bilateral and regional trade.  The Committee , however, notes that the Kaladan 
project has seen many delays in the implementation of the first phase and revised deadlines 
and recommends that the IWAI and the MEA may ensure that the second phase of the 
project in which the waterway and road components of KMTTP will link the East coast of 
India to the North -eastern states through the Sittwe port would be completed as per 
schedule.   
70. The Committee desires to know  the number of voyages made in the IBP route in 
2022-23.  The Committee notes that the Protocol provides for a 50:50 ratio for sharing on 
tonnagebasis for inter -country and transit cargo by Indian and Bangladeshi vessels. The 
Committee desires to know the number of Indian vessels actually plying on the Indo -
Bangladesh Protocol Route as compared to Bangladeshi vessels in 2022-23.  The Committee 
has been informed that in 2018 -19, approximately 600 Bangladeshi vessels and 40 Indian 
vessels used the IBP route a nd in subsequent years also the number of Indian vessels has 
been much less than Bangladeshi vessels and desires to know the reasons for the same.   
The Committee further observes that the IWAI , as per its website,  has 121 vessels 
(including 13 accommodat ion boats, 07 cargo vessels, 03 classic watermaster, 01container 
crane, 09 crane pontoons, 12 cutter suction dredgers, 03 hydraulic surface dredger, 01 
container crane, 07 inspection boats, 01 Ro-Ro cargo, 18 survey vessels, 34 terminal barges 

31 
 
and 12 work boats/ tags) and desires to know whether the number is sufficient for full 
utilization of the protocol route.   
71. Upon query of the Committee, the IWAI informed that the IWAI Board has considered 
Agenda 185.04 i.e., Framing of Subsidy scheme for Procurement of Ro -Ro, Ro-Pax, Dredgers 
and other Inland Vessels by any State Governments and Union Territories or Private 
Individuals/Firms in 185th Authority meeting held on 31 st May, 2023 and forwarded the same to 
MoPS&W for further consideration and approval of Government. This scheme is  valid for 15 
years and provides for rate of financial assistance for construction of inland vessels from 40% in 
first five years to 31% in the last 01 year and as also applicable for charte red hire vessel where 
financial assistance of 35% to 26% is applicable on year -to-year basis over the differential of 
book value taking into account straight line depreciation of 35% per year.  The guidelines for 
providing subsidy for procurement of inland  vessels, its eligibility criteria etc. and will include 
the following vessels: - 
a) Inland Vessels (Ro -Ro, Ro-Pax, Dredgers and other Inland Vessels) of maximum 2000 
GT.  
b) Inland River Cruise Vessels with minimum one night stay of maximum of 2000 GT. 
c) River Sea vessels of minimum 100 GT and maximum of 3000 GT.    
d) Vessels on Charter hire basis with differential rate of Subsidy.  
72. The estimated cost of the scheme is Rs. 950 crore and the duration of the scheme is from 
(FY 2023–24 to 2038 –39) (15 years). Th e scheme is under consideration of the Government in  
the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways. 
73. Upon further query of the Committee regarding e xtension of Tonna ge tax scheme on 
Inland Vessels, it was informed that currently, Development rebate under Tonnage tax scheme is 
available to Indian public companies operating ships. They are allowed to deduct amount (up -to 
100% of income) from P&L under IT Act. Amount deducted used for creation of dedicated 
reserve for acquis ition of new ships. Under the Income Tax Act, 1961, Chapter XII -G provides 
for Special Provisions relating to Income of Shipping Companies wherein Tonnage tax is 
applicable for ships above 15 GT and registered under Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. Hence, the 
same is not applicable for inland vessels registered under Indian Vessels Act, 1917 or Indian 

32 
 
Vessels Act, 2021. Extending of the tonnage tax for inland vessels can be considered after due 
deliberations. 
74. As regards the steps being taken by the Ministry to catalyse investment and enhancing 
availability of inland vessels in IWT sector, the Ministry has informed the Committee that they 
have waived off waterway usage charges considering the Government of India’s vision to 
promote inland waterways as a supplementary, eco-friendly and cheaper mode of transport. 
75. The Committee feels that with the huge increase in NWs after 2016 and the 
requirement of more inland vessels , the Ministry should consider the scheme for 
subsidizing the manufacture of inland vessels. The incentives for manufacturing may 
persuade reluctant shippers to switch to the waterways mode.  
 
Development of other National Waterway 
Waterways Project in the State of Odisha  
76. The Ministry informed the Committee that for the development of certain stre tches of 
NW-5 and NW-64 in the State of Odisha, the following steps have been taken:- 
 An Expression of Interest (EoI) was published in June, 2022 for development of the select 
stretches of NW -5 (Padanipal – Paradip &Dhamra) and NW -64 (Marshaghai to Paradip) on 
Design-Build-Finance-Operate-Transfer (DBFOT) model. 
 In response, M/s Adani Ports and Special Economic Zone (APSEZ) Limited has shown their 
interest and submitted the conditional proposal i.e., requested IWAI to provide fairway 
infrastructure a nd 20% cargo assurance. M/s APSEZ also requested for change of 
development model from DBFOT to Engineering, Procurement & Construction (EPC)/ 
Hybrid Annuity Model (HAM)Model.  
 IWAI has appointed M/s KPMG -HAS (Health Savings Account) as a Transaction Adviso r 
for development and operationalization of NW -5 and NW-64 through suitable Public Private 
Partnership (PPP) model. The consultancy period is 11 months and the study is under 
progress.  
 After assessment / workshop – roadshow and market assessment study, the suitable structure/ 
model is to be designed by the Consultant for selection of concessioners/ investors.  

33 
 
 Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) to be formed between stakeholders viz., the Ministry of Coal;  
IWAI/ MoPS&W; Government of Odisha; Paradip Port Authority; and Dhamra Port, for long 
term prospective plan to promote Rail-Sea-Rail (RSR) mode for Coal movement in Odisha. 
 A presentation was made before the Cabinet Secretary on 21.06.2023. It was decided as per 
the requirement of the Ministry of Coal th at SPV to be formed in consultation with the State 
Government of Odisha and all stakeholders for submission to the MoPS&W. 
 
77.  The Committee observes that the NW -5 was declared as a National Waterway on 
25th November, 2008 but there had been no action for further development for several 
years. The proposal to connect the coal belt of Tacher with Dhamra and Paradip ports had 
been initiated during the last few years and targeted to be completed by 2021 but again due 
to no progress,  the MoU signed between IWA I, Paradip Port, Dhamra Port and the State 
Government expired in 2018.  Now the IWAI has initiated Phase – I of the project and 
Phase-II and III would be taken up after completion of Phase -I.  The Committee is 
disappointed at the tardiness in the implement ation of this project which would have 
provided a cost -effective route for transportation of bulk cargo to the ports.  The 
Committee would like to know the reasons for the lack of progress earlier and the targeted 
date of completion of the first phase of t he project.  The Committee recommends that the 
IWAI may set targets and a schedule for completion of Phase -I of the project and the NW 
64 project which have already been much delayed and endeavour to complete it as 
scheduled.   
 
78.         As per the information given to Parliament, funds to the tune of Rs. 43.70 crores have 
been allocated to develop Phase -I of the project in the last five years  (Details placed at 
Annexure-X). The Committee desires to be informed of the expenditure incurred in this 
regard.  
 
Waterways Project in the State of Kerala  
79. The Ministry apprised the Committee about the following features of the waterways 
project undertaken for development of NW-3 in the State of Kerala:- 

34 
 
 The West Coast Canal from Kottapuram to Kollam (168 km) together  with Champakara 
canal (14 km) and Udyogmandal Canal (23 km) in Kerala was declared as NW -3 in 1993. 
The National Waterways Act, 2016, included stretch of West Coast Canal from Kottapuram 
to Kozhikode for a length of 165 km, thereby extending the total length of NW-3 to 370 km.  
 The IWAI is conducting channel developmental works that includes dredging for providing 
fairway of 2.20 m LAD, channel width of 38/ 32m, 24 hours navigational facilities and 
terminal facilities equipped with mechanical cargo handling equipment. 
 Monthly thalweg surveys are carried out in the entire waterway and regular river notices have 
been issued to provide fairway related information to the IWT operators. 
 The IWAI has constructed nine permanent terminals viz., Kottapuram, Aluva, Maradu, 
Vaikkom, Thanneermukkom (Cherthala), Alappuzha, Kayamkulam, Thrikkunnapuzha and 
Kollam. In addition, two terminals with Ro -Ro facilities have been constructed by IWAI at 
Bolghatty and Willingdon Island in Cochin Port area. 
 
80. Projects under implementation through Government of Kerala 
 The IWAI has sanctioned Rs.  38.00 crore  for reconstruction of one lock gate at 
Thrikkunnapuzha across NW -3 for utilization of full capacity of NW -3 and Rs.  33.00 
crorefund deposited to Inland Navigation Directora te (IND), Government of Kerala. The 
work was awarded by IND, Kollam in August, 2018 and overall physical progress 
achieved till 31st March, 2023 is 63%.  
 Construction of road over bridge at Kovilthottam on cost sharing basis (50:50) with 
Kerala Mineral & Metal Ltd. and the work entrusted to Harbour Engineering Dept., Govt. 
of Kerala for augmentation of width of narrow channel to 32 m at this location. 
81. The Committee notes that the reconstruction of new navigat ional lock at 
Thrikkunnapuzha had been sanct ioned in 2018 -19 with a n initially scheduled completion 
period of 26 months. Ever since, only 64% of the work has been awarded/completed.  
82. Upon query, the Committee was informed that the work on the lock at Thrikkun napuzha 
was awarded on deposit basis to the Govt. of Kerala. As per the Kerala Government, reasons of 
delay include devastating floods in 2018, issues faced during the COVID 19, issues relating to 
passage of public over the existing road bridge on lock under construction, affected the progress 
of the work severely.  

35 
 
83. The Committee does not find the reasons for delay very convincing as the initial 
scheduled completion time was only little over about 02 years.  Despite the fact that more 
than four years have passed since the sanction of the project, one third of the work is still 
pending. The Committee also observed that the proposed Kovalam-Bekal waterways under 
the State Government, has also been much delayed and the deadline extended to 2025.  
84. The Commi ttee queried about the present status of NW -3 from Kovalam to Bekal and 
development of areas ar ound Vizhinjam Port &  Kovalam. The IWAI has informed that the 
Kollam to Kottapuram stretch along with Champakara and Udyog mandal canal (205 Km) was 
declaered as NW-3. Further, the Kottapuram to Kozhikode stretch (169 Km) was also declared as 
per NW Act, 2016 and total length of NW-3 works out to 374 Km in Kerala. 
85. There is no cargo traffic in extended stretch of NW -3 ( i.e., from Kottapuram to 
Kozhikode) and also in the stretches beyond declared NW -3 (in south and north of Kerala). The 
developmental works in the extended stretch of NW -3 (169 Km) is yet to commence and hence 
Kollam - Kovalam (in south) and Kozhikode to Bekal (in north) may not yield any improvement 
in overall navigation system unless the already declared stretch is fully developed and utilized 
for the intended purpose.  
86. Hence, it is imperative to focus on completion of ongoing works viz., completion of 
works on Thrikkunnapuzha lock gate and road bridge at Kovilthottam on NW -3 (both entrusted 
to Govt. of Kerala on deposit basis).  The waterway in and around Vizhinjam Port and Kovalam 
is away from the declared stretch of NW -3 and hence no dev elopmental work is planned or 
envisaged by IWAI.  
87. The Committee observes that the proposed Waterway  in Kerala , which passes 
through nine districts, will connect Thiruvananthapuram to Kasorgod and the 
international airports at Thiruvana nthapuram, Kozhik ode and Kannur, and will have 
much impact on bo th logistics and tourism.  The backwaters of Kerala  with its innate 
serenity and beauty  can rival the canals of Amsterdam which are visited by millions of 
tourists. Development of waterways in the state is  key to its tourism centric development .  
The Committee recommends that the IWAI and the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & 
Waterways should address the  concerns and resolve the issues in coordination with the 
State Government of Kerala, and if necessary, involve t he public representatives for 
finding durable solutions to vexatious problems. 

36 
 
 
Projects related to National Waterway (NW) 4 
88. As regards the development of NW -4, the Ministry has stated that NW -4 was declared in 
2008 for the length of 1,078 km comprising Kakinada – Puducherry stretch of canals and the 
Kaluvelly Tank, Bhadrachalam – Rajahmundry stretch of river Godavari and Wazirabad – 
Vijayawada stretch of river Krishna in Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu. With the notification of 
the National Wate rways Act, 2016, the total length of NW -4 got extended to 2,890 km with 
additional reaches in the River Krishna from Wazirabad to Galagali (628 Km) and the River 
Godavari from Bhadrachalam to Nasik (1184 Km).   
89. The Chairperson, IWAI also informed the Commi ttee that the IWAI has taken some 
smaller projects including the construction of terminals, out of which four floating terminals 
have been completed.  Further, for the development of three Ro -Ro terminals, land acquisition 
process has been completed at Harshchandrapuram and Muktalaya whereas land acquisition is in 
progress at Ibrahimpatnam. He also added that the NW -4 also consists of the Buckingham Canal 
which starts from the Krishna River and goes up to Chennai and Puducherry.   
 
Buckingham Canal 
90. The Buckingham Canal consisting of 316 km long North Buckingham Canal 
(Pedaganjam to Central Station Chennai) and 110 km long South Buckingham Canal (Central 
Station Chennai to Marakanam) is part of NW -4, which was declared a NW in 2008. Subsequent 
to the declaration, the Detailed Project Report (DPR) was completed by IWAI in March, 2010. 
As per the findings of DPR, Buckingham Canal has many low -level bridges, defunct structures 
and encroachments. Both the above stretches of Bucki ngham Canal are tidal canals and remain 
dry during non-monsoon periods. A 50 km long stretch connecting North and South Buckingham 
canals in Chennai city is in an abandoned condition and the Mass Rapid Transport System 
(MRTS) has constructed Elevated Railw ay Stations right over the canal with columns of MRTS 
flyover bridges being within the canal bed itself. In certain places, the pedestal foundation of the 
column is exposed ab ove the canal bed. At present, there is no navigation possible in the 
Buckingham canal due to heavy siltation, eroded banks, encroachments and non -availability of 
sufficient water level throughout the year for safe passage of vessels. 
91. The other aspects of the development project are as follows:- 

37 
 
 Fairway development works in Vijayawada – Muktyala stretch (82 km) of river Krishna (Part 
of NW -4) under Phase -I has commenced at a cost of Rs. 96.00 crore including following 
main activities:- 
 Dredging completed as per requirement. 
 Floating terminals: 4 nos. floating pontoons delivered. 
 Land acquisition for permanent Ro-Ro terminals at Harischandrapuram and Muktyala 
is completed and for remaining terminal at Ibrahimpatnam is in progress. 
92. The Committee enquired about the status of encroachments in the Buckingham 
Canal. The IWAI informed that the Madras High Court had directed the State 
Government to remove the encroachments but no action has been taken so far.  Upon 
enquiry by the Committee whether sufficient water was available in the Canal from 
Chennai to Marakonnam es pecially during summer season, the IWAI replied in the 
negative, stating that even in earlier times, the Canal was fed not by natural river systems 
but by barrages and dams.   
93. The canal stretch from Chennai to Marakkanam comes in South Buckhingham Canal 
with sea openings at 07 nos . locations viz., Marina beach, Adyar, Muthukadu, Kalpakkam 
(Ediyuru), Palar, ParamankaniKuppam and Markanam. The south Buckingham canal requires 
widening, removal of encroachments & effective de -silting by which the required draft for the 
vessels can be achieved as per Class -I standards. In order to facilitate availability of adequate 
water for Navigation in the canal; the sea mouths at various silted locations needs to be dredged 
and removal of encroachments from canal. The IWAI also emphasized that a Canal should 
navigable for at least 200 -300 kms to be economically viable before other problems could be 
addressed. The Committee observes that the Buckingham canal is a very old canal from British 
times which could still be economically viable and also of historical and tourist interest.  
94. The Committee further notes that certain waterways projects are delayed due to 
issues that fall in the domain of the State s. The Committee opines that such issues can be 
resolved by establishing necessary co-ordination mechanism to address state level and local 
concerns. The Committee, therefore, recommends that IWAI and the Ministry may take up 
the pending issues with the concerned authorities to accelerate the development of already 
declared Inland Waterways.  

38 
 
 
Waterways Projects in the States of Mumbai, Gujarat and Goa  
95. The Committee was informed that out of the 106 new National Waterways (NWs) 
declared in April 2016, six inland waterways of the State of Goa have been declared as NWs 
{Mondovi River (NW -68), Zuari river (NW -111), Chapora river (NW -25), Cumberjua canal 
(NW-27), Mapusa River (NW-71) & Sal River (NW-88)}. Before declaration of these waterways 
as NWs some of these waterways in the state of Goa were already amongst the most used 
waterways in the co untry for navigation and shipping both for cargo & Passengers traffic. The 
Committee was also informed that the works at Goa are being carried out in consultation with 
Captain of Ports Department, Govt of Goa. The activities carried out till date in Goa are:- 
Jetties River Location No of Pontoons as per 
tender 
1 River Mondovi (NW-68) Captain of Ports Jetty 6 
2 River Mondovi (NW-68) Old Goa Jetty 6 
3 River Mondovi (NW-68) Panjim Ferry Ramp 6+ 6* 
4 River Chapora (NW-25) Chapora Jetty 
Later on shifted to 
Panjim Ferry Ramp due 
to local resistance 
Total 4 jetties each having 6 
floating pontoons 24 pontoons 
 
96. The planned activities are  
 Setting up of River Information Service across River Mondovi (NW-68). 
 Laying of navigational Aids across NW-68 and NW-111 
 Setting up of Community jetties across NW-68, NW-27 and NW-111. 
97. The Committee was informed that IWAI intends to develop the Maharashtra NWs on 
PPP mode. In the first instance 5 NWs i.e., NW-10 ( Amba River) ,NW -28 (Dabhol Creek - 
Vashishti River), NW-53 (Kalyan Thane Mumbai Waterway, Vasai Creek & Ulhas River), NW -
85 (Revadanda Creek - Kundalika River System) & NW -91 (Shastri River –Jaigad Creek) have 
been selected for development. EoI has been floated for operationalisation of these NWs and M/s 
Price WaterHouse Coopers have been appointed as the Transaction Advisor for this project. The 
Assessment Report for NW -10, NW-28 and NW -85 is expected by July, 2023 and the bidding 
process will be initiated by July -August.  The IWAI also informed that in the sta te of Gujarat, 

39 
 
development of NW-73 and NW-100 is being taken up on PPP Mode. EoIs have been issued and 
the bids received are being finalized.   
98. The Committee observes that the two states of Goa and Maharashtra have  
promising inland water prospects with Ma harashtra accounting for about 50% waterway 
cargo movement across the country.  Out of 126.15 MMT cargo movement on National 
Waterways in FY 2022-23, around 63 MMT cargo movement was through NWs in the state 
of Maharashtra. The Committee notes that NW -10 (Amba River) in Maharashtra has two 
Major Ports, Mumbai Port and JNPA, in its vicinity, and two functional non -major ports 
namely, Dharmatar Port and PNP port on its banks. NW -8 (Revdanda Creek -Kundalika 
River) also in Maharashtra has a large ind ustrial are a in its catchment. The Committee 
observes that despite promise and potential, the development of waterways in Maharashtra 
is still in its preliminary stages and recommends that the IWAI may make all efforts for 
development of waterways in Maharashtra in a targeted and timebound schedule.   
99. The Committee observes that the state of Gujarat is only second to Maharashtra in 
transport of cargo through waterways. Out of the total 111, there are four NWs in the State 
of Gujarat i.e., NW-48, 66, 73 and 87. The Committee understands that there is a proposal 
for development of terminals at Barwani, Sakarja and Hanfeshwar on the banks of the 
river Narmada for starting  to and fro  cruise services to the Statue of Unity in Kevadia, 
Gujarat and desires to know  the details of the steps taken on the commencement of the 
proposed cruise services and its likely impact on the tourists’ footfall to the statue. 
 
100. The Committee recommends  the Government to provide institutional framework 
for development of IWT sector in the country so as to increase the capacity of IWT 
agencies, commercialisation of IWT industries, increased cost recovery through user 
charges and creation of a vibrant IWT sector in the country.  
101. The Committee is of the view that Research and Development activities is the key to 
success of any sector and recommends the Government to strengthen the Research & 
Development facilities for the desired development of Inland Water Transport sector in the 
country. The Committee also urges that Research and Development studies should be 
conducted for making assessment of the impact of the increased inland water transport 
activities on the aqua-marine life as development should invariably be in sustainable mode 
with due consideration to environment and ecology.   

40 
 
 
 
Ro-Ro (Roll-on, Roll-off) and Ro-Pax (Roll-on/Roll-off with passenger) Ferry Services 
102. The Ministry informed the Committee that there are number of Ro -Ro/Ro-Pax services 
being operated on waterways by State Governments mandated under States Ferries Acts. 
Initiatives by Inland Waterways Authority of India are detailed below:- 
 Ro-Ro/ Ro-Pax Vessels for State Governments to operate ferry services, 
 Three RO -RO services demonstrated  on NW -2 by deployment of IWAI vessels 
between Dhubri &Hatsingmari (July , 2017); Neamati&Kamalabari (Majuli Island) 
(October, 2018) and Guwahati & North Guwahati (March, 2019), 
 Hon’ble Prime Minister digitally launched following projects of IWAI in Februar y, 
2021, 
 2 Ro -Ro Vessels M. V. Adi Shankara and M.V. C V Raman were dedicated to the 
nation by Hon’ble Prime Minister at Kochi, 
 Flagging off of 4 Ro-Pax vessels to be operated by Government of Assam, 
 MV JFR Jacob – for service between Guwahati and North Guwahati, 
 MV Bob Khathing – for service between Dhubri and Hatsingimari, 
 MV Rani Gaidinllu and MV Sachin Dev Burman – for service between Neamati and 
Kamalabari (Majuli), 
 1 no. Ro -Pax vessel M.V. Bhupen Hazara ika handed over by IWAI to Government  of 
Odisha for operation in NW-5 on 28th April, 2021,  
 Operation of Ro -Pax vessels inaugurated by Hon’ble Prime Minister for the Govt. of 
U.P. in Varanasi on 15 th July, 2021: 2 nos Ro -Pax vessels, i.e., M.V. Swami 
Vivekanand and M.V. Sam Manekshaw were dedicated to the Nation on 15th July, 2021 
which were handed over by IWAI to  the Government of Uttar Pradesh fo r operation in 
Varanasi on NW-1, and 
 MoU signed with Govt. of Bihar for handing over two Nos. Ro -Pax vessels 24 th July, 
2023. One vessel handed ove r on 11 th August, 2023 and second in  the process of 
handing over. 
103. The Committee observes that Ro-Ro projects have the potential to open up  
connectivity for the geographically disadvantaged areas and have the advantages of speed 

41 
 
of operation due to less cargo handling and ability to integrate with other transport 
systems. The Committee recommends that the Ministry and IWAI may ensure the 
operationalization of Ro-Ro ferries National Waterways wherever possible.    
 
Public-Private Partnership 
104. The Ministry has informed the Committee that the IWAI is in the process of handing over 
its terminals on all NWs to private operators on Public -Private Partnership (PPP) basis. The 
newly constructed Multimodal Terminals (MMTs) at Varanasi (capacity 1.26 million tonne), 
Sahibganj (capacity 3.03 million tonne) and Haldia (capacity 3.18 million tonne) on NW -1 under 
JMVP are in the process of being tendered out to private operators on PPP basis, for operation 
and maintenance. Similar exercise i s in progress for IWAI’s terminals at Gaighat (Patna) on 
National Waterway -1 and Dhubri, Pandu (Guwahati) on National Waterway -2. Subsequently, 
IWAI’s terminals on NW -3 and NW -16 are also planned to be handed over for Operations and 
Maintenance (O&M) to pr ivate players. Appointment of O&M operators will bring in necessary 
operations and marketing experience and contribute to increasing traffic on the IWT mode. 
105. Although, significant investment of private sector is not achieved in the IWT sector, as it 
is still  at nascent stage of development. However, efforts are being made to foster private 
participation in the inland waterways sector. Accordingly, details of various invited bids for 
NWs on PPP mode are as follows:- 
 
 
Description Status 
Expression of Interest for 
Operationalization of NW -10 
and NW - 28 & NW -85 in the 
State of Maharashtra on 
Design, Build, Finance, 
Operate and Transfer basis 
The IWAI has parallely called for EoI (to fast pace the 
project) and appointed PwC as a transaction advisor also. 
  
The analysis with respect to Draft Assessment report 
submitted by PwC (the transaction advisor for this project) is 
being evaluated based on the cargo projections put forth by 
PwC. In addition, based on the cargo projections NW -91 has 

42 
 
also being included in the present proposal. 
The final assessment report is likely to be submitted by the 
next week. Bids to be invited by the end of this month 
Expression of Interest for 
Operationalization of NW -73 
& NW -100 in the State of 
Gujarat on PPP mode 
The EoI was floated and 4 bids have been received against 
this EoI. The bids are being analysed and if found feasible, 
the bids will be taken up for the next stage of work. 
Expression of Interest for 
Cruise Tourism across 
National Waterways in the  
State of Gujarat, M aharashtra 
Goa, Kerala 
  
The bids closed on 10.06.2023. 2 bidders have evinced 
interest in the EoI. The EoI submitted by bidders is for cruise 
operations in the State of Gujarat and Goa with a request to 
IWAI for providing infrastructure at these locations. 
The bidders are being asked to submit the DPR for 
operations of cruise.  
Expression of Interest for 
Operationalization of NW -53 
in the State of Maharashtra on 
PPP mode 
The EoI was floated with a closing date of 17.06.2023 and 4 
bids have been received against this EoI. The bids are being 
analysed and if found feasible, the bids will be taken up for 
the next stage of work. 
 
106. The Committee strongly feels that active involvement of the private sector in the 
inland waterways sector is imperative to ensure greater efficiency and competitiveness and 
attract higher investment for infrastructure development . The Committee appreciates the 
efforts of the Ministry and IWAI taken so far  to attract private investment  in this critical 
infrastructure sector. 
 
 
 

43 
 
Accidents in National and Inland Waterways  
107. The Ministry informed that the Central Government has notified the Rules governing 
safety in the maritime sector and the responsibility of the implementation of rules and regulations 
related to safety of inland vessels   primarily rests with the State Governments. The responsibility 
of issuance of Survey and Registration Certificates of inland vessels plying in rivers, lakes  and 
backwaters also lies with the States as per Inland Vessels Act, 2021. 
108. Safety devices are compulsory while ferrying passengers and goods as listed in National 
Disaster Management Guidelines on Boat Safety (September 2017) issued by  the NDMA, 
Government of India for strict adherence by the concerned States as the ope ration of Ferries is 
the mandate of the States as per the State Ferries Acts. 
109. As per the NDMA guidelines, the following prime factors contribute to boat/ferry 
accidents in most of the inland waterways - 
 Understaffing/Unqualified crew 
 Severe overcrowding/overloading  
 Ageing vessels  
 Lack of regulatory standards 
 Faulty boat design and stability 
 Poor Weather conditions  

44 
 
 
Source: NCRB, the Ministry of Home Affairs 
110. The Committee notes that the number of accident cases due to boat capsizing has 
seen an increasing trend especially in the last two years, resulting in many  deaths and 
injury to the  passengers. With the increase in the number of waterways, the number of 
accidents may also increase unless remedial measures are put in plac e to enhance boat 
safety and prevent accidents .  The Committee observes that one of the main  reasons for 
most boat accidents in India is overloading of passengers , imbalance due to lack of proper 
distribution of weight of the running boat,  and dangerous working practices,    followed by 
poor quality of vessels and  unregistered vessels , violating rules, vessel traffic etc.  In their 
deposition before the Committee, the representatives of the IWAI had stated that a system 
is in place to survey and certify the vessels for balance and stability, fire safety and training 
of manpower manning the vessel , etc. before registration and certification.  Accidents 
taking place are registered by the State Government and feedback is taken for 
improvement.   
111. The Committee notes that though passenger boat safety is a subject  under the State 
list yet, it is also the responsibility of the Ministry to see that states have the financial and 
organization as support to institutionalize the enforcement of regulations in boat safety. 


45 
 
112. The Committee takes serious note of these cases and urges the Ministry to take 
corrective actions to prevent such accidents in the future. The State Disaster Management 
Authorities must be a part of the regulatory mechanism of the State  to bring about greater 
boat safety. The IWAI must set up observational network and infrastructural facilities at 
the regional, state and local levels for safe navigation and ensure the  proper 
implementation of warnings and weather advisories given by IMD, from time to time.   
 
Digital initiatives in the Waterways Sector 
113. Further, the Chairperson, IWAI during the meeting of the Committee, informed that they 
monitor the depth . However, a third -party organisation also measures and verifies the depth 
which is available. To reduce dredging, certain prevention methods have been brought out and 
with the assistance of IIT -Roorkee, these methods have been stabilised and IWAI is using it on 
all their river systems, in increasing numbers, to reduce the cost of dredging. He also apprised 
the Committee about the navigation system and stated that where the water depth is available and 
traffic is increasing, digital navigation is being used which give s depth to the vessel, for keeping 
the vessel safe, while increasing their speed and efficiency. With the help of the digital 
navigation system, the vessel operator can see the depth on their screen and IWAI can also track 
the vessel.  A certain vessel can  also see where the other vessels are, ahead of them or behind 
them, so that they can calibrate their speed accordingly. The feature of night navigation is also 
available which allows the vessels to see on their digital screen as to how far is the vessel ahead; 
which vessel is following them; at what speed it is going; and what is the depth of the water, at 
night as well.  
114. The Committee is aware that the Maritime Vision India 2030 recognises that India needs 
a unified digital platform for National Wate rways that will result in transparent availability of 
information; higher stakeholder interaction; increased traffic on inland waterways; safe voyages; 
better communication; and enhanced monitoring. The Ministry informed that as a step towards 
improving th e efficiency and effectiveness of various activities and to ensure e ase-of-doing-
business, digital solutions  have been developed to enable stakeholders to have access to key 
information on National Waterways. Least Available Depth Information System (LADIS ) has 
been introduced for dissemination of minimum available depth in navigation channels of selected 

46 
 
NWs. Permission for vessels operating on Indo -Bangladesh Protocol Route and construction of 
cross structures across NWs, with stipulated horizontal and ve rtical navigational clearances are 
also issued online. For the convenience of prospective IWT cargo operators, following portals 
have been implemented: - 
 CAR-D (Cargo Data) Portal: CAR-D is a web -based portal for collection and 
compilation, analysis and dissemination of all cargo and cruise movement data of 
National Waterways to the stakeholders. It captures the traffic data in a near real time 
mode for cargo and cruise from different terminals, operators, Maritime Boards, etc. It is 
accessible to all the stakeholders and helps in understanding the traffic flow pattern, key 
commodities and potential key logistic players in the sector and can facilitate cargo 
consolidation and promotion of National Waterways transportation.  
 PANI (Portal for Asset and Navigation Information): PANI is an integrated solution 
bringing river navigation and infrastructure information on a single platform. It provides 
detailed information of various features of National Waterways and the assets such as 
fairway, infrastructure facilities, cross -river structures, connectivity at jetties and 
emergency services for facilitating transportation of cargo. The Geographic Information 
System (GIS) -based Bharat Map portal also helps external stakeholders in voyage 
planning, leading to ease of business. 
 E-Navigation Software: E-Navigation is an indigenous software, on Android platform, 
being developed by the IWAI through NTCPWC/ IIT Madras. The software is utilised by 
Masters of the passenger/Ro-Ro vessels for navigation along the proposed ferry routes. In 
the first phase, NW-1 is intended to be covered as the IWAI is holding a repository of the 
Thalweg/Detailed survey which is being utilised by National Technology Centre for 
Ports, Waterways and Coasts ( NTCPWC) for co nsidering the navigational route in the 
development of software. The field trials are underway and recently a trial has also been 
conducted in Patna. Although  the River Information System is in place, the basic 
requirement of Automatic Identification Syste m (AIS) for tracking any vessel is a must, 
and keeping in view the procurement and annual license fee for AIS, small time operators 
were unable to bear the cost. It was accordingly felt that the IWAI may develop another 
software for safe navigation, which may provide similar directions. 

47 
 
115. The Ministry has also enumerated a roadmap to promote digitization of IWAI operations, 
as per the Maritime Vision-2030, which is as follows: - 
 River Information System (RIS) implemented on NW -1 and is under extension to  
selected other prospective NWs; 
 Portal for Navigational Information (PANI) has been implemented; 
 Least Available Depth Information System (LADIS) also implemented; 
 Cargo tracking and booking system (Cargo Data & IBP Permission Portal) implemented; 
 Platform for asset capacity sharing between Logistics Service Providers (LSPs): 
Digitisation of 75 nos. land and 20 nos. building parcels of IWAI has been completed and 
uploaded on Government Land Information System (GLIS) Portal of the Ministry of 
Housing & Urban Affairs;  
 Multi-Modal Integration is under implementation; and 
 Management Information and Reporting Solution (MIRS): To monitor and analyze key 
processes like traffic, terminal performance and incidence management efficiently, 
projects of IWAI are regularly monitored on MIRS. 
 
116. The Ministry also informed the Committee about the other steps which have been taken 
to ensure end -to-end digitization at all NWs. The Cartographic Cell in IWAI Head Office, 
NOIDA is equipped with modern technology and sof tware for preparation of Digital Charts 
using GIS & Image processing software like CARIS, ERDAS Imagine, AutoCAD, Global 
Mapper, etc. The Cartographers of IWAI have been trained using GIS software and Image 
processing software, etc. In Cartographic section , the newly identified 106 waterways have been 
explored and river course have been digitized using state-of-the-art computer hardware and 
software installed in Cartographic Lab for preparation of index map of new waterways.  
117. The IWAI has also been carrying out surveys from 1986 for development of the National 
Waterways. Section 14(2)(c) of the IWAI Act, 2016 envisages carrying out Hydrographic 
surveys and publishing of river charts and IWAI has published River Atlas and river Pilots 
National Waterways No.- 1,2,3 and Sunderbans NW-97, and available for sale to users. 
118. Satellite data from National Remote Sensing Centre, Hyderabad for Waterways was 
obtained, and the same has been processed, digitized using GIS Software. The land marks, 

48 
 
topographical features of Survey of India (SOI) and digital data were compiled along with field 
survey data (from Hypack) and latest NRSC data for preparation of electronic Charts.   
119. The Committee appreciates the digital initiatives taken by the IWAI to enhance 
availability of information in waterways and recommends that River Information Services 
may be implemented in at least  five National Waterways existing befo re 2016 in a 
scheduled manner. The Committee understands that River Information Services should 
support both traffic and transport management, by not only ensuring the safety and 
efficiency of inland navigation but also enhance  the resource management of the  
waterways transport chain by enabling information exchange between vessels, locks, 
bridges, terminals and ports.  The Committee also recommends that IWAI may make 
concertedefforts to develop the phone software which would enable small operators who 
are unable to afford the AIS system to avail of the facilities for safe navigation.   
 
Connectivity of National Waterways to road-rail-air and constraints faced 
120. The Committee appreciates that while the total cost of IWT is one -seventh that of road, 
the usage of waterways is viable only if the length of the waterways is beyond 300 -400 kms. 
Further, an inefficient first mile or last mile cost upsets the cost formula . Connectivity to other 
modes of transport is, therefore, essential for efficient usage of waterways.   
 
121. The terminals/jetties on National Waterways are connected with nearest Roads. Provision 
of Railway connectivity is also envisaged with few termina ls/jetties. Examples of such 
connectivity are detailed as under: - 
Port 
Name 
Operational/ 
Non-
operational 
Road 
Connectivity 
Status 
Rail Connectivity 
Status 
Air Connectivity 
status  (Distance by 
road) 
Varanasi 
MMT Operational 
Connected with 
636 m approach 
road to NH-7 
Proposed 7.1 km rail 
line proposed 
between Varanasi 
MMT to Jeonathpur 
Railways station 
Connected to 
Varanasi airport  
(distance 37 kms) 

49 
 
Sahibganj 
MMT Operational 
Connected with 
1.035 km 
approach  road to 
NH-7 
Proposed 11 km (5 
km route and 6 km 
yard line length) rail 
line proposed 
between MMT 
Sahibganj to 
Sakrigali Railway 
Station 
Connected to 
Jayprakash Narayan 
International Airport, 
Patna ( 335 kms) 
Haldia 
MMT Operational 
Connected with 5 
km of 4 lane road 
inside HDC 
connecting NH 41 
Proposed 1.2 km 
between MMT 
Haldia to Haldia port 
siding 
Connected to Netaji 
Subhash Chandra 
Bose International 
Airport (129 Kms) 
Joghighopa 
Terminal Operational Connected with 
NH 31B 
Rail connectivity not 
envisaged, as 
Jogighopa MMLP 
has rail siding 
Connected to 
Lokpriya Gopinath 
Bordoloi 
International Airport, 
Guwahati (135 kms) 
Pandu 
Terminal Operational 
Connectivity with 
NH-31, road with 
state PWD, can be 
declared as NH 
Connected with Rail 
Connected to 
Lokpriya Gopinath 
Bordoloi 
International Airport, 
Guwahati (15 kms) 
Kalughat 
IMT 
Under 
Construction 
Connected with 
NH-19 
Rail connectivity not 
envisaged 
Connected to 
Jayprakash Narayan 
International Airport, 
Patna (22 kms) 
 
122. The Committee desi res to know whether the Broad G auge Rail Siding at Pandu is 
now operational as the CAG in its Report 15 of 2016 had commented adversely on the 
same.  The Committee observes that with the exception of Pandu and Jogighopa Terminals, 
none of the other Terminals have railway connectivity at present and recomme nds that the 
IWAI may take all efforts to develop the connectivity of the Terminals with rail and road at 
the earliest. Connectivity ensures a smooth and predictable supply chain which is essential 
for reduction of logistics costs.   
123. The Committee also observes that connectivity of waterways with Major Ports and 
transferring some of the cargo evacuation to waterways would relieve congestion of ports 
and lessen the burden on rail and road besides reducing the  logistics costs. Interlinking 
waterways and ports with coastal shipping would ensure development of th e entire 

50 
 
hinterland. The Commit tee recommends that for the newly notified waterways under 
development, the IWAI may ensure that the connectivity to rail, road and ports be 
comprehensively dealt with in the Detailed Project Report (DPR) itself.   
 
Tourism around National Waterways 
124. The Committee opines that there are various attractive spots located around National 
Waterways (NWs) that can be used to boost tourism. This includes , among others, hill stations, 
religions places, gardens/ parks, boat rides, museums, monuments and sanctuaries. In this regard, 
the Committee enquired from the Ministry about the identification of such tourist spots around 
NWs; steps taken to develop them; and initiatives proposed to be taken up in the future. 
125. In response, the Ministry informed the Committee that the mandate of IWAI is to develop 
and regulate NWs for shipping and navigation. However, the infrastructure developed for 
transportation on NWs by IWAI including fairway, terminals, jetties, navigation aids, etc. are 
used by the river tourism operators also. The IWAI plays th e role of a technical facilitator for 
cruise/river tourism on NWs. The Government has been laying emphasis on promotion of river 
cruise tourism and a Working Group (WG) was constituted in 2014 with representatives of cruise 
operators, domestic tour operato rs, IWAI, the Ministry of Tourism and State Tourism 
Departments to examine the modalities of cruise tours for Identification of the Religious Tourist 
Places along National Waterways (NW) – 1 (the Ganga) and NW-2 (the Brahmaputra).   
126. IWAI has taken sev eral other steps towards developing an ecosystem for increasing 
cargo, passengers and tourists on national waterways in India. IWAI in consultation with cruise 
vessel operators and other stakeholders strives to develop adequate infrastructure to boost rive r 
cruise tourism. Steps taken in this regard are detailed at Annexure-X.   
127. The Committee strongly believes that taking into account the navigable waterways 
length of around 14,500 km, India has enormous potential to develop tourism in and 
around the country’s inland waterway system. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that a robust mechanism has to be devised in c o-ordination with the Union Ministry of 
Tourism and various State Governments to promote/ develop tourism across the 
waterways network in t he Country, especially in the North -Eastern Region; Buckingham 
Canal including the areas in Kadiyam; and backwaters of Kerala.  

51 
 
128. The Committee also observes that there are many fascinating places near the Canal 
like the Kadiyam nursery spread over 25,000 hectares and the Kolleru lake, home to 
several species of migratory birds. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry and IWAI may take up the issue of removal of encroachments with the State 
Government from the Buckingham canal  to ensure  its further development  at least for 
promoting tourism. 
 
Kochi Water Metro  
129. The Committee during its Study Visit to Kochi, Thiruva nanthapuram and Bekal from 4 th 
to 8 th September, 2023, heard the views of the State Government of Kerala including the 
representatives of Kochi Water Metro at Kochi on 4 th September, 2023. The Kochi Water 
Metro is an integrated ferry transport system serving the Greater Kochi region in Kerala. It is the 
first water metro system in India and the first integrated water transport system of this size in 
Asia. This project is expected to reduce pollution and traffic congestions in the city and also to 
ease access to business areas on the mainland for urban households situated along the Kochi 
lakeshore. The Kochi Water M etro project envisages the development of 15 identified routes, 
connecting 10 islands along a network of routes that span 78 km with a f leet of 78 fast, 
electrically propelled hybrid ferries plying to 38 jetties. More than 33 ,000 islanders are expected 
to benefit from the water metro. It is envisaged to be a socially inclusive transport system than 
being just a transport service with focus  on improved livelihoods through commercial property 
development and tourism-based initiatives.  
130. The Kochi Water Metro Project intends to introduce modern, energy efficient, 
environment friendly and safe boats with low wake and draft characteristics a t a high frequency 
to increase ridership.The Kerala backwaters are a network of brackish lagoons and lakes parallel 
to the Arabian Sea coast of Kerala state in southern India. Kochi is the largest city in Kerala and 
is less vulnerable to storm surges or cy clones due to its location on the lower west coast of the 
Indian peninsula. Kochi Water Metro Limited  has been formed as a Special Purpose Vehicle 
(SPV) with 74% of the shareholding being owned by the  State Government of Kerala and 26% 
by Kochi Metro Rail Limited  (KMRL). It is operated and maintained by the KMRL . The 
construction work started in2016and its first route between  Vyttila and InfoPark was inaugurated 

52 
 
in February, 2021 by the Chief Minister of Kerala. It was officially inaugurated and opened to 
passengers by the Prime Minister on 25thApril, 2023. Kochi Water Metro is expected to become 
fully operational by 2035 with a daily commuter-count of 1.5 lakh passengers. 
131. The Committee notes the introduction of the Kochi Water Metro and would like to 
know its  performance assessment, both physical and financial, at periodic interval s. The 
Committee would also like to know whether the Ministry has any plan to implement 
similar models in other States  for the integration of waterways in the public transport 
system or it would wait for an annual performance assessment  of Kochi water metro for a 
better and meaningful plan for replication. 
 
River Cruises 
132. 'Cruise Shipping' is one of the most dynamic a nd fastest growing components of the 
leisure industry worldwide. India , with its vast and beautiful coastline, virgin forests and 
undisturbed idyllic islands, rich historical and cultural heritage, can be a fabulous tourist 
destination for cruise. The Committee was informed about the following river cruises in India:- 
 River Cruise Tourism is already active on NW-1, NW-2 and NW-3. 
 10 cruise vessels on NW-1 cruise circuit and 4 on NW-2 are already operating. 
 Following circuits have been identified on IBP Route 
 Mongla circuit 
 Barisal circuit 
 Narayanganj circuit 
 Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) and Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) on 
Passenger and Cruise services on the Coastal and Protocol routes between India and 
Bangladesh, already exists since 2018. 
 Movement of 04 Cruise vessels between Pandu and Kolkata through IBP has already 
been conducted. 
133. The IWAI organised Reception function of the World Longest voyage of River c ruise 
“MV Ganga Vilas” for the successful completion of its epic journey coverin g 3200 KM from 
Varanasi to Dibrugarh via Dhaka on 28 th February, 2023 at Bogibeel, Dibrugarh, which was 
flagged off by the Hon’ble Prime Minister virtually on 13th January, 2023 from Varanasi.  

53 
 
134. The IWAI has also completed a study in November, 2022 on preparation of an Action 
Plan and Detailed Road Map for Development of River Cruise Tourism in India so as to tap the 
vast potential of river cruise tourism existing in the country and also to increase t he share of 
visitors on river cruises. Further, an MoU has also been signed among IWAI, Sagarmala 
Development Company Ltd (SDCL), Assam Tourism Development Corporation Ltd (ATDC) 
and Directorate of IWT Assam (IWTD) for Project of Riverine Based Religious T ourism Circuit 
in SPV Framework on 19th May, 2023.  Other steps taken by the Ministry to promote river cruise 
tourism are given at Annexure-XI. 
 
River Cruise Vision 2047  
Up to 2023 Key River Cruise Performance Indicator 2047 
8 
Operational waterways for River Cruise Tourism- night 
stay 
34 
17 Number of Cruise Circuits with night stays 80 
15 Number of River Cruise Terminals 185 
5,000 Cruise Tourism Traffic with night stays 1,20,000 
2,00,000 Local Cruise Tourism Traffic on NWs without night stay 15,00,000 
Investment potential to enhance river cruise tourism (Rs. in Cr) 
 
Cruise Vessel Related 35,000 
Cruise Terminal Infrastructure 10,000 
 
River Cruise-Ganga Vilas  
135. To utilize the infrastructure developed for Cargo movement on NWs also by River 
Cruises and boost tourism in the sector, world’s longest voyage of 3200 km on river Ganga 
(NW-1), Sunderbans (NW -97) and Indo -Bangladesh Protocol Route and river Brahmaputra 
(NW-2) successfully completed by River Cruise Ganga Vilas inaugurated online by Hon’ble 
Prime Minister at Varanasi on 13.01.2023 and reached Bogibeel (Dibrugarh) on 28th February, 

54 
 
2023.  
136. The Ministry also highlighted the following intended benefits of River Cruises:- 
• Showcasing the rich cultural heritage and unexplored India along the river. 
• New avenue towards the investment in river cruise tourism Sector 
• Avenue for new employment generation at local levels 
• Reduced carbon footprint 
• Significant regional development and economic growth along the river sides. 
•  More work in ship construction and repairs along with generation of much more scope for 
skilled& trained manpower for construction/ repair/Operation 
137. The Committee notes that following the initiat ion of Ganga Vilas, the potential of 
river cruise tourism in the country has remained vast. It feels that river cruise will not only 
promote the tourism sector in the India by attracting foreign tourists, it will also aid in 
boosting the peripheral coastli ne economy of the country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should take conce rted efforts to increase the number of 
River Cruises plying in the country. It also recommends that the Ministry should launch 
programmes to incentivize river cruise operators so that the available potential can be fully 
realised.  
138. The Committee may also be apprised about the details of the proposed River 
Cruises and an estimated timeframe for their development, alongwith the details of the 
revenue that is presently being generated by operational River Cruise circuits  in the 
country. 
 
Acts, Rules and Policies of IWAI 
139. The IWAI has also furnished a brief of the relevant Acts/ Rules/ Policies related to the 
Inland Waterways Authority of India, placed at Annexure-XII. 
 
 
 

55 
 
Waterways – A Global Perspective  
Comparison of Indian Waterways with other Countries 
140. Until about a hundred years ago, the rivers in India were busy waterways . However, with 
the focused approach for development of road and railways, the waterways fell into disuse. At 
present, Freight movement on waterways in India is having about 2% of modal share whereas 
USA stands at 4%, the Netherlands at 49%, China at 14% and Vietnam at 48%. 
141. The Ministry also submitted a break -up of data regarding the IWT modal share of India 
compared to other countries1, which is as follows: - 
(i) European Union - 500 million MT annual cargo, 60% cargo on Rhine (1232 km). IWT modal 
share of key countries in the EU: - 
 Netherlands- 49% 
 Germany -16% 
 Belgium -9% 
 Romania- 8% 
(ii) China - 3,500 million MT annual cargo, 80% cargo on Yangtze (6300 km). IWT modal 
share: 14%. 
(iii) India - 84 million MT annual cargo, 60% on Maharashtra and Goa Waterways. IWT modal 
share: 2%. 
142. Considering India’s marginal share in global IWT and its subdued position in the 
development of waterways as a viable mode of transportation, and its huge untapped 
potential, the Committee calls upon the Ministry and IWAI to come out with a credible 
action plan with implementable time schedules for harnessing the full potential of the 
waterways both as an option for sustainable transport and also as a tourism product. The 
Government’s increased focus on and priority for development of NWs can usher in 
waterways-led development in the country. 
***  
                                                           
1http://vietnamsupplychain.com/assets/files/530ef9a17e47adone_1_Blancas_IWT.pdf  

56 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
National Waterways 
The Committee notes that in the past 05 years, 18 more National Waterways have 
been operationalized making a total of 23 Operational Waterways from the earlier 05 and 
one more Waterway is to be made operational by 2024. The Committee appreciates that 
the p ace of development of Inland Waterways has gained considerable traction. The 
Committee has also been informed that presently development activities are being taken up 
only on 20 NWs out of the 23 Operational Waterways. The Committee desires to know the 
reason for lack of development activities on 03 of the 23 Operational NWs, notwithstanding 
the policy priority to develop the Inland Waterways in the country. The Committee may 
also be informed about the action taken and timeline chalked out for the developme nt of 
the 26 potentially viable NWs.   
(Para 16) 
The Committee notes the IWAI’s submission that the manpower sanctioned in 
IWAI is for 3 National Waterways only. During the discussions with the IWAI at the time 
of deliberations on the National Waterways Bill, 2015, (223rd Report of the Committee) the 
Committee had been informed that the IWAI had a sanctioned strength of 419 with 
additional floating and contractual staff. Further, cadre reorganization in IWAI was 
underway. The Committee desires to know the  present sanctioned manpower in IWAI, the 
number of vacancies available and whether the sanctioned strength had been increased, 
after the said reorganization, at the time of notification of the new 106 waterways or 
anytime thereafter. The Committee would l ike to know the reasons if such review was not 
carried out, as it reflects on poor management skills on the part of the Ministry and IWAI. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry and IWAI may take immediate steps to 
review the manpower requirement for t he 23 Operational Waterways so that such 
constraints which are having a negative impact on the waterways development could be 
removed. The Committee is of the opinion that manpower constraints cannot be allowed to 
be the limiting conditions for the impleme ntation of the development projects that are 
crucial for ensuring the country’s economic prosperity.  

57 
 
(Para 18) 
Regarding the lack of cargo earmarked for IWT and insufficient facilities, the 
Committee observes that after decades of dependence on road and rail transport, shifting 
from road and rail to waterways would entail redesignating entire supply chains. The 
factors such as the slow pace of development of IWT, poor hinterland connectivity, high 
investment costs of vessels and equipments, etc. all discourage companies and shippers 
from shifting to the inland waterways mode. The Committee notes the Ministry’s 
submission that waterway usage charges have been kept at Nil and other charges kept at a 
low level to promote inland water transport. The Committee, however, feels that 
substantial financial incentives rather than mere waiver of charges would be necessary to 
facilitate the modal shift to waterways. The Committee has been informed that no financial 
incentives are at present proposed by the IWAI.   
(Para 19) 
The Committee recommends that given the long term and slow nature of 
development of IWT, and the huge inves tments in the creation of requisite infrastructure 
and facilities and the fact that a large number of waterways are being developed in the 
country simultaneously, the Ministry and IWAI may consider giving certain financial 
incentives to shippers for the mo dal shift to waterways.  The Committee is aware that 
Terminals for loading/unloading of cargo at various locations along the waterways are one 
of the three essential requirements for successful navigation on Inland Waterways, apart 
from navigable fairways and aids to navigation. The Committee observes that while limited 
depths of rivers, erosion and meandering are determined by the forces of nature and 
cannot be easily controlled, factors such as development of loading/unloading facilities at 
Terminals, increase of staff strength to deal with the expansion of operational waterways, 
connectivity to rail and road networks are not insurmountable obstacles and should be 
taken up with priority in the usual course along with the development plans. The 
Committee observes that the CAG in its Performance Audit Report of Kerala Waterways 
(2015) had pointed out that several PSUs near the Kochi Port were transporting large 
volumes of cargo by road and were willing to shift to waterways mode if proper 
loading/unloading fa cilities were created. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 

58 
 
and IWAI should focus on creating adequate terminal facilities at the loading and 
unloading points and ensure the availability of hinterland connectivity to encourage 
potential users, manufa cturers and shippers to prefer waterways to rail and road. The 
Committee also observes that one of the proposed initiatives under the Blue Economy 
Vision 2047 is mandating PSUs and Cooperative Companies to divert 10% of their cargo 
by coastal or inland wat erways. The Committee desires to know as to whether at present, 
PSUs have been   required to transport some percentage of their cargo by waterways.  
(Para 21) 
The Committee further notes that while Inland Waterways is undeniably the most 
environment friendly mode of transport, development of waterways cannot be undertaken 
without its environmental costs as development activities change a river’s hydrology and 
morphology. Indian rivers support much biodiversity and aquatic life, many of which are 
already endangered due to high levels of pollution. Dredging of the river bed for providing 
requisite draft adversely affects the ecology of the river systems and fish breeding activities. 
While river systems could play a crucial role in cargo transportation and redu ction in 
logistics costs especially in landlocked States and thus, could be an economic game -
changer, the concerns of environmental sustainability should also be given equal 
importance. A case in point is India’s national aquatic animal, the endangered Gan getic 
Dolphin. The NW -1, passes through the Vikramshila dolphin sanctuary, India’s only 
dedicated protected area for the Gangetic Dolphin, one of the only three surviving 
freshwater dolphin species in the world. The Gangetic Dolphins, essentially blind, re ly 
heavily on echolocation, i.e., using sound to navigate and locate prey, and developmental 
activities such as capital dredging and construction interfere with their activities. The 
Committee observes that speed regulations, buffer zones and regulation of  dredging were 
some of the measures proposed to be taken to minimize the deleterious impact on dolphins 
and other aquatic life and desires to know the status of implementation in this regard.   
(Para 23) 
The Committee opines that while development of waterways is crucial for reduction 
of logistics costs and boosting economic growth, the environmental costs and the cost 
effectiveness of waterways on case to case basis have to be assessed in tandem with the 

59 
 
overall economic goals. Moreover, as stated by the Ministry, it takes close to a decade for 
the development and full utilization of a waterway. Out of the five NWs existing prior to 
2016, two NWs have still not been fully developed while development activi ties have only 
been started on 20 more waterways. In such a scenario, the Committee is in agreement with 
the IWAI that the 63 NWs which are not found to be viable, should at present not be taken 
up for development. The Committee also expresses its displeas ure at the declaration of a 
huge number of NWs without making proper assessment about their viability. The 63 
NWs, which have been found to be non -viable have created a peculiar situation whereby 
declaration of a NW through enactment has generated massive popular expectation about 
the development of waterways by the Central Government thus absolving the State 
Government from its responsibility in the development and maintenance of the waterways 
in question, leaving the waterways in a state of perennial neglect and abandonment. 
(Para 24) 
Considering the constraints, the Committee recommends that the IWAI should 
concentrate its efforts in developing the 23 Operational National Waterways. The 
Committee desires to know whether all requisite hydrographic and tech no-economic 
feasibility studies and environmental and forest clearances have been obtained for these 23 
Operational NWs as no such studies had been carried out prior to the notification of the 
new waterways. The Committee exhorts the IWAI to give due importance to environmental 
studies along with techno -economic studies in the development projects on the 23 
Operational NWs. The Committee has been informed that the Least Available Depth 
(LAD) for a waterway to be made operational in a profitable way must be two meters. The 
Committee recommends that those waterways which have a naturally available depth of 
two meters and above may be given top priority for development. The Committee also 
recommends that wherever Inland Water Authority of India proposes to conduct feasibility 
study, the State’s representation should be ensured in the proposed feasibility study and 
the State should be given opportunity to be heard and its views on feasibility should be 
adequately taken into account. 
(Para 25) 
 

60 
 
Cargo Traffic on National Waterways 
The Committee observes that while the quantum of cargo moved on the National 
Waterways shows a huge increase post the declaration of new Waterways in the year 2016, 
much of the cargo movement is still contributed by the state of Maharashtr a (63.15 MMT) 
i.e., nearly 50% of the total cargo moved on National Waterways. Gujarat contributes 
27.66 MMT that is about 21% of the total cargo and the NW-1 contributes 13.17 MMT that 
is about 10% of the total cargo moved on National Waterways. The state s of Maharashtra 
(mainly NW -10 and NW -91) and Gujarat (mainly NW -100) and the NW -1 combined 
contribute about 80% of the total cargo moved on NWs, whereas the balance is contributed 
by the NW -3, NW -4, NW -68 in Goa and the Sunderbans. The contribution of all  the 
remaining NWs is rather miniscule. Even prior to the notification of the NWs, the 
Maharashtra waterways had accounted for more than 50% of the cargo movement in the 
country and as such, post notification of NWs, and this has led to increase in the car go 
movement in NWs. While the Committee acknowledges the Ministry’s submission that it 
takes about a decade for proper development of a waterway, the targeted MMTP for 2029 -
30 does not appear to be significant.    
(Para 27) 
While the Committee accepts the fact that development of waterways is a long -term 
project, the targeted cargo throughput on 16 of the NWs presently under development 
seems too slow to be of much value. The Committee desires to know the reason for the Nil 
target for NW -14 and NW -31 for the year 2030. The Committee again recommends that 
the IWAI may concentrate on the 23 NWs presently operational and review the impact of 
the investments on the cargo output by 2030 before initiating development work on the 
remaining NWs. Any plan for development of more NWs at this juncture needs to be 
eschewed as the resources available are too thin for any tangible returns on investment.  
(Para 29) 
Current Projects on the Operational Waterways  
The Committee notes that the existing navigational lock at Farakka was constructed 
in 1987 and is in need of major repairs. Due to lack of proper maintenance of lock, the 

61 
 
waterways infrastructure is facing a great deal of problems which is causing inefficiencies 
in movement of vessels. Development of a new lock would immensely enhance transport 
efficiency on NW -1 as it will reduce the turnaround time from the present 02 hours to 23 
minutes only (for a two way traffic). The project was conceived in November, 2014 and 
received the Cabinet approval in January, 2018. The Committee is dismayed to note that 
the project which is so essential to JMV Project has been much delayed. The Committee 
recommends the IWAI to take all efforts to complete the project expeditiously in a time -
bound manner.   
(Para 36) 
The Committee observes that the IWAI had received cargo commitments from 
various industries, shippers and manufacturers before the operationalization of the Haldia 
MMT mainly for fly-ash, edible oil, vegetable oil and gypsum. The Committee would like to 
be informed about the types of major cargos handled at these Terminals in the last three 
years, whether the targeted cargo handling capacity of the Multi -Modal Terminals at 
Varanasi, Sahibganj and Haldia have been achieved, and the total employment  generated 
by the operationalization of these three MMTs. The Committee has also been informed that 
the Varanasi MMT is proposed to be linked by rail to the Eastern Dedicated Freight 
Corridor at Jeonathpur and the Sahibganj MMT is to be linked by rail to t he Sakri Gali 
Station. The Committee understands that while both MMTs have dependable road 
connectivity, rail connectivity is yet to be established. The Committee recommends that the 
Ministry may ensure that rail connectivity is established as per a targeted schedule for both 
MMTs.   
(Para 37) 
The Committee notes that Performance Based Dredging Contracts awarded pertain 
to only 3 stretches, Farakka -Kahalgaon, Sultanganj -Mahendrapur and Mahendrapur -
Barh out of which only the Farakka -Kahalgaon stretch has bee n physically completed.  
Dredging contracts are yet to be awarded in the remaining seven stretches. Bids received 
are being evaluated in the stretches pertaining to Varanasi -Ghazipur, Ghazipur-Majhaua, 
Majhaua-Digha, Digha -Barh, Farakka -Katwa, Farakka -Tribeni and the Haldia Access 
Channel. Out of the nearly 1217 kms, dredging contract has been awarded in a portion of 

62 
 
291 kms and completed in a small portion of 146 kms. The remaining stretches have 
tentative completion dates mostly in 2026. The Committee finds that the work pertaining to 
dredging for development of the fairways has a sluggish pace and recommends that it may 
be completed in a time-bound schedule.   
(Para 38) 
In its interaction with the IWAI in 2013, the Committee had been informed that 
IWAI aimed to provide LAD of 3.0 m in Haldia -Farakka, 2.5 m in Farakka -Barh and 2.0 
m in Barh -Ghazipur. The Committee desires to know whether the IWAI has been 
successful in maintaining the targeted LAD in the respective Fairways.   
(Para 39) 
The Committee has be en informed that 12 Community Jetties have been completed 
in UP and work is in progress in the remaining Jetties in UP, Bihar, Jharkhand and West 
Bengal. The Committee observes that out of the 62 Community Jetties, 15 are in Uttar 
Pradesh, 22 in Bihar & Jh arkhand and 22 in West Bengal. (ANNEXURE) No Community 
Jetty has yet been completed in Bihar, Jharkhand, and West Bengal. NIT (Notice Inviting 
Tender) has been floated in 11 of the 22 proposed Community Jetties in West Bengal and 
there is no work in progre ss in the remaining 11 Jetties. No Tenders have been floated as 
yet for any of the 22 Community Jetties in Bihar and Jharkhand as work is claimed to be 
in progress in all of them.   
(Para 45) 
The Committee observes that the Ganga is a part of Indian identi ty and the very 
embodiment of Indian Culture. The extensive basin of the Ganga accounts for one -fourth 
of India’s water resources and is home to a third of India’s population. Life without the 
Ganga is unimaginable to the communities living beside the rive r and the entire concept of 
the Arth Ganga programme is to link people with the river through the bridge of economy . 
The development of Community Jetties and Ro -Ro Terminals are thus, essential for 
channelizing economic activity along the banks of the Ganges and the Committee is 
dismayed to observe the slow pace of construction of such essential infrastructure. The 
Committee desires to know the reasons behind the lack of progress in construction of 
community jetties and RO-RO Terminals in Bihar and Jharkhand and West Bengal.   

63 
 
(Para 46) 
Projects in NW-2 in the North Eastern Region   
The Committee notes that presently 80 M TPA cargo moves into and within the 
North Eastern Region and is handled by either rail or road.  The landlocked NER is 
connected with mainland by only the narrow 22 -km-long Siliguri corridor which along 
with the challenging geography and topography of the r egion creates road and rail 
congestion and hampers connectivity of the north -eastern states. Development of NW -2 as 
a Multi Modal Terminal, is therefore, important to augment the Logistics infrastructure of 
the North-Eastern Region, hitherto largely depend ent on rail and road. Jogighopa , due to 
its geographical location, holds immense potential to serve the hinterlands of Upper Assam, 
Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, and Nagaland. The Committee appreciates the initiative of 
IWAI and the Ministry as the Termina l proposed here would prove to be a game changer 
for the entire North Eastern Region as well as the neighbouring countries of Bhutan, Nepal, 
and Bangladesh. The Committee, however, expresses concern at the slow pace of the 
project. Besides, the NHIDCL is y et to appoint an Authority Engineer for the project. The 
Committee desires to know the reasons for the same and recommends that action may be 
taken at the earliest in this regard.   
(Para 54) 
The Committee understands that the ship repair facility at Pandu  will enable repair 
of inland vessels with dry docking in the North-Eastern Region itself instead of having to go 
to Kolkata, which will result in less cost and shorter repair time. The Committee observes 
that the announcement of the Ship Repair Project at  Pandu was made in August, 2021 and 
the construction was to commence from May, 2022 to be completed by 2024. The project is 
now rescheduled for completion by 2025. While some delay is understandably due to the 
Covid pandemic, the Committee notes  that as p roposals for construction of a ship repair 
facilities at Guwahati were under consideration for many years before the finalization of 
this project, the IWAI should take every measure to ensure that the project is completed as 
per schedule.   
(Para 55) 

64 
 
The Committee notes that an alternative road to Pandu port had been proposed 
since 2011 at a then estimated cost of Rs. 12.32 crores but due to various reasons, could not 
be constructed. CAG in its Report No. 15 of 2016 had commented adversely that due to the 
lack of this alternate road, the available infrastructure at Pandu port was lying largely 
unutilised. The Committee observes that the proposal has been deferred for nearly more 
than a decade despite CAG observations and the Alternate Road is now propos ed to be 
built at a cost of Rs. 186 crores by 2026. The Committee feels that this indicates apathy on 
the part of the Ministry and IWAI that an important infrastructure project which would 
have benefitted the region should have been allowed to be delayed f or such a long time and 
recommends that the IWAI may ensure that there is no further delay in this project. The 
Committee also desires to have the feedback from the IWAI on the reasons for the cost 
escalation of this project. The Committee also desires to know whether the broad gauge rail 
siding between Pandu Terminal and Guwahati Railway station is now fully operational as 
the CAG had in its report commented adversely on the same.   
(Para 56) 
The Committee had asked for information about any surveys done by the IWAI to 
tap the potential of developing waterways systems in the North Eastern Region beyond 
Dibrugarh but the IWAI has only replied that Regular Thalweg Surveys are being carried 
out up  to Sadiya beyond Dibrugarh, i.e., up to the declared National Waterway No. 2 
stretch. The Committee notes that only the NW-2 is presently operational in the North-East 
region though four NWs i.e. , NW no. 2, 16, 31 and 57, all in Assam have been identified  as 
viable. Besides, the work on the development of NW-2 has also been going at a much slower 
pace. The Committee recommends that the IWAI may give special consideration to the 
North-Eastern region and attach top priority to the development of waterways in  that 
region.  
(Para 57) 
Development of NW-16 and Indo-Bangladesh Protocol (IBP)  
The Committee notes though that the date of completion of the Sonamura Terminal 
is in October, 2023, yet the physical progress is merely 25%. The Committee also notes that 
the scheduled completion time of the upgradation of Badarpur and Karimganj Terminals 

65 
 
was March, 2023 and desires to know whether the work on these projects could be 
accomplished as per schedule. 
(Para 60) 
Trade on the Indo-Bangladesh Protocol Route  
The Committee observes that the North -Eastern Region is strategically and 
economically important being the gateway to the South East Asia but in the decades since 
independence, the region had to face connectivity hurdles with mainland India due to poor 
conditions of roads, frequently washed away by floods. The River navigation system offers 
natural navigation channels connecting the entire NER region.   
(Para 68) 
The Committee observes that the “Act East Policy” (AEP) of the Government 
strives to promote ec onomic cooperation and cultural ties with the countries in the Asia -
Pacific region by providing enhanced connectivity to the North -Eastern States. Regional 
connectivity initiatives   act as force multipliers for regional growth and development while 
enhancing people to people contact and enhancing economic cooperation. One of the 
important components of the Act East Policy is the Kaladan Multimodal Transit Project in 
Myanmar. The Committee appreciates the efforts made for the operationalisation of the 
Sittwe port which connects Kolkata with Myanmar over the Kaladan River, thus 
promoting bilateral and regional trade. The Committee, however, notes that the Kaladan 
project has seen many delays in the implementation of the first phase and revised deadlines 
and r ecommends that the IWAI and the MEA may ensure that the second phase of the 
project in which the waterway and road components of KMTTP will link the East coast of 
India to the North -eastern states through the Sittwe port would be completed as per 
schedule.   
(Para 69) 
The Committee desires to know the number of voyages made in the IBP route in 
2022-23.  The Committee notes that the Protocol provides for a 50:50 ratio for sharing on 
tonnage basis for inter -country and transit cargo by Indian and Bangladeshi vessels. The 
Committee desires to know the number of Indian vessels actually plying on the Indo -

66 
 
Bangladesh Protocol Route as compared to Bangladeshi vessels in 2022-23.  The Committee 
has been informed that in 2018 -19, approximately 600 Bangladeshi vessels  and 40 Indian 
vessels used the IBP route and in subsequent years also the number of Indian vessels has 
been much less than Bangladeshi vessels and desires to know the reasons for the same. The 
Committee further observes that the IWAI, as per its website, has 121 vessels (including 13 
accommodation boats, 07 cargo vessels, 03 classic watermaster, 01container crane, 09 crane 
pontoons, 12 cutter suction dredgers, 03 hydraulic surface dredger, 01 container crane, 07 
inspection boats, 01 Ro-Ro cargo, 18 survey vessels, 34 terminal barges and 12 work boats/ 
tags) and desires to know whether the number is sufficient for full utilization of the 
protocol route.   
(Para 70) 
The Committee feels that with the huge increase in NWs after 2016 and the 
requirement of more inland vessels, the Ministry should consider the scheme for 
subsidizing the manufacture of inland vessels. The incentives for manufacturing may 
persuade reluctant shippers to switch to the waterways mode.  
(Para 75) 
Development of other National Waterways 
Waterways Project in the State of Odisha  
The Committee observes that the NW -5 was declared as a National Waterway on 
25th November, 2008 but there had been no action for further development for several 
years. The proposal to connect the coal belt of Tacher with Dhamra and Paradip ports had 
been initiated during the last few years and targeted to be completed by 2021 but agai n due 
to no progress and the MoU signed between IWAI, Paradip Port, Dhamra Port and the 
State Government expired in 2018.  Now the IWAI has initiated Phase – I of the project 
and Phase -II and III would be taken up after completion of Phase -I. The Committee  is 
disappointed at the tardiness in the implementation of this project which would have 
provided a cost -effective route for transportat ion of bulk cargo to the ports. The 
Committee would like to know the reasons for the lack of progress earlier and the ta rgeted 
date of completion of the first phase of the project.  The Committee recommends that the 
IWAI may set targets and a schedule for completion of Phase -I of the project and the NW 

67 
 
64 project which have already been much delayed and endeavour to complet e it as 
scheduled.  
(Para 77) 
As per the information given to Parliament, funds to the tune of Rs. 43.70 crores 
have been allocated to develop Phase -I of the proj ect in the last five years. (Details placed 
at Annexure-X). The Committee desires to be informed of the expenditure incurred in this 
regard.  
(Para 78) 
Waterways Project in the State of Kerala  
The Committee notes that the reconstruction of new navigational lock at 
Thrikkunnapuzha had been sanctioned in 2018 -19 with an initially scheduled completion 
period of 26 months. Ever since, only 64% of the work has been awarded/ completed.   
(Para 81) 
The Committee does not find the reasons for delay very convincing as the initial 
scheduled completion time was only littl e over about 02 years. Despite the fact that more 
than four years have passed since the sanction of the project, one third of the work is still 
pending. The Committee also observed that the proposed Kovalam-Bekal waterways under 
the State Government, has also been much delayed and the deadline extended to 2025.  
(Para 83) 
The Committee observes that the proposed Waterway in Kerala, which passes 
through nine districts, will connect Thiruvananthapuram to Kasorgod and the 
international airports at Thiruvananth apuram, Kozhikode and Kannur, and will have 
much impact on both logistics and tourism. The backwaters of Kerala with its innate 
serenity and beauty can rival the canals of Amsterdam which are visited by millions of 
tourists. Development of waterways in the  state is key to its tourism centric development. 
The Committee recommends that the IWAI and the Ministry of Ports, Shipping & 
Waterways should address the concerns and resolve the issues in coordination with the 

68 
 
State Government of Kerala, and if necessar y, involve the public representatives for 
finding durable solutions to vexed problems.  
(Para 87) 
Buckingham Canal 
The Committee enquired about the status of encroachments in the Buckingham 
Canal. The IWAI informed that the Madras High Court had directed t he State 
Government to remove the encroachments but no action has been taken so far.  Upon 
enquiry by the Committee whether sufficient water was available in the Canal from 
Chennai to Marakonnam especially during summer season, the IWAI replied in the 
negative, stating that even in earlier times, the Canal was fed not by natural river systems 
but by barrages and dams.   
(Para 92) 
The Committee further notes that certain waterways projects are delayed due to 
issues that fall in the domain of the State. The Committee opines that such issues can be 
resolved by establishing necessary co-ordination mechanism to address state level and local 
concerns. The Committee, therefore, recommends that IWAI and the Ministry may take up 
the pending issues with the concerned authorities to accelerate the development of already 
declared Inland Waterways.  
(Para 94) 
Waterways Projects in the States of Mumbai, Gujarat and Goa  
The Committee observes that the two states of Goa and Maharashtra have 
promising inland water prospects with Maharashtra accounting for about 50% waterway 
cargo movement across the country. Out of 126.15 MMT cargo movement on Natio nal 
Waterways in FY 2022-23, around 63 MMT cargo movement was through NWs in the state 
of Maharashtra. The Committee notes that NW -10 (Amba River) in Maharashtra has two 
Major Ports, Mumbai Port and JNPA, in its vicinity, and two functional non -major ports 
namely, Dharmatar Port and PNP port on its banks. NW -8 (Revdanda Creek -Kundalika 
River) also in Maharashtra has a large industrial area in its catchment. The Committee 
observes that despite promise and potential, the development of waterways in Maharashtra 

69 
 
is still in its preliminary stages and recommends that the IWAI may make all efforts for 
development of waterways in Maharashtra in a targeted and timebound schedule.   
(Para 98) 
The Committee observes that the state of Gujarat is only second to Maharash tra in 
transport of cargo through waterways. Out of the total 111, there are four NWs in the State 
of Gujarat i.e., NW-48, 66, 73 and 87. The Committee understands that there is a proposal 
for development of terminals at Barwani, Sakarja and Hanfeshwar on the banks of the 
river Narmada for starting to and fro cruise services to the Statue of Unity in Kevadia, 
Gujarat and desires to know the details of the steps taken on the commencement of the 
proposed cruise services and its likely impact on the tourists’ footfall to the statue.   
(Para 99) 
The Committee recommends the Government to provide institutional framework 
for development of IWT sector in the country so as to increase the capacity of IWT 
agencies, commercialisation of IWT industries, increased cost recovery through user 
charges and creation of a vibrant IWT sector in the country.  
(Para 100) 
The Committee is of the view that Research and Development activities is the key to 
success of any sector and recommends the Government to strengthen the Research & 
Development facilities for the desired development of Inland Water Transport sector in the 
country. The Committee also urges that Research and Development studies should be 
conducted for making assessment of the impact of the increased inland water transport 
activities on the aqua-marine life as development should invariably be in sustainable mo de 
with due consideration to environment and ecology.   
(Para 101) 
Ro-Ro (Roll-on, Roll-off) and Ro-Pax (Roll-on/Roll-off with passenger) Ferry Services 
The Committee observes that Ro -Ro projects have the potential to open up 
connectivity for the geographi cally disadvantaged areas and have the advantages of speed 
of operation due to less cargo handling and ability to integrate with other transport 

70 
 
systems. The Committee recommends that the Ministry and IWAI may ensure the 
operationalization of Ro-Ro ferries National Waterways wherever possible.    
(Para 103) 
Public-Private Partnership 
The Committee strongly feels that active involvement of the private sector in the 
inland waterways sector is imperative to ensure greater efficiency and competitiveness and 
attract higher investment for infrastructure development. The Committee appreciates  the 
efforts of the Ministry and IWAI taken so far to attract private investment in this critical 
infrastructure sector.  
(Para 106) 
Accidents in National and Inland Waterways  
The Committee notes that the number of accident cases due to boat capsizing has  
seen an increasing trend especially in the last two years, resulting in many deaths and 
injury to the passengers. With the increase in the number of waterways, the number of 
accidents may also increase unless remedial measures are put in place to enhance boat 
safety and prevent accidents. The Committee observes that one of the main  reasons for 
most boat accidents in India is overloading of passengers, imbalance due to lack of proper 
distribution of weight of the running boat, and dangerous working practic es, followed by 
poor quality of vessels and  unregistered vessels, violating rules, vessel traffic etc. In their 
deposition before the Committee, the representatives of the IWAI had stated that a system 
is in place to survey and certify the vessels for balance and stability, fire safety and training 
of manpower manning the vessel, etc. before registration and certification. Accidents 
taking place are registered by the State Government and feedback is taken for 
improvement.  
(Para 110) 
The Committee notes th at though passenger boat safety is a subject under the State 
list yet, it is also the responsibility of the Ministry to see that states have the financial and 
organization as support to institutionalize the enforcement of regulations in boat safety.  

71 
 
(Para 111) 
The Committee takes serious note of these cases and urges the Ministry to take 
corrective actions to prevent such accidents in the future. The State Disaster Management 
Authorities must be a part of the regulatory mechanism of the State to bring abou t greater 
boat safety. The IWAI must set up observational network and infrastructural facilities at 
the regional, state, and local levels for safe navigation and ensure the proper 
implementation of warnings and weather advisories given by IMD, from time to time.  
(Para 112) 
Digital initiatives in the Waterways Sector 
The Committee appreciates the digital initiatives taken by the IWAI to enhance 
availability of information in waterways and recommends that River Information Services 
may be implemented in at least five National Waterways existing before 2016 in a 
scheduled manner. The Committee understands that River Information Services should 
support both traffic and transport management, by not only ensuring the safety and 
efficiency of inland navigation but also enhance  the resource management of the  
waterways transp ort chain by enabling information exchange between vessels, locks, 
bridges, terminals and ports. The Committee also recommends that IWAI may make 
concerted efforts to develop the phone software which would enable small operators who 
are unable to afford the AIS system to avail of the facilities for safe navigation.   
(Para 119) 
Connectivity of National Waterways to road-rail-air and constraints faced 
The Committee desires to know whether the Broad Gauge Rail Siding at Pandu is 
now operational as the CAG in its Report 15 of 2016 had commented adversely on the 
same.  The Committee observes that with the exception of Pandu and Jogighopa Terminals, 
none of the other Terminals have railway connectivity at present and recommends that the 
IWAI may take all efforts to develop the connectivity of the Terminals with rail and road at 
the earliest. Connectivity ensures a smooth and predictable supply chain which is essential 
for reduction of logistics costs.   

72 
 
(Para 122) 
The Committee also observes that connectivity of w aterways with Major Ports and 
transferring some of the cargo evacuation to waterways would relieve congestion of ports 
and lessen the burden on rail and road besides reducing the logistics costs. Interlinking 
waterways and ports with coastal shipping would  ensure development of the entire 
hinterland. The Committee recommends that for the newly notified waterways under 
development, the IWAI may ensure that the connectivity to rail, road and ports be 
comprehensively dealt with in the Detailed Project Report (DPR) itself.   
(Para 123) 
Tourism around National Waterways 
The Committee strongly believes that taking into account the navigable waterways 
length of around 14,500 km, India has enormous potential to develop tourism in and 
around the country’s inland wate rway system. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that a robust mechanism has to be devised in c o-ordination with the Union Ministry of 
Tourism and various State Governments to promote/ develop tourism across the 
waterways network in the Country, especially in the North -Eastern Region; Buckingham 
Canal including the areas in Kadiyam; and backwaters of Kerala.  
(Para 127) 
The Committee also observes that there are many fascinating places near the Canal 
like the Kadiyam nursery spread over 25,000 hectares and the Kolleru lake, home to 
several species of migratory birds. The Committee, therefore, recomme nds that the 
Ministry and IWAI may take up the issue of removal of encroachments with the State 
Government from the Buckingham canal to ensure for its further development at least for 
promoting tourism. 
(Para 128) 
Kochi Water Metro  
The Committee notes the  introduction of the Kochi Water Metro and would like to 
know its performance assessment, both physical and financial, at periodic interval. The 

73 
 
Committee would also like to know whether the Ministry has any plan to implement 
similar models in other States  for the integration of waterways in the public transport 
system or it would wait for an annual performance assessment of Kochi water metro for a 
better and meaningful plan for replication. 
(Para 131) 
River Cruise-Ganga Vilas  
The Committee notes that foll owing the initiation of Ganga Vilas, the potential of 
river cruise tourism in the country has remained vast. It feels that river cruise will not only 
promote the tourism sector in the India by attracting foreign tourists, it will also aid in 
boosting the p eripheral coastline economy of the country. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should take concerted efforts to increase the number of 
River Cruises plying in the country. It also recommends that the Ministry should launch 
programmes to incentivize river cruise operators so that the available potential can be fully 
realised. 
(Para 137) 
The Committee may also be apprised about the details of the proposed River 
Cruises and an estimated timeframe for their development, alongwith the details  of the 
revenue that is presently being generated by operational River Cruise circuits in the 
country. 
(Para 138) 
Waterways – A Global Perspective 
Comparison of Indian Waterways with other Countries 
Considering India’s marginal share in global IWT and its subdued position in the 
development of waterways as a viable mode of transportation, and its huge untapped 
potential, the Committee calls upon the Ministry and IWAI to come out with a credible 
action plan with implementable time schedules for harnessing the full potential of the 
waterways both as an option for sustainable transport and also as a tourism product. The 

74 
 
Government’s increased focus on and priority for development of NWs can usher in 
waterways-led development in the country. 
(Para 142) 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 

75 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 

76 
 
Annexure-I 
Entries relevant to Waterways and Navigation in Union, State and Concurrent Lists  
 
List I – Union List 
24. Shipping and navigation on inland waterways, declared by Parliament by law to be national 
waterways, as regards mechanically propelled vessels; the rule of the road on such waterways. 
25. Maritime shipping and navigation, including shipping and navigation on tidal waters; 
provision of education and training for the mercantile marine and regulation of such education 
and training provided by States and other agencies. 
30. Carriage of passengers and goods by railway, sea or air, or by national waterways in 
mechanically propelled vessels. 
 
List II – State List 
13. Communications, that is to say, roads, bridges, ferries, and other means of communication 
not specified in List I; municipal tramways; ropeways; inland waterways and traffic thereon 
subject to the provisions of List I and List III with regard to such waterwa ys; vehicles other than 
mechanically propelled vehicles. 
56. Taxes on goods and passengers carried by road or on inland waterways. 
 
List III – Concurrent List 
32. Shipping and navigation on inland waterways as regards mechanically propelled vessels, and 
the rule of the road on such waterways, and the carriage of passengers and goods on inland 
waterways subject to the provisions of List I with respect to national waterways. 
 
 
 
 

77 
 
Annexure-II 
Criteria for declaration of National Waterway 
 It should possess capability of navigation by mechanically propelled vessels of minimum 
300 tonnes (DWT) capacity (45m x 8m x1.2m);   
 It should have a fairway of minimum 40m wide channel with 1.4m depth in case of rivers 
and minimum 30m wide channel with 1 .8m depth in case of canals. Exception may be 
given in case of irrigation-cum-navigation canals based on request of the concerned State 
Government in order to safeguard the interest of irrigation;   
 It should be a continuous stretch of minimum 50 kms; the only exception to be made to 
waterway length is for urban conglomerations and intra-port traffic; and   
 It should pass through and serve the interest of more than one States or connect a vast and 
prosperous hinterland and major port, or either pass through  or connect a strategic region 
where development of navigations is considered necessary to provide logistic support for 
economic development or national security, or connect place not served by any other 
mode of transport. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

78 
 
Annexure-III 
State-wise details of 111 Waterways 
S. 
No. 
National 
Waterway No. 
Length 
(km) Details of Waterways State(s) 
1 National 
Waterway 1 1620 Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly River 
System (Haldia - Allahabad) 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Bihar, Jharkhand 
& West Bengal 
2 National 
Waterway 2 891 Brahmaputra River (Dhubri - Sadiya) Assam 
3 National 
Waterway 3 
205 
West Coast Canal (Kottapuram - 
Kollam), Champakara and Udyogmandal 
Canals Kerala 
170 West Coast Canal (Kottapuram - 
Kozhikode) 
4 National 
Waterway 4 
50 Kakinada Canal (Kakinada to 
Rajahmundry) 
Andhra Pradesh, 
Telangana, 
Chhattisgarh, 
Karnataka, Tamil 
Nadu, Pondicherry 
and Maharashtra 
171 Godavari river (Bhadrachalam to 
Rajahmundry) 
139 Eluru Canal (Rajahmundry to 
Vijayawada) 
157 Krishna river (Wazirabad to Vijayawada) 
113 Commamur Canal (Vijayawada to 
Peddaganjam) 
316 North Buckingham Canal (Peddaganjam 
to Central Station of Chennai) 
110 South Buckingham canal (Central 
Station of Chennai to Marakanam) 
22 Marakanam to Puducherry through 
Kaluvelly tank 

79 
 
S. 
No. 
National 
Waterway No. 
Length 
(km) Details of Waterways State(s) 
1202 River Godavari (Bhadrachalam - Nashik) 
636 River Krishna (Wazirabad - Galagali) 
5 National 
Waterway 5 
256 East Coast Canal and Matai river 
Odisha and West 
Bengal 
265 Brahmani-Kharsua-Dhamra rivers 
67 
Mahanadi delta rivers (Consisting of 
Hansua river, Nunanala, Gobrinala, 
Kharnasi river and Mahanadi river) 
6 National 
Waterway 6 68 Aai River Assam 
7 National 
Waterway 7 90 Ajoy (Ajay) River West Bengal 
8 National 
Waterway 8 29 Alappuzha- Changanassery Canal Kerala 
9 National 
Waterway 9 40 Alappuzha- Kottayam – Athirampuzha 
Canal 
Kerala 
Alternate route: 
11.5km 
10 National 
Waterway 10 45 Amba River Maharashtra 
11 National 
Waterway 11 99 Arunawati - Aran River System Maharashtra 
12 National 
Waterway 12 5.5 Asi River Uttar Pradesh 
13 National 
Waterway 13 11 Avm Canal Kerala & Tamil 
Nadu 
14 National 
Waterway 14 48 Baitarani River Odisha 

80 
 
S. 
No. 
National 
Waterway No. 
Length 
(km) Details of Waterways State(s) 
15 National 
Waterway 15 135 Bakreswar - Mayurakshi River System West Bengal 
16 National 
Waterway 16 121 Barak River Assam 
17 National 
Waterway 17 189 Beas River Himachal Pradesh 
& Punjab 
18 National 
Waterway 18 69 Beki River Assam 
19 National 
Waterway 19 67 Betwa River Uttar Pradesh 
20 National 
Waterway 20 95 Bhavani River Tamil Nadu 
21 National 
Waterway 21 139 Bheema River Karnataka & 
Telangana 
22 National 
Waterway 22 156 Birupa - BadiGenguti - Brahmani River 
System Odisha 
23 National 
Waterway 23 56 BudhaBalanga Odisha 
24 National 
Waterway 24 61 Chambal River Uttar Pradesh 
25 National 
Waterway 25 33 Chapora River Goa 
26 National 
Waterway 26 51 Chenab River Jammu & Kashmir 
27 National 
Waterway 27 17 Cumberjua River Goa 
28 National 45 Dabhol Creek -Vashishti River System Maharashtra 

81 
 
S. 
No. 
National 
Waterway No. 
Length 
(km) Details of Waterways State(s) 
Waterway 28 
29 National 
Waterway 29 132 Damodar River West Bengal 
30 National 
Waterway 30 109 Dehing River Assam 
31 National 
Waterway 31 114 Dhansiri / Chathe Assam 
32 National 
Waterway 32 63 Dikhu River Assam 
33 National 
Waterway 33 61 Doyans River Assam 
34 National 
Waterway 34 137 Dvc Canal West Bengal 
35 National 
Waterway 35 108 Dwarekeswar River West Bengal 
36 National 
Waterway 36 119 Dwarka River West Bengal 
37 National 
Waterway 37 296 Gandak River Bihar & Uttar 
Pradesh 
38 National 
Waterway 38 62 Gangadhar River Assam & West 
Bengal 
39 National 
Waterway 39 49 Ganol River Meghalaya 
40 National 
Waterway 40 354 Ghaghra River Bihar & Uttar 
Pradesh 
41 National 
Waterway 41 112 Ghataprabha River Karnataka 

82 
 
S. 
No. 
National 
Waterway No. 
Length 
(km) Details of Waterways State(s) 
42 National 
Waterway 42 514 Gomti River Uttar Pradesh 
43 National 
Waterway 43 10 Gurupur River Karnataka 
44 National 
Waterway 44 63 Ichamati River West Bengal 
45 National 
Waterway 45 650 Indira Gandhi Canal Punjab , Haryana 
& Rajasthan 
46 National 
Waterway 46 35 Indus River Jammu & Kashmir 
47 National 
Waterway 47 131 Jalangi River West Bengal 
48 National 
Waterway 48 590 Jawai-Luni-Rann Of Kutch River System Gujarat & 
Rajasthan 
49 National 
Waterway 49 110 Jhelum River Jammu & Kashmir 
50 National 
Waterway 50 43 Jinjiram River Assam & 
Meghalaya 
51 National 
Waterway 51 23 Kabini River Karnataka 
52 National 
Waterway 52 53 Kali River Karnataka 
53 National 
Waterway 53 145 Kalyan-Thane-Mumbai Waterway, Vasai 
Creek And Ulhas River System Maharashtra 
54 National 
Waterway 54 86 Karamnasa River Bihar & Uttar 
Pradesh 
55 National 311 Kaveri - Kollidam River System Tamil Nadu 

83 
 
S. 
No. 
National 
Waterway No. 
Length 
(km) Details of Waterways State(s) 
Waterway 55 
56 National 
Waterway 56 22 Kherkai River Jharkhand 
57 National 
Waterway 57 50 Kopili River Assam 
58 National 
Waterway 58 236 Kosi River Bihar 
59 National 
Waterway 59 19 Kottayam-Vaikom Canal Kerala 
60 National 
Waterway 60 80 Kumari River West Bengal 
61 National 
Waterway 61 28 Kynshi River Meghalaya 
62 National 
Waterway 62 86 Lohit River Assam & 
Arunachal Pradesh 
63 National 
Waterway 63 336 Luni River Rajasthan 
64 National 
Waterway 64 426 Mahanadi River Odisha 
65 National 
Waterway 65 80 Mahananda River West Bengal 
66 National 
Waterway 66 247 Mahi River Gujarat 
67 National 
Waterway 67 94 Malaprabha River Karnataka 
68 National 
Waterway 68 41 Mandovi River Goa 

84 
 
S. 
No. 
National 
Waterway No. 
Length 
(km) Details of Waterways State(s) 
69 National 
Waterway 69 5 Manimutharu River Tamil Nadu 
70 National 
Waterway 70 245 Manjara River Maharashtra & 
Telangana 
71 National 
Waterway 71 27 Mapusa / Moide River Goa 
72 National 
Waterway 72 59 Nag River Maharashtra 
73 National 
Waterway 73 226 Narmada River Maharashtra & 
Gujarat 
74 National 
Waterway 74 79 Netravathi River Karnataka 
75 National 
Waterway 75 142 Palar River Tamil Nadu 
76 National 
Waterway 76 23 Panchagangavali (Panchagangoli) River Karnataka 
77 National 
Waterway 77 20 Pazhyar River Tamil Nadu 
78 National 
Waterway 78 262 Penganaga - Wardha River System Maharashtra & 
Telangana 
79 National 
Waterway 79 28 Pennar River Andhra Pradesh 
80 National 
Waterway 80 126 Ponniyar River Tamil Nadu 
81 National 
Waterway 81 35 Punpun River Bihar 
82 National 58 Puthimari River Assam 

85 
 
S. 
No. 
National 
Waterway No. 
Length 
(km) Details of Waterways State(s) 
Waterway 82 
83 National 
Waterway 83 31 Rajpuri Creek Maharashtra 
84 National 
Waterway 84 44 Ravi River 
Jammu & 
Kashmir, 
Himachal Pradesh 
& Punjab 
85 National 
Waterway 85 31 Revadanda Creek - Kundalika River 
System Maharashtra 
86 National 
Waterway 86 72 Rupnarayan River West Bengal 
87 National 
Waterway 87 210 Sabarmati River Gujarat 
88 National 
Waterway 88 14 Sal River Goa 
89 National 
Waterway 89 45 Savitri River (Bankot Creek) Maharashtra 
90 National 
Waterway 90 29 Sharavati River Karnataka 
91 National 
Waterway 91 52 Shastri River - Jaigad Creek System Maharashtra 
92 National 
Waterway 92 26 Silabati River West Bengal 
93 National 
Waterway 93 63 Simsang River Meghalaya 
94 National 
Waterway 94 141 Sone River Bihar 

86 
 
S. 
No. 
National 
Waterway No. 
Length 
(km) Details of Waterways State(s) 
95 National 
Waterway 95 106 Subansiri River Assam 
96 National 
Waterway 96 311 Subarnrekha River Jharkhand, West 
Bengal & Odisha 
97 National 
Waterway 97 
172 Sunderbans Waterway West Bengal 
56 Bidya River West Bengal 
15 ChhotaKalagachi (ChhotoKalergachi) 
River West Bengal 
7 Gomar River West Bengal 
16 Haribhanga River West Bengal 
37 Hogla (Hogal)-Pathankhali River West Bengal 
9 Kalindi (Kalandi) River West Bengal 
22 Katakhali River West Bengal 
99 Matla River West Bengal 
28 Muri Ganga (Baratala) River West Bengal 
53 Raimangal River West Bengal 
14 Sahibkhali (Sahebkhali) River West Bengal 
37 Saptamukhi River West Bengal 
64 Thakurran River West Bengal 
98 National 
Waterway 98 377 Sutlej River Himachal Pradesh 
& Punjab 
99 National 
Waterway 99 62 Tamaraparani River Tamil Nadu 

87 
 
S. 
No. 
National 
Waterway No. 
Length 
(km) Details of Waterways State(s) 
100 National 
Waterway 100 436 Tapi River Maharashtra & 
Gujarat 
101 National 
Waterway 101 42 Tizu - Zungki Rivers Nagaland 
102 National 
Waterway 102 87 Tlwang (Dhaleswari River) Assam & 
Mizoram 
103 National 
Waterway 103 73 Tons River Uttar Pradesh 
104 National 
Waterway 104 232 Tungabhadra River 
Karnataka, 
Telangana & 
Andhra Pradesh 
105 National 
Waterway 105 15 Udayavara River Karnataka 
106 National 
Waterway 106 20 Umngot (Dawki) River Meghalaya 
107 National 
Waterway 107 46 Vaigai River Tamil Nadu 
108 National 
Waterway 108 53 Varuna River Uttar Pradesh 
109 National 
Waterway109 166 Wainganga - Pranahita 
River System 
Maharashtra 
&Telangana 
110 National 
Waterway 110 1080 Yamuna River Delhi, Haryana & 
Uttar Pradesh 
111 National 
Waterway 111 50 Zuari River Goa 
 
 
 
 

88 
 
Annexure-IV 
 
Category-A 
 
LIST OF 23 NATIONAL WATERWAYS FOUND FEASIBLE FOR CARGO 
MOVEMENT 
Sl. 
No. 
National 
Waterway 
(NW) 
Length 
(km) Details of Waterways STATES 
1 NW-1 1620 Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly River System 
(Allahabad- Haldia) 
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, 
Jharkhand & West 
Bengal 
2 NW-2 891 Brahmaputra River (Dhubri - Sadiya) Assam 
3 NW-16 121 Barak River Assam 
4 NW-3 205 West Coast Canal (Kottapuram - Kollam), 
Champakara and Udyogmandal Canals Kerala 
5 NW-4 82 Krishna River (Vijayawada – Muktyala) Andhra Pradesh 
6 NW-5 233 Dhamra-Paradip via Mangalagadi to Pankopal Odisha 
7 NW-9 40 Alappuzha-Kottayam – Athirampuzha Canal Kerala Alternate route: 
11.5km 
8 NW-10 44.97
1 Amba River Maharashtra 
9 NW-25 25 Chapora River Goa 
10 NW-27 17 Cumberjua River Goa 
11 NW-28 45.22
8 VashisthiRiver Maharashtra 
 
12 NW-37 296 GandakRiver Bihar and U.P. 
13 NW-40 345 Ghaghra River Bihar &U.P. 
14 NW-44 63 Ichamati River West Bengal 
15 NW-57 50 Kopili River Assam 
16 NW-68 41 Mandovi River Goa 
17 NW-73 226 Narmada River Maharashtra & Gujarat 
18 NW-85 31 Revadanda Creek - Kundalika River System Maharashtra 
19 NW-86 72 Rupnarayan River West Bengal 
20 NW-94 141 Sone River Bihar 
21 NW-97 172 Sunderbans Waterway West Bengal 
22 NW-100 436 Tapi River Maharashtra & Gujarat 
23 NW-111 50 Zuari River Goa 
  

89 
 
Category-B 
 
LIST OF 25 NATIONAL WATERWAYS FOUND FEASIBLE FOR TOURISM AND 
FERRY SERVICES 
Sl. 
No. 
National 
Waterw
ay (NW) 
Length 
(km) Name of Waterways STATES 
1 NW-6 68.484 Aai river Assam 
2 NW- 7 19.59 Ajoy river West Bengal 
3 NW-8 29.123 Alappuzha - Changanassery Canal Kerala 
4 NW-14 48 Baitarani river Odisha 
5 NW-15 135.165 Bakreswar - Mayurakshi river system West Bengal 
6 NW-18 68.9 Beki river Assam 
7 NW-20 94.65 Bhavani river Tamil Nadu 
8 NW-23 56 BudhaBalanga Odisha 
9 NW-24 60.86 Chambal river U.P. 
10 NW-29 135 Damodar River Jharkhand and West Bengal 
11 NW-30 109.136 Dehing river Assam 
12 NW-36 119.165 Dwarka river West Bengal 
13 NW- 42 514.31 Gomti river U.P. 
14 NW-47 130.59 Jalangi river West Bengal 
15 NW-50 42.576 Jinjiram river Assam & Meghalaya 
16 NW-52 53.41 Kali river Karnataka 
17 NW-83 31 Rajpuri Creek Maharashtra 
18 NW-87 212 Sabarmati River Gujarat 
19 NW-88 14 Sal River Goa 
20 NW- 90 28.67 Sharavati river Karnataka 
21 NW-91 48 Shastri River/ Jaigad Creek Maharashtra 
22 NW-95 106.45 Subansiri River Assam 
23 NW- 104 232.4 Tungabhadra river Karnataka, Telangana & 
Andhra Pradesh 
24 NW-108 52.83 Varuna river U.P. 
25 NW-110 1089 River Yamuna Delhi, U.P. & Haryana 
 
 
 
 
 

90 
 
 
Category-C 
 
LIST OF 63 NATIONAL WATERWAYS FOUND UNECONOMICAL FOR 
DEVELOPMENT AT PRESENT 
Sl. 
No. 
National 
Waterwa
y (NW) 
Length 
(km) Name of Waterways STATES 
1 NW-11 98.9 Arunawati - Aran river system Maharashtra 
2 NW-12 5.5 Assi river Uttar Pradesh 
3 NW-13 11.3 AVM Canal Kerala & Tamil Nadu 
4 NW-17 189 Beas river Himachal Pradesh & Punjab 
5 NW-19 67.05 Betwa river Uttar Pradesh 
6 NW-21 138.9 Bheema river Karnataka & Telangana 
7 NW-22 152 Birupa / BadiGenguti / Brahmani 
River system Odisha 
8 NW-26 51.072 Chenab river J&K 
9 NW-31 110 Dhansiri River Assam 
10 NW-32 63.205 Dikhu river Assam 
11 NW-33 61.368 Doyans river Assam 
12 NW-34 136 DVC Canal West Bengal 
13 NW-35 113 Dwarakeshwar river West Bengal 
14 NW-38 62 Gangadhar river Assam &W.B 
15 NW-39 49.143 Ganol river Meghalaya 
16 NW-41 111.76 Ghataprabha river Karnataka 
17 NW-43 10.041 Gurupur river Kanataka 
18 NW-45 650.1 Indira Gandhi Canal Punjab, Haryana and 
Rajasthan 
19 NW-46 34.67 Indus river Leh 
20 NW-48 615.445 Jawai-Luni-Rann of Kutch river 
system Gujarat and Rajasthan 
21 NW-49 181.2 River Jhelum Jammu & Kashmir 
22 NW-51 23.56 Kabini river Karnataka 
23 NW-53 143 Vasai-Thane-Kalyan Maharashtra 
24 NW-54 86 Karamnasa river Bihar &U.P. 
25 NW-55 310 Kaveri-Kollidam river Tamil Nadu and 
Maharashtra 
26 NW-56 22.104 Kherkai river Jharkhand 
27 NW-58 236 River Kosi Bihar 
28 NW-59 18.78 Vechoor-Athirampuzha Canal Kerala 

91 
 
29 NW-60 80.446 Kumari river West Bengal 
30 NW-61 27.87 Kynshi river Meghalaya 
31 NW-62 86 Lohit river Assam and Arunachal 
Pradesh 
32 NW-63 98 Luni river Rajasthan 
33 NW-64 98 Mahanadi Luna river Odisha 
34 NW-65 80.391 Mahananda river West Bengal 
35 NW-66 246.98 Mahi river Gujarat 
36 NW-67 93.5 Malaprabha river Karnataka 
37 NW-69 4.75 Manimutharu river Tamil Nadu 
38 NW-70 245 Manjira river Maharashtra & Telangana 
39 NW-71 26.638 Mapusa river Goa 
40 NW-72 58.7 Nag river Maharashtra 
41 NW-74 30 Netravathi River Karnataka 
42 NW-75 141 Palar River Tamil Nadu 
43 NW-76 23 Panchagangvali river Karnataka 
44 NW-77 20 Pazhyar River Tamil Nadu & Andhra 
Pradesh 
45 NW-78 261.51 Penganga - Wardha river system Maharashtra & Telangana 
46 NW-79 29 Pennar River Andhra Pradesh 
47 NW-80 125.5 Ponniyar River Tamil Nadu 
48 NW-81 34.61 Punpun river Bihar 
49 NW-82 58.234 Puthimari river Assam 
50 NW-84 44.276 Ravi river Jammu & Kashmir, 
Himachal Pradesh & Punjab 
51 NW-89 45.47 Savitri river Maharashtra 
52 NW-92 26 Silabati river West Bengal 
53 NW-93 62.6 Simsang river Meghalaya 
54 NW-96 30 Subarnarekha river Odisha 
55 NW-98 377 Sutlej river Himachal Pradesh & Punjab 
56 NW-99 62 Tamaraparni river Tamil Nadu 
57 NW-101 42 Tizu-Zungki rivers Nagaland 
58 NW-102 87 Tlwang (Dhaleshwari) river Assam & Mizoram 
59 NW-103 73 Tons river Uttar Pradesh 
60 NW-105 15 Udayavara river Karnataka 
61 NW-106 20 Umngot (Dawki) river Meghalaya 
62 NW-107 46 Vaigai river Tamil Nadu 
63 NW-109 166 Wainganga-Pranahita river system Maharashtra & Telangana 
  6716.573   
 

92 
 
Annexure-V 
Details of Operational National Waterways 
 
Operational Waterways till 2018-19 
Sl.No. NW No. Length 
(km) NW Name State 
1 NW-1 1620 Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly River System 
(Haldia-Allahabad) 
UP, Bihar, 
Jharkhand, W. 
Bengal 
2 NW-2 891 Brahmaputra River (Dhubri-Sadiya) Assam 
3 NW-3 205 West Coast Canal Kerala 
4 NW-4 82 Krishna Godavari River Systems Andhra Pradesh 
5 NW-10 45 Amba River Maharashtra 
6 NW-83 31 Rajpuri Creek Maharashtra 
7 NW-85 31 Revadanda Creek-Kundalika River System Maharashtra 
8 NW-91 52 Shastri River - Jaigad Creek System Maharashtra 
9 NW-68 41 Mandovi River Goa 
10 NW-111 50 Zuari River Goa 
11 NW-73 226 Narmada River Gujarat 
12 NW-100 436 Tapi River Gujarat 
13 NW-97 172 Sunderbans Waterway W. Bengal 
Waterways Operationalized in 2019-20 
14 NW-16 121 Barak River Assam 
15 NW-44 63 Ichamati River W. Bengal 
Waterways Operationalized in 2020-21 
16 NW-86 72 Rupnarayan River W. Bengal 
Waterways Operationalized in 2021-22 
17 NW-5 233 East Coast Canal And Matai River/Brahmani-
Kharsua-Dhamra Rivers/Mahanadi Delta Rivers Odisha 
18 NW-64 98 Mahanadi River Odisha 

93 
 
Waterways Operationalized in 2022-23 
19 NW-23 55 Budha Balanga Odisha 
20 NW-8 29 Alappuzha-Changanassery Canal Kerala 
21 NW-9 40 Alappuzha-Kottayam – Athirampuzha Canal Kerala 
22 NW-14 48 Baitarani River Odisha 
23 NW-31 114 Dhansiri/Chathe Assam 
Waterways to be Operationalized in 2024-25 
24 NW-94 141 Sone River Bihar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  

94 
 
Annexure-VI 
 
LIST OF 26 NATIONAL WATERWAYS (NWs) FOUND  VIABLE FOR CARGO / 
PASSENGER MOVEMENT 
S. 
No. NW Details of Waterways Length 
(Km) States 
1 NW 1 Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly River System (Haldia - 
Allahabad) 1620 
Uttar Pradesh, 
Bihar, Jharkhand 
& West Bengal 
2 NW 2 Brahmaputra River (Dhubri - Sadiya) 891 Assam 
3 NW 
16 Barak River (Lakhipur -Tuker Gram) 121 Assam 
4 NW 3 West Coast Canal (Kottapuram - Kollam), 
Champakara and Udyogmandal Canals 205 Kerala 
5 NW 4 Krishna River (Vijayawada – Muktyala) 82 Andhra Pradesh 
6 NW 5 Dhamra-Paradip via Mangalagadi to Pankopal 233 Odisha 
7 NW 8 Alappuzha- Changanassery Canal 29 Kerala 
8 NW 9 Alappuzha - Kottayam – Athirampuzha Canal 40 Kerala (Alternate 
route: 11.5km) 
9 NW 
27 
Cumberjua River (Cortalim-Ferry to Sao 
MartiasVidhanParisad) 17 Goa 
10 NW 
68 Mandovi River (Usgoan bridge to Arabian Sea) 41 Goa 
11 NW 
86 Rupnarayan River (Pratap Pur to Geonkhali) 72 West Bengal 
12 NW 
97 
Sunderbans Waterway (Namkhana to AtharaBanki 
Khal) 172 West Bengal 
13 NW 
111 Zuari River (Sanvorden bridge to Marmugao Port) 50 Goa 
14 NW 
40 Ghagra River (Faizabad to ManjhiGhat) 345 Bihar & U.P. 
15 NW 
10 
Amba River (Arabian Sea, Dharamtaar Creek to 
Nagothane ST Stand) 45 Maharashtra 

95 
 
16 NW 
44 
Ichamati River (Bridge at Gobra to Bansjhari near 
Bangladesh Border) 63 West Bengal 
17 NW 
52 
Kali River (Kodasalli Dam to Sadashivgad Bridge, 
Arabian Sea) 53 Karnataka 
18 NW 
57 
Kopili River (Banthai Gaon Tinali Bus Stop to 
Chandrapur No.2 confluence with Brahmaputra) 50 Assam 
19 NW 
25 
Chapora River (Bridge near Maneri village to Morjim, 
Arabian Sea) 25 Goa 
20 NW 
37 Gandak River (Bhaisalotal Barrage to Hazipur) 296 Bihar & U.P. 
21 NW 
28 
Dabhol Creek Vasisti River (Arabian Sea at Dabhol to 
Bridge at Pedhe) 45 Maharashtra 
22 NW 
73 Narmada River (Pandhariya to Gulf of Khambhat) 226 Maharashtra & 
Gujarat 
23 NW 
85 
Revadanda Creek - Kundalika River System (Arabian 
Sea at Revadanda to Bridge near Roha Nagar) 31 Maharashtra 
24 NW 
94 
Sone River (Sone Barrage, Dehri to Confluence with 
the Ganga) 141 Bihar 
25 NW 
100 Tapi River (Hatnur Dam to Gulf of Khambhat) 436 Maharashtra & 
Gujarat 
26 NW 
31 
Dhansiri River (Morongi T.E. village Bridge to 
Numaligarh) 110 Assam 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

96 
 
Annexure-VII 
 
Target for Cargo Traffic through NWs till 2029-30 (million metric tons-MMT) 
Sr. 
No. National Waterways State 
2022-23 2029-30 
Existing 
(MMT) 
Targeted 
(MMT) 
1 NW-1 (Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hooghly River System 
(Haldia-Allahabad)) 
Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, 
Jharkhand, West Bengal 13.17 20.88 
2 NW-2 (Brahmaputra River (Dhubri-Sadiya)) Assam 0.63 1.00 
3 NW-3 (West Coast Canal) Kerala 3.23 5.12 
4 NW-4 (Krishna Godavari River Systems) Telangana & Andhra 
Pradesh 8.42 13.35 
5 
NW-5 (East Coast Canal And Matai 
River/Brahmani-Kharsua-Dhamra 
Rivers/Mahanadi Delta Rivers) 
Odisha 0.40 0.64 
6 NW-8 (Alappuzha-Changanassery Canal) Kerala 0.03 0.05 
7 NW-9 (Alappuzha-KottayamAthirampuzha 
Canal) Kerala 0.02 0.03 
8 NW-14 (Baitarani River) Odisha 0.001 0.00 
9 NW-16 (Barak River) Assam 0.01 0.02 
10 NW-23 (BudhaBalanga) Odisha 0.03 0.05 
11 NW-31 (Dhansiri/Chathe) Assam 0.001 0.00 
12 NW-44 (Ichamati River) West Bengal 0.46 0.73 
13 NW-64 (Mahanadi River) Odisha 0.45 0.71 
14 NW-86 (Rupnarayan River) West Bengal 0.09 0.14 
15 NW-94 (Sone River) Bihar - - 
16 NW-97 (Sunderbans Waterway) West Bengal 5.47 8.68 
17 NW-10 (Amba River) Maharashtra 28.54 45.25 
18 NW-83 (Rajpuri Creek) Maharashtra 0.24 0.38 
19 NW-85 (Revadanda Creek-Kundalika River 
System) Maharashtra 0.50 0.79 
20 NW-91 (Shastri River - Jaigad Creek System) Maharashtra 33.87 53.69 
21 NW-68 (Mandovi River) Goa 2.54 4.03 
22 NW-111 (Zuari River) Goa 0.39 0.61 
23 NW-73 (Narmada River) Gujarat 0.04 0.07 
24 NW-100 (Tapi River) Gujarat 27.62 43.78 
 Grand Total MMT  126.15 200.00 
 
 
 
 
 
 

97 
 
Annexure-VIII 
 
Major remaining Procurement: Tentative Timeline & Current Status under JMVP 
Procurement 
Activities 
Publishing 
of Tender 
Expected 
Award 
Duration of 
Contract 
Tentative 
Completion Status 
Fairway 
Development 
between Tribeni – 
Katwa 
Published 
:January 
2023 
Aug 2023 3 Years July 2026 
4 bids received. 
Tech. evaluation 
under progress 
Fairway 
Development 
between Katwa – 
Farakka 
Published : 
January 
2023 
July 2023 3 Years June 2026 4 bids - Under 
Tech. evaluation 
Fairway 
Development 
between Barh– 
Digha 
Published 
April 2023 
Aug 2023 3 Years July 2026 3 bids - Under 
Tech. evaluation 
Fairway 
Development 
between Digha- 
Majhaua 
Published in 
Feb’23 
Sept 
2023 
3 Years Aug 2026 
Retender To be 
published Single 
Bid Received from 
(KMEW) 
Fairway 
Development 
between 
Majhaua– 
Ghazipur 
Published 
in April 
Single Bid 
Received 
from Reach 
RDL 
Sept 
2023 
3 Years July 2026 Retender To be 
published 
Removal of hard 
strata in 
Ghazipur – 
Varanasi 
Under 
Approval Oct 2023 2 years Aug 2025 To be published 
Fairway 
Development 
between Ghazipur 
- Varanasi 
To be 
initiated 
after one 
year of 
execution 
of hard 
strata 
works 
July 2025 1+2 Years June 2026 
Fairway 
Development 
between Ghazipur - 
Varanasi 

98 
 
Development & 
Dredging of MMT 
Haldia Access 
Channel 
Published : 
January 2023 Aug 2023 3 Years July 2026 
2 bids received 
Under Tech. 
evaluation 
Re- Engineering 
of River bend in 
approach channel 
at Farakka 
Navigation Lock 
Published : 
June 2023 
Sept 
2023 18 months March 2025 
1 bid received 
Under Tech. 
evaluation 
Fairway 
Development 
between Farakka– 
Kahalgaon 
June 2023 Sept 
2023 3 Years August 
2026 
Bid Opening: 4th 
Aug 2023 
Development of 
Access Channel at 
Kalughat 
July 2023 Sept 
2023 6 months March 2024 Bid opening: 7th 
Aug 2023 
Procurement of 5 
Cutter Section 
Dredgers units 
August 
2023 Oct 2023 3 Years Sept 2026 To be published 
Procurement of 
Inland Vessels (3 
tugs +6 barges) 
August 
2023 Oct 2023 3 Years Sept 2026 To be published 
Traﬃc Study for 
Regional 
Waterway Grid 
August 
2023 Oct 2023 6 months Apr’ 2024 To be published 
 
 
 
 
 
 

99 
 
Major Remaining Procurement: Proposed Timeline (JMVP-II,  Arth Ganga) 
S. 
No 
Procurement 
Activities NIT Expected 
Award Completion 
1 
Fabrication and execution at 
Pontoon opening at 02 sites 
on pilot basis 
Published: 
21-Apr- 
2023 
Awarded 
Aug-2023 Sep-2024 
2 
Execution of Channel 
Stabilization Works (CSW) 
works on 15  locations 
Jan-2024 Mar-2024 Jun-2024 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

100 
 
 
Annexure – IX 
Community Jetties under JMVP 
 
State  
Total Number 
of jetties 
planned  
Number of 
jetties 
commissioned 
Work in 
progress 
NIT floated / 
To be 
tendered 
Uttar Pradesh  15 11 - 4 
Bihar & 
Jharkhand 
22 - 22 - 
West Bengal 22 0 11 11 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

101 
 
Annexure-X 
The quantum of funds allocated by the Inland waterways Authority of India (IWAI) to develop 
Phase I of the system, year-wise, for the last five years:- 
S. No. Year Sanction Amount approved from H.O. (Rs. in crore) 
1. 2018-19 2.08 
2. 2019-20 11.70 
3. 2020-21 5.16 
4. 2021-22 6.81 
5. 2022-23 17.95 
Total 43.70 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

102 
 
Annexure-XI 
 
Steps taken to Promote River Cruise Tourism in the Country- 
 
1.   MoPSW had organized 1 st Incredible India International Cruise Conference 2022 at Mumbai 
on 14-15 May, 2022. The Session “Potential of River Cruise” was anchored by IWAIwherein 
leading cruise operators of the world had participated. The work done by IWAI in ensuring draft 
and navigational aids in waterways and the jetties constructed and planned were shared. MoUs 
were signed with M/s. Heritage River Journeys Pvt. Ltd., M/s. Antara River Cruise and M/s. J.M. 
Baxi& Co. for promotion of river cruises. Work done on waterways and cruise conference – 
 
i. Led to start of first longest river cruise from Varanasi to Dibrugarh Assam via Indo -
Bangladesh Protocol Route from 13.01.2023. 
ii. Shown increased bookings on several river cruises on Ganga, Brahmaputra, Kerala 
Backwaters, Odisha etc. 
 
Accordingly, Hon'ble Prime Minister has on -line flagged off the World's Longest River 
Cruise on 13 th January 2023 from Varanasi on NW -1 (River Ganga) to Dibrugarh NW -2 (River 
Brahmaputra) via Bangladesh, which successfully covered a waterway distance of  3200 km 
approx. on 28.02.2023.  
 
2.  IWAI has provided the following infrastructure facilities for smooth operation of river cruises 
on National Waterways. These include:  
 
a) Berthing facilities: Floating pontoons have been placed at various locations for bert hing 
of vessel and embarkation/ disembarkation of tourists. To promote river cruise tourism, 
IWAI has partnered with the Ministry for construction of 9 tourist jetties on NW -1 and 
NW-2 
b) Fairway: Navigational fairway along with marking of the channel with na vigational aids 
and electronic navigation chart for safe plying of cruise vessels. 
c) Pilotage: Pilots are provided on -demand at a very nominal charge of Rs. 750/ - per day 
for navigating the vessel in the waterway. 
d) Coordination with State Govt.:  Assistance is provided to the cruise operators in close 
coordination with State Governments for facilitating the voyage. 
e) Assistance to the vessel in distress:  IWAI provides high powered tug to tow the cruise 
vessel to the safe location when they are in distress due to mechanical failure or 
otherwise, on the National Waterway. 
 
 
 

103 
 
Annexure-XII 
A Brief of the relevant Acts/ Rules/ Policies related to the Inland Waterways Authority of India, 
which is as follows:- 
Sl. 
No. 
Particulars IWAI Act,  
1985 
National 
Waterways 
Act, 2016 
Inland Vessels 
Act,  
1917 
(REPEALED) 
Inland Vessels Act,  
2021 
1 Title and 
year of 
passing of 
the Act 
Inland 
Waterways 
Authority of 
India Act, 1985; 
No. 82 of 1985 
(30th 
December,1985)  
The 
National 
Waterways 
Act, 2016 
No. 17 of 
2016 (25 th 
March 
2016) 
The Inland Vessels 
Act, 1917 (1 of 
1917) further 
amended by The 
Inland Vessels 
(Amendment) Act, 
2007 (35 of 2016). 
The Inland 
Vessels Act, 2021 
(24 of 2021) notified 
on 12th August, 
2021 has come into 
force w.e.f. 16th 
February, 2022 
(Section 1 and 
Section 106) and 
w.e.f. 7th June, 2022 
(Section 2 to Section 
105 and Section 107 
to Section 114). 
 
2 Number of 
Rules 
framed 
under the 
Act  
Inland 
Waterways 
Authority of 
India Rules, 
1986 (10 th 
December 1986)   
No rules 
have been 
framed 
1.DATE OF 
OPERATION OF 
THE ACT  
a. No. 6256 -S, 
dated the 1stJune, 
1917 DEFINING 
CERTAIN 
TIDAL 
WATERS 
WHICH MAY 
BE DEEMED AS 
INLAND 
WATERS FOR 
THE PURPOSE 
OF THE ACT  
a. S.R.O. 264, dated 
the 15thJuly, 1950  
b. S.R.O. 3654, 
dated the 
5thNovember, 
Nine Rules under the 
Inland Vessels Act, 
2021 (24 of 2021) 
have been Gazetted 
pertaining to The 
Inland Vessels 
Survey and  
(i) Certification Rules 
2022; 
(ii) Registration and 
other technical 
issues Rules 2022;  
(iii) Manning Rules 
2022;  
(iv) Crew and Passenger 
Accommodation 
Rules 2022; 
(v) Safe Navigation, 
Communication and 
Signals Rules 2022; 
(vi) Life Saving 

104 
 
1957  
c. S.O.1049, dated 
the 16th March, 
1964  
d. G.S.R. 51, dated 
the 8thDecember, 
1970  
e. G.S.R. 1137, 
dated the 8th 
July, 1976  
 
  2. INLAND 
VESSELS 
(THIRD PARTY 
INSURANCE) 
RULES, 1978  
G.S.R. 60l(E) 
dated 
30thDecember, 
1978  
 3.INLAND 
VESSELS 
(PREVENTION 
AND CONTROL 
OF POLLUTION 
AND 
PROTECTION 
OF INLAND 
WATER) 
RULES, 2016 
G.S.R. 687(E), 
dated 13thJuly, 
2016  
Appliances Rules 
2022; 
(vii) Fire Fighting 
Appliances Rules 
2022; 
(viii) Prevention 
and Containment of 
Pollution Rules 2022 
(Eight Rules 
Gazetted and w.e.f. 
7th June, 2022) and 
(ix) Insurance, 
Limitation of 
liability, 
Inquiry and 
investigations 
Obligations of 
service providers 
and service users 
Rules 2022 
(Gazetted and w.e.f. 
14th June, 2022). 
 
***** 

105 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
  


106 
 
CONFIDENTIAL 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XXXI 
THIRTY-FIRST MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Wednesday , the 2nd August, 2023 , in Committee 
Room „C‟, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
 
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy -  Chairman   
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri A. A. Rahim 
7. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
Lok Sabha 
8. Shri Anto Antony 
9. Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
10. Shri Tapir Gao 
11. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
12. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
13. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
14. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
15. Shri Dushyant Singh 
16. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
17. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav “Nirahua”  
  
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
   
 
 


107 
 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways  
 Shri T. K. Ramachandran, Secretary 
 Shri Sanjay Bandopadhyaya, Chairperson, Inland Waterways Authority of India  
 
     (Complete list of witnesses who attended the meeting is attached as Annexure)  
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and informed them that the 
Committee has taken up the subject “Development and Expans ion of Existing and New National 
Inland Waterways”. Now, the Committee has invited the Ministry of Ports, Shipp ing & 
Waterways and Inland Waterways Authority of India, to deliberate on the said subject.  
 
 (After the witnesses took their respective seats) 
 
3.      The Chairman welcomed the Secretary , Ministry of Ports, Shipping & Waterways; 
Chairperson, Inland Waterways Authority of India;  and other Senior Officers of the Ministry . 
The Chairman informed that the Ministry has been invited to share their views and valuable 
suggestions on various aspects related to the subject “Development and Expansion of Existing 
and New National Inland Waterways” . He remarked that India has navigable waterways of 
around 14,500 km, consisting of 111 National Waterways (05 Existing and 106 New) , however, 
the modal share of Inland Waterways Tra nsport is just 2%. He also highlighted the introduction 
of Kochi Water Metro and enquired whether similar models can be implemented in other States 
for the integration of waterways in the public transport system.  He further desired that the 
Committee may be apprised on the following points: 
i. Number of new National Waterways which have been operationalized; 
ii. Amount of Cargo handled by National Waterways; 
iii. Modal share of the freight movement; 
iv. Number of Projects proposed for development of National Waterways; 
v. Number of Ro-Ro (Roll-on, Roll-off) and Ro-Pax (Roll-on/Roll-off with passenger) ferry 
services on Waterways; 
vi. Budgetary allocations made for Inland Waterway projects for the year 2023 -24 and its 
adequacy;  
vii. Steps taken to develop connectivity of Inland Waterways with other modes of transport;  

108 
 
viii. Co-ordination with State Governments to develop Inland Waterways and challenges 
faced thereof; and 
ix. Status of Buckingham Canal project which connects Kakinada to Chennai alongwith the 
projects related to Krishna and God avari rivers, and Ministry‟s plans to make them 
operational again. 
 
4.         The Chairperson, Inland Waterways Authority of India (IWAI) made a detailed 
presentation on the subject and informed the Committee that Inland Waterways Authority of 
India since its inception had introduced 111 National Waterways (NWs). He also added that the 
amount of Cargo moved through National Waterways has i ncreased from 30.41 MTs in 2014 -15 
to 126.15 MTs in 2022 -23 and is expected to grow to 200 MTs by 2030 and 500 MTs by 2047 , 
under the Maritime India Vision (MIV). Further, he highlighted that under the MIV, the Ministry 
aims to operationalise more than 50 Waterways by 2047, from the present 24, alongwith the 
increase in River Cruises from 14 vessels at present to 23 by 2023 and 60 by 2047.   
 
(Shri Dushyant Singh, Member took over as the Chairman at 3:20 P.M.)  
 
5.         The Committee was informed about the Jal Marg Vikas Project (JMVP) which is being 
implemented for capacity augmentation of NW -1 from Varanasi to Haldia and is funded by the 
World Bank. The Chairperson, IWAI added that  under the JMVP, the Ministry aims to develop 
four Multi-Modal Terminals (MMTs) viz., Varanasi; Sahibganj; Haldia; and Kalughat , besides 
developing Inter-Modal, Community Jetties and Ro -Ro Terminals. He also highlighted the other 
objectives of the JMVP i.e., fairway development by maintaining assured Least Available Depth 
(LAD); implementation of navigational aids including Digital Global Positioning System 
(DGPS), night navigation & beacon lights; and construction of new navigational lock, to develop 
an environment friendly, safe, economic and reliable mode of transport.  
 
6. The Chairperson, IWAI apprised the Committee  about the ongoing p rojects on the 20 
declared National Waterways in the North Eastern Region (NER) including NW-2. He added 
that besides fairway maintenance contract amounting to Rs. 204.00 crore, various other projects 
including a Ship Repair Facility at Pandu (Guwahati); Floating Terminal at Sonamura (Tripura); 
02 Floating Jetties at Bogibeel & Guijan (Assam); alternative road to Pandu Port; Cargo 
Terminal at Bogibeel; and Multi-Modal Terminal at Jogighopa (Assam) are ongoing in the NER. 

109 
 
Further, he informed the Committee that to promote economic relations with Bangladesh, the 
IWAI has undertaken numerous initiatives on the Indo -Bangladesh Protocol (IBP) Route 
including 10 declared routes for navigation; 13 declared Ports of Call on each side; 08 bunkering 
stations on each side; and operationalisation of IBP Route No . 5&6 from Maia (Near Farakka, 
West Bengal)  to Aricha (Bangladesh) & IBP Route No. 9&10 from Sonamura (Tripura) to 
Daudkandi (Bangladesh).       
 
7. The Chairperson, IWAI also briefed the Committee about various Waterways projects 
ongoing in the States of Odisha, Goa, Gujarat and Maharashtra.  As regards the status of the 
IWAI projects in the State of Kerala, he stated that projects viz., reconstruction of new 
navigational lock at Thrikkunnapuzha; demolition of old Foot O ver Bridge & construction of 
new single lane bridge at Kovilthottam; and lifting of high te nsion lines across Champakkara 
Canal, are pending with the Government of Kerala , and the IWAI is in the process of expediting 
the said projects. 
 
8. The Chairperson, IWAI deposed before the Committee that small projects have been 
taken up for development of NW -4 which flows through Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,  
Telangana, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Puducherry , including completion of 04 Floating 
Terminals. He also highlighted that the Buckingham Canal on NW -4 is 426 km long, out of 
which 316 km is known as the North Buckingham Canal (from Peddaganjam, Andhra Pradesh to 
Central Station  Chennai), whereas South Buckingham Canal is 110 km flowing from Centra l 
Station Chennai to Marakkanam in Tamil Nadu . He added that due to the construction of Mass 
Rapid Transport System (MRTS) and encroachments on the Canal, the development is restricted 
as it is not being fed by the natural river system and water is supplemented by Barrages and 
Dams. In this context, responding to the queries of two Members, he further stated that the 
Madras High Court has already directed the State Government of Tamil Nadu to remove the 
encroachments. 
 
9. The Committee was also informed th at out of the total 111 NWs, only 24 are presently 
operational whereas 87 are non -operational owing to varied reasons  including inadequate draft 
and lack of cargo earmarked for Inland Water Transport  (IWT). The Chairperson, IWAI also 
informed about the Ganga Vilas River Cruise which recently journeyed from Varanasi to 
Dibrugarh passing through 27 river systems in 51 days. He also added that under the River 

110 
 
Cruise Vision, 2047, the IWAI intends to increase the number of Cruise circuits from the present 
17 to 80, resulting in increase of Cruise tourism traffic with night stays, from 5,000 to 1,20,000. 
He summarized his deposition by informing the Committee about other aspects of Inland 
Waterways including the Acts/ Rules  & Policies; Accidents in NWs  & reasons thereon ; 
connectivity status of IWT Terminal with road, rail & air ; and percentage share of IWT across 
the World.     
 
10. Members also raised the following queries/ issues some of which were replied to by the 
Secretary, MoPS&W and the Chairperson, IWAI:- 
 Reasons for non-completion of Navigational lock at Thrikkunnapuzha; 
 Present status of Buckingham Canal project from Kakinada to Chennai; 
 Reasons for halfway stalling of Ganga Vilas River Cruise; 
 Revenue being generated by River Cruise circuits; 
 Holding meetings with State Governments and representatives of local people to settle 
State related issues at various NWs; 
 Status of survey being done to tap the potential of developing Waterw ays system in the 
North Eastern Region beyond Dibrugarh, to promote cargo movement especially coal; 
 Co-ordination with Ministry of Tourism to promote/ develop tourism on and around 
National Waterways in the Country , especially in the NER, Buckingham Canal  and 
backwaters of Kerala; 
 Development status of areas around Vizhinjam Port and Kovalam; 
 Status of NW-3 from Kovalam to Bekal; 
 Provision to identify new Canals at the coastline from Kolkata to Chennai; 
 Connecting Rann of Kutch through a dry port for linkage with Rajasthan; 
 Data on depth of Waterways and how it can be maintained; 
 Feasibility of navigating Dams through Waterways; 
 Feasibility Report of the project linking Puducherry to Kanyakumari through 
Rameswaram; and 
 Project cost of East Coast Canal from Kolkata to Balasore and details re garding 
Government investment in the project; and 
 Details of proposed River Cruises and how are they going to be developed. 
 

111 
 
11.       The Secretary, MoPSW and Chairperson, IWAI took note of all queries and suggestions 
made by the Members. The Chairman gave a list of ten questions on the subject to the Ministry 
and directed that written replies to the ten questions and also to the points which had not been 
adequately answered may be sent within one week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
12.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
13.       The meeting adjourned at 4:31 PM. 
 
 
New Delhi,                                                                                                       Monica Baa  
2nd August, 2023           Additional Director  
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

112 
 
 
Annexure 
  
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
  
03.00 P.M. 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways  
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri T. K. Ramachandran  Secretary 
2. Shri Sanjay Bandopadhyaya Chairman, Inland Waterways Authority of India 
3. Shri R. Lakshmanan Joint Secretary (Inland Water Transport) 
4. Shri Ashutosh Gautam Member Technical, IWAI 
5. Shri Vinayak Azaad Member (Traffic & Logistics), IWAI 
6. Col. Harsh Vardhan Secretary, IWAI 
7. Shri Ravi Kant Chief Engineer (Jal Marg Vikas Project), IWAI 
8. Capt. Mahender Kumar Hydrographic Chief, IWAI 
9. Shri Arun Kumar Mishra Director (Tech), IWAI 
 
* * * * 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

113 
 
CONFIDENTIAL 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2023-24) 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 19th September, 2023 in Committee 
Room-D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri A.A. Rahim 
3. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
 Lok Sabha 
4. Shri Anto Antony 
5. Shri Tapir Gao  
6. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
7. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
8. Shri Prince Raj 
9. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
11. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
12. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
13. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav “Nirahua” 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Raghab Prasad Dash, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Vishwarupa Bhattacharya, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  


114 
 
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Committee. 
He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the following 
Reports:- 
(i) *** 
(ii) *** 
(iii)  *** 
(iv) „Development and Expansion of Existing and New National Inland Waterways‟; and 
(v) *** 
 
2. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Reports, one by one. After a brief 
discussion, the Committee adopted the aforesaid five draft Reports and authorised the Chairman 
to carry out minor modifications of typographical and factual errors and formatting, if need be in 
all the Reports. 
 
3.       The Committee authorised Dr. C. M. Ramesh, M.P., and in his absence, Shri A.A. Rahim, 
M.P., to present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 21st September, 2023. The Committee 
also authorised Shri Tapir Gao, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Prince Raj, M.P. to lay the Reports 
on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
 
4. *** 
 
5. *** 
 
6. ***1 
 
7. The Meeting adjourned at 4:00 P.M.                                                                                     
                                          
New Delhi,                                                                                                 Monica Baa 
19th September, 2023                                                                                    Additional Director  
 
 
                                                           
1 Relates to other matter 