99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
NINETY-NINTH REPORT
ON
THE ADMIRALTY BILL, 2005
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21ST MARCH, 2006)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21ST MARCH, 2006)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MARCH, 2006/PHALGUNA, 1927(SAKA)
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
C O N T E N T S
 
1.COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                      
2.INTRODUCTION                                                                                                    
3.REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                 
4.OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE        
5.ANNEXURE
6.MINUTES                                                                                                                                                                
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2004-2005)
 
 1.  Shri Nilotpal Basu - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
*2.   Shri Kamal Akhtar
3.      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4.   Shri S.S. Chandran
5.
      Smt. Hema Malini
6.      Shri Janardhana Poojary
7.      Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
8.      Shri Shatrughan Sinha
9.      Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
10.  Shrimati Ambika Soni
 
LOK SABHA
11.
  Shri Ramdas  Athawale
12.  Shri Raj Babbar
13.  Shri Anil Basu
14.  Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15.  Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16.  Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17.  Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18.  Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
19.  Shri Dip Gogoi
20.  Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
21.  Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
22.  Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
23.  Shri Samik Lahiri 
24.  Shri Sudam Marandi
25.  Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26.  Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
27.  Shri Manabendra Shah
28.  Shri Dushyant Singh
29.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma
30.  Shri Chengara Surendran
31.  Shri Umakant Yadav 
(i)
(2005-2006)
1.   Shri Nilotpal Basu - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.   Shri Kamal Akhtar
3.   Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4.
      Shri S.S. Chandran
5.      Smt. Hema Malini
6.      Shri Janardhana Poojary
7.      Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
8.      Shri Shatrughan Sinha
9.      Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
*10. Shri Janardan Dwivedi
 
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Ramdas  Athawale
12. Shri Raj Babbar
13. Shri Anil Basu
14. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18. Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
19. Shri Dip Gogoi
20. Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
21. Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
22. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
23. Shri Samik Lahiri 
24. Shri Sudam Marandi
25. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26. Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
27. Shri Manabendra Shah
28. Shri Dushyant Singh
29. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
30. Shri Chengara Surendran
31. Shri Umakant Yadav 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
INTRODUCTION
 I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
 Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Ninety-ninth Report
 of the Committee on the Admiralty Bill 2005*.
2.         The Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 11 th May 2005.  In pursuance of rules relating to the
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the
 Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha, referred** the Bill to the Committee on 27th May 2005 for examination and report within
 three months. On the requests being made by the Chairman of the Committee, Hon’ble Chairman had granted extension
 of time till the 27th November, 2005, and then upto the 15th December, 2005, 28th February, 2006 and  28th April, 2006
 respectively for the presentation of the report of the Committee on the aforesaid Bill.
3.          The Committee took oral evidence of the Secretary and other officers of the Department of Shipping and
 Ministry of Law and Justice at its meetings held on the      8th July 2005 and 28th September 2005 respectively.
4.         In order to get wider views on the subject, the Committee invited the views of individuals, organisations and
 institutions on the subject through advertisement in all major national dallies and vernacular newspapers all over the
 country.  The advertisement evoked tremendous public response and the Committee received memoranda on the subject
 for consideration of the Committee.  The Committee also heard the views of the representatives of the Indian National
 Shipowners Associations, Foreign Owners Representative & Shipmanagers Association, Port, Dock and Waterfront
 Workers' Federation of India, All India Port and Dock Workers’ Federation, Indian National Port and Dock Workers’
 Federation, Iron Steel Scrap and Shipbreakers Association of India,  Company of Master Mariners of India and the
 National Union of Seafarers of India on the provisions of the Bill at its meetings held on the 18
th July, 19th July, 31 st
 August and 9th September 2005 respectively.
5.        The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill during its meeting held on the 17 th March
 2006.  The Committee also considered the draft Report on the subject and adopted the same with minor modifications
 on 17
th March 2006 itself.
6.          The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Secretary and other officers of the Department of Shipping
 and Ministry of Law and Justice for the assistance provided during deliberations on the provisions of the Bill. The
 Committee also acknowledges the contribution of Shri Zarir P. Bharucha, Advocate, Supreme Court of India and the
 representatives of employees Unions/Federations/Associations of major ports, who submitted their valuable suggestions
 on the provisions of the Bill.
 
NEW DELHI ;   
March 17, 2006
Phalguna 26, 1927 (Saka)                                            
                          NILOTPAL BASU                   Chairman
 Department-related Parliamentary Standing                 
 Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
*   Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II, Section-2, dated 11.5.2005
            ­­
**   Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No.42212 dated 30.5.2005.
RE P O R T
 
The Admiralty Bill, 2005 was introduced in the Lok Sabha on the 11 th May, 2005.  The Bill seeks to update
 India's Admiralty Laws which would be responsive to the needs of the Industry and will ensure that the maritime
 disputes are disposed of expeditiously and effectively. The long title of the Bill highlights the purpose of the Bill as to
 consolidate and amend the law relating to the admiralty jurisdiction of courts, legal proceedings in connection with
 ships, their arrest, detention and sale and other matters.   It also seeks to repeal five age old Acts namely; the Admiralty
 Offences (Colonial) Act, 1849,  the Admiralty Jurisdiction (India) Act, 1860, the Admiralty Court Act 1861, the
 Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act, 1890, the Colonial Courts of Admiralty (India) Act, 1891 and  Patent relating to

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 High Courts of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras, which are in force since colonial days.  The Bill was referred to this
 Committee by the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for examination and report.  The Committee has accordingly
 discharged its mandate.
Statement of Objects & Reasons:-
2.         The salient features given in the Statement of objects and reasons appended to the Admiralty Bill (Annexure)
 are as follows:-
      i.        The Admiralty laws in India are more than a century old and maritime industry has been highlighting the need to
 update India's admiralty laws to be responsive to the needs of the industry.
     ii.        To consolidate and amend the law relating to Admiralty jurisdiction of Courts, legal proceedings in connection
 with ships, their arrest, detention and sale and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
   iii.        To enlarge the scope of the legislation to cover claims pertaining to pollution damages, loss of life, personal
 injury, towage of ships, pilotage of ships, port dues, disbursement made by the ship owners and agents of ships.
   iv.        To make certain provision for vesting of civil jurisdiction in respect of various types of claims pertaining to
 shipping industry in High Courts, power of Supreme Court to transfer any proceedings from one High Court to
 another, power of the High Court to confer Admiralty jurisdiction in consultation with the Chief Justice of India
 on any Principal Civil Court of the State.
    v.        To spell out Admiralty jurisdiction and mode of exercising it, conditions in respect of claims in an action in rem,
 jurisdiction in personam, restrictions on entertainment of actions in cases pertaining to action in personam in
 collision of ships.
   vi.        To incorporate certain provision for vesting of rights on sale of ships, distribution of sale proceeds, order of
 priority of claim, maritime lien, procedure in respect of foreign ships and protection of owner, demise charterer,
 manager or operator of ships arrested.
 vii.        To apply Code of Civil Procedure, assistance of assessors, reference to arbitration and appeal.
viii.        To confer upon the Central Government the power to make rules besides provision for repeal of the existing laws
 on the subject as recommended by the Law Commission.
3.         In the background note  furnished to the Committee, the Department of Shipping cited the following reasons for
 introduction of Admiralty Bill which have been enumerated in the following paragraps :-
Reasons for Introduction of Admiralty Bill:-
4.         The Committee was informed that a Committee in 1986, under the aegis of Shri Praveen Singh, the then Director
 General of Shipping, Mumbai, reviewed the existing maritime laws and admiralty jurisdiction in India and
 recommended for enacting a specific admiralty law.
5.         The Parveen Singh Committee observed that existing admiralty jurisdiction of courts in India is by virtue of the
 Colonial Admiralty Jurisdiction Act, 1891 which vested the jurisdiction only in the High courts of Bombay, Calcutta
 and Madras.  However, the jurisdiction of these courts, in fact extended to the whole of British India.  These courts
 were vested with similar powers exercised by the English Courts under the Admiralty Courts, Act 1861 and as such this
 Act became the principal Act to be adopted and adapted by the courts in India.  But, the Admiralty Courts Act, 1861
 had limited jurisdiction in respect of claims leaving the Indian courts to follow precedents from British courts in areas
 relating to claims pertaining to ownership, building of or equipping of ships, repairs of ships, necessary supplies of
 ships, cargo or ship damages, crew wages, maintenance of ships, salvage disbursements by master and mortgages. 
 Claimants often resort to obtaining arrest of ship involved in a claim with a view to effectively realizing the claim.  In

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 the existing Act of 1861, there is a general provision to the effect that an action for a claim can be brought in personam
 or in rem. The main drawback of this provision is that only the ship involved in cause can be proceeded against for
 arrest, thus leaving the claimant without recourse to effective action in the court.  However, the British laws on the
 subject have undergone several changes including the adoption of the convention of arrest of a sister ship.  But the
 British Act of 1861, is still being followed which is not only inadequate but also cumbersome British legacy. 
 Accordingly, Parveen Singh Committee opined that the present admiralty jurisdiction of courts in India was outdated
 and recommended that a comprehensive legislation defining the scope of admiralty jurisdiction be enacted.
6.         The Supreme Court in the case of M.V.Elizabeth & others Vs Harwan Investment  Trading Pvt. Ltd. JT
 1992(2) S.C. 65, while stressing on the need to codify and clarify the admiralty laws of this country had observed as
 under:
"Admiralty jurisdiction, an unfamiliar branch of jurisprudence, was the subject of illuminating debate in this
 appeal directed against judgement of the Andhra Pradesh High Court.  But what was surprising to hear, even in
 1991, that the admiralty jurisdiction by the High Courts in India Republic is still governed by the obsolete Acts
 of 1861, 1890 & 1891.  Yet there appeared no escape from it, notwithstanding its unpleasant echo in ears.  The
 shock was still greater when it transpired that this state of affairs is due to lack of legislative exercise.  Various
 provisions in 1890 Act have been rendered not only anomalous but also even derogatory to the sovereignty of
 the State.  Nothing further need be said except the hope that the unfortunate state of affairs shall be brought to
 an end at the earliest."
7.         Pursuant to the above direction of the Supreme Court, the Law Commission of India examined the whole
 question of admiralty jurisdiction.  It has been pointed out by the Law Commission that the admiralty jurisdiction,
 despite the peculiarities of its origin and growth, is a part of the totality of jurisdiction vested in the High Court as a
 superior court of record and it is not a distinct and separate jurisdiction.  The Commission felt that it is not necessary to
 limit the jurisdiction only to High Courts whose territories have a coastal belt as was recommended earlier by Praveen
 Singh Committee.  The Commission therefore, recommended that the admiralty jurisdiction must be conferred upon all
 High Courts as part of their original jurisdiction with a provision empowering the extension of this jurisdiction to other
 Principal civil Courts in case a necessity should arise in future. The Commission in its 151
st Report presented in 1994
 recommended that legislation on the lines of the draft Bill suggested by it, might be enacted.  The Commission also
 recommended repealing the following existing Acts/statutes, which will become redundant once the new law is
 enacted.
(i)         the Admiralty Offences (Colonial) Act, 1849;
(ii)       the Admiralty Jurisdiction (India) Act, 1860;
(iii)      the Admiralty Court Act 1861;
(iv)     the Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act, 1890;
(v)       the Colonial Courts of Admiralty (India) Act, 1891; and
(vi)     Patent relating to High Courts of Bombay, Calcutta and Madras.
8.         The Department of Shipping in their  background note informed that the present legislation is to give effect to
 the recommendations of Law Commission.  The Clause 3 of Bill proposes to confer the original admiralty jurisdiction
 on all the High Courts with a provision for empowering the extension of this jurisdiction to other Principal Civil Courts
 in case a necessity should arise in future. Efforts have been made to ensure that the Bill is comprehensive in nature by
 defining the scope of the admiralty jurisdiction in clause 5.  The limitation of the existing laws about the action in
 personam or action in rem has been removed by providing for both the actions by clearly defining the cases when a
 particular action can be initiated.  Clause 6 deals with action in rem while clauses 7 & 8 relate to the action in

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 personam.  Particular attention has been paid to prescribe the manner and procedure of distribution of sale proceeds in
 clause 11 and the order of priority of claims in clause 12.
9.         The Department of Shipping has summarised the main reasons for bringing the present Bill as follows:-
(i)                  to consolidate and amend the law relating to Admiralty jurisdiction of Courts, legal proceedings in connection
 with ships, their arrest, detention and sale and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto;
(ii)                to have a comprehensive legislation with enlarged scope to cover claims pertaining to oil pollution damages,
 loss of life, personal injury, towage of ship, pilotage of ship, port dues, disbursement made by ship owners and
 agents of ships, general average, bottomry bonds, forfeiture or condemnation of ships or cargo; and
 
(iii)               to repeal the outdated and obsolete existing laws made during British period on admiralty jurisdiction.
10.       In its meeting held on the 8 th July, 2005, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Department of
 Shipping on the Bill.  Thereafter, the Committee decided to invite the views of individuals, organisations and
 institutions on the subject matter of the Bill through advertisement in all major national dailies and vernacular
 newspapers all over the country.  Moreover, the Committee also heard the views of various stakeholders and trade
 unions. The Committee received 21 memoranda on the subject.  These memoranda were thereafter forwarded to the
 Department of Shipping for its comments. The Department of Shipping forwarded their comments vide their Office
 Memorandum no. SR-11011/2/05-MA dated 26
th September, 2005. The Committee in its meeting held on    
 17.03.2006, considered the Bill Clause by Clause and recommends the following. :-
CHAPTER-I
Clause- 2 (Definitions)
11.       Clause 2 of the Bill deals with the definitions of various terms and expressions used in the Bill.  Definitions are
 intended to avoid ambiguities and tedious repetitions.  The Committee will deal with this clause as under:-
11.1     Clause - 2 - In this Act, Unless the context otherwise requires, -
11.1.1    (a) “admiralty jurisdiction” means jurisdiction exercised by a court on any matter referred to in section 5;
11.1.2  The Clause was adopted without any change.  The Committee therefore, does not suggest any change.
11.2      (b)      "admiralty proceeding" means "any proceeding pending before  a court exercising admiralty jurisdiction.
11.2.1   The Committee observes that the Department of Shipping in its reply has admitted that “this definition shall
 take care of every such proceeding pending before a court either before or after the enactment.” Therefore, the
 Committee recommends that the words “either before or after the commencement of this Act” should be added between
 the words “court” and “exercising Admiralty Jurisdiction”.
11.3    (c) "charge" means " any charge with the exception of light dues  and any other charges in respect of lighthouses,
 buoys, beacons or pilotage".
11.3.1    The Committee was informed by the Stakeholdersthatthe definition appears to be all inclusive and cannot be
 restricted to hypothecation. The Department of Shippingreplied that   the expression ”charge” in relation to a ship
 means   "generally any dues with reference to port and pilotage etc".  Therefore, an attempt has been made by the
 Government to give a precise definition so that there is no difficulty when it comes to settlement of claims.  The
 Ministry therefore, suggested retaining the definition in the present form.
11.3.2  The Committee is of the considered view that the definition of a word spells out its meaning/content; it states
 what it is inclusive of and not what it is exclusive of.  The Department of Shipping in their comments has accepted that
 “charge” means “any due with reference to port and pilotage etc.” This definition may be suitably changed and

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 substituted with the existing one.
11.4   (d) “collision regulations” shall have the meaning assigned to this expression in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958;
11.4.1   The Clause was adopted without any change.  The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 definition.
11.5     (e)  “court” means the High Court or any other court exercising admiralty jurisdiction under section 3;
11.5.1   The Committee considered the Clause 2(e) alongwith Clause 2(g).
11.6  (f)  “goods” means any property including live animals, containers, pellets or such other articles of transport or
 packaging supplied by the consignor, irrespective of the fact whether such property is to be carried on or under the
 deck.
 
11.6.1   The Clause was adopted without any change.  The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 definition.
11.7   (g) “High Court”  shall have the meaning assigned to this expression in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.
11.7.1    The Committee was suggested by the Stakeholders that the definition of the expression “High Court” contained
 in section 2(g) should exclude all references to the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 and instead mention the High Courts
 of Bombay, Ahmedabad, Cochin, Hyderabad, Chennai, Calcutta, Bangalore and Bhubaneshwar, as being conferred
 with concurrent admiralty jurisdiction which is not restricted territorially.
11.7.2    The Department of Shipping clarified that the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 contains the definition of High
 Court in relation to its jurisdiction. By putting referential definition of the High Court, it is intended to vest admiralty
 jurisdiction in High Courts with extension to Principal Civil Courts under clause 3(2) of the Bill. The admiralty
 jurisdiction is thus, not restricted to territory where a court is located but extends to the entire coast of India and inland
 waters as parties to maritime disputes are dispersed all over India.
11.7.3  The Committee observes that the Clause 2(c) defines the expression "Court” to mean "High Court".  Whereas, in
 Clause 2(g) High Court is defined as per Clause 3(15) of the Merchant Shipping Act 1958 as "High Court within the
 limits of whose appellate jurisdiction, (a) the port of registry of the vessel is situate ; (b) the vessel is for the time
 being,; or (c) the cause of action wholly or in part arises."  It appears from the above definitions that the exercise of
 admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court appears to be circumscribed by the territorial allocation of jurisdiction
 contained in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.  Whereas the concepts of 'cause of action' and 'port of registry' are
 incongruous as the Admiralty jurisdiction is universal and is not concerned with the question of nexus between the
 cause of action and forum. 
 11.7.4   The Committee strongly feels that the designated High Courts should be conferred pan-Indian admiralty
 jurisdiction which would facilitate the courts to take out writ in rem and warrant of arrest which can be served or
 executed anywhere in India. Ships spend only a brief period of time in a port.  In a case, where security / bail has been
 granted to a ship and the security or bail proves inadequate after the vessel has sailed, the absence of pan-Indian
 admiralty would involve the claimant following the vessel and filing an admiralty suit in another High Court.  This
 process will lead to multiplicity of cases. Therefore, the Committee feels that there is a compelling need for certain
 designated High Courts namely., Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Cochin, Hyderabad, Chennai, Calcutta, Bangalore and
 Bhubaneshwar to be conferred with an all-India admiralty jurisdiction.  In any case, the efforts of courts have been
 vested with admiralty jurisdiction so there is no departure.

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
11.8   (h)  “Inland waters” as "include all waters that are in fact navigable, irrespective of whether they are affected by
 tides or are land-locked or open or contain salt or fresh waters, and any part of the sea adjacent to the coast of India
 notified by the Central Government to be Inland Waters for the purposes of this Act."
11.8.1  The Committee enquired that the definition of "Inland Water" in the context of the clause 2 (h) requires further
 clarifications and desired the Ministry to explain their position in this regard.   The Department of  Shipping replied that
 by putting the definition of inland waters, it is attempted to give a precise definition to the expression and at same time
 the Central Government is empowered to notify any part of the sea adjacent to the coast of India to be its inland waters.
11.8.2                 The Clause was adopted without any change.  The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 definition.
11.9   (i)  “limits of the port” shall have the meaning assigned to this expression in the Indian Ports Act, 1908;
11.9.1   The Clause was adopted without any change. The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 definition.
11.10   (j)   “maritime lien” means the maritime lien specified in section 13.
11.10.1     The Clause was adopted without any change. The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 definition.
11.11  (k)  “master” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958;
11.11.1   The Clause was adopted without any change. The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 definition.
11.12   (l)   “port” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Ports Act, 1908;
11.12.1   The Clause was adopted without any change. The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 definition.
11.13   (m)       “ship” does not include a sailing vessel.
11.13.1  The Committee has been informed that “ship” means a vessel of any kind used or constructed for use in
 navigation by water, however, it is propelled or moved, and includes a) barge, lighter or other floating vessel; b) a
 hovercraft; c) an offshore industry mobile unit or jack up oil rig and d) a vessel that has sunk or is stranded or the
 remains or wreck of such vessel but does not include e) a sea plane or f) a vessel under construction that has not been
 launched.
 
11.13.2  The Committee was also informed that a ship imported for breaking as per EXIM Policy and Customs Act,
 1962, ceases to be a ship. The Department of  Shipping informed that definition of the ship has been taken from the
 Merchant Shipping Act, 1958. It is intended to give a comprehensive meaning to the expression ship by excluding only
 sailing vessels. Therefore, the definition may be retained in the present form.
11.13.3  The Committee observes that Clause 2(m) defines "ship' as "does not include sailing vessel".  Whereas, the
 term "sailing vessel" has not been defined under the Bill, which is otherwise very much required for understanding the
 meaning of the ship.  The Committee recommends the Department of Shipping to re-examine the Clause 2 (m) in
 consultation with the Ministry of Law and Justice so as to make the definition of the Ship more clear.  The Committee
 further recommends that while defining the term "ship", the interest of the ship-breaking industry should also be

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 protected in clear terms.
11.13.4  The Committee also recommends that the terms such as “Charter”, “Sub-Charter”, “Sailing Vessel”,
 “Manager”, etc., that are in vogue in admiralty parlance should also be defined appropriately.  Further, it also
 recommends that such terms which are not defined in the Act, but defined in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 should
 have the same meaning assigned to them in that Act..
CHAPTER II
JURISDICTION OF COURTS
Clause - 3
12                Clause 3
12.1     Clause-3(1) reads  - "Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the civil jurisdiction in respect of all claims
 under this Act shall vest in the High Court concerned and be exercisable in accordance with the provisions contained in
 this chapter."
 
12.1.1  The Committee has been informed that there are several High Courts conferred with the admiralty jurisdiction.
 Therefore, there should be a centralized registry where information regarding admiralty proceedings such as caveats
 against arrest of a vessel are shared with or instantaneously accessible by other High Courts, so as to avoid any
 duplication of effort and confusion. This is the position in Australia where there is centralized national admiralty court
 registry maintained with the Federal Court.   The Committee was further informed that the provisions of the Merchant
 Shipping Act, 1958 and the Major Port Trust Act, 1963 are sufficient in so far as the crew claims and various port dues
 are concerned. It is felt that by bringing that jurisdiction entirely under the High Courts will make the matters worse
 and time consuming. Supreme Court being the appellate authority, there could be a possibility of denial of justice as
 crewmembers may not be in a position to follow up the appeal. 
12.1.2  The Department Shipping explained thatAdmiralty jurisdiction is a part of the totality of jurisdiction vested in
 the High Courts as a superior court of record.  As it is proposed that admiralty jurisdiction should extend over all
 navigable waters in the country, it is not necessary to limit the jurisdiction only to the High Courts whose territories
 have a coastal belt.  Hence, it is provided that the admiralty jurisdiction shall continue with all High Courts as a part of
 their original jurisdiction, with a provision empowering the extension of this jurisdiction to the Principal Civil Courts in
 case a necessity therefor, arise in future.  As to the suggestion of information regarding the steps taken by various High
 Courts and to link them, it is understood that the computerization is being undertaken to link these courts.
12.1.3  The Committee notes that there are several High Courts conferred with the admiralty jurisdiction. Therefore, the
 Committee recommends that the Department of Shipping may explore the possibility of setting-up of a centralized
 registry for admiralty jurisdiction in consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice in order to avoid any duplication
 or confusion.  It should not be a problem once the process of computerisation is expedited which will enable linking of
 courts. 
12.2    Clause-3(2) If  at  any  time, the High Court  is of  the opinion that the number of cases filed under this Act is
 unduly large,  it  may,  in consultation with the Chief Justice of India, by notification in the official gazette, confer
 admiralty jurisdiction in such matters, wholly or to the extent it considers necessary, on such of the Principal Civil
 Courts of the State as may be specified in the notification."
12.2.1  The Clause was adopted without any change.  The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 sub-clause.

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
12.3    Clause- 3(3)  Any notification referred to in sub-section (2) may also contain such supplemental, incidental and
 consequential provisions, as the High Court may deem necessary.
12.3.1   The Clause was adopted without any change. The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 sub-clause.
12.3.2  Clause 3 was adopted with one recommendation.
Clause 4
Transfer of proceedings by Supreme Court.
13        Clause 4 of the Bill states:-
13.1     The Supreme Court may, on application of any party, transfer, at any stage, any admiralty proceeding from one
 High Court to any other High Court and the latter High Court shall proceed to try, hear and determine the matter from
 the stage at which it stood at the time of transfer: 
            Provided that no such proceeding shall be transferred unless parties to the proceeding have been given an
 opportunity of being heard in the matter.
13.2     The Committee has been informed by the Stakeholders that in this context a time frame, say 90 days, should be
 provided for transfer of proceedings from one High Court to another to avoid dragging of proceedings. The Committee
 was further  suggested that Supreme Court ought to be invested with the jurisdiction to transfer admiralty proceedings
 on its own also.
13.3     The Department of Shipping replied that the Supreme Court, being the highest court of land, it is not advisable to
 adopt a criteria which is generally adopted in the case of lower courts. Therefore, the provision may be retained in the
 present form.
13.4     The Clause was adopted without any change. The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 clause.
Clause 5
Admiralty Jurisdiction
14.       Clause 5(1)
14.1   (a) to hear and determine any of the questions and claims mentioned in sub-section(2);
14.1.1 (b) in relation to any of the proceedings mentioned in section 7;
14.1.2  The sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause 5(1) were adopted without any change. The Committee, therefore, does not
 suggest any change therein.
14.1.3  (c)  Any other admiralty jurisdiction which it had immediately before the commencement of this Act by virtue of
 the Admiralty Court Act, 1861 or the Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act, 1890 or the Colonial Courts of Admiralty
 (India) Act, 1891 or otherwise;
14.1.4  The Committee was informed that sub-clause (c) of 5 shouldmention the retention of jurisdiction under the 1840
 Admiralty Court Act, as this Act is still in force and was not repealed by 1861 Act. The latter Act merely enlarged the
 jurisdiction of the former without repealing it.  This view has been judicially approved by the Bombay High Court in
 MV Nicos’s case (AIR 1983 from 178 at para 17). 
14.1.5  The Department of  Shipping has stated that the Admiralty Courts Act, 1840 was enacted to improve the practice

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 and extend the jurisdiction of the High Courts of Admiralty of England. It appears that the said Act was not extended to
 the Courts in India.
14.1.6  Sub- clause (1) of clause 5 proposes to confer admiralty jurisdiction in all cases specified therein and clause (c)
 takes care of such jurisdiction with reference to the earlier laws in force.  The causes of action, question of claims in
 respect of which admiralty jurisdiction can be exercised have been most comprehensively set out in clause 5 of the Bill
 in light of the Supreme Court Act, 1981 of UK. It does not seem necessary to add any other clauses to the proposed
 clause 5(2). The Department of Shipping has therefore, suggested for retention of  the provision in the present form.
14.1.7  The Committee is not convinced with the reply of the Department of Shipping -  "It appears that the said Act
 was not extended to the Courts in India". In legal matters, there should not be any ambiguity with regard to Acts/
 provisions in vogue.  The Committee recommends that the status of jurisdiction under the 1840 Admiralty Court Act,
 which was further, enlarged in the 1861 Act may be re-examined in consultation with the Ministry of law and Justice so
 that there is no scope of any ambiguity with regard to jurisdiction of 1840 Admiralty Court Act. 
14.1.8 (d)  any jurisdiction connected with ships which is vested in the High Court by rules of such courts made after the
 commencement of this Act, assigning and directing the jurisdiction to be exercised by that court.
14.1.9  The sub-clause (d) of clause 5(1) was adopted without any change. The Committee, therefore, does not suggest
 any change in this sub-clause.
14.2     Clause 5(2)- For the purposes of clause (a) of sub-section (1), a court may exercise jurisdiction to hear and
 determine any of the following questions or claims, namely:- 
14.2.1  (a)  any claim to the possession or ownership of a ship or to the ownership of any share therein including a claim
 concerning employment or earnings relating to that ship;
14.2.2 (b) any question arising between the co-owners of a ship as to its possession, employment or earning;
14.2.3  (c) any claim in respect of registered mortgage or of charge on a ship or any share therein;
14.2.4  (d) any claim for the forfeiture or condemnation of a ship or of goods which are being or have been carried, or
 have been attempted to be carried in a ship, or for the restoration of a ship or any such goods after seizure, or for droits
 of admiralty. 
14.2.5   (e) any claim for damage caused to a ship during her stay, business or voyage
14.2.6   (f) any claim for damage caused by a ship including civil liability for damage caused by oil pollution covered
 under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958
14.2.7    (g) any claim for loss of life or personal injury sustained in consequence of any defect in  a ship or in her
 apparel or equipment or in its operation, or in consequence of the wrongful act, neglect or default of-
(i)
                  the owners, charterers or persons in possession or control of a ship; or
(ii)                the master or crew of a ship, or any other person for whose wrongful act, neglect or default the owner,
 charterer or person in possession or control of a ship is responsible, being an act, neglect or default, in
 the navigation or management of the ship, in the loading, carriage or discharge of goods on, in or from
 the ship, or in the embarkation, carriage or disembarkation of persons on, in or from the ship;
14.2.8  (h) any claim for loss of, or damage to, goods carried on board a ship;
14.2.9  (i) any claim arising out of any agreement relating to the carriage of goods in a ship or to the use or hire of a
 ship;
14.2.10 (j) any claim in the nature of salvage for services rendered in saving life from a ship or in preserving the ship
 cargo, equipment, apparel or any other property of ship or wreck;

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
14.2.11 (k) any claim in the nature of towage in respect of a ship;
14.2.12 (l) any claim in the nature of pilotage in respect of a ship;
14.2.13 (m) any claim in respect of goods, materials bunker or other necessaries supplied to a ship or any services
 rendered to a ship for her operation or maintenance;
Explanation- For the purpose of this clause the expression “services” with reference a claim shall include a
 claim made towards insurance for such services;
 
14.2.14 (n)  any claim in respect of the construction, repair or equipment of a ship or in respect of any port dues, fee and
 other charges to the Port Authorities under the Indian Ports Act, 1908 as amended from time to time or rates and other
 charges due under the Major Port Trust Act, 1963
14.2.15 (o) not withstanding anything contained in the provisions of sections 150 and 151 of the Merchant Shipping
 Act, 1958, any claim by a master or member of the crew of a ship for wages including any sum allotted out of wages or
 adjudged to be due which may be recoverable as wages;
 14.2.16 (p) any claim by a master, shipper, charterer or agent in respect of disbursements made on account of  a ship;
14.2.17 (q) any claim arising out of an act which is or is claimed to be in the nature of general average
Explanation- For the purpose of this cla ge” means "any extraordinary sacrifice or expenditure voluntarily and
 reasonably made or incurred in time of peril for the purpose of preserving the ship property imperiled in the
 common use, “general avera adventure”
14.2.18 (r) any claim arising out of bottomry
14.3     Clause 5(3) -   While exercising jurisdiction under clause (b) of sub-section (2), the court may settle any account
 outstanding and unsettled between the parties in relation to a ship, and direct that the ship, or any share thereof, shall be
 sold, or make such other order as the court thinks fit.
14.4     Clause 5(4)   The provisions of this section shall apply -
14.4.1 (a) in relation to all ships whether Indian or not irrespective of the residence or domicile of owners thereof;
14.4.2 (b) in relation to all maritime claims, wherever arising (including, in the case of cargo or wreck or wreck salvage,
 claim in respect of cargo or wreck found on land and ;  
14.4.3 (c) to all registered mortgages or charges, whether legal or equitable, including mortgages and charges created
 under any foreign law.
14.4.4  The Committee considered the clause 5 and took into account various submissions made to it by stakeholders /
 trade unions which inter-alia includes the following points:-
Ø      it should be positively classified as maritime claim.
Ø      Section 5(2)(a) of the draft Bill should insert the word “operation” between the words employment or earnings.  The
 clause would read as “including a claim for the employment, operation or earnings relating to that ship”
Ø      Section 5(2)(c) of the draft Bill should be read as “any claim in respect of mortgage or a charge on a ship or any
 share therein or any mortgage of ship’s freight
Ø      There will be uncertainty if there is a claim for an unregistered mortgage.
Ø      The definition of charge, which appears to be all-inclusive, cannot be restricted to hypothecation.  
Ø      Section 5(2)(d) of the draft Bill should be deleted.  The proposed legislation should not confer jurisdiction over
 forfeiture. Forfeiture is a penal remedy and is out of place in what is basically a civil jurisdiction. Moreover, the
 omission of the clause will avoid the need to explore the 19 th century admiralty decisions in order to discover just

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 what type of forfeiture are covered by admiralty jurisdiction. The second concept contained in the clause viz. droits
 of admiralty, is a residual category covering rights to Royal fish and other obscure vestiges of the prerogative of the
 Crown is right of admiralty.  There is no evidence that admiralty jurisdiction is ever exercised in respect of these
 matters or that any inconvenience would result from its abolition.
Ø
      This clause appears to have restricted the scope to some uncertain extent, especially when a ship is idle, under
 repairs or mothballed.
Ø      The word “oil” may be deleted so as to cover other pollutants also. It is also suggested that exclusion of damage
 caused by pollution other than oil pollution covered under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 would not be
 appropriate.
Ø
         It would be necessary to include claims for damage caused by Air and Water Pollution and the discharge of
 hazardous waste/substance, within the meaning of the relevant statutes/rules.
Ø      A new clause 5(g)(iii) may be added, as “nothing contained in section 5(g) (iii) shall be applicable during lawful
 agitation and strike by seamen.”
Ø      This clause presents conflict, if it is not dealt under maritime claim enforceable as an action in rem, then vessel
 interest may sue as Admiralty action which otherwise not available
Ø      Section 5(2)(i) draft Bill should add the following words at the end “whether by charter party or otherwise”. This
 would ensure that a claim arising out of any agreement for the use or hire of the ship not limited to charter parties
 would attract the admiralty jurisdiction of the court. 
Ø      Section 5(2)(j) of the draft Bill which deals with salvage should towards the end contain “or any salvage agreement,
 including, if applicable special compensation relating to salvage operation in respect of a ship which by itself or its
 cargo threatened damage to the environment”. This wording will ensure salvors are able to recover special
 compensation for amounts due to them under SCOPIC clause for oil pollution/environmental damage.
Ø
      There should be 'service of salvage' or 'salvage' instead of 'salvage of services'. It is also suggested that at the time of
 towing/ pilotage, if any damage occurred, provisions of the Major Port Trust Act should be implemented.
Ø      Section 5(2)(m), the Bill should be read as “any claim in respect of goods, material bunkers or other necessaries
 supplied to a ship or any services rendered to a ship for her operation or maintenance, including stevedoring and
 lighterage services”.  This is because very often Indian entities provide lighterage and stevedoring services to
 foreign vessels and have no means of recourse for unpaid dues.
Ø
      Explanation to the clause including insurance premium to the clause is incongruous and incorrect. There should be a
 separate head of jurisdiction that deals with claim for unpaid insurance premia and club calls. This is because
 insurance is not a service rendered to ship.  It should be included in the draft Bill as separate head of admiralty
 jurisdiction.
Ø      It is not clear about the claim made towards insurance. It should be worded more suitably.
Ø      There is no material change despite specific mention of Bunker and other necessaries. The insurance clause appears
 to favor the insurance lobbies in recovering their unpaid premium. It is unclear if cargo insurance would also be
 covered. There is further uncertainty as to whether the explanation clarifies that the Admiralty jurisdiction covers
 only an action by an insurer against the defaulting assured.
Ø
      Section 5(2)(n) of the draft Bill fuses and conflates three distinct concepts. Accordingly it has been proposed to split
 the same in three separate heads of jurisdiction .as under:

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
(i)                  “any claim in respect of the construction of a ship (including such a claim relating to a vessels before it was
 launched)”.
(ii)                “any claim in respect of  the alteration, repair or equipping of a ship”.
(iii)               “any claim in respect of any liability for any port, harbour, canal or light tolls, charges, dues, tolls, charges
 or dues of similar kind in relation to a ship”.
Ø      Port charges due by a vessel in a non-Indian port, and vessel are available/present in Indian territorial waters. He has
 also suggested that it should be bi-furcated into construction/repair of a ship and port charges.
Ø      The following should be added at the end of the clause:
“including cost of repatriation or social insurance contribution payable on their behalf or any amount that a
 person as employer, is under an obligation to pay to a person as employee, whether the obligation arose out of a
 contract of employment or by operation of law, including the operation of the law of foreign country and
 includes any claim  arising under a manning and crew agreement , relating to a vessel.”
Ø      It should be expended to cover all other sums due including money, property or other remuneration and benefits in
 respect of their employment on the ship, including but not restricted to social insurance contributions, repatriation
 costs, whether the obligation arose out of a contract of employment or by operation of law, including the operation
 of the law of foreign country Further, the procedure to be adopted for challenging disputed award by a seaman or
 seamen may be mentioned.
     Words “or its owner” should be added at the end of the clause.
Ø      The word “or” should be added between the ship and property. There can be general average contribution by freight
 interests as well. Therefore, freight could also be considered for inclusion.
It has been recommended that this head of jurisdiction should be deleted, as bottomry is largely obsolete.
Ø      The following heads of jurisdiction be added to those contained in clause 5(2):
a)      a claim for an insurance premium or for a mutual insurance call, in relation to a ship payable by or on behalf of a
 ship owner or demise charterer or manager;
b)      a claim for any commissions, brokerages or agency fees payable by or on behalf of a ship owner or demise
 charterer or manager; and
c)      a claim for any dispute arising out of a contract for the sale of a ship 
Ø      The Bill is silent on the aspect of sub-standard shipping and safety of vessels. Hence, in order to protect and
 safeguard the lives of crew on board and at sea the jurisdiction of courts should be extended as under: -
“The Master, the Crew, the Trade Union or the ITF representing crew on board the vessel shall entertain a claim
 against the beneficial owner or operator, if the vessel is suspected for seaworthiness and unsafe shipping
 defying ISM or ILO guidelines. In clause (o), line 2 & 3 after the words the crew of the ship” the words
 “including their representative unions at the national/international level” should be added
Ø
      Sub-clause(4) of clause 5 makes it clear that  sub clauses  (1)(2)(3) of clause 5 shall apply to all ships and their
 property, all maritime claims and all registered mortgages or charges created under foreign law. In brief, this
 provision is meant to extend to all those cases in which money or property is recoverable in respect of a
 maritime claim. 
Ø
      The expression registered mortgage has been used for the reasons that it will be difficult to establish mortgage

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 which are not registered and ultimately affect the settlement of maritime claims in genuine cases. Therefore,
 clauses 5(4) (b) and 5(4)(c) may be retained in the present form.
Ø       Clause 5(2) (p) provides for "any claim by a master, shipper, charterer or agent in respect of disbursements made
 on account of  a ship" "instead this should read as under":- "notwithstanding anything contained in the
 provisions of sections 150 and 151 of the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958, any claim by a master or member of the
 crew and complement of a ship or their heirs and dependants for wages including all other sums due (whether
 money, property or other remuneration and benefits) in respect of their employment on the ship, including but
 not restricted to, social insurance contributions, repatriation costs, compensation for death or injury, whether the
 obligation to pay such wages, dues or compensation arose out of a contract of employment or otherwise or by
 operation of law including the operation of law of a foreign country".  Effectively, this would ensure, that crew
 members would be entitled to arrest a ship not just in terms of wages, but in respect of other benefits also.
14.4.5  All these suggestions were referred to the Department of Shipping for their comments. The comments of the
 Department of Shipping are given in the succeeding paragraphs:-
14.4.6  Clause 5 of the Bill makes provision for admiralty jurisdiction of the court.  Before we proceed to discuss
 contents of clause 5, it is necessary to recapitulate, in brief, the background of this provision.  As we know India does
 not have “Admiralty Laws” of its own, instead our courts continue to administer the admiralty jurisdiction in
 accordance with the statutes enacted by the British Parliament and extended to India as its colony. 
14.4.7  Though the British admiralty law has undergone substantive changes but in India our courts dispensed justice
 only with respect to these limited admiralty jurisdiction conferred by the British statutes.  Today, the wide jurisdiction
 vested in English Courts is derived from ancient principle of maritime law developed by customs and practices as well
 as from subsequent statutes, which have incorporated the provisions of International Conventions.
14.4.8  In India the statutory law regulating the shipping is contained in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 but it does not
 deal with the admiralty jurisdiction.
14.4.9  The Indian admiralty jurisdiction is founded on the English law but it could not develop for the obvious reasons. 
 In the circumstances, it was felt necessary to have an independent legislation to replace the century old statutes on the
 scope and extent of admiralty jurisdiction.
14.4.10            The present Bill is primarily based on the Supreme Court Act, 1981 of UK, which takes into account
 various aspects, and features needed reference in the provisions.  The causes of action, questions of claims in respect of
 which admiralty jurisdiction can be exercised have been most comprehensively dealt with in the Act of 1981. 
14.4.11            In the proposed Bill provisions relating to admiralty jurisdiction have been based on similar provisions
 contained in the UK Act of 1981, which are relevant in the Indian context also. The law which is in force in UK today
 is the outcome of development of law on the subject during so many centuries, which seems to be time tested with
 reference to International Conventions and Protocols.
14.4.12            Since clause 5 is based on the UK Act of 1981, it does not seem necessary to add any other causes in the
 proposed Bill. In brief, the maritime law administered in India has been based on English Law all along and it is also
 that law which influenced the law administered all over the world.  It will, therefore, be not only expedient but also
 natural that our proposed Bill should be substantively based in the legislation of UK but with improvements and
 additions necessary to meet our needs.

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
14.4.13            All laws are essentially organic in nature in the sense there is ongoing exercise requiring
 changes/modification in them to keep pace with the changes/requirements of the people whose conduct are intended to
 be regulated under these instruments.  As the law is not static this can be further improved after gaining experience in
 this regard.
14.4.14            The Committee observes that the reply furnished by the Department of Shipping "All laws are essentially
 organic in nature in the sense there is ongoing exercise requiring changes/modification in them to keep pace with the
 changes/requirements of the people whose conduct are intended to be regulated under these instruments.  As the law is
 not static this can be further improved after gaining experience in this regard." is not acceptable in toto.  The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that in view of the issues highlighted by various representationists,  as mentioned
 above,  the Clause 5 may be re-considered and revised wherever necessary taking into account the issues.
Clauses 6
Conditions in respect of claims in an action in rem
15.       Clause 6
15.1     Clause 6  (1) reads -The admiralty jurisdiction of the court shall not be invoked by an action in rem by arrest of a
 ship, in the case of a ship registered in India as an Indian ship, unless six clear days’ notice in writing is served upon the
 registered owner or the master of the ship intended to be proceeded against, stating the cause of action and the quantum
 of claim and the date and time of application to the court for arrest and calling upon the owner or master to provide
 security for the claim to the satisfaction of the admiralty court in lieu of the arrest and where such a security is
 provided, the court shall entertain the action without arresting the ship and shall order the arrest of the ship only in the
 event of failure to provide such security.
15.2     Clause 6(2) reads - Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force,
 the admiralty jurisdiction of the  court shall not be invoked by action in rem unless the ship against which the
 proceedings have been commenced is within the territorial or inland waters of India at the time of commencement of
 the proceedings and as such is within the jurisdiction of that High   court:
Provided that no such ship shall be arrested unless there is failure to provide security.
 
15.3     Clause 6(3) reads - The admiralty jurisdiction of the court shall not be invoked by an action in rem against a
 vessel arising out of a breach of contract and a claim in such case may be enforced by an action in personam under this
 act.
15.4     The Committee was requested thatthis clause may be deleted, as it is directly contrary to clause 5(4)(a).  It was
 submitted that arrest of Indian ships should be on the same footing as any other vessel. The issue of “in rem” and “in
 personam” claims should be looked into in more details and the English Law provisions as set out in Sections 21 and
 22 of the British Supreme Court Act, 1981 be incorporated in the Admiralty Bill with logical amendments. 
15.5     The Committee was also apprised that in clause 6(1) there should be explicit mention that during the notice
 period the ship shall not leave the port, without the permission of the court. With regard to “security” it has been
 suggested that in the case of crew claims it could be a bank guarantee or claim value deposit. In the case of safety and
 non-seaworthiness except detention no other security should be accepted. 
15.6     The Committee was further suggested that Clause 6 should further provide that in an action in rem, the previous
 seller must be made a privy to the proceedings in cases where indemnity/undertaking for clean title is given. Action in
 rem by arrest of a ship can be invoked only in respect of claims directly attributable to the res and for the claims

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 attributable to sister vessels or vessels owned by a joint/group owners. 
15.7     The Committee was informed that provisions of clauses 6(3) and 7(2) are contradictory to each other. While 6(3)
 provides that admiralty jurisdiction of the court shall not be invoked by an action in rem against a vessel arising out of
 breach of contract. At the same time, clause 7(2) provides that in case any claims mentioned in clauses (e) to (r) of sub-
section (2) of section 5 admiralty jurisdiction may be invoked by an action in rem. It  is felt that claims under 5(2)(i) or
 (k) or (m) would generally arise out of a contract.
15.8     While offering their comments on the suggestions about various provisions of Clause 6, the Department of 
 Shipping replied as under: -
The provisions contained in the sub-clause (1) of clause 6 deal with one of the conditions in respect of claims in
 an action in rem.  The provisions of clause 6 correspond to article 4 on Release from arrest in International
 Convention on Arrest of Ships, 1999.   The basis of making modifications in sub-clause (1) of clause 6 lies to
 the fact that all Indian ships are under full control of the Govt. of India under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958
 which is not available in respect of foreign ships.   Therefore, it has been provided that no arrest of an Indian
 ship should be effected unless at least six clear days’ notice is given to the owner and he failed to provide the
 security to the court to cover the maritime claims.  The rationale behind inclusion of this clause may kindly be
 considered by the Hon’ble Committee before deciding its omission to bring the Indian ship at par with foreign
 ship owners.
 
15.9     Clause 7 of the Bill deals with jurisdiction in personam.  Sub-clause (3) of clause 6 has been incorporated in the
 Bill to take care of the judgment of the Supreme Court in Epoch Enterrepots Vs MV Won FU (JT 2002 (8) SC 546). 
 Though sub clause 3 constitute a condition for exercise of the admiralty jurisdiction in rem, on reconsideration it has
 been thought appropriate to place this provision under clause 7 as its sub-clause (4). Clause 7 provides for the Mode of
 exercise of admiralty jurisdiction which after the arrest of a ship or otherwise is in personam only.
15.10   The Committee notes that Clause 6 of the Bill has been captioned in the marginal heading as “Conditions in
 respect of claims in an action in rem”. The Committee feels that the 6 days notice period, which is provided in this
 clause can be reduced suitably given the fast means of communication available in  today's world. 
15.11   Moreover, the Committee observes that the provisions given in the Clause 6(3) are ambiguous and it appears that
 wherever an affected party proceeds in personam cannot proceed in rem.  This will unnecessarily complicate the gamut
 of issues.  Under the present law, the Indian crew are entitled to what is called an action in rem against a ship; it simply
 means that a ship can be arrested to secure a claim.  But provisions of Clause 6 of the Admiralty Bill, 2005 takes away
 the existing right.  More fundamentally, what it does is it leaves the door open for foreign owners to start arguing that
 their vessels are also not liable to be arrested in India.  In such circumstances  the Committee apprehends that the
 foreign owners will escape in the pretext of having local agents in India and accordingly they are amenable to the courts
 in personam jurisdiction.  Moreover, provisions of Clause 6 will also lead to circumstances when a ship can be
 proceeded against in personam by means of a regular civil suit.  Resultantly, for arresting a ship, it will take a quite
 long period sometimes expanding over decades.
15.12   Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Clause 6 (3) may suitably be made part of clause 7.
Clause 7
Jurisdiction in personam
16.
              Clause 7
16.1     Clause 7 (1) reads - The jurisdiction of the court may be invoked by an actionin personam in the cases -
(i)         referred to in clauses (a) to (c) of sub-section (2) of section 5; or
 

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
(ii)        of maritime lien or charge on  any ship or its property including bunker.
 
16.2     Clause 7(2)reads  - In the case of any such claim as is mentioned in clauses (e) to (r) of sub-section (2) of
 section 5, where –
(a) the claim arises in connection with a ship; and
(b) the person who would be liable on a claim in an action in personam (hereinafter referred to as ‘the relevant
 person’) was, when the cause of action arose, the owner, or charterer of, or in possession, or in control of  a
 ship,
admiralty jurisdiction may be invoked (whether or not the claim gives rise to a maritime lien on that ship) by an action
 in rem against -
(i) that ship, if at the time when the action is brought the relevant person is either the beneficial owner of that
 ship as respects all the shares in it or the charterer of it under a charter by demise; or
(ii) any other ship of which, at the time when the action is brought, the relevant person is the beneficial owner as
 respects all the shares in it.
16.3     Clause 7(3) reads - Where, in the exercise of its admiralty jurisdiction, the court orders any ship or its property
 to be sold, the court shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine any question arising as to title to the proceeds of sale
16.4     The Committee was informed that the present wording of clause 7 of the draft Bill is seriously deficient and
 unsatisfactory. The draft Bill appears to have selectively borrowed parts of section 21 of the 1981 UK Act. It should,
 therefore, be completely redrafted.
16.5     The Committee was suggested that the entire legislation could have been more supportive of cargo interests by
 circumventing the need for an in personam liability of the relevant person as required under section 7(2)(b) and creating
 a right of lien against offending vessels, regardless of their ownership or control.  Section 7(1) (ii) must be deleted.   In
 clause 7(2), it should be corrected to read as clauses (f) to  ( r ) . In clause 7(2)(b), it should read as “ the ship “ in place
 of  “a ship".
16.6     The Department of Shipping substantiated their position with regard to the above suggestions relating to various
 provisions of Clause 7 in the following paragraphs:-
“Broadly the proposed Bill may be divided into two parts, one part dealing with “court” which will exercise
 admiralty jurisdiction and the second part in which the extent and scope of their jurisdiction have been dealt with. 
 Clause 7 of the Bill deals with some principal aspects of the second part. 
16.7     At present a wide range of subjects fall within the ambit of admiralty jurisdiction particularly those relating to
 maritime claims, contracts, torts etc.   There are various aspects touching upon admiralty jurisdiction in regard to
 location, persons, aliens, property, vessels etc  and certain principles governing tortuous liability in admiralty matters
 which are generally governed by judicial precedents. 
16.8     The principal feature of admiralty actions, however, has been a distinction between proceedings in rem and
 proceedings in personam.  Admiralty law confers on a claimant a right in rem to proceed against a ship or cargo as
 distinguished from a right in personam against an owner. 
16.9     The admiralty action in rem, as practiced in UK or in US, is not followed in many of the countries. In the
 countries, following the civil law, all proceedings are initiated by an action in personam.  The object of civil law is to
 redress of wrongs by compelling compensation or restitution, the wrong doer is not punished, he only suffers so much
 harm as is necessary to make good the wrong he has done.  The person who has suffered gets a definite benefit from the
 law or at least he avoids a loss. The court having competence in the matter has the power to order an attachment of the

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 ship if it is convinced that the plaintiff is likely to lose his security unless the ship is detained within jurisdiction.  The
 hands of the court are not fettered by the technicalities of an action in personam and the scope of the   proceedings is
 not limited to the maritime liens or claims. 
16.10   The real purpose of the arrest in both the English Law and Civil law system is to obtain security as a guarantee
 for the satisfaction of the decree.   In any event, once the arrest is made and owner has entered appearance, the
 proceedings continue in personam. 
16.11   All action in civil law whether maritime or not are in personam and arrest of a vessel is permitted even in respect
 of non-maritime claims.  Admiralty actions in England, whether in rem or in personam are conferred to well defined
 maritime liens or claims and directed against the res (ship cargo or freight) which is the subject matter of the dispute or
 any other ship in the same beneficial ownership as the one already in question. Having regard to importance, in
 maritime matters, of an effective remedy against the ship, it is proposed to retain the distinction between an action in
 rem by sub clause (2) of clause 7 of the Bill and an action in  personam by clause 7 itself. Though the contents of clause
 7 have been termed as “jurisdiction in personam,” in fact the provisions deal with the mode of exercise of admiralty
 jurisdiction.
16.12   In the Bill, we have taken note of good points of both the English Law and Civil Law systems and attempt has
 been made to make the admiralty jurisdiction and its mode of exercise wide enough and explicit. Well defined aspects
 of English Law are taken care of in clauses 5(2) and 7(2) of the Bill and necessary discretion is also given to the courts. 
 In the Bill, clause 9 confers discretion to the courts to decide the more appropriate form of action in any particular case
 at any stage, make appropriate directions and orders and grant necessary relief so as to ensure that technicalities as to
 the form or mode of action do not defeat the valid claims and rights of the parties. 
16.13   Thus, the question whether any action should be instituted or permitted to continue in rem or in personam is left
 to the court which will examine each case on its merits and take appropriate action in the interests of justice. Concisely,
 the determination of the Mode of exercise of admiralty jurisdiction after enunciation of their basic principles in the Bill,
 has been    left to the discretion   of the court instead of confining it to   statutory provisions as is the case in the Act of
 1981 of UK.  For the above reasons, the text of the UK Act has not been lifted as it is but finds place in a modified form
 in the Bill.”
16.14   During the course of oral evidence held on 31
st August, 2005, the Committee was informed that Clause 7 is very
 important from the admiralty jurisdiction until Brussel Arrest Convention was enacted, the admiralty law did not permit
 the arrest of any other ship belonging to the ship owner but only the offending ship could be arrested.  In the year 1952,
 the Brussel Arrest Convention was enacted which allowed a sister ship to be arrested as it is supposed to be within the
 beneficial ownership of the same owner.  In the instant case Clause 7 of the Admiralty Bill, 2005 appears to be a model
 of Section 22 of the English Act.  But surprisingly, for inexplicable reasons material alterations to Section 22 has been
 made.  Section 22 has 8 sub-sections and each of those sub-sections has precise meaning.  Those sub-sections are being
 omitted in Clause 7. 
16.15   The Committee recommends that keeping in view of its earlier recommendation regarding Clause 6 (3), the
 marginal heading of Clause 7 be changed to 'mode of exercise of admiralty jurisdiction 'instead of jurisdiction in
 personam'.
Clause 8
Restrictions on entertainment of actions in personam
in collision and other similar cases

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
17.       Clause 8
17.1    Clause 8 (1) reads - This section applies to any claim for damage or loss of life or personal injury arising out of
 –
(a)    a collision between ships; or 
(b)   the carrying out of or omission to carry out, a manoeuvre in the case of one or more ships; or
(c)    non-compliance, on the part of one or more ships, with the collision regulations.
17.2    Clause 8(2) reads - While exercising admiralty jurisdiction, a court shall not entertain any action in personam
 against any defendant unless-
(a)        such defendant, at the time of commencement of the action, actually and voluntarily resides or carries on
 business or personally works for gain in India:
provided that an action may be entertained in any case where there are more defendants than one if the
 defendant who does not actually and voluntarily reside or carry on business or personally works for gain
 in India is made a party to such action either with the leave of the court, or each of such defendants
 acquiesces in, such institution; or
(b)        the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises in India, including inland waters of India or within the
 limits of a port of India; or
(c)        an action arising out of the same incident or series of incidents is pending in a court or has been heard
 and determined by such court; or
           (d)        a ship is beneficially owned or chartered by demise by the defendant and such ship has been arrested
 and proceedings are pending in respect thereof.
17.3    Clause 8(3) reads - The court shall not entertain any action in personam to enforce a claim to which this section
 applies until any proceedings previously brought by the plaintiff in any court outside India against the same defendant
 in respect of the same incident or series of incidents have also been discontinued or have otherwise come to an end.
17.4   Clause 8(4) reads - The provisions of sub-section (2) and (3) of this section shall apply to counterclaims in
 proceedings arising out of the same incident or series of incidents as they apply to actions, and a reference to the
 plaintiff and the defendant for this purpose shall be construed as reference to the plaintiff in the counter-claim and the
 defendant in the counter-claim respectively.
17.5    Clause 8(5) reads - The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of this section shall not apply to any action or
 counter-claim if the defendant submits or agrees to submit to the jurisdiction of the court.
17.6     Clause 8(6) reads  - Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the court shall have jurisdiction to entertain an
 action in personam to enforce a claim to which this section applies whenever any of the conditions specified in clauses
 (a) to (d) of sub section (2), are satisfied and where applicable, the rules of the court relating to the service of process
 outside the jurisdiction shall apply.
17.7     The Committee was informed that the word “voluntarily” may be deleted from clause 8(2)(a) as the “actual
 residing” in the jurisdiction should be sufficient. The Committee was also suggested that provision of Section 8 (2)
 should be consistent with the provisions of Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure and Clause 8(2) (c) & ( d ) should
 be deleted.
17.8     Further, the Department of Shipping informed the Committee that the Clause 8 of the Bill is based on the
 provisions contained in section 20 and 22 of the Supreme Court Act of 1981 of UK.   Having a re-look into the
 provisions, it appears that the word “unless” occurring in sub-clause (2) of clause 8 do not read properly with sub

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 clauses (c) & (d).  Therefore, for clause (c) & (d) the word “if” may be used, which will clarify the position and take
 care of the doubts rose in this regard.
17.9     The expression “voluntarily” is based on the provisions of Civil Procedure Code. The maritime claims may arise
 against a defendant who is having his office and business outside India and as a consequence a claim having been filed
 in a court outside India. The provisions of sub clause (3) of clause 8 takes care of such cases which is different than
 what is given in section 10 of Civil Procedure Code.
17.10  The Committee observes that according to Clause 8(2)(a)  “while exercising admiralty jurisdiction, a court shall
 not entertain any action in personam against any defendant unless such defendant, at the time of commencement of
 the action, actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain in India”.  The
 Committee feels that the wordings in the clause may be mis-used by foreign ship owners as their agent resides and
 carries on business for them in India.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Department of Shipping should
 take adequate care so that the possibility of such kind of misuse can be prevented in future.
 
17.11  The rest of the  Clause was adopted without any change.
Clause 9
Directions by Court
 
18.       Clause 9 of the Bill reads - "Notwithstanding anything contained in section 5 of this Act, it shall be open to the
 court in its discretion, at any stage of the proceedings to treat proceedings in rem or in personam, either in whole or in
 part, and to grant such reliefs and make such directions and orders (including amendments to the pleadings) as it may
 consider appropriate and just."
18.1
          The Committee was informed that this clause lacks a clear definition of action in rem and action in personam. 
 The jurisdiction and pre-requisites of both of them cannot be inter-changed without satisfying the criteria laid down.  In
 personam action is based on residence, cause of action or acquiescence to jurisdiction and ought not to be exercised
 otherwise.  Further, in rem action should only be against the property under arrest and not against all properties of party
 who appeared to defend the vessel.
 
18.2     The Committee notes that it has been left open to the Court in its discretion to treat the proceedings in rem or in
 personam and grant relief and make orders.  The Committee feels that the directions by Court may be considered
 appropriate and just and adopted the  Clause  without suggesting any change.
Clause 10
Vesting of rights on sale of ship
19.       Clause 10 reads - "On the sale of a ship by the court in exercise of its admiralty jurisdiction, the ship shall vest in
 the purchaser free from all encumbrances."
19.1     The Clause was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 11
Distribution of sale proceeds.
20.
              Clause 11

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
20.1     Clause 11(1) reads  - In an action in rem, where the court has ordered the property proceeded against to be sold-
(a)        a notice  in the manner provided in sub-section (2) shall be given by the court; and
(b)        any party which obtains a decree or order against the said property may claim  such reliefs as are
 provided in sub-section (3).
20.2    Clause 11(2)reads  - For the purposes of clause (a) of sub-section (1), a notice shall be given in one
 international and one national newspaper as the court may specify containing the following particulars, namely:-
(a)  number of the action;
(b)  names of the parties to an action;
(c)  gross sale proceeds; and
(d)  the order of priority of the claim to the sale proceeds.
20.3    Clause 11(3)reads  - Any party referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) may apply to the court by a notice of
 motion for an order determining the order of priority of the claims against the proceeds of the sale of the property.
20.4     Clause 11(4)  reads - The court shall determine order of priority of the claim to the sale proceeds on expiration
 of the period of ninety days from the publication of notice under sub-section (2):
20.4.1  Provided that any party having a claim to the property or the proceeds of sale thereof may apply to the court
 before the expiry of period of ninety days for leave to intervene and prove claims by filing an action before it or by
 filing a suit before any other appropriate court before the expiration of that period.
 
20.5     Clause 11(5) reads - The court may extend the period of ninety days on the application of any party which has
 instituted proceedings before any other court as provided in sub-section (4) or before the court of competent
 jurisdiction in India for obtaining a decree against the property or proceeds of sale and the said court shall not disburse
 the sale proceeds or determine priority until thirty days after the disposal of the said suit or action and any appeal
 therefrom.
20.6     Clause 11(6) reads - Notwithstanding the provisions contained in sub-section (3) above, the court may
 determine priority among the parties and direct payment out of the sale proceeds on an application by any party which
 has obtained a decree or order against the ship or its property if the court is of the opinion that the claim of the
 applicant is entitled to priority over the claim in respect of which a suit or action has been instituted:
             Provided that the court shall provide opportunity of hearing to all parties which may have made claims and
 filed suit or action against the property or sale proceeds within the prescribed period of ninety days or such other
 period which may be extended by the court before determining priority and directing disbursement out of the sale
 proceeds.
20.7     The Committee received variety of opinions on different sub-clauses of Clause 8 but there was unanimity
 regarding the complicated  nature of this clause.  The Committee was informed that the clause is procedural in nature
 and ought to find place in the admiralty court rules. 
20.8     This clause also presupposed an arrest, if sale is specified, the modality of initiation of an action in rem ought to
 be specified. In section 11 (2) & (3) the notice provision is intermixed, if it is a notice advertising propose sale of a
 vessel then section 11 (2) (e) & (d) are out of context.   In 11(4) it should be rem proceedings against the same ship
 whereas section 11(6) presupposes an consolidated overview of all rival claims on sale proceeds.
20.9     The Ministry clarified before the Committee that though the Clause appears to contain some procedural aspect
 but in essence deals with the principles underlying the distribution of sale proceeds Sale of property of a person

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 involves touching of a very important legal right of a person and any interference with such right has to be dealt with in
 the legislation instead of leaving it to the rules.   Interests of third parties who may have claims have been protected by
 giving 90 days’ notice in news papers. In sum and substance, this provision takes care of each and every aspect of sale
 of property arising out of an action in rem. It may, therefore, be retained in the present form.
20.10   The Committee adopted the  Clause  without suggesting any change.
Clause 12
Order of priority of claims
21.       Clause 12
21.1     Clause 12(1) reads  - The order of claims determining inter se priority in an admiralty proceedings shall be as
 follows:-
(a)  a claim on any ship or its property including bunker where there is a maritime lien and action is proceeded
 against ship or its property;
(b) mortgages and charges on a ship or its property where an action is proceeded against ship or its property ;
(a)
       all other claims
21.2     Clause 12(2) provides,
The priority among the claims inter se with respect to clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall be as follows: -
(a)        claims for salvage of life, ship or its property provided that salvage of life shall take priority over other
 salvages;
(b)        wages and other sums due to the master or  members of crew of the ship in respect of their employment on the
 ship;
(c)        (i) claims in respect of  loss of  life or personal injury having a direct connection with the operation of the ship;
(ii) claims for contribution for general average;
(iii) claims based on tort arising out of physical damage caused by the operation of the ship other than loss or
 damage to cargo containers and passengers’ effects carried on the ship;
(iv)  bottomry;
(d)        port, canal and other waterway dues and pilotage dues.
21.3    Clause 12(3) provides,
The following principles shall apply in determining the priority of claims inter se –
(a)        prior claims shall exclude subsequent ones;
(b)        if there are more claims than one in any category of priority, they shall rank pari passu;
(c)        claims for various salvages shall rank in inverse order of time when the claims secured thereto accrue;
(d)        claims for salvage, port dues, wages and claims in the nature of general average shall take priority over all other
 claims mentioned in clause (c) of sub-section (2) notwithstanding the fact that the claims arose earlier.
21.3.1  All the stakeholders who presented their views before the Committee agreed to one suggestion that this clause
 should be deleted and left to the High Courts to frame rules.  It is felt that in the field of admiralty jurisdiction for
 determining priorities between competing maritime claims, historically discretionary approach was exercised on a
 broad basis. 
21.3.2  The Committee was also suggested this provision is contravening the provisions of sections 64 & 65 of the
 Major Port Trust Act, 1963 as per which repayments to port is the topmost priority whereas the present Bill has fixed
 the priorities in a different order.  

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
21.3.3  The representatives of port and dock workers were of the view that clause (b) dealing with wages and other sums
 due to the master and crew of the ship in respect of their employment on the ship should take priority over clause.  
 They also suggested that in case of loss of life of crew and missing, the ship owners and Government would protect
 their family by way of giving compensation of amounts.
21.3.4  The Committee desired that the Ministry should explain their position on the provisions of Clause 12.  The D/o.
 Shipping inter-alia replied that the clause deals with the manner of distribution of the proceeds of sale of any ship or
 property and the order of priority of the claims in regard thereto. As this clause deals with basic principles to be applied
 in determining the priority in any admiralty proceedings, which is a must in admiralty legislation, for giving priority to
 persons’ livelihood, injury suffered during the operation etc., to any other claim. These principles cannot be provided in
 the rules.   The provision, therefore, may be retained in the present form.
 
21.3.5  The Committee observes that the Clause 12(2) of the Bill endeavours to categorise the priority of maritime
 claims which is not recommended in respect of admiralty jurisdiction as priority between competing maritime claims
 has historically been exercised on the basis of a broad discretionary approach.  The Committee cites for example,
 though a crew member claims for wages is generally subordinated to a claim for salvage.  The same is not rigid and the
 courts have at times departed from these guidelines due to considerations of equity, public policy and commercial
 expediency.  Therefore, the order of priorities adopted in one case may not be followed in another if the court believes
 that considerations of justice or public policy warrant a departure.  In view of this, the Committee recommends that this
 provision should not be included in the Bill.
Clause 13
Maritime lien
22.      Clause 13 (1) provides
Maritime lien shall attach to a ship or its property in respect of the following, namely:- 
(a)        claim for salvage of life, ship or its property;
(b)        wages and other sums due to the master or  members of crew of the ship in respect of their employment on the
 ship;
(c)        claim for loss of life or personal injury having a direct connection with the operation of the ship;
(d)        claim for  contribution to general average
(e)        port, canal and other waterway dues and pilotage dues;
(f)         claim based on tort arising out of physical loss or damage caused by the operation of the ship other than the loss
 or damage to cargo, containers and passengers’ effects carried on the ship, the date of accrual of such maritime lien
 being the date on which the operations giving rise to the said claim were performed.
22.1     Clause 13(2) provides
No maritime lien shall attach to a vessel to secure  a claim which arises out of or results  from:-
a)
                  damage in connection with the carriage of oil or other hazardous or noxious substances by sea for which
 compensation is payable to the claimants pursuant to an  international convention providing for strict liability,
 compulsory insurance or  any other means of securing such claim;
(b)        the radio-active properties or a combination of radio-active properties with toxic, explosive or other hazardous
 properties or nuclear fuel or  radio-active products or waste.

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
22.2     Clause 13(3) provides
22.2.1  A maritime lien shall stand extinguished on the expiry of one year from the date of its creation under sub-section
 (1):
Provided that the claim, if any, not barred by limitation, may be enforced by an action in personam:
22.2.2  Provided further that the period of one year may be extended further by the court if the claimant of lien is
 unable to commence an action to enforce the lien against the ship or its property for reasons beyond his control.
22.2.3  The Committee was informed that clause (b) dealing with wages and other sums due to the master and crew of
 the ship in respect of their employment on the ship should take priority over clause (a).  The Committee was also
 suggested that the heads of claim should be restricted to five and that the proviso extending the period should be deleted
 and the statutory period should be confined to normal period of 3 years.  There is no mention of “contribution to
 general average” in the 1993 International Convention on Maritime Liens and Mortgages.
22.2.4  It was also suggested to the Committee that the Bill must conform to the relevant International Conventions and
 any deviation should be deleted. It has also suggested that words “or its property” (section 13(1)) and “claim for
 contribution to general average” (section 13(1)(d)) should be deleted. Further, a proviso to provide that maritime lien
 shall stand extinguished if the ship has been purchased or imported for the purpose of demolition may be incorporated
 in section 13(2). There was a suggestion that there should be proper safeguards for radioactive substances as provided
 in 13(2)(a) for oil spillage matters. The 2
nd proviso should be deleted as it makes the process cumbersome. The limit of
 one year is equitable and should not be extendable.  The proviso in section 13(3) providing time limit of one year and
 its further extension by one more year may be deleted.  
22.2.5  The Department of Shipping explained to the Committee that the provision is based on International Convention
 on Maritime Liens and Mortgages 1993. This provision takes care of the interests of creditors and recognizes the right
 on property till every debt due in respect of that property is discharged. In view of the above, the provision may be
 retained in the present form.
22.2.6  The Committee observes that a maritime lien is a charge that attaches to a ship to secure certain types of claims. 
 Typically, such claims are few in number, as they tend to place the holder in favoured position in law.  For instance, a
 maritime lien unlike an ordinary maritime claim does not get extinguished on the sale of a ship, but instead survives a
 change of ownership of the vessel.   This is why such liens are restricted to certain limited categories of claims.  The
 Supreme Court in MV Won Fu’s Case (2003 1 SCC 305) ruled that maritime lien exists in 5 cases only viz., a) salvage
 b) damage done by a ship  c) seaman’s and masters wages d) master’s disbursements and e) bottomry.   The Committee
 also takes note of the fact that  as per the provisions of Clause 13 of the Bill, maritime liens has a wider scope as it
 includes claims for general average and port and canal dues.  Whereas, there is no mention of master’s disbursements
 and damage done by a ship.  Therefore, this clause apart from being contrary to the Supreme Court’s judgment in MV
 Won Fu’s case, also marks a departure from the policy of other commonwealth jurisdictions by creating new classes of
 maritime liens.  The Committee recommends that Clause 13 be amended on the line of Supreme Court judgement in
 MV Won Fu's Case, 2003.
 
22.2.7  The Committee feels that Clause 13(3) provides for extension of lien indefinitely which is harmful for the
 interest of the Ship-breaking industry.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Government must take care of
 Ship-breaking industry and lien period may be specified in the Bill and should not be extendable beyond that period. 

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
Clause 14
Procedure in respect of foreign ships.
 Clause 14
23.1     Clause 14(1) provides
In all actions under this Act, the nationality of the ship proceeded against shall be stated in the plaint, and if the
 ship is a foreign ship, notice or institution of the suit shall be given to the Consulate of the State to which the ship
 belongs.
23.2     Clause 14(2) provides
A statement of service of such notice or a statement that there is no such Consulate in the City, shall be made in
 the affidavit in support of any application for arrest of the ship.
23.3     Clause 14(3) provides
If a notice is served on the Consulate, a copy of the said notice shall be annexed to the affidavit.
23.4     Clause 14(4) provides
            For the purposes aforesaid, it would be sufficient service if a notice is served on a Consul or any other officer in
 the Consulate.
23.5
    The Committee was apprised by various organisations that the Australian admiralty court rules might be adopted
 with appropriate modifications in this regard.  The Clauses 14 & 15 ought to be contiguous along with arrest
 proceedings sections.
23.6     The Department of  Shipping apprised the Committee that the provisions of a notice, where suit is filed against a
 foreign ships, for notice to the Counsel/mission of the foreign country in India is dealt with in clause 14 of the Bill.
23.7     The Clause was adopted without suggesting any change.
Clause 15
Protection of owner, demise charterer, manager
or operator of ships arrested.
24.
              Clause 15
24.1    Clause15 (1) provides
The court may,  as a condition of arrest of a ship, or for` permitting an arrest already effected to be maintained,
 impose upon the claimant who seeks to arrest or who has procured the arrest of the ship an obligation to provide such
 security and upon such terms as may determine,  for any loss or damage  which may be incurred by the defendant as a
 result of the arrest, and for which the claimant may be found liable, including but not restricted to the following:
    (a)    the arrest  having been wrongful or unjustified; or
    (b)   excessive security having been demanded and     provided.
24.2     Clause 15(2)  provides
Where pursuant to sub-section (1), the security has been provided, the person providing such security may at any
 time apply to the Court to have the security reduced, modified or cancelled.
24.3     One of the leading port and dock employee’s federation is of the view that it may not be possible to adhere to the
 provision if the ship is arrested by the master or the crew or the trade union or ITF for realizing wages of the crew. 
24.4     The Committee referred the matter to the D/o. Shipping to which they replied that the Clause 15 of the Bill is
 based on Article 6 of International Convention on Arrest of Ships, 1999. Clauses 14 & 15 are not merely procedural

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 provisions but are provisions, which apply to a foreign flagship and provide protection to the owner, demise charterer,
 manager or operator of ships arrested. Any action, which if taken, amounts to interfering with the legal rights of a
 person, is always dealt with in the legislation and not left to the rules. The provisions of clauses 14 & 15 may, therefore,
 be retained in the present form.
24.5     The Clause was adopted without suggesting any change.
Chapter III
Procedure and Appeals
Clause 16
Code of Civil Procedure to Apply
25.
              Clause 16
25.1     Clause 16(1) provides
The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall apply in all the proceedings before the court in so far
 as they are not inconsistent with or contrary to the provisions of this Act or the rules made there under.
25.2     Clause 16(2) provides
            The admiralty court shall have all the powers of a civil court in dealing with any application before it and of
 passing such interim and other orders, as it may consider necessary and appropriate to protect the interests of the parties
 before it.
    25.3The Committee during the course examination was informed by various organisations that the clause 16(1 )
 makes clause 19 superfluous as CPC provides for appeal against judgment, decree or final order.
       25.4          The Department of Shipping on the other informed that the Clause 16 makes procedural provisions
 relating to admiralty jurisdiction created under its provisions.  When a jurisdiction is envisaged consequent to an
 amendment or consolidation of laws with reference to a particular subject matter, it becomes necessary to make
 relevant procedural provisions and this is what is intended by clause 16. By this clause, it has been clarified that the
 procedure in admiralty matters will be the same as that in suits and interlocutory application in civil courts.
25.5     The Civil Procedure Code, 1908 will therefore be applicable as far as may be to these proceedings.  As regards
 clause 19 of the Bill, consequent to exercise of admiralty jurisdiction by a High Court or a Principal Civil Court, in
 terms of the CPC, an appeal would normally lie in the Supreme Court and the High Court respectively. Since the Bill
 vests admiralty jurisdiction in the High Court concerned, it becomes necessary to make a provision for hearing of first
 appeal by a Division Bench of the same High Court. In view of above clauses 16 & 19 may be retained in the present
 form.
25.6     The Committee adopted the Clause without suggesting any change.
Clause 17
Assistance of Assessors
26.       Clause 17
26.1     Clause 17(1) provides
            In pursuance of the provisions of section 140 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the Central Government
 shall appoint and publish in the Official Gazette a list of assessors with such qualifications or experience in admiralty
 and maritime matters as may be prescribed.
26.2     Clause 17(2) provides

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
The appointment of assessors shall not be construed as a bar to the examination of expert witnesses by any of the
 parties in any admiralty proceeding.
26.3     Clause 17(3) provides
            The Central Government may make rules prescribing the qualifications for assessors, the nature of duties to be
 performed by them and the fees to be paid, to them and other ancillary and incidental matters.
26.4     The Committee adopted the Clause without suggesting any change.
Clause 18
Reference to arbitration
 27.      Notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions of any other law, it shall be open to the court in admiralty
 proceedings to refer, with the written consent of the parties, the entire dispute before it or such questions of law or fact
 raised thereby,   as the court may consider necessary, to arbitration and dispose of the dispute or the questions, as the
 case may be, in conformity with the award unless modified by the court for reasons to be recorded in writing.
28.       The Committee adopted the Clause without suggesting any change.
Clause 19
Appeal
29.       An appeal shall lie from any judgment, decree or final order of a single Judge of the High Court or any other
 court exercising admiralty jurisdiction under this Chapter to a Division Bench of the High Court.
30.       The Committee enquired the Ministry as to why the Bill provides for appeals only in respect of final orders but
 not against interim orders.  To this, the Department of Shipping replied that the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 will be
 applicable as far as may be to admiralty proceedings.  As regards clause 19 of the Bill, consequent to exercise of
 admiralty jurisdiction by a High Court or a Principal Civil Court, in terms of the CPC, an appeal would normally lie in
 the Supreme Court and the High Court respectively. Since the Bill vests admiralty jurisdiction in the High Court
 concerned, it becomes necessary to make a provision for hearing of first appeal by a Division Bench of the same High
 Court. In view of above clauses 19 may be retained in the present form.
31.       Clause 19 of the Bill provides for appeals only in respect of “final order”. The Committee feels that revision
 application should be allowed against any “interim order” and recommends that the clause be amended suitably. 
Chapter V
Miscellaneous
Clause 20
Power to make rules
32.
              Clause 20
32.1     Clause 20(1) provides
The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the provisions
 of this Act.
32.2     Clause 20(2) provides
In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Central Government may
 regulate by rules the practice and procedure of admiralty jurisdiction under this Act including fees, costs and expenses
 in such proceedings.
32.3     Clause 20(3) provides

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
Until rules are made under sub-section (2) by the Central Government, the existing rules governing the exercise
 of admiralty jurisdiction in the High Courts shall be applicable.
32.4     Clause 20(4) provides
32.5     Every rule made, under this Act shall be laid as soon as may be after the rule is made before each House of
 Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
 more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
 sessions aforesaid both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should
 not be made, the rule shall thereafter have effect, only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so
 however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
 under that rule.
32.6     The Committee adopted the Clause without suggesting any change
Clause 21
Repeal and Savings
33.       Clause 21
33.1     Clause 21(1) provides
The following enactments are hereby repealed:-
(a)        the Admiralty Offences (Colonial) Act, 1849
(b)        the Admiralty Jurisdiction (India) Act, 1860
(c)        the Admiralty Court Act, 1861
d)         the Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act, 1890
(e)        the Colonial Courts of Admiralty (India) Act, 1891
(f)         the provisions of Letters Patent, 1865 in so far as they apply to the admiralty jurisdiction of the Bombay,
 Calcutta and Madras High Courts.
33.2     Clause 21(2) provides
Notwithstanding the repeal of any of the enactments mentioned in sub-section (1), any rule, notification,
 regulation, bye-law or order previously issued shall, in so far as such rule, notification, regulation, bye-law or order is
 not inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Act or any rule made under section 20, continue in force as if it had
 been issued or made under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
33.3     The Committee was informed by different stakeholders / trade unions that the Admiralty Courts Act of 1840
 should also be repealed. Further, the Admiralty Offences (Colonial) Act, 1849 may not be repealed unless an
 amendment to the law relating to criminal justice like the Indian Penal Code and the Criminal Procedure Code is
 brought about to deal with piracy cases on the high seas.
33.4     The Department of Shipping observed that the admiralty jurisdiction in India is exercised by virtue of century
 old British legislation. When the draft Bill is accepted and enacted, certain existing legislation on the subject would
 become redundant. 
33.5     In clause 21, therefore, it is proposed to repeal those enactments.  The Admiralty Courts Act, 1840 has not been
 included in this repeal and savings clause for the reason that the said Act apply to the courts in UK and appears not to
 have been extended to India. Hence, no modification is necessary in this clause.
 
34.       The Committee is not convinced with the reply given by the Department of Shipping and recommends that the

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 Bill should repeal the Admiralty Courts Act of 1840 as well.
 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title
 
35.       The Committee recommends that the Bill’s title should aptly be changed from “Admiralty Bill” to “Admiralty
 Jurisdiction Bill” by amending Clause 1 of the Bill.  The figure "2005" should be changed to '2006".
36.       In the enacting formula the words "fifty-sixth" be substituted by "fifty-seventh".
37.       The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed after incorporating official amendments and taking into
 account its recommendations in respect of Clause 1, 2(b), 2(c), 2(g), 2(m), 3(1), 5, 6(1), 6(3), 7, 8(2)(a), 12(2), 13,19
 and 21 above.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS - AT A GLANCE
 
Clause 2(a)
 
The Clause was adopted without any change.  The Committee therefore, does not suggest any change.(para
 11.1.2)
 
Clause 2(b)
 
The Committee observes that the Department of Shipping in its reply has admitted that “this definition shall take
 care of every such proceeding pending before a court either before or after the enactment.” Therefore, the Committee
 recommends that the words “either before or after the commencement of this Act” should be added between the words
 “court” and “exercising Admiralty Jurisdiction”.(para 11.2.1)
 
Clause 2(c)
            The Committee is of the considered view that the definition of a word spells out its meaning/content; it states
 what it is inclusive of and not what it is exclusive of.  The Department of Shipping in their comments has accepted that
 “charge” means “any due with reference to port and pilotage etc.” This definition may be suitably changed and
 substituted with the existing one.
(para 11.3.2)
Clause 2(d)
 
The Clause was adopted without any change.  The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 definition. (para 11.4.1)
 
Clause 2(e)
The Committee considered the Clause 2(e) alongwith Clause 2(g).(para 11.5.1)
 
Clause 2(f)
 
The Clause was adopted without any change.  The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 definition. (para 11.6.1)
Clause 2(g)
The Committee observes that the Clause 2(c) defines the expression "Court” to mean "High Court".  Whereas, in
 Clause 2(g) High Court is defined as per Clause 3(15) of the Merchant Shipping Act 1958 as "High Court within the
 limits of whose appellate jurisdiction, (a) the port of registry of the vessel is situate ; (b) the vessel is for the time
 being,; or (c) the cause of action wholly or in part arises."  It appears from the above definitions that the exercise of

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 admiralty jurisdiction of the High Court appears to be circumscribed by the territorial allocation of jurisdiction
 contained in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958.  Whereas the concepts of 'cause of action' and 'port of registry' are
 incongruous as the Admiralty jurisdiction is universal and is not concerned with the question of nexus between the
 cause of action and forum. 
 
            The Committee strongly feels that the designated High Courts should be conferred pan-Indian admiralty
 jurisdiction which would facilitate the courts to take out writ in rem and warrant of arrest which can be served or
 executed anywhere in India. Ships spend only a brief period of time in a port.  In a case, where security / bail has been
 granted to a ship and the security or bail proves inadequate after the vessel has sailed, the absence of pan-Indian
 admiralty would involve the claimant following the vessel and filing an admiralty suit in another High Court.  This
 process will lead to multiplicity of cases. Therefore, the Committee feels that there is a compelling need for certain
 designated High Courts namely., Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Cochin, Hyderabad, Chennai, Calcutta, Bangalore and
 Bhubaneshwar to be conferred with an all-India admiralty jurisdiction.  In any case, the efforts of courts have been
 vested with admiralty jurisdiction so there is no departure. (paras 11.7.3&11.7.4)
Clause 2(h)
The Clause was adopted without any change.  The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 definition.
(para 11.8.2)
Clause 2(i)
The Clause was adopted without any change. The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 definition.
(para 11.9.1)
 
Clause 2(j)
 
The Clause was adopted without any change. The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 definition.
(para 11.10.1)
Clause 2(k)
The Clause was adopted without any change. The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 definition.
(para 11.11.1)
 
Clause 2(l)
 
The Clause was adopted without any change. The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 definition.
(para 11.12.1)
Clause 2(m)
 
            The Committee observes that Clause 2(m) defines "ship' as "does not include sailing vessel".  Whereas, the term
 "sailing vessel" has not been defined under the Bill, which is otherwise very much required for understanding the
 meaning of the ship.  The Committee recommends the Department of Shipping to re-examine the Clause 2 (m) in
 consultation with the Ministry of Law and Justice so as to make the definition of the Ship more clear.  The Committee
 further recommends that while defining the term "ship", the interest of the ship-breaking industry should also be
 protected in clear terms.
 
            The Committee also recommends that the terms such as “Charter”, “Sub-Charter”, “Sailing Vessel”, “Manager”,
 etc., that are in vogue in admiralty parlance should also be defined appropriately.  Further, it also recommends that such
 terms which are not defined in the Act, but defined in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958 should have the same meaning
 assigned to them in that Act.
(paras 11.13.3&11.13.4)
 

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
Clause 3(1)
            The Committee notes that there are several High Courts conferred with the admiralty jurisdiction. Therefore, the
 Committee recommends that the Department of Shipping may explore the possibility of setting-up of a centralized
 registry for admiralty jurisdiction in consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice in order to avoid any duplication
 or confusion.  It should not be a problem once the process of computerisation is expedited which will enable linking of
 courts. 
(para 12.1.3)
Clause 3(2)
The Clause was adopted without any change.  The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 sub-clause. (para 12.2.1)
 
Clause 3(3) 
 
The Clause was adopted without any change. The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this sub-
clause.
 
Clause 3 was adopted with one recommendation. (paras 12.3.1&12.3.2)
 
Clause 4
            The Clause was adopted without any change. The Committee, therefore, does not suggest any change in this
 clause.
(para 13.4)
Clause 5(1)(a)&(b)
 
The sub-clauses (a) and (b) of clause 5(1) were adopted without any change. The Committee, therefore, does not
 suggest any change therein. (para 14.1.2)
 
Clause 5(1)(c)
 
            The Committee is not convinced with the reply of the Department of Shipping -  "It appears that the said Act
 was not extended to the Courts in India". In legal matters, there should not be any ambiguity with regard to Acts/
 provisions in vogue.  The Committee recommends that the status of jurisdiction under the 1840 Admiralty Court Act,
 which was further, enlarged in the 1861 Act may be re-examined in consultation with the Ministry of law and Justice so
 that there is no scope of any ambiguity with regard to jurisdiction of 1840 Admiralty Court Act.  (para 14.1.7)
Clause 5(1)(d)
 
The sub-clause (d) of clause 5(1) was adopted without any change. The Committee, therefore, does not suggest
 any change in this sub-clause. (para 14.1.9)
 
Clause 5(2)(3)&(4)
            The Committee observes that the reply furnished by the Department of Shipping "All laws are essentially
 organic in nature in the sense there is ongoing exercise requiring changes/modification in them to keep pace with the
 changes/requirements of the people whose conduct are intended to be regulated under these instruments.  As the law is
 not static this can be further improved after gaining experience in this regard." is not acceptable in toto.  The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that in view of the issues highlighted by various representationists,  as mentioned
 above,  the Clause 5 may be re-considered and revised wherever necessary taking into account the issues. (para 14.4.14)
Clause 6(1)(2)&(3)
 
            The Committee notes that Clause 6 of the Bill has been captioned in the marginal heading as “Conditions in
 respect of claims in an action in rem”. The Committee feels that the 6 days notice period, which is provided in this
 clause can be reduced suitably given the fast means of communication available in  today's world. 

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 
            Moreover, the Committee observes that the provisions given in the Clause 6(3) are ambiguous and it appears that
 wherever an affected party proceeds in personam cannot proceed in rem.  This will unnecessarily complicate the gamut
 of issues.  Under the present law, the Indian crew are entitled to what is called an action in rem against a ship; it simply
 means that a ship can be arrested to secure a claim.  But provisions of Clause 6 of the Admiralty Bill, 2005 takes away
 the existing right.  More fundamentally, what it does is it leaves the door open for foreign owners to start arguing that
 their vessels are also not liable to be arrested in India.  In such circumstances  the Committee apprehends that the
 foreign owners will escape in the pretext of having local agents in India and accordingly they are amenable to the courts
 in personam jurisdiction.  Moreover, provisions of Clause 6 will also lead to circumstances when a ship can be
 proceeded against in personam by means of a regular civil suit.  Resultantly, for arresting a ship, it will take a quite
 long period sometimes expanding over decades.
 
            Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Clause 6 (3) may suitably be made part of clause 7.
(para 15.10, 15.11 & 15.12)
Clause 7
            The Committee recommends that keeping in view of its earlier recommendation regarding Clause 6 (3), the
 marginal heading of Clause 7 be changed to 'mode of exercise of admiralty jurisdiction 'instead of jurisdiction in
 personam'.
(para 16.15)
Clause 8
           The Committee observes that according to Clause 8(2)(a)  “while exercising admiralty jurisdiction, a court shall
 not entertain any action in personam against any defendant unless such defendant, at the time of commencement of
 the action, actually and voluntarily resides or carries on business or personally works for gain in India”.  The
 Committee feels that the wordings in the clause may be mis-used by foreign ship owners as their agent resides and
 carries on business for them in India.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Department of Shipping should
 take adequate care so that the possibility of such kind of misuse can be prevented in future.
           The rest of the  Clause was adopted without any change.
(paras 17.10.&17.11)
 
Clause 9
 
            The Committee notes that it has been left open to the Court in its discretion to treat the proceedings in rem or in
 personam and grant relief and make orders.  The Committee feels that the directions by Court may be considered
 appropriate and just and adopted the  Clause  without suggesting any change.(para 18.2)
Clause 10
The Clause was adopted without suggesting any change. (para 19.1)
Clause 11
            The Committee adopted the  Clause  without suggesting any change.(para 20.10)
Clause 12
            The Committee observes that the Clause 12(2) of the Bill endeavours to categorise the priority of maritime
 claims which is not recommended in respect of admiralty jurisdiction as priority between competing maritime claims
 has historically been exercised on the basis of a broad discretionary approach.  The Committee cites for example,
 though a crew member claims for wages is generally subordinated to a claim for salvage.  The same is not rigid and the
 courts have at times departed from these guidelines due to considerations of equity, public policy and commercial
 expediency.  Therefore, the order of priorities adopted in one case may not be followed in another if the court believes
 that considerations of justice or public policy warrant a departure.  In view of this, the Committee recommends that this
 provision should not be included in the Bill.
(para 21.3.5)
Clause 13 (1)(2)&(3)
            The Committee observes that a maritime lien is a charge that attaches to a ship to secure certain types of claims. 

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 Typically, such claims are few in number, as they tend to place the holder in favoured position in law.  For instance, a
 maritime lien unlike an ordinary maritime claim does not get extinguished on the sale of a ship, but instead survives a
 change of ownership of the vessel.   This is why such liens are restricted to certain limited categories of claims.  The
 Supreme Court in MV Won Fu’s Case (2003 1 SCC 305) ruled that maritime lien exists in 5 cases only viz., a) salvage
 b) damage done by a ship  c) seaman’s and masters wages d) master’s disbursements and e) bottomry.   The Committee
 also takes note of the fact that  as per the provisions of Clause 13 of the Bill, maritime liens has a wider scope as it
 includes claims for general average and port and canal dues.  Whereas, there is no mention of master’s disbursements
 and damage done by a ship.  Therefore, this clause apart from being contrary to the Supreme Court’s judgment in MV
 Won Fu’s case, also marks a departure from the policy of other commonwealth jurisdictions by creating new classes of
 maritime liens.  The Committee recommends that Clause 13 be amended on the line of Supreme Court judgement in
 MV Won Fu's Case, 2003.
 
            The Committee feels that Clause 13(3) provides for extension of lien indefinitely which is harmful for the
 interest of the Ship-breaking industry.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that the Government must take care of
 Ship-breaking industry and lien period may be specified in the Bill and should not be extendable beyond that period. 
 (paras 22.2.6&22.2.7)
 
Clause 14
            The Clause was adopted without suggesting any change. (para 23.7)
 
Clause 15
24.5   The Clause was adopted without suggesting any change.(para 24.5)
 
Clause 16
 
            The Committee adopted the Clause without suggesting any change.
(para 25.6)
Clause 17
            The Committee adopted the Clause without suggesting any change.
(para 26.4)
Clause 18
The Committee adopted the Clause without suggesting any change.
(para 28)
Clause 19
 
            Clause 19 of the Bill provides for appeals only in respect of “final order”. The Committee feels that revision
 application should be allowed against any “interim order” and recommends that the clause be amended suitably. 
(para 31)
Clause 20
            The Committee adopted the Clause without suggesting any change(para 32.6)
 
Clause 21
 
            The Committee is not convinced with the reply given by the Department of Shipping and recommends that the
 Bill should repeal the Admiralty Courts Act of 1840 as well.
(para 34)
 
Clause 1
            The Committee recommends that the Bill’s title should aptly be changed from “Admiralty Bill” to “Admiralty

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 Jurisdiction Bill” by amending Clause 1 of the Bill.  The figure "2005" should be changed to '2006".
 
            In the enacting formula the words "fifty-sixth" be substituted by "fifty-seventh".
            The Committee recommends that the Bill be passed after incorporating official amendments and taking into
 account its recommendations in respect of Clause 1, 2(b), 2(c), 2(g), 2(m), 3(1), 5, 6(1), 6(3), 7, 8(2)(a), 12(2), 13,
 19and 21 above.
(paras 35,36&37)
ANNEXURE
THE ADMIRALTY BILL, 2005
A
BILL
        to consolidate and amend the law relating to the admiralty jurisdiction of courts, legal proceedings in connection
 with ships, their arrest, detention and sale and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
BE it enacted by Parliament in the Fifty-sixth Year of the Republic of India 
 as follows:—
CHAPTER I
PRELIMINARY
1. (1) This Act may be called the Admiralty Act, 2005.
(2) It shall come into force on such date as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette,
 appoint.
2. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,—
(a) “admiralty jurisdiction” means jurisdiction exercised by a court on any matter referred to in section 5;
(b) “admiralty proceeding” means any proceeding pending before a court exercising admiralty jurisdiction;
(c) “charge” means any charge with the exception of light dues and any other charges in respect of
 lighthouses, buoys, beacons or pilotage;
(d) “collision regulations” shall have the meaning assigned to this expression in the Merchant Shipping Act,
 1958;
(e) “court” means the High Court or any other court exercising admiralty jurisdiction under section 3;
(f) “goods” means any property including live animals, containers, pellets or such other articles of transport or
 packaging supplied by the consignor, irrespective of the fact whether such property is to be carried on or under the
 deck;
(g) “High Court” shall have the meaning assigned to this expression in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958;
(h) “inland waters” includes all waters that are in fact navigable, irrespective of whether they are affected by
 tides or are land-locked or open or contain salt or fresh waters, and any part of the sea adjacent to the coast of
 India notified by the Central Government to be inland waters for the purposes of this Act;
 (i) “limits of the port” shall have the meaning assigned to this expression in the Indian Ports Act, 1908;

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
(j) “maritime lien” means the maritime lien specified in section 13;
(k) “master” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958;
(l) “port” shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Indian Ports Act, 1908;
(m) “ship” does not include a sailing vessel.
CHAPTER II
JURISDICTION OF COURTS
3. (1) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (2), the civil jurisdiction in respect of all claims under this Act shall
 vest in the High Court concerned and be exercisable in accordance with the provisions contained in this Chapter.
(2) If at any time, the High Court is of the opinion that the number of cases filed under this Act is unduly large, it
 may, in consultation with the Chief Justice of India, by notification in the Official Gazette, confer admiralty jurisdiction
 in such matters, wholly or to the extent it considers necessary, on such of the principal civil courts of the State as may
 be specified in the notification.
(3) Any notification referred to in sub-section (2) may also contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential
 provisions as the High Court may deem necessary.
4. The Supreme Court may, on application of any party, transfer, at any stage, any admiralty proceeding from one
 High Court to any other High Court and the latter High Court shall proceed to try, hear and determine the matter from
 the stage at which it stood at the time of transfer:
Provided that no such proceeding shall be transferred unless parties to the proceeding have been given an
 opportunity of being heard in the matter.
5. (1) The court shall have jurisdiction—
(a) to hear and determine any of the questions and claims mentioned in 
 sub-section (2);
(b) in relation to any of the proceedings mentioned in section 7;
(c) any other admiralty jurisdiction which it had immediately before the commencement of this Act by virtue
 of the Admiralty Court Act, 1861 or the Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act, 1890 or the Colonial Courts of
 Admiralty (India) Act, 1891 or otherwise;
(d) any jurisdiction connected with ships which is vested in the High Court by rules of such court made after
 the commencement of this Act, assigning and directing the jurisdiction to be exercised by that court.
 (2) For the purposes of clause (a) of sub-section (1), a court may exercise jurisdiction to hear and determine any of
 the following questions or claims, namely:—
(a) any claim to the possession or ownership of a ship or to the ownership of any share therein including a
 claim concerning employment or earnings relating to that ship;
(b) any question arising between the co-owners of a ship as to its possession, employment or earnings;
(c) any claim in respect of a registered mortgage or of charge on a ship or any share therein;

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
(d) any claim for the forfeiture or condemnation of a ship or of goods which are being or have been carried, or
 have been attempted to be carried, in a ship, or for the restoration of a ship or any such goods after seizure, or for
 droits of admiralty;
(e) any claim for damage caused to a ship during her stay, business or voyage;
(f) any claim for damage caused by a ship including civil liability for damage caused by oil pollution covered
 under the Merchant Shipping Act, 1958;
(g) any claim for loss of life or personal injury sustained in consequence of any defect in a ship or in her
 apparel or equipment or in its operation, or in consequence of the wrongful act, neglect or default of—
(i) the owners, charterers or persons in possession or control of a 
 ship; or
(ii) the master or crew of a ship, or any other person for whose wrongful act, neglect or default the
 owner, charterer or person in possession or control of a ship is responsible, being an act, neglect or
 default, in the navigation or management of the ship, in the loading, carriage or discharge of goods on, in
 or from the ship, or in the embarkation, carriage or disembarkation of persons on, in or from the ship;
(h)    any claim for loss of, or damage to, goods carried on board a ship;
(i)     any claim arising out of any agreement relating to the carriage of goods in a ship or to the use or hire of a
 ship;
(j) any claim in the nature of salvage for services rendered in saving life from a ship or in preserving the ship,
 cargo, equipment, apparel or of any other property of the ship or wreck;
(k) any claim in the nature of towage in respect of a ship;
(l) any claim in the nature of pilotage in respect of a ship;
(m) any claim in respect of goods, materials, bunker or other necessaries supplied to a ship or any services
 rendered to a ship for her operation or maintenance.
Explanation.— For the purposes of this clause, the expression “services” with reference to a claim shall
 include a claim made towards insurance for such services;
(n) any claim in respect of the construction, repair or equipment of a ship or in respect of any port dues, fee
 and other charges to the Port Authorities under the Indian Ports Act, 1908, as amended from time to time or rates
 and other charges due under the Major Port Trusts Act, 1963;
(o) notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions of sections 150 and 151 of the Merchant Shipping
 Act, 1958, any claim by a master or member of the crew of a ship for wages including any sum allotted out of
 wages or adjudged to be due which may be recoverable as wages;
(p) any claim by a master, shipper, charterer or agent in respect of disbursements made on account of a ship;
(q) any claim arising out of an act which is or is claimed to be in the nature of general average.
Explanation.—For the purposes of this clause, “general average” means any extraordinary sacrifice or
 expenditure voluntarily and reasonably made or incurred in time of peril for the purpose of preserving the ship

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 property imperilled in the common adventure;
(r) any claim arising out of bottomry.
(3) While exercising jurisdiction under clause (b) of sub-section (2), the court may settle any account outstanding
 and unsettled between the parties in relation to a ship, and direct that the ship, or any share thereof, shall be sold, or
 make such other order as the court thinks fit.
(4) The provisions of this section shall apply –
(a) in relation to all ships whether Indian or not irrespective of the residence or domicile of owners thereof;
(b) in relation to all maritime claims, wherever arising (including, in the case of cargo or wreck salvage,
 claims in respect of cargo or wreck found on land); and
(c) to all registered mortgages or charges, whether legal or equitable, including mortgages and charges created
 under any foreign law.
6. (1) The admiralty jurisdiction of the court shall not be invoked by an action in rem by arrest of a ship, in the case
 of a ship registered in India as an Indian ship, unless six clear days’ notice in writing is served upon the registered
 owner or the master of the ship intended to be proceeded against, stating the cause of action and the quantum of claim
 and the date and time of application to the court for arrest and calling upon the owner or master to provide security for
 the claim to the satisfaction of the admiralty court in lieu of the arrest and where such a security is provided, the court
 shall entertain the action without arresting the ship and shall order the arrest of the ship only in the event of failure to
 provide such security.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act or any other law for the time being in force, the admiralty
 jurisdiction of the High Court shall not be invoked by an action in rem unless the ship against which the proceedings
 have been commenced is within the territorial or inland waters of India at the time of commencement of the
 proceedings and as such is within the jurisdiction of that High Court:
Provided that no such ship shall be arrested unless there is failure to provide security.
(3) The admiralty jurisdiction of the court shall not be invoked by an action in rem against a vessel arising out of a
 breach of contract and a claim in such case may be enforced by an action in personam under this Act.
7. (1) The jurisdiction of the court may be invoked by an action in personam in the cases,—
(i) referred to in clauses (a) to (c) of sub-section (2) of section 5; or
(ii) of maritime lien or charge on any ship or its property including bunker.
(2) In the case of any such claim as is mentioned in clauses (e) to (r) of sub-section (2) of section 5, where—
(a) the claim arises in connection with a ship; and
(b) the person who would be liable on a claim in an action in personam (hereinafter referred to as “the
 relevant person”) was, when the cause of action arose, the owner, or charterer, or in possession, or in control, of a
 ship,
admiralty jurisdiction may be invoked (whether or not the claim gives rise to a maritime lien on that ship) by an action
 in rem against,—
(i) that ship, if at the time when the action is brought the relevant person is either the beneficial owner of that

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 ship as respects all the shares in it or the charterer of it under a charter by demise; or
(ii) any other ship of which, at the time when the action is brought, the relevant person is the beneficial owner
 as respects all the shares in it.
(3) Where, in the exercise of its admiralty jurisdiction, the court orders any ship or its property to be sold, the court
 shall have jurisdiction to hear and determine any question arising as to title to the proceeds of sale.
8. (1) This section applies to any claim for damage or loss of life or personal injury arising out of—
(a) a collision between ships; or
(b) the carrying out of or omission to carry out, a manoeuvre in the case of one or more ships; or
(c) non-compliance, on the part of one or more ships, with the collision regulations.
(2) While exercising admiralty jurisdiction, a court shall not entertain any action in personam against any
 defendant unless—
(a) such defendant, at the time of commencement of the action, actually and voluntarily resides or carries on
 business or personally works for gain in India:
Provided that an action may be entertained in any case where there are more defendants than one if the
 defendant who does not actually and voluntarily reside or carry on business or personally works for gain in India is
 made a party to such action either with the leave of the court, or each of such defendants acquiesces in, such
 institution; or
(b) the cause of action, wholly or in part, arises in India, including inland waters of India or within the limits
 of a port of India; or
(c) an action arising out of the same incident or series of incidents is pending in a court or has been heard and
 determined by such court; or
(d) a ship is beneficially owned or chartered by demise by the defendant and such ship has been arrested and
 proceedings are pending in respect thereof.
(3) The court shall not entertain any action in personam to enforce a claim to which this section applies until any
 proceedings previously brought by the plaintiff in any court outside India against the same defendant in respect of the
 same incident or series of incidents have been discontinued or have otherwise come to an end.
(4) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply to counter-claims (except counter-claims in
 proceedings arising out of the same incident or series of incidents) as they apply to actions, and a reference to the
 plaintiff and the defendant for this purpose shall be construed as reference to the plaintiff in the counter-claim and the
 defendant in the counter-claim respectively.
(5) The provisions of sub-sections (2) and (3) of this section shall not apply to any action or counter-claim if the
 defendant submits or agrees to submit to the jurisdiction of the court.
(6) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (3), the court shall have jurisdiction to entertain an action in personam
 to enforce a claim to which this section applies whenever any of the conditions specified in clauses (a) to (d) of sub-
section (2), are satisfied and where applicable, the rules of the court relating to the service of process outside the
 jurisdiction shall apply.

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
9. Notwithstanding anything contained in section 5 of this Act, it shall be open to the court in its discretion, at any
 stage of the proceedings to treat proceedings in rem or in personam, either in whole or in part, and to grant such reliefs
 and make such directions and orders (including amendments to the pleadings) as it may consider appropriate and just.
10. On the sale of a ship by the court in exercise of its admiralty jurisdiction, the ship shall vest in the purchaser
 free from all encumbrances.
11. (1) In an action in rem, where the court has ordered the property proceeded against to be sold—
(a) a notice in the manner provided in sub-section (2) shall be given by the court; and
(b) any party which obtains a decree or order against the said property may claim such reliefs as are provided
 in sub-section (3).
(2) For the purposes of clause (a) of sub-section (1), a notice shall be given in one international and one national
 newspaper as the court may specify containing following particulars, namely:—
(a) number of the action;
(b) names of the parties to an action;
(c) gross sale proceeds; and
(d) the order of priority of the claim to the sale proceeds.
(3) Any party referred to in clause (b) of sub-section (1) may apply to the court by a notice of motion for an order
 determining the order of priority of the claims against the proceeds of the sale of the property.
(4) The court shall determine order of priority of the claim to the sale proceeds on expiration of period of ninety
 days from the publication of notice under sub-section (2):
 Provided that any party having a claim to the property or the proceeds of sale thereof may apply to the court before
 the expiry of period of ninety days for leave to intervene and prove claims by filing an action before it or by filing a suit
 before any other appropriate court before the expiration of that period.
 (5) The court may extend period of ninety days on the application of any party which has instituted proceedings
 before any other court as provided in sub-section (4) or before the court of competent jurisdiction in India for obtaining
 a decree  against the property or proceeds of sale and the said court shall not disburse the sale proceeds or determine
 priority until thirty days after the disposal of the said suit or action and any appeal therefrom.
(6) Notwithstanding the provisions contained in sub-section (3) above, the court may determine priority among the
 parties and direct payment out of the sale proceeds on an application by any party which has obtained a decree or order
 against the ship or its property if the court is of the opinion that the claim of the applicant is entitled to priority over the
 claim in respect of which a suit or action has been instituted:
Provided that the court shall provide opportunity of hearing to all parties which may have made claims and filed
 suit or action against the property or sale proceeds within the prescribed period of ninety days or such other period
 which may be extended by the court before determining priority and directing disbursement out of the sale proceeds.

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
12. (1) The order of claims determining inter se priority in an admiralty proceeding shall be as follows:—
(a) a claim on any ship or its property including bunker where there is a maritime lien and action is proceeded
 against ship or its property;
(b) mortgages and charges on a ship or its property where an action is proceeded against ship or its property;
(c) all other claims.
(2) The priority among the claims inter se with respect to clause (a) of sub-section (1) shall be as follows:—
(a) claims for salvage of life, ship or its property provided that salvage of life shall take priority over other
 salvages;
(b) wages and other sums due to the master or members of crew of the ship in respect of their employment on
 the ship;
(c) (i) claims in respect of loss of life or personal injury having a direct connection with the operation of the
 ship;
(ii) claims for contribution for general average;
(iii) claims based on tort arising out of physical damage caused by the operation of the ship other than loss or
 damage to cargo containers and passengers’ effects carried on the ship;
(iv) bottomry;
(d) port, canal and other waterway dues and pilotage dues.
(3) The following principles shall apply in determining the priority of claims 
 inter se—
(a) prior claims shall exclude subsequent ones;
(b) if there are more claims than one in any category of priority, they shall rank pari passu;
(c) claims for various salvages shall rank in inverse order of time when the claims secured thereto accrue;
(d) claims for salvage, port dues, wages and claims in the nature of general average shall take priority over all
 other claims mentioned in clause (c) of sub-section (2) notwithstanding the fact that the claims arose earlier.
13. (1) Maritime lien shall attach to a ship or its property in respect of the following, namely:—
(a) claim for salvage of life, ship or its property;
(b) wages and other sums due to the master or members of crew of the ship in respect of their employment on
 the ship;
(c) claim for loss of life or personal injury having a direct connection with the operation of the ship;
(d) claim for contribution to general average;
(e) port, canal and other waterway dues and pilotage dues;
         (f) claim based on tort arising out of physical loss or damage caused by the operation of the ship other than the loss
 or damage to cargo, containers and passengers’ effects carried on the ship, the date of accrual of such maritime lien
 being the date on which the operations giving rise to the said claim were performed.
(2) No maritime lien shall attach to a vessel to secure a claim which arises out of or results from:—

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
(a) damage in connection with the carriage of oil or other hazardous or noxious substances by sea for which
 compensation is payable to the claimants pursuant to an international convention providing for strict liability,
 compulsory insurance or any other means of securing such claim;
(b) the radio-active properties or a combination of radio-active properties with toxic, explosive or other
 hazardous properties or nuclear fuel or radio-active products or waste.
(3) A maritime lien shall stand extinguished on the expiry of one year from the date of its creation under sub-
section (1):
Provided that the claim, if any, not barred by limitation, may be enforced by an action in personam:
Provided further that the period of one year may be extended further by the court if the claimant of lien is unable to
 commence an action to enforce the lien against the ship or its property for reasons beyond his control.
14. (1) In all actions under this Act, the nationality of the ship proceeded against shall be stated in the plaint, and if
 the ship is a foreign ship, notice or institution of the suit shall be given to the Consulate of the State to which the ship
 belongs.
(2) A statement of service of such notice or a statement that there is no such Consulate in the City, shall be made in
 the affidavit in support of any application for arrest of the ship.
(3) If a notice is served on the Consulate, a copy of the said notice shall be annexed to the affidavit.
(4) For the purposes aforesaid, it would be sufficient service if a notice is served on a Consul or any other officer in
 the Consulate.
 15. (1) The court may, as a condition of arrest of a ship, or for permitting an arrest already effected to be
 maintained, impose upon the claimant who seeks to arrest or who has procured the arrest of the ship an obligation to
 provide such security and upon such terms as may determine, for any loss or damage which may be incurred by the
 defendant as a result of the arrest, and for which the claimant may be found liable, including but not restricted to the
 following:—
(a) the arrest having been wrongful or unjustified; or
(b) excessive security having been demanded and provided.
(2) Where pursuant to sub-section (1), the security has been provided, the person providing such security may at
 any time apply to the court to have the security reduced, modified or cancelled.
CHAPTER III
PROCEDURE AND APPEALS
16. (1) The provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 shall apply in all the proceedings before the court in so
 far as they are not inconsistent with or contrary to the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder.
(2) The admiralty court shall have all the powers of a civil court in dealing with any application before it and of
 passing such interim and other orders as it may consider necessary and appropriate to protect the interests of the parties
 before it.
17. (1) In pursuance of the provisions of section 140 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, the Central Government
 shall appoint and publish in the Official Gazette a list of assessors with such qualifications or experience in admiralty

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 and maritime matters as may be prescribed.
(2) The appointment of assessors shall not be construed as a bar to the examination of expert witnesses by any of
 the parties in any admiralty proceeding.
(3) The Central Government may make rules prescribing the qualifications for assessors, the nature of duties to be
 performed by them and the fees to be paid, to them and other ancillary and incidental matters.
18. Notwithstanding anything contained in the provisions of any other law, it shall be open to the court in admiralty
 proceedings to refer, with the written consent of the parties, the entire dispute before it or such questions of law or fact
 raised thereby, as the court may consider necessary, to arbitration and dispose of the dispute or the questions, as the
 case may be, in conformity with the award unless modified by the court for reasons to be recorded in writing.
19. An appeal shall lie from any judgment, decree or final order of a single Judge of the High Court or any other
 court exercising admiralty jurisdiction under this Chapter to a Division Bench of the High Court.
CHAPTER V
MISCELLANEOUS
20. (1) The Central Government may, by notification in the Official Gazette, make rules for carrying out the
 provisions of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing power, the Central Government may
 regulate by rules, the practice and procedure of admiralty jurisdiction under this Act including fees, costs and expenses
 in such proceedings.
(3) Until rules are made under sub-section (2) by the Central Government, the existing rules governing the exercise
 of admiralty jurisdiction in the High Courts shall be applicable.
(4) Every rule made, under this Act shall be laid, as soon as may be after the rule is made, before each House of
 Parliament, while it is in session for a total period of thirty days which may be comprised in one session or in two or
 more successive sessions and if, before the expiry of the session immediately following the session or the successive
 sessions aforesaid both Houses agree in making any modification in the rule or both Houses agree that the rule should
 not be made, the rule  shall thereafter have effect only in such modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be; so,
 however, that any such modification or annulment shall be without prejudice to the validity of anything previously done
 under that rule.
21. (1) The following enactments are hereby repealed—
(a) the Admiralty Offences (Colonial) Act, 1849;
(b) the Admiralty Jurisdiction (India) Act, 1860;
(c) the Admiralty Court Act, 1861;
(d) the Colonial Courts of Admiralty Act, 1890;
(e) the Colonial Courts of Admiralty (India) Act, 1891;
(f) the provisions of Letters Patent, 1865 in so far as they apply to the admiralty jurisdiction of the Bombay,
 Calcutta and Madras High Courts.
(2) Notwithstanding the repeal of any of the enactments mentioned in sub-section (1), any rule, notification,
 regulation, bye-law or order previously issued shall, in so far as such rule, notification, regulation, bye-law or order is

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 not inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Act or any rule made under section 20, continue in force as if it had
 been issued or made under the corresponding provisions of this Act.
STATEMENT OF OBJECTS AND REASONS
The Admiralty Laws in India are based on the British Acts which are more than a century old. While the British
 Acts has been revised from time to time, the Admiralty laws applicable to India remained unchanged.
2. The maritime industry has been highlighting the need to update India's Admiralty Laws to be responsive to the
 needs of the Industry and to ensure that the maritime disputes are disposed of expeditiously and effectively.
3. The Supreme Court in its judgment in M.V. Elizabeth & Others Vs Harwan Investment and Trading Pvt. Ltd. (JT
 1992 (2) SC (5) advised on the need to codify and clarify the Admiralty laws of the country. It also advised to update
 these laws to serve the needs of the Shipping industry. The matter was, accordingly, referred to the Law Commission.
 Various issues including representations from the shipping industry were examined by the Law Commission. In its
 151st Report tabled in Parliament in August, 1995 the Law Commission recommended for enacting a new Admiralty
 Act of India. The present proposal is to give effect to the said recommendations.
4. The objective of the proposed Admiralty Bill is to consolidate and amend the law relating to Admiralty
 jurisdiction of Courts, legal proceedings in connection with ships, their arrest, detention and sale and matters connected
 therewith or incidental thereto. It is proposed to enlarge the scope of the legislation to cover claims pertaining to
 pollution damages, loss of life, personal injury, towage of ships, pilotage of ships, port dues, disbursement made by the
 ship owners and agents of ships.
5. The Bill, inter alia, provides for vesting of civil jurisdiction in respect of various types of claims pertaining to
 shipping industry in High Courts, power of Supreme Court to transfer any proceedings from one High Court to another,
 power of the High Court to confer Admiralty jurisdiction in consultation with the Chief Justice of India on any
 principal civil court of the State. It also spells out Admiralty jurisdiction and mode of exercising it, conditions in
 respect of claims in an action in rem, jurisdiction in personam, restrictions on entertainment of actions in cases
 pertaining to action in personam in collision of ships.
6. The Bill also makes provisions for vesting of rights on sale of ships, distribution of sale proceeds, order of
 priority of claim, maritime lien, procedure in respect of foreign ships and protection of owner, demise charterer,
 manager or operator of ships arrested. The Bill also provides for application of Code of Civil Procedure, assistance of
 assessors, reference to arbitration and appeal. It also confers upon the Central Government the power to make rules
 besides provision for repeal of the existing laws on the subject as recommended by the Law Commission.
7. The proposed Bill takes into account the needs of the maritime industry and will be conducive to the efficiency
 and development of the industry.
8. The Bill seeks to achieve the above stated objectives.
NEW DELHI;
The 31st March, 2005
T. R. BAALU.
MEMORANDUM REGARDING DELEGATED LEGISLATION
Sub-clause (3) of clause 17 of the Bill empowers the Central Government to make rules prescribing the
 qualifications for assessors, the nature of duties to be performed by them and the fees to be paid to them and other

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 ancillary and incidental matters. Sub-clause (1) of clause 20 empowers the Central Government to make rules for
 carrying out the provisions of the Bill. Sub-clause (2) of clause 20 empowers the Central Government to make rules to
 regulate the practice and procedure of admiralty jurisdiction including fees, costs and expenses in such proceedings.
 And all such rules made under the provisions of the Bill are required to be laid in Parliament.
The matters in respect of which rules may be made in accordance with the provisions of the Bill are matters of
 procedure and detail and it is not practicable to provide for them in the Bill itself. The delegation of legislative power
 is, therefore, of a normal character.
LOK SABHA
————
A
BILL
to consolidate and amend the law relating to the admiralty jurisdiction of courts, legal proceedings in connection with
 ships, their arrest, detention and sale and matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
————
(Shri T.R. Baalu, Minister of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways)
MINUTES     
XXXV
THIRTY-FIFTH MEETING
           
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 6 th June 2005 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S.S. Chandran
3. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
4. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
5. Smt. Ambika Soni
 
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anil Basu
7. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
8. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
9. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
10. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
11. Shri Samik Lahiri
12. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
13. Shri Ravindra Naik
 
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
            Shri Prashant Kumar Mishra, Additional Secretary & FA
            Dr. Nasim Zaidi, Joint Secretary
            Shri Sanjay Narayen, Joint Secretary
            Shri Sanjeev Kumar, Director
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
            Shri K. Ramalingam, Chairman
            Shri V.D.V. Prasad Rao, Member (Finance)
 
 
 
2.         At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee informed the Members that the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in
 consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha, has referred the Admiralty Bill, 2005, which was introduced in the Lok
 Sabha on the 11
th May, 2005 and is pending therein, to this Committee for examination and report within three
 months.  
3.         *                                  *                                              *         
4.         *                                  *                                              *
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 5.15 p.m. to meet again on 20
th June 2005.
_____________________________
* Relates to other matter.
XXXVII
THIRTY-SEVENTH MEETING
 
           
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesday, the 29 th June 2005 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
14. Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
15. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
16. Shri S.S. Chandran
17. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
 
LOK SABHA
18. Shri Ramdas Athawale
19. Shri Anil Basu
20. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
21. Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
22. Shri Samik Lahiri
23. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
24. Shri Ravindra Naik
25. Shri Manabendra Shah
26. Shri Dushyant Singh
27. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28. Shri Sartaj Singh
29. Shri Umakant Yadav
SECRETARIAT

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
            Shri Ajay Prasad, Secretary
Shri Prashant Kumar Mishra, Additional Secretary & FA
            Dr. Nasim Zaidi, Joint Secretary
            Shri Sanjay Narayen, Joint Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
            Shri K. Ramalingam, Chairman
            Shri V.D.V. Prasad Rao, Member (Finance)
            Shri A.K. Misra, Member (Planning)
2.         At the outset, the Committee held preliminary discussion on the Admiralty Bill, 2005.  After some discussion,
 the Committee decided to invite comments/suggestions from interested individuals/organisations on the Bill and
 directed the Secretariat to issue a Press Communiqué accordingly.  The Committee also decided to hear the Secretary,
 Department of Shipping in connection with the subject at its next meeting to be held on the 8
th July 2005.
3.         *                                  *                                  *
4.         *                                  *                                  *
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 5.00 p.m. to meet again on 8
th July 2005.
_________________________
* Relates to other matter.
XXXVIII
THIRTY-EIGHTH MEETING
 
           
The Committee met at 2.00 p.m. on Friday, the 8 th July 2005 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1.   Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kamal Akhtar
3. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4. Shri Janardhana Poojary
5. Smt. Ambika Soni
 
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anil Basu
7. Shri Adhir Ranjan Chowdhury
8. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
9. Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
10. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
11. Shri Samik Lahiri
12. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
13. Shri Ravindra Naik
14. Shri Sartaj Singh
15. Shri Umakant Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SHIPPING
            Shri D.T. Joseph, Secretary
Shri Pradeep Kumar, Director (IWT)
Shri G.S. Sahni, Director General (S)
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE(LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT)
Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary and Legal Counsel
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE MINISTRY OF LAW AND JUSTICE     (LEGAL AFFAIRS)
Shri K.D. Singh, Additional Secretary
2.         At the outset, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Department of Shipping on the Admiralty Bill
 2005.   The Secretary, while presenting his views, also detailed the background of the Bill.  The Committee called for
 written explanation from the Department explaining the delay involved in bringing out the Admiralty Bill, 2005.    The
 Committee also directed the Secretariat to forward a Questionnaire on the Bill to the Department of Shipping and
 obtain replies thereon.  The Committee also decided to hear the views of the experts/organisations on the Bill during its
 next meetings. 
3.         A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
4.         *                                  *                                  *
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 2.50 p.m.
_____________________________
* Relates to other matter.
XXXIX
THIRTY-NINTH MEETING
 
           
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Monday, the 18th July 2005 in Room No. '63', First Floor, Parliament House,
 New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.   Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kamal Akhtar
3. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4. Shri S.S. Chandran
5. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
6. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
7. Smt. Ambika Soni
 
LOK SABHA
8. Shri Ramdas Athawale
9. Shri Anil Basu
10. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
11. Shri Samik Lahiri
12. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
13. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
14. Shri Umakant Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVE OF INDIAN NATIONAL SHIPOWNERS ASSOCIATION:
Shri Dipankar Halder -  Company Secretary, Shipping Corporation of India
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE FOREIGN OWNERS REPRESENTATIVE & SHIPMANAGER
 ASSOCIATION:
                        Capt. R.K. Sood
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE PORT, DOCK & WATERFRONT WORKER'S FEDERATION OF INDIA:
                        Shri.V.K. Balakrishnan, Vice-President
2.         The Committee heard the views of the above-mentioned representatives of the various stakeholders on the
 Admiralty Bill 2005.   The Committee also called for written comments from the representatives within 10 days
 period.   
3.         A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
4.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 4.40 p.m.
XL
FORTIETH MEETING
 
           
The Committee met at 12.00 noon on Tuesday, the 19
th July 2005 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.   Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kamal Akhtar
3. Shri Janardhana Poojary
4. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
5. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
 
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Ramdas Athawale
7. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
8. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
9. Shri W.Wangyuh Konyak
10. Shri Ravindra Naik
11. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
12. Shri Sartaj Singh
13. Shri Umakant Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVE OF ALL INDIA PORT & DOCK WORKERS' FEDERATION:
Shri P.M. Mohammed Haneef, General Secretary
2.         The Committee heard the views of the representative of the All India Port & Dock Workers' Federation on the
 Admiralty Bill 2005.   The Committee also called for written comments from the representative.    
3.         A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
4.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 12.40 p.m.
II
SECOND MEETING

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
            The Committee met at 11.00 a.m. on Wednesday, the 31 st August 2005 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.   Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri S. S. Chandran
3. Shri Janardhana Poojary
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Anil Basu
5. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
6. Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
7. Shri Dip Gogoi
8. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
9. Shri Samik Lahiri
10. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
11. Shri Manabendra Shah
12. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
13. Shri Chengara Surendran
14. Shri Umakant Yadav
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary   
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
I.REPRESENTATIVE OF THE INDIAN NATIONAL PORT & DOCK WORKER'S FEDERATION:
Shri P.K. Samantray, President
 
II.REPRESENTATIVES OF THE FOREIGN OWNERS REPRESENTATIVES & SHIPMANAGERS
 ASSOCIATION:       
Capt. K. Guha, Chairman
Shri Zarir P. Bharucha, Advocate, Supreme Court of India
 
III.REPRESENTATIVE OF THE PORT, DOCK & WATERFRONT WORKER'S FEDERATION OF INDIA:
Shri P. Krishnaiah, President
 
IV.REPRESENTATIVE OF THE IRON STEEL SCRAP & SHIPBREAKERS ASSOCIATION OF INDIA:
                              Shri P.S. Nagarsheth, President
2.         The Committee heard the views of the above mentioned representatives of the various organisations on the
 Admiralty Bill 2005.   The Committee also called for written comments from the representative of the Indian National
 Port & Dock Worker's Federation within fifteen days.   
3.         A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
4.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 1.40 p.m.
III
THIRD MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 10.30 a.m. on Friday, the 9 th September 2005 in Committee Room 'A', Ground Floor,

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
2. Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
3. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4. Shri S. S. Chandran
5. Shri Janardhana Poojary
6. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
7. Shrimati Ambika Soni
LOK SABHA
 
8. Shri Ramdas Athawale
9. Shri Raj Babbar
10. Shri Anil Basu
11. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
12. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
13. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
14. Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
15. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
16. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
17. Shri Manabendra Shah
18. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
19. Shri Chengara Surendran
20. Shri Umakant Yadav
SECRETARIAT
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary  
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
MEMBERS OF SWEDEN'S PARLIAMENTARY COMMITTEE ON CULTURE AFFAIRS
1.         Mr. Lars Wegendal      -  Leader of the Delegation
2.
                  Mr. Paavo Vallius
3.                  Ms. Gunilla Tjernberg
4.                  Mr. Nikos Papadopoulos
5.                  Ms. Cecilia Wikstrom
6.                  Ms. Anna Lindgren
7.                  Ms. Gunilla Carlsson
8.                  Ms. Rossana Dinamarca
9.                  Mr. Peter Pedersen
10.              Ms. Margareta Palsson
 
OFFICIALS ACCOMPANING THE DELEGATION
 
Ms. Igna Eriksson Fogh, Ambassdor
Ms. Karin Josephson, Secretary to the Committee
Ms. Charlotte Rundelius, Clerical assistant to the Committee     
           
OFFICER FROM THE MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS:
Shri V. Ashok, Joint Secretary

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE COMPANY OF MASTER MARINERS OF INDIA:    
Capt. J.S. Gill, Chairman
 
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE NATIONAL UNION OF SEAFARERS OF INDIA:
Dr. Shanti G. Patel, President
2.         *                                  *                                  *
3.         *                                  *                                  *
4.         *                                  *                                  *
5.         The Committee then re-assembled after tea-break and heard the views of the Capt. J.S. Gill, Chairman of the
 Company of Master Mariners of India and Dr. Shanti G. Patel, President of the National Union of Seafarers of India on
 the Admiralty Bill 2005.  
6.         A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
7.         The Committee while considering its future programme decided to meet next on 19
th September 2005 at 3.00
 P.M. to have views of the Secretary, Department of Shipping on the Admiralty Bill 2005.
8.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 12.45 p.m.
______________________________
* Relates to other matter.
V
FIFTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 10.30 a.m. on Wednesday, the 28 th September 2005 in Committee Room 'C', Ground
 Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.   Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Shri S. S. Chandran
4. Shri Janardhana Poojary
5. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
6. Shrimati Ambika Soni
 
LOK SABHA
7. Shri Ramdas Athawale
8. Shri Anil Basu
9. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
10. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
11. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
12. Shri Samik Lahiri
13. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
14. Shri Gingee N. Ramachandran
15. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
16. Shri Chengara Surendran
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary  

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
MEMBERS OF SOUTH AFRICAN PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON SOCIAL
 DEVELOPMENT AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT
1.   Ms. Ntombizodwa Pauline Magwaza -  Leader of the Delegation
2. Ms. Petronella Catherine Duncan
3. Mr. Max Ozinsky
4. Mr. Mzwandile Manjiya
5. Mr. Johan Pieter Gelderblom
6. Mr. Patric Cecil Mckenzie
7. Mr. Zandisile Christopher Stall
8. Ms. Lindiwe Nisabo    
9. Ms. Paulina Wilhelmina Cupido
 
OFFICER ACCOMPANING THE DELEGATION
Mr. Jacob Moroe, Second Secretary : Political (Africa High Commission)                    
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SHIPPING
            Shri D.T. Joseph, Secretary
            Shri Susheel Kumar, Joint Secretary
            Shri G.S. Sahni, Director-General, Shipping
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT
            Dr. Sanjay Singh, Joint Secretary & Legislative Counsel
REPRESENTATIVE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS
            Shri R. Raghupati, Joint Secretary & Legal Advisor
 
2.         *                                  *                                  *
3.         *                                  *                                  *
4.         *                                  *                                  *
5.         The Committee then re-assembled after tea-break and heard the views of the Secretary, Department of Shipping
 on the Admiralty Bill 2005.   The Committee also discussed the comparative statement containing the provisions of the
 Admiralty Bill 2005 vis-à-vis the observation made by the stakeholders/public  and the comments of the Department of
 Shipping thereon.  While discussing the statement, the Chairman of the Committee directed to the Secretary,
 Department of Shipping to furnish clause-by-clause detailed comments on the points contained in the Memoranda
 within 15 days, which has already been forwarded to the Department of Shipping.    The Committee also decided to
 hear the Secretary, Department of Shipping once again in future.
6.         A verbatim record of the proceedings of the Meeting was kept.
7          The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 1.15 p.m.
 
XV
FIFTEENTH  MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Friday, the 17 th March 2006 in Committee Room 'A’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Nilotpal Basu – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Kamal Akhtar
3. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary

99th Report of Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
file:///D/responive/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/99threport.htm[22-10-2018 12:11:25]
4. Shri Janardhana Poojary
5. Shri Rama Muni Reddy Sirigireddy
 
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Raj Babbar
7. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
8. Shri Ravindra Naik Dharavath
9. Shri W. Wangyuh Konyak
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Umakant Yadav
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Sham Sher Singh, Joint Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Director
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary  
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
2.         *                                              *                                              *   
3.         The Committee then took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Admiralty Bill, 2005; the Inland Vessels
 (Amendment) Bill, 2005; and the Carriage by Road Bill, 2005.  The Committee also considered the draft Report on the
 said Bills and adopted the same with minor modifications.
 
4.         The Committee also authorized the Chairman to nominate the Members for presentation of all the four reports to
 the Parliament on 21st March, 2006.
 
5.         *                                              *                                              *.
6.                  The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 10.30 a.m.
_______________________
* Relates to other matter.
 
 
* Nominated w.e.f. 14.04.2005 vice Shri Dara Singh Chauhan.
* Nominated w.e.f. 8.3.2006  vice Smt. Ambika Soni.