 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2022/ Chaitra, 1944 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
320
_ 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTIETH REPORT  
Development of Tourism Infrastructure in the country   
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28th March, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th March, 2022) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTIETH REPORT  
 
Development of Tourism Infrastructure in the country   
 
 (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 28th March, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 28th March, 2022) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2022/ Chaitra, 1944 (Saka) 
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. INTRODUCTION       ii 
3. ACRONYMS               iii 
 4. REPORT                                1-16 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   17-23 
6. MINUTES        24-29 
    7. ANNEXURES        30-45 
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

i 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2021-22) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Ms. Jahanvi, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Twentieth Report on  ‘Development of Tourism 
Infrastructure in the country’. 
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Tourism on the subject 
on 1st November, 2021.  
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Tourism for 
placing before the Committee , the material and information desired in connection with the 
subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  25th 
March, 2022.   
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
March 25, 2022                                                        Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Chaitra 4, 1944 (Saka)                                      Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

ACRONYMS 
 
 
ASEAN Association of Southeast Asian Nations 
ASI Archaeological Survey of India 
ATOAI Adventure Tour Operators Association of India 
BSF Border Security Force 
CBSP Capacity Building for Service Providers 
CFA Central Financial Assistance 
CPT Cochin Port Trust 
CPWD Central Public Works Department 
CRF Central Road Fund 
CSR Corporate Social Responsibility 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
GDP Gross Domestic Production 
GFR General Financial Rules 
ITA International Tourist Arrivals 
ITDC India Tourism Development Corporation 
IWAI Inland Waterways Authority of India 
J&K Jammu and Kashmir 
JCP Joint Check Post 
MAC Museum and Arts Consultancy 
MEA Ministry of External Affairs 
MbPT Mumbai Port Trust 
MICE Meetings Incentives Conferences and Exhibitions 
MoRTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MoR Ministry of Railways 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MPT Mormugao Port Trust 
NCSM National Council of Science Museums 
NGMA National Gallery of Modern Art 
NHAI National Highways  Authority of India 
PRASHAD Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual Heritage 
Augmentation Drive 
SAARC South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation 
SAI Sports Authority of India 
SDS Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
SLREF Socio Legal Research and Education 
TAACHT The Arts and Cultural Heritage Trust 
US$ Unites States Dollars 
UT Union Territory 
VPT Visakhapatnam Port Trust 
WAPCOS Water and Power Consultancy Services (India) Limited 
 
 
 
 
iii 

1 
REPORT 
 
  India is an all year around tourist country, offering anything and everything to tourists 
from an incredible geographical diversity of lofty mountains , golden  beaches, deserts and serene  
backwaters to secluded islands , an ancient and mesmerizing cultura l history reflected in its 
myriad historical monuments including the seventh wonder of the world, the Taj Mahal, palaces 
and forts, places of interests for all religions, ancient cities, diverse art forms and lively local 
bazaars, the most diverse cuisine in the world which changes every 100 km, all of which combine 
to make India a vibrant, eclectic fusion of the traditional and the modern, the historical and the 
contemporary. Every scene evokes countless imaginations and every sight, a million more sights.  
From the northern most Jammu & Kashmir proclaimed to be ―heaven on earth‖ to the rapturously 
acclaimed ―God‘s own country‖ Kerala in the south, from the lofty peaks of the Himalayas to the 
rolling hills of the Eastern and Western Ghats, from the lush Gang etic plains to the sandy dunes 
of Rajasthan, the landscape of India is as ever-changing and diverse as its culture. 
 
“If I were to look over the whole world to find out the country most richly endowed with all the 
wealth, power, and beauty that nature can bestow – in some parts a paradise on earth – I 
should point to India.” 
~ German Philosopher Max Mueller 
 
2. There is no fall from Eden, no divide of matter and spirit in ancient Indian cosmology. 
Instead, nature flows from the Creator  as a fountain of divinit y into space and time.   India has an 
outstanding and unmatched diversity of religions, languages, and cultures. It has beautiful green 
crops, it has many rivers flowing through  its fertile soil, it has variety in flora and fauna, and it 
has the great  Himalayas as its majestic crown. The Sun plays hid e and seek in its  hill stations, 
providing relief from scorching heat.  Its western region has a potpourri of Ghats, caves while the 
southern region boasts of exquisitely carved temple architecture and beauteous beaches. India has 
something for ever yone, history buffs , spiritual seekers, adventure tourists, wildlife enthusiasts, 
tourist shoppers, luxury travelers and backpackers.   
3. Indian tourism industry contributes to around 4.7 percent of the country's GDP and 
provides employment to around 3 1.8 million of inhabitants.  By attracting a huge number of both 
foreign and domestic tourists for professional as well as holiday purpose s, the tourism industry in 
India has displayed remarkable growth. India has popularized the entire South Asia as one of the 
most spectacular tourist hotspots. International tourists bring significant income, foreign currency, 
and jobs. The more investment is there  to improve the infrastructure in the tourists  hotspots, the 

2 
more at tractive the destination will be, for both domestic and foreign  tourists. Given that the 
investment in tourism and hotel industry/ recreation facilities can mobilize the resources of the 
entire society, India‘s share in Foreign/ Inter national Tourist Arrivals at a mere 1.59% [India 
Tourism Statistics 2021] is certainly low given the huge tourist potential India has in its resources. 
It is thus evident that the vast tourism potential of India remains untapped. Foreign tourism is of 
considerable value to the I ndian Tourism and Hospitality Se ctor as is evinced by the fact that 
foreign exchange earnings from tourism in India amounted to Rs. 50,136 Crores (US$ 6.958 
Billion) in the year 2020. [Source: India Tourism Statistics, 2021].  
4. Infrastructure—both physical and soft – serves as the arteries of the industry and 
amplifies the  travel and tourism competitiveness . A country‘s tourism automatically becomes 
attractive if there are all possible alternative and reasonably priced transport and lodging facilities 
which streamlines the overall travel experience for tourists. Given that the investment in the 
tourism and hotel industry/ recreation facilities is a substantial amount requiring the mobilization 
of the resources of the entire society,  in this backdrop, the Committee decided to take up the 
subject ‗Development of Tourism Infrastructure in the country‘ for examination and report 
thereon. 
5. In this co nnection, the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture heard the views of the Ministry of Tourism on the subject at  
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi on 1 st November, 2021. Major points discussed during the 
deliberations of the Committee are:-  
(i) Tourism Infrastructure Development Schemes; 
(ii) Swadesh Darshan Scheme (SDS); 
(iii) PRASHAD Scheme; 
(iv) Assistance to Central Agencies Scheme; 
(v) Adopt a Heritage Scheme (in collaboration with Ministry of Culture and ASI); 
(vi) Development of Iconic Tourist Sites; 
(vii) Land availability and statutory clearance; 
(viii) Central Road Fund (CRF); 
(ix) Generating revenue and overall tourist satisfaction; and 
(x) Promotion and Publicity 
 
TOURISM INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT SCHEMES 
6. Tourism infrastructure is the basis of tourism development and utilization of existing 
destination resources. Tourism infrastructure includes  ancillary and complementary facilities, 

3 
equipment, systems, processes, and resources necessary for functioning of every tourist 
destination, to meet the needs of the tourist and to increase their satisfaction during their stay at 
the destination. A Tourist destination is made accessible to the tourists through rail , road, air and 
port connectivity. Tourism industry st imulates investments in new infrastructure, most of which 
improves the living conditions of local residents as well as generate tourist satisfaction. 
7. The infrastructure for tourism includes basic infrastructure like airports, railways, roads, 
waterways, electricity, water supply, drainage, sewerage , solid waste disposal systems, and 
amenities like accommodation, restaurants, recreational facilities, and shopping facilities . The 
Ministry of Tourism is the nodal agency to formulate national policies and pro grammes for the 
development and promotion of tourism. Augmentation of quality tourism infrastructure 
throughout the country is a key area of functioning of the Ministry of Tourism. More than 50% of 
the Ministry's expenditure on Plan Schemes is incurred for development of quality tourism 
infrastructure at various tourist destinations and circuits in the States/UTs. To facilitate p lanning 
for sustainable develo pment of Tourism Infrastructure  and provide basic amenities in a balanced 
manner, the Ministry of Tourism with due emphasis has launched schemes like Swadesh Darshan 
Scheme (SDS), Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual, Heritage Augmentation Drive 
(PRASHAD), Adopt a Heritage Site (in collaboration with Ministry of Culture and ASI), 
Development of Iconic Tourist Sites with a goal to attract tourists from every nook and corner of 
the world towards various Indian destinations through thema tic circuits, pilgrimage sites and 
excellent amenities at the hotspots.  
 
SWADESH DARSHAN SCHEME (SDS) 
8. Envisioned to synergize with other Government of India initiatives like ‗Swachh Bharat 
Abhiyan,‘ Skill India,‘ ‗Make in India‘ etc., the Ministry launched the Swadesh Darshan Scheme 
(SDS) in January, 2015 with objectives to: 
 Position tourism as a major engine of economic growth and job creation;  
 Develop circuits having tourist potential in a planned and prioritized manner;  
 Promote cultural and heritage value of the country to generate livelih oods in the identified 
regions; 
 Enhance the tourist attractiveness in a sustainable manner by developing world class 
infrastructure in the circuit/destinations;  
 Follow community based development and pro-poor tourism approach;  

4 
 Create awareness among the local communities about the impor tance of tourism for them in 
terms of increased income sources, improved living standards and o verall development of 
the area; 
 Create employment through active involvement of local communities; 
 Harness tourism potential for its effects in employment gener ation and economic 
development; 
 Make full use of the potential and advantages in terms of available infrastructure, national 
culture and characteristic strong points of each and every region throughout the country by 
development of theme-based circuits; and 
 Develop tourist facilitation services to enhance visitor experience/satisfaction. 
 
9. The site-wise detailed tourism infrastructure inventory is an important part of the DPR 
so as to get the idea of the existing tourism infrastructure, its adequacy and envis aged tourist flow 
in the future and the necessary action required to mitigate the infrastructure gap. Selection and 
evaluation criteria is divided into three levels based on the need  assessment and stakeholder 
interaction for SDS: 
I. Ministry of Tourism 
II. Central Agencies 
III. State Governments/ UT Administrations. 
10. Concept presentation would be made to MoT highlighting the potential, need, impact of  
the project by the agency proposing the p roject and its alignment to the Detailed Perspective Plan 
(DPP) prepared by the ministry. After in-principle approval, site evaluation would be carried out 
and Conceptual Detailed Project Report (DPR) would be prepared. 
11. Fifteen thematic circuits have been identified  namely: North -East India Circuit, 
Buddhist Circuit, Himalayan Circuit, Coastal Circuit, Krishna Circuit, Desert Circuit, Tribal 
Circuit, Eco Circuit, Wildlife Circuit, Rural Circuit, Spiritual Circuit, Ramayana Circuit, Heritage 
Circuit, Tirthankar Circui t and Sufi Circuit  for development of 76 sanctioned projects for 
development across 31 States and UTs with a budgetary allocation of Rs. 5526.71 crores for the 
year 2021 -22. The projects are being implemented in 917 Tier -II and Tier -III destinations. 16 
projects have been completed while 30 projects have been completed upto 80% and above. The 
various projects sanctioned under the Scheme are given at Annexure –I. The major interventions 
under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme are:- 
 
 
 

5 
Nature of facilities No of facilities 
Log Hut Facilities 16 
Tourist Facilitation Centres 20 
Craft Haats/ Souvenir Shops 12 
Open Air Theatre / Sound & Light 20 
Cafeteria  and Way Side Amenities 20 
Convention Centres/ Exhibition Centres 8 
Museum/ Interpretation Centre 9 
Adventure Activities 15 
Wellness Centre 7 
Helipad 4 
Golf Course 1 
Beach/ Ghat Development 6 
 
12. The Ministry further informed the Committee that the Swadesh Darshan Scheme is 
currently under review and therefore no pro posals are under consideration.  State Governments 
have been advised that proposals may be submitted once the review is finished  and new 
guidelines are issued. 
13. The Committee observes that infrastructure for tourism includes basic 
infrastructure components like roads, railways, airports, water, electricity, hotels etc.  The 
Committee recommends that interconnectivity of roads, ports, airports, railways and 
waterways should be part of the infrastructure planning process while preparing the 
Detailed Appraisal Report of any Tourism project.  Service roads and linkage of nearby 
places should also be included. Transport infrastructure plays a vital role in connecting 
origin and destination locations while ensuring safe, comfortable and efficient 
transportation to tourists. While evaluating trave l experiences, transport is one of the main 
factors which has a great bearing on trip satisfaction. The Committee therefore 
recommends that multi -modal transport should be envisaged while preparing DPR for 
facilitating tourism in the country.  This will no t only facilitate free flowing traffic but also 
serve to make tourist destinations more attractive and accessible. 
14. The Committee observes that in its earlier report, it had noted that only one of the 
fifteen thematic circuits under the Swadesh Darshan Sche me had been completed till that 
time and had recorded its disappointment about the slow progress in the projects under the 
Scheme. Now, since all the projects under the Scheme are being reviewed, the Committee 
urges the Ministry to complete the review in a  time bound manner so that the Scheme may 

6 
be completed without undue delay. Since the projects under the Scheme are spread 
throughout the country and involve local bodies, the Committee recommends the Ministry 
to hear the views of all stakeholders involved  or ensure that the agencies implementing the 
Scheme do so, and take due cognizance of local sentiment so that once streamlined the 
projects under the Scheme would be able to be implemented without any hindrance. The 
Committee also recommends that the yardstick to review the project should only be whether 
it would be truly effective in increasing the tourist potential of the area. 
15. The Committee also suggests that the Ministry should build a systematic approach 
towards restoration/ conservation of historic structures under the SDS Scheme as buildings 
of very rich historic background add character, distinctiveness, and a sense of identity to the 
places they belong to . The Committee desires t hat the Ministry promote heritage through 
branding and use it as a potential factor in tourism development. 
16. The Committee is of the opinion that  in order to successfully implement tourism 
infrastructural Schemes,  the state governments should carry out due diligence in 
consultation with the nodal agencies during conceptualizing the projects and ensure the 
completion of tendering process of projects in a time bound manner to enable the Ministry 
to release funds for such projects. The Committee recommends the Ministry to create a 
mechanism for proactive project monitoring and reviewing the same to avoid delays in 
implementation as per agreed schedules and in compliance with the approved DPRs. 
 
PRASHAD SCHEME 
17. This Nati onal Mission on Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual, Heritage  
Augmentation Drive (PRASHAD ) was launched in the year 2015  to develop tourism 
sustainability and harness pilgrimage tourism so that it directly affects and multiplies the 
employment generation and economic developmen t.  The vision of this Scheme is to rejuvenate 
the pilgrimage and spiritual experience of the tourists as well as preserve the soul of the 
pilgrimage/heritage city. 
18. PRASHAD covers Ghats, Tourist Reception/ Facilitation Centers, Public Amenities, 
Open-air Amphitheatres, Museums, Medicine Centers, external infrastructure such as water 
supply, sewage, drainage, electricity, roads and use of renewable source of energy in the sites, 
namely, Ama ravati, Srisailam, Simhachalam and Annavaram (Andhra Pradesh), Parashuram 
Kund (Lohit Distt., Arunachal Pradesh), Kamakhya and Srikrishnaguru Sevashram, Nasatra 
(Assam), Patna and Gaya (Bihar), Balmeshwari Devi Temple (Rajnandgaon, Chhattisgarh), St. 
Bom J esus Church  (Goa), Dwarka, Somnath and Ambaji in Banaskantha (Gujarat), Panchkula 

7 
for development of Gurudwara Nada Saheb and Maa Mansha Devi Temple (Haryana), Maa 
Chintpurni (Una, Himachal Pradesh), Hazratbal, Katra and Sundarbani in Rajauri district (Ja mmu 
& Kashmir), Deogarh and Parasnath (Jharkhand), Chamundeshwari Devi (Mysuru District, 
Karnataka), Guruvayoor, St. Thomas International Shrine, Cheraman Juma Mosque (Kerala), 
Chawkihang Vihara (Leh), Omkareshwar and Amarkantak (Madhya Pradesh), Trimbakes hwar 
(Maharashtra), Charanthala Durga Temple - Babedpara, Nartiang Shakti Temple, Nongsawlia 
Church- Sohra, Madan Air Nar Sacred Pool Near Jowai (Meghalaya), Aizawl, Ailwang, 
Khawrulian and Lunglei -Serkawn (Mizoram), Cathedral of Kohima, Noksen Church, Miss ion 
Compound, Aizuto, Molungkimong, Zunheboto Mission Compound and Vankhosung -Wokha 
(Nagaland), Puri (Odisha), Amritsar and Ropar for development of Chamkaur Sahib (Punjab), 
Ajmer (Rajasthan), Yuksom (Sikkim), Kanchipuram, Vellankani and Rameshwaram (Tamil  
Nadu), Jogulamba Devi Temple and Bhadrachalam (Telangana) Tripura Sundari - Agartala 
(Tripura), Varanasi, Mathura and Ayodhya (Uttar Pradesh), Bad rinath, Kedarnath and Gangotri -
Yamunotri (Uttarakhand) and Belur (West Bengal). 
19. 61 sites in 29 States have been identified for development of tourism infrastructure and 
37 projects have been sanctioned in 24 States and UTs for an amount of Rs. 1214.19 crores under 
this scheme as given in Annexure – II. 17 projects have been completed and 13 projects are in the 
pipeline in 11 states. The major interventions under this Scheme are: - 
Admissible Components 
Tourist Reception / Facilitation Centers 
Public Conveniences, wayside amenities 
Site Illuminations, development / Landscape 
Restoration/ conservation of historic structure/ monuments 
Museums, interpretation centers and socio-cultural spaces 
Open-Air Theatres/ Amphitheaters 
Ghat Developments, Shoreline development/ Rejuvenation of natural water bodies 
First Aid Centers/ Indian Medicines Systems 
Craft Haats/ Bazaars/ Souvenir Shops/ Cafeteria/ Food stalls 
Use of renewable sources of energy/ clean technology/ e-vehicles 
External infrastructure such as water supply, sewerage, drainage, electricity and roads 
 
20. The Ministry informed that some of the challenges faced in execution of the tourism 
infrastructure projects were a delay in land availability and statutory clearances, delayed tendering 
and slow project implementation by State Governments.   The Ministry opined that the challenges 
could be overcome if Stat e Governments carried out due diligence to check land availability and 

8 
statutory clearances and consulted nodal agencies while conceptualizing the projects , ensure 
completion of tendering processes in a time bound manner and have a mechanism for proactive 
project monitoring and reviewing the same to avoid delays in implementation as per agreed 
schedule and in compliance with the approved DPR.  
21. The Committee observes that religious tourism is unlike leisure tourism in as much 
that in building a religious tourism product, it is essential to build in community 
participation at the given location. The participation of local nodal agencies along with State 
Governments in the PRASHAD Scheme is therefore of utmost importance and  the Ministry 
should endeavour to make all efforts to ensure their involvement and not leave it to the 
responsibility of the State Governments alone.  
22. The Committee is of the view religious tourists come from all economic strata and 
there is enormous need for hotels especially in the Budget and Economy categories. The 
Committee is also of the opinion that local families willing to provide homemade food and 
homestay facilities in the ir abodes to the tourists should be identified and given training by 
the Ministry in handling the process  to promote local Indian cuisine among foreign tourists 
and at international level. The Committee is sanguine that such a novel step will unlock job 
opportunities for Indian families and generate resources for huge revenue potential in the 
Indian tourism sector. 
23. The Committee recommends that improvement of reception/ facilitation center for 
tourists be done with the help of travel agencies and local busi nesses promoting their 
products and hotel-booking tickets at lowest prices. 
24. The Committee is of the opinion that the rejuvenation of natural water bodies 
under the PRASHAD Scheme and building them as tourist hubs available on cheaper 
tickets will attract tourists searching for a tranquil beach-like affordable and less crowded 
environment, which  will greatly benefit the Indian tourism industry  and promote 
sustainable growth as well.  
25. The Committee desires that the Ministry should reinforce sustainable development 
in Indian tourism sector through the PRASHAD Scheme by  transitioning to  the use of  
renewable energy features such as photovoltaic electricity, waste water re-use and rainwater 
recovery, which not only will reduce the environmental impacts, but also generate benefits 
for local communities. 
26. The Committee is of the view that approach to these destinations should be 
strengthened by proper roads, transport facilities, ticket booking facilities, lodging  and 
other logistic support like reception center s etc. The role of states becomes very crucial in 

9 
this aspect. The Committee recommends that the Ministry shoul d play a proactive role to 
provide such facilities so as to attract tourists from every nook and corner of the world. 
 
ASSISTANCE TO CENTRAL AGENCIES SCHEME 
27. The Scheme of ‗Assistance to Central Agencies ‘ (also called Central Financial 
Assistance (CFA)) was proposed to provide financial assistance to the Central Agencies owning 
the assets in Tourism industry  as well as encourage the State Tourism Departments to take major 
IT initiatives as marketing and publicizing their tourist products  so that they develop and upgrade 
basic tourism infrastructure with the aim to: 
a) Improve efficiency at Govt. of India tourist Offices and the Ministry Headquarters 
b) Improve Tourist information to tourists 
a) Improve Tourist facilitation 
28. This Scheme has 55 projects in pipeline with budgetary allocation of Rs. 629.06 Crores 
and has 19 completed projects  till date. The details o f projects sanctioned under this Scheme are 
given in Annexure – III. 
29. The responsibilities of Central Agencies will be to: 
(i) Ensure land availability for development; 
(ii) Implement Rehabilitation package in shifting dwellings or commercial units or provide 
assistance for construction of Tourist Reception Centres to house the displaced shops; 
(iii) Ensure any restoration work is done by experts/specialized agencies only. 
(iv) Submit an Undertaking for providing the necessary assistance to make the land available 
& other allied facilities related to execution of the project. Other authorities/ stakeholder 
shall also submit a letter of authorisation to the Central agency to implement the show on 
their behalf. 
(v) Follow Challenge Method Guidelines to envisage an innovative project and submit the 
project report for consideration. This is to encourage induction of new technology, 
promotion of unique solutions, provide for financially sustainable solutions, and to bring 
in finance and expertise in project execution. This method is to provide transparency and 
induction of Capital for infrastructure where innovative  proposals are received. This is to 
ensure certainty of success under this Methodology. 
(vi) It would be mandatory for the Central Agency who is recipient of the funds released from 
this scheme to put up a signage of the Ministry of Tourism  with the logo ‗Incredible 
India‘ stating that the project has been funded by the Ministry of Tourism. 

10 
30. The Financial sanction by the Ministry of Tourism under this Scheme would be released 
in three installments to the implementing/ central agencies: 
i. First installment – 50% of the Central Financial Assistance amount at the time of sanction 
ii. Second installment- 30% of the sanctioned amount on submission of Utilization Certificate 
of the first installment 
iii. Third installment- 20% of the sanctioned amount on submission of final Utilization 
Certificate by the imple menting agency after the entire work is completed along with an 
affidavit for Management of Assets created and an undertaking for maintenance of the 
same as per applicable GFR. 
31. The holistic development of tourism infrastructure at all tourist destinations 
through Central Financial Assistance to the States/ UTs may require convergence of 
resources, expertise and experience for maintenance and management after development 
since many of them are under the jurisdictions of Central Agencies like ASI, Port Trusts  in 
India, ITDC etc. and the overall development of places of tourist interest under their control 
may not be possible through their own resources. In order to remove these bottlenecks, the 
Committee suggests the Ministry to devise mechanisms to build infrastructure with the 
assistance of state governments and other agencies to bring a world standard spot with all 
the amenities. 
32. The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry is facilitating development of 
lighthouses as tourist hotspots to provide panoramic view of scenic  coastline and marking 
historic importance of their times through developing museums , open-air amphitheatres, 
cafeteria, children’s parks, and gardens in or around the lighthouses. 
ADOPT A HERITAGE SCHEME (in collaboration with Ministry of Culture and ASI) 
33. ‗Adopt a Heritage: Apni Dharohar, Apni Pehchaan‘ is a collaborative effort between the 
Ministry of Tourism, Ministry of Culture, Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), and State/UTs 
Governments launched i n 2017, aiming to provide basic amenities including cleanliness, public 
convenience, drinking water, ease of access, signages, TFC, Souvenir Shops, Cafeteria etc.  to 
make sites tourist-friendly and increase its potential by enhancing tourist experience.  
34. The Scheme envisages that selected public sector companies, private sector companies, 
and individuals will develop tourist amenities at heritage sites  and would become ‗Monument 
Mitra‘ by adopting the sites essentially under their Corporate Social Responsi bility (CSR) 
activity. They would also look after the operations and maintenance of the adopted site initially 
for the 5 years subject to review at any time.  29 MoUs have been signed for 29  sites under this 
Scheme as shown in Annexure IV. The main objectives of this Scheme are : 

11 
 Developing basic tourism infrastructure. 
 Inclusive tourist experience for heritage site/monument or tourist site. 
 Promoting cultural and heritage value of the country to generate livelihoods. 
 Enhancing the tourist attractiveness in a sustainable manner through world-class 
infrastructure at the site. 
 Creating employment through the active involvement of local communities. 
 Harnessing tourism potential for its effects in employment generation and economic 
development. 
 Developing sustainable tourism infrastructure and ensuring proper operations and 
maintenance. 
35. Monuments are categorized as green, blue and orange on the basis of tourist footfall and 
visibility e.g. Red -Fort and Taj Mahal have regular  tourist footfall throughout the year, they are 
green category monuments while Purana Quila is a blue category monument . ‗Monument Mitras‘ 
opting for a green category monument will have to choose at least one orange or blue category 
site. 
36. A Joint Committe e (composition given below in the table) would undertake the 
monitoring or services such as rates at snack and souvenir shops , decision on costing of items for 
semi-commercial activities and grievance redressal at adoptaheritage-tour@gov.in: 
1. Nodal Department (ASI/ State 
Archaeology Deptt.) 
Chairperson 
2. Ministry of Culture Member 
3. State Govt Representatives Member 
4. Ministry of Tourism Member 
5. Monument Mitra Member 
 
37. The Committee observes that the Ministry, with the assistance of business houses 
under the CSR, should build public amenities like public toilets, drinking water facility, ease 
of access for differently-abled citizens, standardized signage, surveillance system, night 
viewing facilities etc. in order to increase tourist footfall in the country. 
38. The Committee also observes that Souvenir shops selling miniatures of historical 
monuments are very popular among tourists in foreign  countries. However, these types  of 
souvenir shops are very few in India and lack in marketing skills . The Committee would, 
therefore, recommend that the Government ought to take initiatives to help establish 
genuine outlets for the sale of miniature replicas of historical monuments near such 
monuments. 

12 
39. The Committee notes the immense contribution of arts and crafts through various 
fairs and festivals. Haats present a colourful picture where small artisans can nurture their 
crafts businesses.  The Committee is of the opinion that d evelopment of haats should be 
facilitated along with branding them as the go -to places on festive occasions, which will also 
lengthen the tourist seasons, extend peak seasons or introduce a new season into a 
community. The Committee believes that such fairs and festivals not only serve to attract 
tourists but also contribute in maintaining regional/ community identity.  
 
DEVELOPMENT OF ICONIC TOURIST SITES 
40. To develop Iconic Tourist Sites  in a holistic manner with focus on issues related to 
destination connectivity, skill development, local c ommunity involvement, and bringing  private 
investment through promotion and branding, the Ministry of Tourism identified  17 sites namely 
Taj Mahal & Fatehpur Sikri (Uttar Pradesh), Ajanta & Ellora (Maharashtra), Humayun‘s Tomb, 
Red Fort and amphitheater; Qutub Minar (Delhi), Colva (Goa), Amer F ort (Rajasthan), Somnath 
Temple and amphitheater ; Dholavira (Gujarat), Khajuraho (Madhya Pradesh), Hampi 
(Karnataka), Mahabalipuram (Tamil Nadu), Kaziranga (Assam), Kumarakom (Kerala) and 
Mahabodhi Temple (Bihar). 
41. Three more sites are proposed to be included in the Development of Iconic Tourist Sites, 
namely, Konark Sun Temple (Odisha), Kevadia ( Gujarat), and Golconda Fort (Telangana).  
Tourism spurs economic development while at the same time contributes to the preservation of 
the environment if planned and implemented in an environmentally and socially friendly manner. 
If tourism potentials are properly harnessed, it is flexible enough  to achieve sustainable 
development for any developing nation 
42. Tourism and hospitality industry is one of the driving forces in the global economy 
and has wider environmental and social impacts . However, no process has been initiated to 
prepare a detailed p roject report for Development of Iconic Tourist Sites . The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to prepare a master plan  for timely implementation of the said 
Scheme in order to increase tourist footfall by providing tourists with the richness and 
diversity of Iconic destinations across the country. 
43. The Committee  applauds the Ministry’s efforts to include more and more 
destinations in its scheme for Development of Iconic Tourist Sites to harness the vast 
potential of Indian tourism sector and  enhance India’s soft power. The Committee 
recommends that promoting the Scheme  and taking it further with infrastructural,  

13 
technological and skill development  as well as branding and marketing to  attract private 
investment will encourage tourism growth in unexplored areas of the country. 
44. The Committee feels that the creative use of audio tours has been instrumental in 
attracting a new museum audience by breaking down language barriers and helping people 
learn without resorting to the signboards and information bulletins. The Committee would 
like the Ministry to include the audio -tour guides at historical sites and museums by 
identifying and tailoring content towards the appropriate audience, from children to history 
lovers; foreign visitors to art experts in this age of podcast. 
 
LAND AVAILABILITY AND STATUTORY CLEARANCE  
45. Tourism development is highly dependent on the availability, quality, quantity and 
characteristics of land, and a plethora of issues like  land acquisition, encroachment,  use of land 
for recreation, conservation, overcrowding and disturbance of local people etc. tend to be 
magnified in developing countries like India where economic transformation and urbanization are 
rapidly going on. 
46. The Committee feels that efficient combination of sea and land accessibility is 
necessary - if not vital – to port activity and to the expansion of wider supply chain systems. 
Taking into account the  land and maritime networks  of the country , the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should focus on d eveloping port cities for lower logistics 
costs, better infrastructure, and jobs  in the Indian maritime sector . The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry take h elp of the local administration and  district authorities 
for removal of encroachments at coastline and port peripheries. 
 
CENTRAL ROAD FUND (CRF) 
47. The Central Road Fund (CRF) is used to mainta in State roads interconnecting S tates, 
railway under/over bridges, rural roads, National Highways and Waterways.  The Committee was 
informed that the process to develop highways and roads out of CRF money was ongoing process 
and some of the connectivity projects had already been undertaken by NHAI. 
48. Connectivity of tourist destinations with roads and railways decisive ly influences 
other branches of a country’s economy, without which the travel and tourism industry will 
not reach a desired place of development. The Committee expresses concern over the delay 
in formulation of master plan for roads -railway-port-air connec tivity across the country 
and desires the Ministry to set up a timeline to speed up the process. 

14 
49. The Committee feels that there is an emerging need for enhanced connectivity of 
tourist spots with road -rail-water-air, which will boost the competitiveness of  India in the 
world tourism market if proper funding and development is expedited in connectivity 
projects. 
50. The Committee is also concerned about lack of funding assistance to states in 
capacity building, which is a major hurdle in elevating India in the r anking of countries 
with maximum tourist satisfaction. 
 
GENERATING REVENUE AND OVERALL TOURIST SATISFACTION 
51. Proper revenue -generation in a developing country leads to innovation – in the 
production, services and pricing sectors, opens new gates of employment, resource sharing, 
education, empowerment of general people, improvement of political relations and 
reforming the system of food and aid distribution.  The Committee feels that identification 
and development of revenue-generating domestic tourist destinations in States is necessary. 
52. The Committee is concerned about the privately owned  culturally rich buildings, 
which are a part of Indian heritage, and therefore, recommends that an assessment and pre-
listing of such properties/ buildings be carried out and proper steps be taken towards their 
preservation. 
53. The Committee is of the view that making Tourist Information Centers accessible 
to tourists and installing signages around tourist spots will go a long way in enhancing total 
satisfaction level of the tourists, hence, it should be taken care of. 
 
PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY 
54. During the course of the oral evidences tendered in the meeting of 1st November, 2021, a 
number of issues like increasing India‘s share of global tourism market, promoting Indian tourism 
products and destinations vis -à-vis competition, functions of India Tourism Overseas Offices and 
jurisdictions covered by them, and role of  overseas diplomatic missions for promotion of Indian 
Tourism, were discussed. The Committee also deliberated upon a host of other issues like (i) 
India's low share in international tourist arrivals (ii) Measures required to be taken to tap the full 
potential of India's tourism sector and establish India as a major international tourist attraction. 
(iii) Promotion of Indian tourism in overseas markets and role and efficacy of overseas tourist 
offices and Indian Embassies and Missions in promoting Indian tou rism. (iv) Sale of miniature 

15 
replicas of historical monuments, souvenirs, and handicraft items. (v) Cleanliness and hygienic 
conditions at tourist destinations. (vi) Promotion of cruise tourism (vii) Contribution of tourism to 
India's GDP (viii) Promotion of MICE tourism (ix) Promotion of brand "Incredible India" in 
source markets. (x) Strengthening of India's role in various multi -lateral and bilateral forum. (xi) 
Partnership with SAARC and ASEAN countries to promote Buddhist circuit, Ramayana Circuit, 
Himalayan Circuit, etc. (xii) Industry -to-Industry partnerships in foreign countries to promote 
tourism fairs, exhibitions, and advertising campaigns. (xiii) Production and distribution of 
publicity material (xiv) Focus on 3-Ts, i.e., Trade, Tourism and Technology to boost tourism, etc.  
55. Based on scrutiny of the submissions made by way of Background Note and Oral 
Evidences tendered, the Committee makes the following recommendations: 
56. The Committee observes that m odern tourism industry is a key driver of socio -
economic growth through creation of jobs, infrastructure development, and the export 
revenues earned because it has potential to stimulate other sectors through its backward 
and forward linkages and cross -sectoral synergies with airlines, transport, basic 
infrastructure like hotels, guides, road connectivity , agriculture, handicrafts etc.  The 
Committee notes that despite the fact that India offers a diverse portfolio for travel, tourism 
and hospitality, the s hare of its International tourist Arrivals (ITAs) is merely 1.59% in 
2021. With the obvious that there is an increased competition among various countries to 
attract more foreign visitors, it is an imperative need for India to prepare a better 
marketing strategy by hiring marketing experts to attract foreign visitors.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should formulate an integrated marketing and 
promotional strategy in collaboration with a professional body to carry out market research 
to identify expectations, requirements, psychographics, demographics and many other 
aspects of a foreign tourist willing to travel to India, thereby enabling to create a strategic 
plan to revive the pandemic-hit tourism sector. The Committee feels that one of the effective 
steps in this direction would be re -casting the website of the Ministry in an attractive and 
user-friendly manner. 
57. Since seaports are the wealth generators of a country and the beauty of landscape 
just increases during Monsoon season, the  Committee is of the view that promoting Seaport 
tourism, Cruise tourism and Monsoon tourism will give a boost to the Indian tourism 
industry.   The Committee also is of the opinion that there is tremendous scope for 
popularizing seaplane services especially among the more affluent travelers who may prefer 
to avoid crowded airport terminals and among adventure tourists.  Seaplane services will 
benefit travelers by providing air connectivity to numerous remote, religious places and 
unexplored places adjacent to water bodies.  

16 
58. The Committee finds that hearing about a place that has never been explored 
before generates a sense of awe and curiosity am ong foreign and domestic travelers alike, 
pulling them towards that place. Curiosity plays a c rucial role in shaping attitude, 
motivation and influencing tourist loyalty. In order to magnify the role of curiosity and 
boost tourism market, the Committee rec ommends that various unexplored/ lesser -known 
tourist spots may be added/ highlighted on the homepage of the Ministry’s website portal to 
attract more tourists to such places. 
59. Tourism Police: The Committee notes that Safety and security of the tourists bot h 
domestic and foreign are paramount importance for projecting the country as a safe haven 
for tourism. There are occasional reports of incidents of misbehaviour, cheating, 
malpractices etc. at various tourist places. This gives a bad publicity for that pa rticular 
tourist destination and the country as a whole. Therefore, it is essential that the Government 
should take all the available measures to provide a safe environment for the tourists. The 
Committee therefore recommends that in every tourist place, t here should be a provision 
for tourism police, as a separate wing of the police force to provide safety and security to the 
tourists. The Committee is fully aware that law and order is a part of the State subject. 
Therefore, the Ministry of Home Affairs should issue an advisory to all the State 
Governments to create tourism police in their State to provide safety and security to the 
tourists in tourist destinations. The Ministry of Tourism should also take up the matter with 
all the State Governments for creation of separate tourism police in their respective States. 
The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the  Ministry of Home Affairs and 
the Ministry of Tourism and the feedback received from the State Governments  in this 
regard. 
* * *  
 
 
 

17 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
SWADESH DARSHAN SCHEME (SDS) 
 The Committee observes that infrastructure for tourism includes basic 
infrastructure components like roads, railways, airports, water, electricity, hotels etc.  The 
Committee recommends that interconnectivity of roads, ports, airports, railways and 
waterways should be part of the infrastructure planning process while preparing the 
Detailed Appraisal Report of any Tourism project. Service roads and linkage of  nearby 
places should also be included. Transport infrastructure plays a vital role in connecting 
origin and destination locations while ensuring safe, comfortable and efficient 
transportation to tourists. While evaluating travel experiences, transport is one of the main 
factors which has a great bearing on trip satisfaction. The Committee therefore 
recommends that multi -modal transport should be envisaged while preparing DPR for 
facilitating tourism in the country.  This will not only facilitate free flowi ng traffic but also 
serve to make tourist destinations more attractive and accessible. 
(Para 13) 
The Committee observes that in its earlier report, it had noted that only one of the 
fifteen thematic circuits under the Swadesh Darshan Scheme had been comple ted till that 
time and had recorded its disappointment about the slow progress in the projects under the 
Scheme. Now, since all the projects under the Scheme are being reviewed, the Committee 
urges the Ministry to complete the review in a time bound manner  so that the Scheme may 
be completed without undue delay. Since the projects under the Scheme are spread 
throughout the country and involve local bodies, the Committee recommends the Ministry 
to hear the views of all stakeholders involved or ensure that th e agencies implementing the 
Scheme do so, and take due cognizance of local sentiment so that once streamlined the 
projects under the Scheme would be able to be implemented without any hindrance. The 
Committee also recommends that the yardstick to review the project should only be whether 
it would be truly effective in increasing the tourist potential of the area.  
(Para 14) 
The Committee also suggests that the Ministry should build a systematic approach 
towards restoration/ conservation of historic structur es under the SDS Scheme as buildings 
of very rich historic background add character, distinctiveness, and a sense of identity to the 
places they belong to. The Committee desires that the Ministry promote heritage through 
branding and use it as a potential factor in tourism development. 
(Para 15) 

18 
 
The Committee is of the opinion that in order to successfully implement tourism 
infrastructural Schemes, the state governments should carry out due diligence in 
consultation with the nodal agencies during conceptua lizing the projects and ensure the 
completion of tendering process of projects in a time bound manner to enable the Ministry 
to release funds for such projects. The Committee recommends the Ministry to create a 
mechanism for proactive project monitoring an d reviewing the same to avoid delays in 
implementation as per agreed schedules and in compliance with the approved DPRs. 
(Para 16) 
PRASHAD SCHEME 
The Committee observes that religious tourism is unlike leisure tourism in as 
much that in building a religiou s tourism product, it is essential to build in community 
participation at the given location. The participation of local nodal agencies along with State 
Governments in the PRASHAD Scheme is therefore of utmost importance and the Ministry 
should endeavour t o make all efforts to ensure their involvement and not leave it to the 
responsibility of the State Governments alone.  
(Para 21) 
The Committee is of the view religious tourists come from all economic strata and 
there is enormous need for hotels especially in the Budget and Economy categories. The 
Committee is also of the opinion that local families willing to provide homemade food and 
homestay facilities in their abodes to the tourists should be identified and given training by 
the Ministry in handling the process to promote local Indian cuisine among foreign tourists 
and at international level. The Committee is sanguine that such a novel step will unlock job 
opportunities for Indian families and generate resources for huge revenue potential in the 
Indian tourism sector. 
(Para 22) 
The Committee recommends that improvement of reception/ facilitation center for 
tourists be done with the help of travel agencies and local businesses promoting their 
products and hotel-booking tickets at lowest prices. 
(Para 23) 
The Committee is of the opinion that the rejuvenation of natural water bodies 
under the PRASHAD Scheme and building them as tourist hubs available on cheaper 
tickets will attract tourists searching for a tranquil beach -like affordable and less crowded 
environment, which will greatly benefit the Indian tourism industry and promote 
sustainable growth as well.  

19 
(Para 24) 
The Committee desires that the Ministry should reinforce sustainable 
development in Indian tourism sector through the PRASHAD Scheme by transitioning to 
the use of renewable energy features such as photovoltaic electricity, waste water re -use and 
rainwater recovery, which not only will reduce the environmental impacts, but also generate 
benefits for local communities. 
(Para 25) 
The Committ ee is of the view that approach to these destinations should be 
strengthened by proper roads, transport facilities, ticket booking facilities, lodging and 
other logistic support like reception centers etc. The role of states becomes very crucial in 
this aspect. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should play a proactive role to 
provide such facilities so as to attract tourists from every nook and corner of the world. 
(Para 26) 
ASSISTANCE TO CENTRAL AGENCIES SCHEME 
The holistic development of tourism infrastructure at all tourist destinations 
through Central Financial Assistance to the States/ UTs may require convergence of 
resources, expertise and experience for maintenance and management after development 
since many of them are under the jurisdiction s of Central Agencies like ASI, Port Trusts in 
India, ITDC etc. and the overall development of places of tourist interest under their control 
may not be possible through their own resources. In order to remove these bottlenecks, the 
Committee suggests the Ministry to devise mechanisms to build infrastructure with the 
assistance of state governments and other agencies to bring a world standard spot with all 
the amenities. 
(Para 31) 
The Committee is pleased to note that the Ministry is facilitating developmen t of 
lighthouses as tourist hotspots to provide panoramic view of scenic coastline and marking 
historic importance of their times through developing museums, open -air amphitheatres, 
cafeteria, children’s parks, and gardens in or around the lighthouses. 
(Para 32) 
ADOPT A HERITAGE SCHEME (in collaboration with Ministry of Culture and ASI) 
The Committee observes that the Ministry, with the assistance of business houses 
under the CSR, should build public amenities like public toilets, drinking water facility, ease 
of access for differently -abled citizens, standardized signage, surveillance system, night 
viewing facilities etc. in order to increase tourist footfall in the country. 
(Para 37) 

20 
 
The Committee also observes that Souvenir shops selling miniatures of hi storical 
monuments are very popular among tourists in foreign countries. However, these types of 
souvenir shops are very few in India and lack in marketing skills. The Committee would, 
therefore, recommend that the Government ought to take initiatives to h elp establish 
genuine outlets for the sale of miniature replicas of historical monuments near such 
monuments. 
(Para 38) 
The Committee notes the immense contribution of arts and crafts through various 
fairs and festivals. Haats present a colourful picture where small artisans can nurture their 
crafts businesses. The Committee is of the opinion that development of haats shoul d be 
facilitated along with branding them as the go -to places on festive occasions, which will also 
lengthen the tourist seasons, extend peak seasons or introduce a new season into a 
community. The Committee believes that such fairs and festivals not only serve to attract 
tourists but also contribute in maintaining regional/ community identity.  
(Para 39) 
DEVELOPMENT OF ICONIC TOURIST SITES 
Tourism and hospitality industry is one of the driving forces in the global economy 
and has wider environmental and so cial impacts. However, no process has been initiated to 
prepare a detailed project report for Development of Iconic Tourist Sites. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry to prepare a master plan for timely implementation of the said 
Scheme in order to incre ase tourist footfall by providing tourists with the richness and 
diversity of Iconic destinations across the country. 
(Para 42) 
The Committee applauds the Ministry’s efforts to include more and more 
destinations in its scheme for Development of Iconic Tourist Sites to harness the vast 
potential of Indian tourism sector and enhance India’s soft power. The Committee 
recommends that promoting the Scheme and taking it further with infrastructural, 
technological and skill development as well as branding and marketing to attract private 
investment will encourage tourism growth in unexplored areas of the country. 
(Para 43) 
 
The Committee feels that the creative use of audio tours has been instrumental in 
attracting a new museum audience by breaking down languag e barriers and helping people 
learn without resorting to the signboards and information bulletins. The Committee would 

21 
like the Ministry to include the audio -tour guides at historical sites and museums by 
identifying and tailoring content towards the appropriate audience, from children to history 
lovers; foreign visitors to art experts in this age of podcast. 
(Para 44) 
LAND AVAILABILITY AND STATUTORY CLEARANCE  
The Committee feels that efficient combination of sea and land accessibility is 
necessary - if not vital – to port activity and to the expansion of wider supply chain systems. 
Taking into account the land and maritime networks of the country, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should focus on developing port cities for lower logistics 
costs, b etter infrastructure, and jobs in the Indian maritime sector. The Committee also 
recommends that the Ministry take help of the local administration and district authorities 
for removal of encroachments at coastline and port peripheries. 
(Para 46) 
CENTRAL ROAD FUND (CRF) 
Connectivity of tourist destinations with roads and railways decisively influences 
other branches of a country’s economy, without which the travel and tourism industry will 
not reach a desired place of development. The Committee expresses co ncern over the delay 
in formulation of master plan for roads -railway-port-air connectivity across the country 
and desires the Ministry to set up a timeline to speed up the process. 
(Para 48) 
The Committee feels that there is an emerging need for enhanced c onnectivity of 
tourist spots with road -rail-water-air, which will boost the competitiveness of India in the 
world tourism market if proper funding and development is expedited in connectivity 
projects. 
(Para 49) 
The Committee is also concerned about lack o f funding assistance to st ates in 
capacity building, which is a major hurdle in elevating India in the ranking of countries 
with maximum tourist satisfaction. 
(Para 50) 
GENERATING REVENUE AND OVERALL TOURIST SATISFACTION 
Proper revenue -generation in a deve loping country leads to innovation – in the 
production, services and pricing sectors, opens new gates of employment, resource sharing, 
education, empowerment of general people, improvement of political relations and 
reforming the system of food and aid dis tribution. The Committee feels that identification 
and development of revenue-generating domestic tourist destinations in States is necessary. 

22 
(Para 51) 
The Committee is concerned about the privately owned culturally rich buildings, 
which are a part of Indian heritage, and therefore, recommends that an assessment and pre-
listing of such properties/ buildings be carried out and proper steps be taken towards their 
preservation. 
(Para 52) 
The Committee is of the view that making Tourist Information Centers acc essible 
to tourists and installing signages around tourist spots will go a long way in enhancing total 
satisfaction level of the tourists, hence, it should be taken care of. 
(Para 53) 
PROMOTION AND PUBLICITY 
The Committee observes that modern tourism industry is a key driver of socio -
economic growth through creation of jobs, infrastructure development, and the export 
revenues earned because it has potential to stimulate other sectors through its backward 
and f orward linkages and cross -sectoral synergies with airlines, transport, basic 
infrastructure like hotels, guides, road connectivity, agriculture, handicrafts etc.  The 
Committee notes that despite the fact that India offers a diverse portfolio for travel, t ourism 
and hospitality, the share of its International tourist Arrivals (ITAs) is merely 1.59% in 
2021. With the obvious that there is an increased competition among various countries to 
attract more foreign visitors, it is an imperative need for India to prepare a better 
marketing strategy by hiring marketing experts to attract foreign visitors.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should formulate an integrated marketing and 
promotional strategy in collaboration with a professional body to carry out market research 
to identify expectations, requirements, psychographics, demographics and many other 
aspects of a foreign tourist willing to travel to India, thereby enabling to create a strategic 
plan to revive the pandemic-hit tourism sector. The Committee feels that one of the effective 
steps in this direction would be re -casting the website of the Ministry in an attractive and 
user-friendly manner. 
(Para 56) 
Since seaports are the wealth generators of a country and the beauty of landscape 
just increases during Monsoon season, the Committee is of the view that promoting Seaport 
tourism, Cruise tourism and Monsoon tourism will give a boost to the Indian tourism 
industry.   The Committee also is of the opinion that there is tremendous scope for 
popularizing seaplane services especially among the more affluent travelers who may prefer 
to avoid crowded airport terminals and among adventure tourists.  Seaplane services will 

23 
benefit travelers by providing air connectivity to numerous remote, religiou s places and 
unexplored places adjacent to water bodies.  
(Para 57) 
The Committee finds that hearing about a place that has never been explored 
before generates a sense of awe and curiosity among foreign and domestic travelers alike, 
pulling them towards that place. Curiosity plays a crucial role in shaping attitude, 
motivation and influencing tourist loyalty. In order to magnify the role of curiosity and 
boost tourism market, the Committee recommends that various unexplored/ lesser -known 
tourist spots may be added/ highlighted on the homepage of the Ministry’s website portal to 
attract more tourists to such places. 
(Para 58) 
Tourism Police: The Committee notes that Safety and security of the tourists both 
domestic and foreign are paramount importance for p rojecting the country as a safe haven 
for tourism. There are occasional reports of incidents of misbehaviour, cheating, 
malpractices etc. at various tourist places. This gives a bad publicity for that particular 
tourist destination and the country as a who le. Therefore, it is essential that the 
Government should take all the available measures to provide a safe environment for the 
tourists. The Committee therefore recommends that in every tourist place, there should be 
a provision for tourism police, as a s eparate wing of the police force to provide safety and 
security to the tourists. The Committee is fully aware that law and order is a part of the 
State subject. Therefore, the Ministry of Home Affairs should issue an advisory to all the 
State Governments to create tourism police in their State to provide safety and security to 
the tourists in tourist destinations. The Ministry of Tourism should also take up the matter 
with all the State Governments for creation of separate tourism police in their respective  
States. The Committee may be apprised of the action taken by the Ministry of Home 
Affairs and the Ministry of Tourism and the feedback received from the State 
Governments in this regard. 
(Para 59) 
***** 
 
 
  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 

24 
 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 AM on Monday, the 1st November, 2021 in the Main 
Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh – Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
3. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
4. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
5. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Anto Antony 
7. Shri Margani Bharat 
8. Shri Tapir Gao 
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
10. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
11. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
12. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
13. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
14. Shri Prince Raj 
15. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
16. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
17. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
18. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
19. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint SecretarY 
 Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
Witnesses: - 
Ministry of Tourism 
(i) Shri Arvind Singh, Secretary, Ministry of Tourism; 
(ii) Shri G. Kamala Vardhana Rao, DG (Tourism); 
(iii) Shri Rakesh Kumar Verma, JS (Tourism); 

25 
 
(iv) Ms. Rupinder Brar, Additional Director General (Tourism); 
(v) Ms. Anita Baghel, Additional Director General (Parliament); 
(vi) Shri Gyan Bhushan, Economic Adviser (Tourism); 
(vii) Shri B.B. Dash, Director; 
(viii) Shri Fakhre Alam, Director; 
(ix) Ms. Kimjamlhing Changloi, Director; 
(x) Ms. Annabella Arya, Deputy Director General; and 
(xi) Shri Shreevats Sanjay, Deputy Director General 
 
* * * 
 At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of  the Committee to the meeting  of 
the Committee and apprised them of the agenda of the meeting i.e. (i) oral evidence of the  
Secretary, M/o Tourism on the subjects - “Development of Tourism Infrastructure in the  
Country” and   *   *   *   * 
 
(i) Oral Evidence of Secretary, Ministry of Tourism 
 
2.  Thereafter, the Chairman invited the Secretary, Ministry of  Tourism to make a 
presentation on the above subjects which are instrumental in promoting tourism in the country. 
The Secretary, M/o Tourism, during the course of his deposition, made a detailed  presentation on 
Tourism Infrastructure Development Schemes. While making the presentation, he elaborated on 
the Schemes of the Ministry viz. ‘Swadesh Darshan,’ ‘PRASHAD,’ ‘Assistance to Central 
Agencies’ and ‘Adopt  a Heritage.’ He informed that the  ‘Swadesh Darshan’ Scheme aimed to 
develop a theme -based integrated tourism infrastructure  with 15 thematic circuits identified for 
development of 76  sanctioned projects across 31  States and UTs with a budgetary allocation  of 
Rs. 5526.71 Crore for the  year 2021 -22 and  that the Ministry completed projects in Tehri 
(Uttarakhand), Khajuraho (M.P.) and Thenzawl  (Mizoram) under the Scheme. He further stated 
that the PRASHAD Scheme aims to develop  Ghats, tourist Reception/ Facilitation Centers, 
Public amenities, open-air amphitheatres, museums, medicine centers, external infrastructure 
such as water supply, sewage, drainage,  electricity, roads and use of renewable source. The 
Secretary also informed the Committee  that under the PRASHAD Scheme, 61 sites have been 
identified for development of tourism  infrastructure and 37 projects have been sanctioned for 
an amount of Rs. 1214.19 crore. 
 
 
 
_____________________________________ 
*Relates to other matters 
 

26 
 
3. Highlighting the challenges faced in execution of the tourism infrastructure projects, the  
Secretary made a mention of delay in land availability and statutory clearances, delayed tendering 
and slow project implementation by State Governments. The Secretary also apprised the 
Committee that the Scheme ‘Assistance to Central Agencies’ aims to develop and upgrade 
basic tourism infrastructure with 55 projects in pipeline with budgetary allocation of Rs. 629.06 
Crore and has 19 completed projects in its lap till date. The Committee was further informed that 
‘Adopt a Heritage Scheme’ aimed at increasing awareness about heritage, also involving 
communal participation and development of hard and soft interventions at the sites and under 
which 27 MoUs (Memorandum of Understanding) have been signed for 27 sites. 
3. * * * * * 
 
4. * * * * * 
  
5. * * * * * 
 
6. Members of the Committee raised various queries on need of tourist infrastructure  
development in various States, identification and development of revenue-generating domestic 
tourist destinations in States; establishing Souvenir Shops selling miniatures of  historical 
monuments, development of Haats, identifying and training local families willing to provide 
local homemade food and  homestay facilities  in their abodes  to the tourists,  creating revenue 
potential through promotion of Seaport tourism, Cruise tourism and Monsoon tourism, 
assessment and pre-listing of privately–owned culturally rich buildings and taking steps towards 
their preservation, assessment of tourist offices abroad, making Tourist Information Centers 
accessible, lack of funds for assistance to the States in capacity  building, etc. some of the queries 
were replied to by the Secretary. The Chairman then  directed that written replies to the queries 
which remained unanswe red may be sent to the  Secretariat within a week.  The Chairman then 
directed that  written replies  to the queries  which remained unanswered  may be sent to the  
Secretariat within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
(ii) Witness:- 
*   *  * 
 
7.  *   *   *   * 
8.   *   *   *   * 
 
___________________________________ 
*Relates to other matters 
 

27 
 
9.   *   *   *   * 
10.   *   *   *   * 
11.   *   *   *   * 
12.   *   *   *   * 
 
(The witnesses then concluded their remarks/ withdrew) 
 
13. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 
14. The meeting adjourned at 3:20 P.M 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*Relates to other matters

28 
 
XIX 
NINETEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:15 A.M. on Friday, the 25 th March, 2022 in Committee  Room 'A', 
Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh - Chairman 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
4. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
5. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
8. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
9. Shri Margani Bharat 
10. Shri Tapir Gao 
11. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
12. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
13. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
14. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
15. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary  
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
 At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the  
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt the 
draft Reports on   *   *   * and ‘Development of Tourism 
Infrastructure in the country.’ 
 
___________________________________ 
*Relates to other matters 
 
 

29 
 
2.  The Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Reports and after a brief  discussion, 
adopted the same with minor changes. The Committee authorised its Chairman to  decide the names 
of Members who may present/lay the report to both Houses of Parliament on 28th March, 2022. 
3.  *   *   *   * 
4.  *   *   * The Committee authorized the 
Chairman of the Committee to seek necessary approval from the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha for 
the purpose. 
5. The meeting adjourned at 11:00 A.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
___________________________________ 
*Relates to other matters 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30  
ANNEXURE-I 
 
 
THE DETAILS OF PROJECTS SANCTIONED UNDER SWADESH DARSHAN SCHEME 
(Rs. in Crores) 
S.No State/ UT Name of the 
Circuit 
Name of the Project Amount 
Sanctioned 
Amount 
released 
Year 2014-15 
1 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
North-East 
Circuit 
Development of Circuit at 
Bhalukpong- Bomdila and Tawang. 
49.77 39.81 
2 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Coastal Circuit Development of Circuit at Kakinada - 
Hope Island - Coringa Wildlife 
Sanctuary-Passarlapudi - Aduru- S 
Yanam- Kotipallyanjuna 
67.84 67.84 
Total of 2014-15 117.61 107.65 
Year 2015-16 
3 Manipur North-East 
Circuit 
Development of Circuit at Imphal- 
Khongjom 
72.23 61.32 
4 Sikkim North-East 
Circuit 
Development of Circuit linking Rangpo 
(entry) - Rorathang- Aritar- 
Phadamchen- Nathang-Sherathang- 
Tsongmo- Gangtok-Phodong- 
Mangan-  Lachung-Yumthang- 
Lachen- Thangu-Gurudongmer- 
Mangan- tamil-TuminLingee- Singtam 
(exit). 
98.05 92.77 
5 Uttarakhand Eco Circuit Development of Circuit at Tehri- 
Chamba- Sarain around Tehri Lake. 
69.17 65.71 
6 Rajasthan Desert Circuit Development of Shakambhari Mata 
Temple, Sambhar Salt Complex, 
Devyani Kund, Sharmistha Sarovar, 
Naliasar and Other Destinations. 
50.01 51.17 
7 Nagaland Tribal Circuit Development of Circuit at Peren- 
Kohima- Wokha. 
97.36 87.62 
8 Madhya 
Pradesh 
Wildlife 
Circuit 
Development of Circuit at Panna- 
Mukundpur- Sanjay- Dubri- 
Bandhavgarh- Kanha- Mukki- Pench. 
92.22 81.15 
9 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Coastal Circuit Development of Nellore, Pulikat Lake,  
Ubblamadugu waterfalls, Nelapattu 
Bird Sanctuary, Mypadu Beach, 
Ramatheertham. 
49.55 47.76 
10 Telangana Eco Circuit Development of Circuit in 
Mahaboobnagar Distt.s (Somasila, 
91.62 87.04 
 

31  
   Singotam, Kadalaivanam, 
Akkamahadevi, Egalanpanta, 
Farahabad, Uma Maheshwaram, 
Mallelatheertham) 
  
11 Kerala Eco Circuit Development of Pathanamthitta - 
Gavi- Vagamon- Thekkady 
76.55 61.24 
12 Mizoram North East 
Circuit 
Integrated Development of Thenzawl 
& South Zote, Distt.s Serchhip and 
Reiek 
92.26 87.65 
13 Assam Wildlife 
Circuit 
Development of   Manas–   Pobitora– 
Nameri– Kaziranga– Dibru– 
Saikhowa. 
94.68 86.51 
14 Puducherry Coastal Circuit Development of Dubrayapet, Arikamedu 
China Veerampattinam, Chunnabmar, 
Nallavadu, Manapet, Kalapet, French 
Quarter, Tamil 
Quarter and Yanam 
58.44 61.82 
15 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
North East 
Circuit 
Integrated Development of Jirigaon, 
Nafra, Seppa, Pappu, Pasa, Pakke 
Valleys, Lumdung, Lafang Sohung 
Lake, Taro Yar, New Sagalee, Ziro, 
Yomcha 
96.72 84.24 
16 Tripura North East 
Circuit 
Development of North East Circuit: 
Agartala - Sipahijala - Melaghar - 
Udaipur - Amarpur- Tirthamukh- 
Mandirghat– Dumboor- NarikelKunja- 
Gandachara– Ambassa 
82.85 68.58 
17 West Bengal Coastal Circuit Development of Beach Circuit: Udaipur- 
Digha- Shankarpur- Tajpur- 
Mandarmani- Fraserganj-Bakkhlai- 
Henry Island 
85.39 68.31 
18 Chhattisgarh Tribal Circuit Development of Jashpur- Kunkuri- 
Mainpat- Ambikapur- Maheshpur - 
Ratanpur- Kurdar-Sarodadadar- 
Gangrel- Kondagaon– 
NathiyaNawagaon- Jagdalpur- 
Chitrakoot- Tirthgarh. 
96.10 84.81 
19 Maharashtra Coastal Circuit Development of Sindhudurg Coastal 
Circuit (Shiroda Beach, Sagareshwar,  
Tarkarli, Vijaydurg (Beach & Creek),  
Devgad (Fort & Beach), Mitbhav, 
Tondavali, Mocehmad and Nivati 
Fort). 
19.06 16.43 
Total of 2015-16 1322.26 1194.13 
Year 2016-17 
 

32  
20 Goa Coastal Circuit Development of Sinquerim-Baga, 
Anjuna- Vagator,  Morjim-Keri, 
Aguada Fort and Aguada Jail. 
97.65 92.76 
21 J&K Himalayan 
Circuit 
Integrated Development of Jammu- 
Srinagar-Pehalgam-Bhagwati Nagar- 
Anantnag-Salamabad Uri-Kargil-Leh 
77.33 60.47 
22 Telangana Tribal Circuit Integrated Development of Mulugu- 
Laknavaram- Medavaram- Tadvai- 
Damaravi- Mallur- Bogatha 
Waterfalls. 
79.87 75.88 
23 Meghalaya North East 
Circuit 
Development of Umium (Lake View), 
U LumSohpetbneng- Mawdiangdiang 
– Orchid Lake Resort. 
99.13 92.91 
24 Madhya 
Pradesh 
Buddhist 
Circuit 
Development of Sanchi – Satna – 
Rewa-Mandsaur-Dhar. 
74.02 69.08 
25 Kerala Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of Sabrimala - Erumeli- 
Pampa- Sannidhanam. 
99.99 20.00 
26 Manipur Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of Shri Govindajee 
Temple, Shri Bijoy Govindajee Temple 
– Shri Gopinath Temple – Shri 
Bungshibodon Temple – Shri Kaina 
Temple. 
53.80 43.04 
27 Gujarat Heritage 
Circuit 
Development of Ahmedabad- Rajkot- 
Porbandar –Bardoli- Dandi. 
59.17 56.21 
28 Haryana Krishna 
Circuit 
Development of Tourism 
Infrastructures at Brahmsarovar, 
SanhitSarovar, Narkatari, Jyotisar in 
Kurukshetra. 
97.35 77.88 
29 Rajasthan Krishna 
Circuit 
Integrated Development   of   Govind 
Devji temple (Jaipur), Khatu Shyam Ji 
(Sikar) and Nathdwara (Rajsamand). 
75.80 60.64 
30 Sikkim North East 
circuit 
Development of Tourist Circuit Linking 
Lingmoo – Lingee – Maka – Temi – 
Bermoik Namchi – Okharey – 
Sombaria – Daramdin- Melli (Exit) 
95.32 76.25 
31 Madhya 
Pradesh 
Heritage 
circuit 
Development of Gwalior – Orchha – 
Khajuraho – Chanderi – Bhimbetka – 
Mandu 
89.82 85.33 
32 Kerala Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of Sree Padmanabha 
Temple, Aranmula- Sabrimala 
87.20 73.77 
33 Bihar Tirthankar 
circuit 
Development of  Vaishali- Arrah- 
Masad- Patna- Rajgir- Pawapuri- 
Champapuri. 
37.19 26.19 
34 Bihar Spiritual 
circuit 
Integrated Development of Kanwaria 
Route: Sultanganj- Mojma- Banka. 
44.76 42.52 
 

33  
35 Odisha Coastal circuit Development of Gopalpur, Barkul, 
Satapada and Tampara. 
70.82 56.65 
36 Nagaland Tribal circuit Development of Mokokchung– 
Tuensang-Mon 
98.14 88.33 
37 Uttarakhand Heritage 
circuit 
Development of Kumaon Region – 
Katarmal –Jogeshwar-Baijnath- 
Devidhura. 
76.32 67.62 
38 J&K Himalayan 
Circuit 
Integrated Development of Tourist 
Facilities at Jammu-Rajouri-Shopian- 
Pulwama 
84.46 67.35 
39 J&K Himalayan 
Circuit 
Integrated Development of Tourist 
Facilities - Construction of Assets in  
lieu of those Destroyed in Floods in 
2014 under PM Development Package 
90.43 74.70 
40 J&K Himalayan 
Circuit 
Integrated Development of Tourist 
facilities at Mantalai and 
Sudhmahadev 
90.85 75.11 
41 J&K Himalayan 
Circuit 
Integrated Development of Tourist 
facilities  at Anantnag-Kishwar- 
Pahalgam-Daksum-Ranjit Sagar Dam 
87.44 69.95 
42 J&K Himalayan 
Circuit 
Development of Tourist Facilities at 
Gulmarg-Baramulla- Kupwara- Kargil 
- Leh 
91.84 48.46 
43 Uttar Pradesh Buddhist 
Circuit 
Development of Srawasti, Kushinagar, 
&Kapilvastu. 
99.97 72.56 
44 Uttar Pradesh Ramayana 
Circuit 
Development of Chitrakoot and 
Shringverpur 
69.45 64.09 
45 Andaman & 
Nicobar 
Islands 
Coastal Circuit Development of Long Island-Ross 
Smith Island- Neil Island- Havelock 
Island- Baratang Island-Port Blair. 
27.57 13.46 
46 Tamil Nadu Coastal Circuit Development of Chennai- 
Mamamallapuram – Rameshwaram – 
Kulasekaranpattinam – Kanyakumari 
73.13 68.60 
47 Uttar Pradesh Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of Shahjahanpur-Basti- 
Ahar-Aligharh-Kasgunj-Sarosi- 
Pratapgarh-Unnao-Kaushambi- 
Mirzapur – Gorakpur – Kairana – 
Doamriyagunj – Bagpat – Barabanki - 
Azamgarh 
65.61 62.33 
48 Uttar Pradesh Spiritual –II 
Circuit 
Development of Bijnor- Meerut- 
Kanpur- Kanpur Dehat- Banda- 
Ghazipur- Salempur- Ghosi- Balia- 
Ambedkar Nagar - Aligarh- Fatehpur- 
Deoria- Mahoba- Sonbhadra- 
Chandauli- Mishrikh- Bhadohi 
67.51 64.14 
 

34  
49 Uttar Pradesh Heritage 
Circuit 
Development of Kalinjar Fort (Banda) - 
MarharDham (SantKabir Nagar)- 
ChauriChaura, Shaheed Sthal 
(Fatehpur)- MavaharSthal (Ghosi)- 
Shaheed Smarak (Meerut) 
33.17 26.54 
50 Bihar Buddhist 
Circuit 
Construction of Convention Centre at 
Bodhgaya 
98.73 78.91 
51 Assam Heritage 
Circuit 
Development of Tezpur – Majuli – 
Sibsagar 
90.98 72.78 
52 Himachal 
Pradesh 
Himalayan 
Circuit 
Integrated Development of Himalayan  
Circuit in Kiarighat, Shimla, Hatkoti,  
Manali, Kangra, Dharamshala, Bir, 
Palampur, Chamba 
80.69 64.55 
53 Mizoram Eco Circuit Development of Eco-Adventure Circuit 
at Aizawl - Rawpuichhip - 
Khawhphawp - Lengpui - Durtlang - 
Chatlang- Sakawrhmuituaitlang - 
Muthee – Beratlawng -Tuirial Airfield 
– Hmuifang 
66.37 49.53 
54 Rajasthan Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of Churu (SalasarBalaji) 
– Jaipur (Shri SamodeBalaji, 
GhatkeBalaji, BandhekeBalaji) – Alwar 
(Pandupole Hanumanji, Bharathari) – 
Viratnagar (Bijak, Jainnasiya, Ambika 
Temple) – Bharatpur (Kaman Region) – 
Dholpur (Muchkund)     –     
MehandipurBalaji- 
Chittorgarh (Sanwaliyaji) 
93.90 68.24 
55 Gujarat Heritage 
Circuit 
Development of Vadnagar and 
Modhera. 
91.84 87.25 
Total of 2016-17 2817.62 2294.08 
Year 2017-18 
56 Bihar Rural Circuit Development of Gandhi Circuit: 
Bhitiharwa- Chandrahia- Turkaulia 
44.65 35.72 
57 Goa Coastal 
Circuit 
Development of Rua De Orum Creek 
- Don Paula -Colva - Benaulim 
99.35 94.38 
58 Gujarat Buddhist 
circuit 
Development of  Junagadh- 
GirSomnath-  Bharuch-Kutch- 
Bhavnagar- Rajkot- Mehsana 
28.67 19.21 
59 Puducherry Heritage 
Circuit 
Development of Franco- Tamil 
Village, Karaikal, Mahe and Yanam 
54.91 33.17 
60 Puducherry Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of Karaikal, Yanam and 
Puducherry 
34.96 30.94 
61 Rajasthan Heritage 
Circuit 
Development of Rajsamand 
(Kumbhalgarh Fort)- Jaipur 
72.49 49.80 
 

35  
   (Nahargarh Fort) - Alwar (BalaQuila) – 
SawaiMadhopur (Ranthambore Fort and 
Khandar Fort)– Jhalawar (GagronFort)–
  Chittorgarh 
(Chittorgarh Fort) Jaisalmer 
(JaisalmerFort) Hanumangarh 
(Kalibangan, Bhatner Fort and 
Gogamedi)- Jalore (Jalore Fort)- 
Udaipur (Pratap Gaurav Kendra)- 
Dholpur (Bagh-i-Nilofar and 
PuraniChawni)– Nagaur(Meera Bai 
Smarak) 
  
62 Telangana Heritage 
Circuit 
Development of Heritage Circuit: Qutub 
Shahi Heritage Park- Paigah Tombs- 
Hayat Bakshi Mosque- 
Raymond's Tomb 
96.90 70.61 
63 Bihar Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of Mandar Hill & Ang 
Pradesh 
47.52 38.02 
64 Madhya 
Pradesh 
Eco Circuit Development of Gandhisagar Dam- 
Mandleshwar Dam- Omkareshwar 
Dam- Indira Sagar Dam - Tawa Dam - 
Bargi Dam- Bheda Ghat- Bansagar 
Dam- Ken River. 
94.61 79.70 
65 Uttar Pradesh Ramayana 
Circuit 
Development of Ayodhya. 127.21 106.64 
66 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Buddhist 
Circuit 
Development of Buddhist Circuit: 
Shalihundam-Thotlakonda – 
Bavikonda- Bojjanakonda – Amravati 
– Anupu in Andhra Pradesh 
24.14 26.17 
Total of 2017-18 725.41 584.36 
Year 2018-19 
 Maharashtra Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of Waki – Adasa- 
Dhapewada – Paradsingha – Chota Taj 
Bagh – Telankhandi – Girad 
54.01 24.00 
 Uttar Pradesh/ 
Bihar 
Development 
of Wayside 
Amenities 
(Sub- 
Scheme) 
Development of Wayside Amenities in  
Uttar Pradesh and Bihar at Varanasi - 
Gaya; Lucknow-Ayodhya- Lucknow; 
Gorakhpur-Kushinagar; Kushinagar- 
Gaya-Kushinagar in collaboration with 
MoRTH 
17.93 12.29 
 Uttar 
Pradesh 
Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of Jewar -Dadri - 
Sikandrabad-Noida-Khurja-Banda. 
12.03 8.83 
 Jharkhand Eco Circuit Development  of Dalma- Chandil- 
Getalsud- BetlaNational  park- 
Mirchaiya–Netarhat. 
52.72 15.07 
 

36  
 Tripura North East 
circuit 
Development of Surma Cherra- Unakoti- 
Jampui Hills - Gunabati- 
Bhunaneshwari- Matabari- Neermahal- 
Boxanagar - Chottakhola- Pilak- 
Avangchaarra 
65.00 10.10 
 Punjab Heritage 
Circuit 
Development of Anandpur Sahib – 
Fatehgarh Sahib – Chamkaur Sahib – 
Ferozpur – Amritsar – Khatkar Kalan 
– Kalanour - Patiala 
91.55 41.45 
 Kerala Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development Sivagiri Sree Narayana 
Guru Ashram-  Arruvipuram- 
Kunnumpara Sree Subrahmania- 
Chembazhanthi  Sree Narayana 
Gurukulam 
69.47 1.61 
 Kerala Rural 
Circuit 
Development of Malanad Malabar 
Cruise Tourism Project 
80.37 23.77 
 Meghalaya North East 
Circuit 
Development of West Khasi Hills 
(Nongkhlaw- Krem Tirot  – Khudoi &  
Kohmang Falls – Khri River- 
Mawthadraishan, Shillon), Jaintia Hills  
(Krang Suri Falls - Shyrmang- Iooksi), 
Garo Hills (Nokrek Reserve, Katta 
Beel, Siju Caves) 
84.97 45.98 
 Uttar Pradesh Spiritual 
Circuit 
Development of Gorakhnath Temple 
(Gorakhpur), Devipattan Temple 
(Balrampur) and Vatvashni Temple 
(Domariyaganj) 
15.76 12.61 
Total of 2018-19 543.81 195.71 
Grand Total 1087.62 391.42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37  
ANNEXURE - II 
 
LIST OF PROJECTS SANCTIONED UNDER PRASHAD SCHEME 
 
(Rs. in Crores) 
 
S.No. State/ UTs Name of the Project Year of 
Sanction 
Approved 
Cost 
Amount 
Released 
1 Andhra 
Pradesh 
Development of Amaravati Town, 
Guntur Distt. as a Tourist 
Destination** 
2015-16 27.77 27.77 
Development of Srisailam Temple** 2017-18 47.45 37.96 
2 Arunachal 
Pradesh 
Development of Parasuram Kund, 
Lohit Distt. 
2020-21 37.88 7.34 
3 Assam Development of Kamakhya Temple 
and Pilgrimage Destination in and 
around Guwahati** 
2015-16 29.99 29.99 
4 Bihar Development of basic facilities at 
Vishnupad temple, Gaya, Bihar** 
2014-15 4.27 2.91 
Development at Patna Sahib** 2015-16 41.54 33.23 
5 Chhattisgarh Development of Maa Bamleshwari 
Devi Temple, Rajnandgaon, 
Dongargarh, Chhattisgarh 
2020-21 43.33 12.16 
6 Gujarat Development of Dwarka** 2016-17 13.08 10.46 
Pilgrimage Amenities at Somnath** 2016-17 45.36 45.36 
Development of Promenade at 
Somnath under PRASHAD 
Scheme** 
2018-19 47.12 44.76 
7 Haryana Development of Nada Saheb 
Gurudwara and Mata Mansa Devi 
Temple in Panchkula Distt. 
2019-20 49.52 20.18 
8 J&K Development at Hazratbal, 2016-17 40.46 32.37 
9 Jharkhand Development of Baidyanathji Dham, 
Deoghar 
2018-19 39.13 20.58 
10 Kerala Development at Guruvayur Temple** 2016-17 46.14 36.91 
11 Madhya 
Pradesh 
Development of Omkareshwar 2017-18 44.83 35.87 
12 Development of Amarkantak 2020-21 49.99 4.86 
13 Maharashtra Development of Trimbakeshwar 2017-18 37.81 8.49 
14 Meghalaya Development of Pilgrimage 
Facilitation in Meghalaya 
2020-21 29.32 6.53 
15 Nagaland Development of Pilgrimage 
Infrastructure in Nagaland 
2018-19 25.26 15.06 
16 Odisha Infrastructure Development at Puri, 
Shree Jagannath Dham – Ramachandi 
- Prachi River front at Deuli under 
Mega Circuit 
2014-15 50.00 10.00 
 

38  
17 Punjab Development of KarunaSagar 
Valmiki Sthal at Amritsar ** 
 6.40 6.40 
18 Rajasthan Integrated Development of 
Pushkar/Ajmer 
2015-16 32.64 26.11 
19 Sikkim Development of Pilgrimage 
Facilitation at Four Patron Saints, 
Yuksom 
2020-21 33.32 9.50 
20 Tamil Nadu Development of Kanchipuram** 2016-17 13.99 13.99 
Development of Vellankani** 2016-17 4.86 4.86 
21 Telangana Development of Jogulamba Devi 
Temple, Alampur 
2020-21 36.73 5.14 
22 Tripura Development of Tripura Sundari 
Temple, Udaipur 
2020-21 37.84 10.59 
23 Uttarakhand Integrated Development of 
Kedarnath** 
2015-16 34.78 27.83 
Development of Infrastructure for 
Pilgrimage Facilitation in Badrinath Ji 
Dham (Uttarakhand) under 
PRASHAD Scheme 
2018-19 39.24 20.79 
Augmentation of Pilgrimage 
Infrastructure Facilities and Gangotri  
and Yamunotri Dham in Uttarakhand 
under PRASHAD Scheme 
2021-22 54.36 Sanction 
ed on 
30.6.202 
1 
24 Uttar Pradesh Development of Mathura-Vrindavan 
as Mega Tourist Circuit (Ph-II)** 
2014-15 14.93 10.38 
Construction of Tourist Facilitation 
Centre at Vrindavan, Mathura** 
2014-15 9.36 9.36 
Development of Varanasi –Phase – 
I** 
2015-16 20.40 16.32 
Cruise Tourism in River Ganga, 
Varanasi 
2017-18 10.72 8.57 
Development of Varanasi Under 
PRASHAD Scheme – Phase II 
2017-18 44.60 31.77 
Development of Infrastructure 
facilities at Govardhan, Mathura, UP 
2018-19 39.74 21.87 
25 West Bengal Development of Belur 2016-17 30.03 23.39 
Total 1214.19 689.66 
** Physical execution of the project completed 
 
 
 
 
 
 

39  
ANNEXURE-III 
 
LIST OF THE PROJECTS SANCTIONED UNDER THE ASSISTANCE TO CENTRAL 
AGENCIES SCHEME 
 
(Rs. in Crores) 
S. No. State/UT Name of Projects Central 
Agency 
Amount 
Sanctioned 
Amount 
Released 
Year 2012-13   
1. Tamil 
Nadu 
Cruise Passenger Facilities Centre in 
the existing Passenger Terminal at 
Chennai Port, Tamil Nadu 
Chennai 
Trust 
Port 17.25 17.25 
2. J&K Sound & Light Show at Dal Lake, 
J&K, Shifted to Nigeen Lake 
ITDC 5.00 5.00 
3. Haryana Implementation of Multimedia/ Laser 
show at Tilyar Lake 
ITDC 5.00 2.24 
Year 2013-14   
4. Delhi Construction of Interpretation Centre 
at the World Heritage Site of 
Humayun's Tomb, New Delhi 
Aga Khan 
Foundation 
New Delhi 
49.45 47.47 
5. Bihar Joint Development of tourist 
Amenities at Gaya Railway Station in 
Association with MoR 
MoR 5.18 2.00 
6. Kerala Joint Development of Tourist 
amenities at Trivandrum Railway 
Station in Association with MoR 
MoR 5.98 4.00 
7. Punjab Joint Development of Tourist 
Amenities at Amritsar Railway 
Station in Association with MoR 
MoR 5.84 4.68 
8. Uttar 
Pradesh 
Joint Development of Tourist 
Amenities at Agra Cantt. Railway 
Station in Association with MoR 
MoR 5.05 5.05 
9. Uttar 
Pradesh 
Joint Development of Tourist 
Amenities at Rae-Bareli Railway 
Station in Association with MoR 
MoR 4.44 3.55 
Year 2014-15   
10. Uttar 
Pradesh 
Illumination of monuments in 
Varanasi/ Sarnath (Dhamekh Stupa in  
Sarnath Chaukhandi Stupa in Sarnath,  
Tomb of Lalkan in Sarnath and Man 
Mahal in Banaras) 
ITDC 5.12 3.81 
11. Daman & 
Diu 
Sound & Light Show at Diu Fort, Diu ITDC 7.76 6.20 
12. Goa Cruise Terminal Building at MPT 8.79 7.67 
 
 

40  
  Mormugao Port Trust    
13. Rajasthan Joint Development of Ajmer Railway 
Station 
MoR 5.52 5.52 
14. Rajasthan Joint Development of Jaipur Railway 
Station 
MoR 4.88 3.90 
15. Multiple 
States 
Manufacture of Glass Top Coach for 
Konkan Railway 
Qazigund and Baramullah, J&K 
Vizag-Arakku Valley 
Vishakhapatnam, Andhra Pradesh 
Route Dadar-Madgaon ( Mumbai to 
Goa ) 
MoR 12.00 12.00 
Year 2015-16 – No project have been sanctioned   
Year 2016-17   
16. Kerala Development of a 
Walkway/Promenade on Willingdon 
Island, Cochin, Kerala 
CPT 9.01 7.20 
17. Kerala Central Financial Assistance for 
upgrading of Births & Backup area of 
Ernakulum Wharf 
CPT 21.41 19.13 
18. Maharasht 
ra 
CFA to Mumbai Port Trust for 
Development of Kanhoji Angre 
Lighthouse as a tourist Destination 
MbPT 15.00 15.00 
19. Kerala Project for Up-gradation of Golf 
Course at SAI Trivandrum Golf Club  
by the Sports Authority of India 
(SAI) 
SAI 24.65 12.32 
20. Telangana Joint Development 
Railway Station 
of  Hyderabad MoR 4.41 3.52 
21. Maharasht 
ra 
Joint Development 
Railway Station 
 of Nanded MoR 5.18 2.59 
22. Andhra 
Pradesh 
Joint Development of Tirupati 
Railway Station 
MoR 5.75 4.59 
23. Karnataka Joint Development of Hospet 
Railway station 
MoR 5.41 4.32 
24. Odisha Joint Development of Puri Railway 
Station 
MoR 6.15 6.15 
Year 2017-18   
25. Uttar 
Pradesh 
Illumination of three monuments in 
Varanasi, Uttar Pradesh-: 
1. Dashashwamedh Ghat to Darbanga 
Ghat (300 m stretch) 
CPWD 2.94 2.94 
 

41  
  2. Tulsi Manas Mandir 
3. Sarnath Museum 
   
26. Punjab Project for Infrastructural 
Development at JCP Attari 
BSF 13.12 10.30 
27. Haryana Sound & Light Show at Yadavindra 
Gardens, Pinjore 
ITDC 6.00 3.00 
28. Andhra 
Pradesh 
Sound & Light Show at Puttaparthy, 
Andhra Pradesh 
ITDC 7.08 3.54 
29. Delhi Sound & Light Show at Purana Quila, 
New Delhi 
ITDC 14.04 6.85 
30. Maharasht 
ra 
Up-gradation/ modernization to 
International Cruise terminal at Indira 
Dock, Mumbai. 
MbPT 12.50 12.50 
31. Tamil 
Nadu 
Joint Development of Rameshwaram 
Railway Station 
MoR 4.70 3.76 
32. Maharasht 
ra 
Joint Development of Aurangabad 
Railway Station 
MoR 5.71 2.85 
33. West 
Bengal 
Joint Development of Rampurhat 
Railway Station 
MoR 3.48 1.74 
34. West 
Bengal 
Joint Development of Tarakeshwar 
Railway Station 
MoR 3.87 1.93 
35. Goa CFA to Konkan Railway Corporation 
Ltd. for development of Madgaon, 
Thivim and Karmali Railway stations 
MoR 25.00 12.50 
Year 2018-19   
36. Goa Improvement of immigration facility 
and deepening of existing cruise berth 
at Mormugao 
MPT 13.16 6.58 
37. Kerala Developing infrastructure at Cochin 
Port Cruise Terminal. 
CPT 1.21 0.97 
38. Kerala Creation of additional tourism 
facilities at the Cochin Port Trust 
Walkway 
CPT 4.66 3.73 
39. Andhra 
Pradesh 
Construction of Cruise-cum-Coastal 
Cargo Terminal at Channel berth area  
in Outer Harbour of Visakhapatnam 
Port 
Visakhapatnam 
Port Trust 
38.50 19.25 
40. Punjab Restoration/  Renovation of 
Jallianwala Bagh Memorial at 
Amritsar, Punjab 
ASI 23.02 21.97 
41. Tamil 
Nadu 
Joint Development of Madurai 
Railway Station 
MoR 4.48 3.56 
42. Assam Joint Development of Kamakhya 
Railway Station 
MoR 4.96 4.96 
43. Assam Joint   Development   of Guwahati MoR 4.99 3.98 
 

42  
  Railway Station    
Year 2019-20   
44. West 
Bengal 
Joint Development of New Jalpaiguri 
Railway Station 
MoR 4.55 2.27 
45. Rajasthan Joint Development of Chittorgarh 
Railway Station 
MoR 4.99 2.50 
46. Delhi CFA for Development & renovation  
of selected facilities of National 
Museum 
National 
Council of 
Science 
Museums 
(NCSM) 
43.73 21.86 
47. Delhi CFA for Illumination of Building of 
National Gallery of Modern Art- 
2019-20 
NCSM 3.80 1.90 
48. Kerala CFA for Development of Additional  
infrastructure in the new Cochin Port  
Trust Terminal 
CPT 10.30 8.23 
49. - CFA for Development of Jetties at 
nine (09) main points of embarkation/ 
disembarkation of River Cruise on 
National Water ways No. 1& 2 
IWAI 28.03 7.01 
Year 2020-21   
50. Madhya 
Pradesh 
Tourism Infrastructure at Beltaal 
Lake, Damoh, Madhya Pradesh by 
ITDC. 
ITDC 23.16 10.08 
51 Leh 
&Ladakh 
Sound & Light Show at Leh, Ladakh 
& Water Screen Projection 
Multimedia Show at Tourist 
Facilitation Centre, Kargil, Ladakh 
ITDC 23.21 5.16 
52 Delhi 3D Projection Mapping Show 
(Multimedia Show) National Gallery  
of Modern Art 
NGMA 6.17 3.08 
53 Haryana Joint Development of Kurukshetra 
Railway Station 
MoR 3.02 1.51 
54 Mizoram Development of Convention Centre 
and associated infrastructure at 
Aizawl, Mizoram 
WAPCOS 39.95 15.71 
Year 2021-22 
55 Goa MPT (Goa) for Development of 
International and Domestic Cruise 
Terminal and allied facilities at MPT 
(Goa) 
MPT(Goa) 0.50 0.50 
 

43  
ANNEXURE-IV 
 
MOUs SIGNED UNDER ‘ADOPT A HERITAGE’ 
S.No. Name of Site State/ UT Name of Agency 
1 Gangotri Temple Area & Trail to 
Gaumukh 
Uttarakhand ATOAI 
2 Red Fort Delhi Dalmia Bharat 
3 Gandikota Fort Andhra 
Pradesh 
Dalmia Bharat 
4 Surajkund Haryana Bliss Inn (India) Pvt. Ltd. 
(VResorts) 
5 Jantar Mantar Delhi Apeejay Surendra Park Hotels 
(P) Ltd. 
6 Ajanta Caves Maharashtra Yatra Online Pvt. Ltd. 
7 Qutub Minar Delhi Yatra Online Pvt. Ltd. 
8 Hampi & Hazara Rama Temple Karnataka Yatra Online Pvt. Ltd. 
9 Leh Palace J&K Yatra Online Pvt. Ltd. 
10 Development of Multi-Lingual 
Audio Guide for 4 Iconic Sites 
I. Amer Fort, Rajasthan 
II. Mahabodhi Temple, Bihar 
III. Chandni Chowk, Delhi 
IV. Somnath, Gujarat 
Pan India Resbird Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 
(Now “Bird Heritage 
Foundation”) 
11 Development of Multilingual Audio 
Guide for 8 Iconic Sites 
I. Dholavira, Gujarat 
II. Humayun’s Tomb, Delhi 
III. Red Fort, Delhi 
IV. Purana Quila Delhi 
V. Fatehpur Sikri, Agra 
VI. Taj Mahal, Agra 
VII.Mahabalipuram, Tamil Nadu 
VIII. Khajuraho, Madhya Pradesh 
Pan India Resbird Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 
(Now “Bird Heritage 
Foundation”) 
12 Tomb of Abdur Rahim Khan – I - 
Khana 
New Delhi Interglobe Foundation 
13 Bekal Fort Kerala Drishti Lifesaving Pvt. Ltd. 
14 Champaner-Pavagadh 
Archaeological Park 
Gujarat Akshar Travels Pvt. Ltd. 
15 Rani ki Vav, Patan Gujarat Akshar Travels Pvt. Ltd. 
16 Buddhist Caves, Uparkot, Junagadh Gujarat Akshar Travels Pvt. Ltd. 
17 Sun Temple, Modhera Gujarat Akshar Travels Pvt. Ltd. 
18 Gol Gumbad Delhi Resbird Technologies Pvt. Ltd. 
 

44  
   (Now “Bird Heritage 
Foundation”) 
19 Aguada Fort Goa Drishti Lifesaving Pvt. Ltd. 
20 Krishna Temple (behind 
Baravalinga), Hampi 
Karnataka Heritage Resorts, Hampi 
21 Elephant Stables, Hampi Karnataka Orange County Resorts 
22 Pattabhirama Temple, Hampi Karnataka Orange County Resorts 
23 Lotus Mahal (Zenana Enslosure), 
Hampi 
Karnataka Orange County Resorts 
24 Ugra Narshimaha, Hampi Karnataka Hotel Malligi 
25 Badava Linga, Hampi Karnataka Hotel Malligi 
26 Bara Lao ka Gumbad Delhi Bird Heritage Foundation 
(Formerly  “Resbird 
Technologies Pvt. Ltd.”) 
27 Mandore Fort Rajasthan Mehrangarh Museum Trust 
28 Dara Shikoh Library Building Delhi The Arts and Cultural Heritage 
Trust (TAACHT) 
& MAC 
29 Narayankoti Temples Uttarakhand Socio Legal Research and 
Education Foundation (SLREF) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

45  
 
ANNEXURE V 
 
1st November, 2021 
 
LIST OF WITNESS WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
 
(11:00 A.M) 
 
Ministry of Tourism 
 
1. Shri Arvind Singh Secretary (Tourism) 
2. Shri G. Kamala Vardhana Rao Director General (Tourism) 
3. Shri Rakesh Kumar Verma Joint Secretary (Tourism ) 
4. Ms. Rupinder Brar Additional Director General (Tourism) 
5. Ms. Anita Baghel Additional Director General (Parliament) 
6. Shri Gyan Bhushan Economic Adviser (Tourism) 
7. Shri B.B. Dash Director 
8. Shri Fakhre Alam Director 
9. Ms. Kimjamlhing Changloi Director 
10. Ms. Annabella Arya Deputy Director General 
11. Shri Shreevats Sanjay Deputy Director General 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* * * * 
 