 
       
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTAR 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
THREE HUNDRED 
Issues relating to Road Sector 
(Presented to the Hon’ble 
(Presented  to the Hon’ble Speaker, 
(P resented to the Rajya Sabha on 8 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA  
RAJYA SABHA 
 
RELATED PARLIAMENTAR Y STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURIS M AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka)  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
Issues relating to Road Sector  
 
resented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15 th  June, 20 22 
to the Hon’ble Speaker,  Lok Sabha on 15 th  June, 2022 ) 
 
resented to the Rajya Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
 
Y STANDING COMMITTEE  
REPORT NO.  
325
REPORT   
22 ) 
 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:      https://rajyasabha.nic.in   
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 

 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA  
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
THREE HUNDRED TWENTY FIFTH REPORT  
 
Issues relating to Road Sector 
 
 
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 15 
th  June, 2022 ) 
(Presented  to the Hon’ble Speaker,  Lok Sabha on 15 th  June, 2022 ) 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 8 th  December, 2022) 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2022/ Agrahayana, 1944 (Saka) 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     i 
2. COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE    ii 
3. INTRODUCTION       iii 
4. ACRONYMS               iv-v 
5. REPORT                                1-32 
6. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   33-48 
    7. MINUTES         49-62 
 8. ANNEXURES        
 
         
        
        
      
  
63-70

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2021-22) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2021) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    RAJYA SABHA 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. *1vacant 
5. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
6. Shri Md. Nadimul Haque 
7. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
8. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
9. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
LOK SABHA 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer 
                                                             
1 *Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 4th May, 2022 

ii 
 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE SUB-COMMITTEE  
(Constituted on 28th March, 2022) 
 
 
1. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy (Member, Lok Sabha)  - Convener 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
3. Shri Margani Bharat 
4. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
5. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
6.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
7.  Shri Prince Raj 
8.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
 
Secretariat 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer 
  

iii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Twenty Fifth Report on ‘Issues relating to Road Sector’. 
2. The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Tr ansport, Tourism 
and Culture had  appointed a Sub -Committee on ‘Road Sector’ under the C onvenership of 
Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy, Member, Lok Sabha, to study issues present in the road 
infrastructure sector in terms of review of awarded projects, black spots, service roads, road 
safety, maintenance and quality of roads, safety of women etc. especially with reference to 
the States of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Bihar and Maharashtra. 
3. The Sub-Committee in its first meeting on 8th April, 2022, had a detailed discussion 
on various issues relating to Road Sector . The Sub-Committee heard the views of the 
Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways , on the subject on 9 th May, 2022. The 
Sub-Committee also heard the views of the Chairperson, National Highways Authority of 
India (NHAI); and  the senior officials of Ministry of Road Transport and Highways  and 
NHAI, in connection with the replies furnished by the Ministry regar ding various queries on 
the subject on 31st May, 2022. 
4.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways and National Highways Authority of India for placing before the 
Committee, the detailed background note and replies to questionnaire in connection with the 
subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
5. The Sub-Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  1st 
June, 2022 and submitted it to the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture . The Committee considered and 
adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 8th June, 2022 
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
June 8, 2022                                                             Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Jyaistha 18, 1944 (Saka)                                   Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 

iv 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
AIS Automotive Industry Standards 
AP Andhra Pradesh 
APUIAML Andhra Pradesh Urban Infrastructure Asset Management Limited 
BE Budget Estimates 
BOT Build-Operate-Transfer 
BRO Borders Road Organization 
CCTV Closed Circuit Television 
CRRI Central Road Research Institute 
DFG Demands for Grants 
DPP Direct Payment Procedure 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
EPC Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
ETC Electronic Toll Collection 
FDR Flood Damage Repairs 
HAM Hybrid Annuity Mode 
IAHE Indian Academy of Highway Engineers 
INR Indian Rupee 
IRC Indian Roads Congress 
MIS Management Information System 
MIV Mobile Inspection Van 
MORTH Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MWCD Ministry of Women & Child Development 
NH National Highway 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NHBF National Highways Builders Federation 
NHDP National Highways Development Project 
NHIDCL National Highway and Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited 
NHLML National Highways Logistics Management Limited 
NITI National Institution for Transforming India 

v 
 
OFC Optical Fibre Cable 
OMT Operation, Maintenance and Transfer 
OR Ordinary Repairs 
PIU Project Implementation Unit 
PR Periodic Renewals 
PRAGATI Pro-Active Governance and Timely Implementation 
RE Revised Estimates 
RW Roads Wing 
SAROD Society for Affordable Redressal of Disputes 
SP Special Publication 
SR Special Repairs 
SRD&Q Standards, Research and Development & Quality 
UPSRTC Uttar Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation 
US United States 
UT Union Territories 
VUP Vehicular Underpass 
 
 
 
 

1 
REPORT 
“It is not our wealth that built our roads, but it is our roads which built our wealth‟. 
-          John F. Kennedy, US President 
Roads are the arteries through which the economy pulses.  A country‟s road network 
plays a crucial role in its overall economic development and growth because roads help in the 
transportation of agricultural and industrial produce from rural to urban areas , provide access to 
employment, education and health services and stimulate economic and social development. 
Road transport is the only mode of transportation which can provide door to door service and 
serve the remotest areas.  The other three modes of tr ansport - airways, railways and waterways 
depend on road transport for service to and from terminals, airports, harbours or stations.  A well 
developed road network is therefore essential not only for the facility of road travel but also to 
serve as feeder  system for the other modes of transportation.  Road transport serves the entire 
community and gives the maximum flexibility for travel with respect to route, direction, time 
and speed of travel. Road infrastructure is therefore the most important of all public assets.  
2. Roads have always been considered indispensable for administrative and military 
purposes in the Indian subcontinent since ancient times.  The Arthashastra of Kautilya classifies 
different types of roads to be built for different purposes and also lays down the required width 
for different types of roads.  The Uttarpath road initially built by Chandragupta Maurya  was 
extended by  Sher Shah Suri   from Kabul to Chittagong in Bengal  with Kos Minars built as 
milestones.  The British later developed this highway and renamed it the Grand Trunk Road, one 
of the oldest and longest roads in Asia, parts of which are still in use.  With the introduction of 
railways in the British period, road development received less attention until after the First  
World War when the increase in motor vehicles fuelled the demand for a better road network.  
The Government appointed the Indian Road Development Committee headed by Sh. M.R. 
Jayakkar as Chairman in 1927 which recommended that road development should be c onsidered 
as a national interest and a semi -official technical advisory body and a research organisation to 
carry out research and development work should be constituted as well as  Road Development 
Fund called Central Road Fund credited by tax imposed on petrol.  Consequently, the Central 
Road Fund, the Indian Roads Congress which is the apex body of Road Sector Engineers and the 
Central Road Research Institute were set up. The Motor Vehicles Act was also passed in 1939 to 
implement traffic laws.  At the i nitiative of the Indian Roads Congress, a conference of all Chief 

2 
Engineers of all the states and provinces was convened in 1943 by the Government at Nagpur,  
to finalise the first road development plan for the country as a whole, a landmark in the history of 
road development in India.  At the time of independence, the total road length in the country was 
3,88,226 kms with a road length density of 11.8 km per 100 square kms.  Since then the pace of 
road development has improved considerably and India now ha s the second largest road network 
in the world of about 63.72 lakh km comprising National Highways (NHs), Expressways, State 
Highways, Major District Roads, Other District Roads and Village Roads.  The total length of 
National Highways in the country as pe r the Annual Report (2021 -22) of the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways, is 1,40,995 kms.   
3. As the National Highways Development Program (NHDP) has reached a certain level of 
maturity, the Government is now focussed on re -defining road development and recasting road 
development by bridging critical infrastructure gaps. Hence Bharatmala has been launched as a 
new umbrella program whose primary focus is on optimizing the efficiency of the movement of 
goods and people across the country. 
4. The Ministr y of Road Transport & Highways has taken up detailed review of NHs 
network with a view to develop the road connectivity to Border areas, development of Coastal 
roads including road connectivity for Non -Major ports, improvement in the efficiency of 
National Corridors, development of Economic Corridors, Inter Corridors and Feeder Routes 
along with integration with Sagarmala, etc., under Bharatmala Pariyojana.   
5. While the Government is pushing an ambitious upgrade of infrastructure of roads 
alongwith railwa ys, ports, logistics etc., the quality of India‟s road infrastructure still remains 
very poor.  The paradox of India‟s road infrastructure is that while its cumulative road network is 
comparable to US and China, countries which are several times the size o f India, the quality of it 
is such that the road infrastructure is not internationally competitive at present. Of India‟s total 
road network, almost 40% is unpaved.  National Highways constitute less than 3% of the total 
road network and 40% of villages ha ve no access to all -weather roads. Pothole ridden roads, 
uneven speed breakers, lack of service roads and general lack of maintenance are characteristic 
of Indian roads.  Unsurprisingly, India accounts for 11 percent of global deaths in road accidents 
while having only 1% of the world‟s vehicles.  During the year 2020, the total recorded road 
accidents in India was 3,66,138.  Flawed road designing and engineering, weak enforcement of 
traffic laws and lack of rapid trauma care contribute to the high number o f road accidents and 
deaths in India.   

3 
6. Given the significant role played by the road sector in the overall Indian economy and the 
various issues plaguing the same, the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Cultur e constituted a Sub -Committee on „Road Sector‟ to study issues 
present in the road infrastructure sector in terms of review of awarded projects, black spots, 
service roads, road safety, maintenance and quality of roads, safety of women etc. especially 
with reference to the States of Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Bihar and Maharashtra, with effect 
from 28 th March, 2022, for examination and report within two months. In its meeting held on 
18th May, 2022, the Committee decided to extend the term of the Sub -Committee till 21 st June, 
2022. 
7. The Sub-Committee on Road Sector heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways on the issues mentioned above in its meeting held  on 9 th May, 2022. 
The Sub-Committee also held discussions with the of ficials of Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways in connection with the replies furnished by the Ministry regarding various queries of 
the Sub -Committee and various new issues, in its meeting held on 31 st May, 2022. The 
discussions of the Sub-Committee pertained to a wide-ranging set of issues related to road sector 
viz., review of awarded/ongoing projects, maintenance and quality of road, road safety, 
rectification of black spots, encroachment of NHs, stray cattle/wildlife on NHs, speed breakers, 
service roads, research and development, arbitration between the Ministry/NHAI and the 
Contractors, setting up dedicated underground utility corridors, safety of women on NHs, etc. 
Review of awarded/ongoing projects 
8. In its background note furnished to the Sub -Committee, the Ministry informed that it has 
sanctioned/approved several National Highway projects during the last three years.  The details 
of projects sanctioned, awarded and constructed during the last three years in the country are at 
Annexure-I and in  the States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Maharashtra and Telangana are at 
Annexure-II.  The Ministry further stated that the implementation of the National Highway 
works depend on several factors, like completion of pre -construction activities, mobilization 
capacity of the Contractors, climatic conditions like monsoons, floods etc.  It was informed that 
close monitoring and reviews are carried out at different levels to complete the projects within 
the scheduled time.  However, due to the above factors, some o f the projects get delayed.  The 
Ministry submitted that presently, there are total 451 ongoing National Highway projects with a 
total length of 10,590.01 km amounting to Rs. 147,165.40 Crore in the States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Bihar, Maharashtra and Telangan a put together. Ministry has taken several initiatives to 

4 
complete the delayed projects within minimum possible time. Some of these initiatives are 
streamlining and online processing of land acquisition through Bhoomirashi Portal, improvement 
of cash flow of the contracting agencies through one time funding, premium re -scheduling, 
securitization of road sector loans, rationalized exit for equity investors, termination/foreclosure 
of stalled/stuck up projects and re -bidding for the balance works, revamping t he Dispute 
Resolution System, rationalized procedure for  compensation for delays attributable to 
authorities, regular reviews at various levels including PRAGATI meetings at Hon‟ble  Prime 
Minister‟s level. 
9. The Committee takes note of the ongoing NH projects in the States of Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana, Bihar and Maharashtra and the various steps being taken by the 
Ministry to minimize delays in execution of the ongoing projects. The Committee 
recommends that all the ongoing NH projects may be monitored  closely, the onset of any 
sort of deviation from the scheduled timeline for a NH project may immediately be looked 
into and necessary remedial action may be taken at the earliest so as to avoid significant 
time and cost overruns. 
10. The Committee recomme nds that due provisions for underpasses or flyover should 
be included at the DPR stage itself for all NH projects, for uninterrupted flow of both 
pedestrian and vehicular traffic for every village/town near the highway as well as on 
accident-prone junctions, to minimize accidents. 
11. The Committee further recommends that CCTV cameras may be installed every 
few kilometers at the construction stage of road projects for close monitoring by NHAI 
officers/ engineers and other stakeholders including public repre sentatives (MPs/MLAs). 
Doing so would permit round -the-clock ground -level monitoring of the progress being 
made in ongoing road projects and also inculcate fear amongst wrongdoers. If required, 
the CCTV project may be implemented with funds available under  the Nirbhaya Scheme. 
The CCTV cameras thus installed can be made a part of the fully constructed road once 
the road project gets completed and can be used to monitor traffic 
movements/accidents/thefts etc. 
12. The Committee desires to be apprised of the p resent status of important road 
projects such as the Hajipur -Chhapra Highway (NH -19), Nagpur Outer Ring Road 
Package-I and II, six -lane road sanctioned from Diwancheruvu to Anakapalle, Greenfield 

5 
NH 516E between Rajahmundry -Rampachodavaram, bridge across t he Kanhan river, 
repair works at Nagpur-Bhandara Road, Patna-Gaya NH etc., alongwith reasons for delay, 
if any, in execution of the same. 
Maintenance & Quality of Road  
Maintenance and Repair (M&R) of Road 
13. With regard to Maintenance and Repair of NHs, the Ministry informed the Sub -
Committee that M&R of NH stretches are carried out for the stretches not covered under any 
programme or completed stretches where there are no liabilities of contractors to maintain such 
stretches and that usually, the annual outlay earmarked for M&R of NHs is about 40% of the 
estimated requirement of funds as per the Ministry‟s norms. This leads to thin spreading of 
available resources. This is one of the main reasons for inability to take up timely maintenance 
interventions.  Efforts are made to keep the NHs in traffic worthy condition within available 
resources as per inter-se priority and traffic density. 
14. The Ministry stated that various types of M&R works undertaken on NHs are Ordinary 
Repairs (OR), Periodic Renewals (P R), Special Repairs (SR) and Emergent/ Flood Damage 
Repairs (FDRs).  Ordinary Repairs (OR) involve routine maintenance, such as maintenance of 
culverts, patch/ pot-hole repairs, crack sealing, roadside drainage, repairing of shoulders, etc. 
a. Periodic Renewa l (PR) involves provision of renewal coat to the wearing surface at a 
predetermined frequency. This is done to safeguard the road crust and at the same time 
giving pavement a better riding surface.      
b. Special Repairs (SR) works are urgent works of origin al nature, such as repairs to 
culverts, bridges, etc. 
c. Emergent/ Flood Damage Repair (FDR) works are immediate repairs to roads affected by 
heavy rains/ flood, cyclone, landslides, sand dunes, etc. to restore traffic.  
15. The Ministry further stated that f or the NH stretches developed on EPC mode 
(Engineering, Procurement, and Construction), the contractor is responsible for remedying the 
defects and the concurrent maintenance of the highway project during the four years defect 
liability period after comple tion of the work. The Ministry informed that for NH stretches 
developed on BOT mode/ HAM, the Concessionaire is responsible for the maintenance of the 
project highway during the concession period and that for some of the developed NH stretches 

6 
through public funding, maintenance contracts have been taken up for a definite time period (4 to 
9 years) on Operate, Maintenance and Transfer (OMT) basis. The maintenance of the project 
highway under OMT contracts is the responsibility of the Concessionaire. 
16. In addition, the Ministry has conceptualised taking up Ordinary Repairs of NHs on Direct 
payment Procedure (DPP) basis through awarding short term / Mid -term maintenance Contracts 
under OR -DPP. Ministry, in first stage, has approved short term maintenance con tract under 
OR(DPP) for 7 nos. of NHs not covered under maintenance for a length of 503 km at a cost of 
Rs 12.12 Crore in the state of Telangana and 10 Nos of proposals covering a length of 1217 km 
at a cost of 37.12 Crore in Andhra Pradesh. The works on s hort term maintenance contract are in 
bidding stage. 
17. The Committee takes note of the present mechanism for Maintenance and Repair 
(M&R) of National Highways in India. However, the Committee is deeply concerned to 
note that the Ministry/NHAI is managing  the maintenance and repair of NHs across the 
country with an allocation of just about 40% of the actual requirements estimated by the 
Ministry. The Committee feels that the shortfall of sufficient budgetary allocation is 
reflected in the sub -par quality o f National Highways that is often witnessed across the 
country, especially in Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Bihar and Maharashtra. Maintenance 
and Repair of the existing National Highways is of utmost importance in order to keep 
them in a safe, pliable condit ion and to permit good average traffic speeds. This should be 
given higher priority than construction of new National Highways. In this regard, the 
Committee notes that it has repeatedly recommended a much higher budgetary allocation 
for Maintenance and Re pair of National Highways in its previous Reports viz., para 75 of 
317th Report on Demands for Grants (2022 -23) of the Ministry, para 12 of 296 th Report on 
„Role of Highways in Nation Building‟, para 45 of 287 th Report on DFG (2021 -22) of the 
Ministry, para 55 of 278 th Report on DFG (2020 -21) of the Ministry, etc. The Committee 
has repeatedly observed that in the „Strategy for New India @ 75‟, NITI Aayog advocates 
that India should begin with earmarking 10 percent of its annual budget for Road and 
Highways for maintenance, to move towards the developed country norm of earmarking 40 
percent to 50 percent of the budget for roads and highways for maintenance. However, 
year-after-year, the actual budgetary allocation made for Maintenance and Repair of 
National Highways remains less than even 4 percent of the annual budget. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry must give much more priority to M&R 

7 
of NHs across the country, allocate substantially higher budgetary allocation for M&R and 
utilize the same to implement a robust monitoring mechanism to identify and meet the 
M&R requirements on NHs across the country. The Ministry should be proactive in its 
approach towards M&R of NHs, carrying out well -defined maintenance checks and 
periodic M&R activities on NHs. 
18. The Committee recommends that 100% requirement for Maintenance and Repair 
projected by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should be allocated in the 
budget. Any reduction in the budget for M&R may result in deterioration of  the roads 
constructed with hundreds of crores of National Budget which will be national wastage. 
19. The Committee feels that NHAI‟s „Sukhad Yatra‟ smartphone application can be 
utilized to gain insights into requirements for M&R on NHs by making the general public a 
source of information for such requirements. In this regard, the Committee reiterates the 
following recommendation made in para 51 of its 317 th Report on DFG (2022 -23) of the 
Ministry: 
The Committee is of the considered view that wide adoption of the application 
can help NHAI gain free actionable information regarding the issues being 
faced by NH users across the country, which can be quickly acted upon, thus 
ensuring a well -maintained a nd safe driving experience on the NHs. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may work upon improving 
the usability of the Sukhad Yatra smartphone application at the earliest and 
come up with innovative means to promote the application to N H users across 
the country. An option to seek feedback from the person posting a complaint 
using the app, may also be added so as to gain insight into whether the problem 
pointed out by the complainant has actually been resolved or not. 
20. The Committee r ecommends that using the data collected through the Electronic 
Toll Collection (ETC) and other suitable means, the Ministry may analyze the average 
traffic speed of various stretches of National Highways. The Committee feels that the 
stretches with low ave rage traffic speeds can then be monitored on a closer level to 
understand the issues throttling the traffic speed, which should lead to identification of 
M&R requirements on different stretches of NHs across the country.  

8 
21. The Committee desires to know the mechanism existing at present to identify M&R 
requirements on NHs across the country. The Committee further recommends that the 
Ministry may collaborate with leading research institutions to devise mechanisms to 
efficiently identify and execute the M&R  requirements of the extensive NH network in the 
country. 
Quality of Roads 
22. On the issue of quality of roads, the Ministry informed the Sub -Committee that all 
National Highways (NHs) are constructed as per quality standards specified in the Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways/ Indian Roads Congress (IRC) specifications. The Ministry stated 
that to ensure that the works are executed as per prescribed specifications and standards, 
Authority‟s Engineer/Supervision Consultants are appointed by the Minist ry and its agencies for 
day to day supervision of the works at site for quality compliance/checking of roads to ensure its 
construction quality and that it is the responsibility of such Consultants to ensure the compliance 
of the provisions of the Concessi on / Contract Agreement in so far as quality of the work is 
concerned. The Ministry further informed the Sub -Committee that officials of Ministry / 
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) / National Highways, Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limi ted (NHIDCL), Border Roads Organisation (BRO) and State Public Works 
Departments (PWDs) / State Road Construction Departments (RCDs), etc., also carry out quality 
checks of the executed works either directly or through independent experts / agencies and 
deficiencies, if any, observed during such examination / inspection are brought to the notice of 
the Concessionaires / Contractors for taking up necessary corrective measures. In case of any 
defaults, actions against the defaulting agencies are taken as per the provisions of agreements.  
23. The Committee notes the existing mechanism to ensure that the road works are 
executed as per prescribed specifications and standards. However, in light of the sub -par 
quality of road construction often witnessed on NHs ac ross the country, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may undertake a thorough review of the existing monitoring 
mechanism for road construction quality and come up with ways to plug the gaps in the 
same so as to ensure higher quality NHs in the fut ure. The Committee further recommends 
that the Ministry may enact provisions for imposing severe financial penalty on the 
individuals appointed as Authority‟s Engineer/Supervision Consultants in cases where 
gross negligence of the prescribed specifications  and standards is observed in roads 
approved by them. 

9 
24. The Ministry has recently undertaken separate initiatives for strengthening the Quality 
Control set up of NHs projects. Independent Quality Monitors are being engaged by NHAI and 
NHIDCL to check the quality of implementation of projects including the stret ches where 
maintenance work is in progress. The Ministry has also taken initiatives for procurement of 
services for supply, operation and maintenance of Mobile Inspection Vans (MIVs) equipped with 
non-destructive testing equipment for Inspection and Qualit y assessment of NH projects. Bids 
have been invited in January, 2022 for procuring services through one MIV in each States of 
Gujarat, Rajasthan, Karnataka and Odisha on Pilot basis. Periodic quality checks are intended to 
be carried out through these MIVs on projects being implemented through all executing agencies 
such as NHAI, NHIDCL, State PWDs/RCDs etc. towards institutionalising Quality Control 
System for NH projects. 
25. The Committee appreciates the recent initiative of the Ministry to strengthen th e 
Quality Control set up of NH projects by engaging the services of Mobile Inspection Vans 
(MIVs) for Inspection and Quality assessment of NH projects. The Committee hopes that 
the pilot project for engaging the services of MIVs turns out to be a success s o that the 
MIVs can be utilized across the country for better quality control of ongoing and future 
NH projects in the country.  
26. The Committee recommends that provisions may be introduced to assess the 
condition of new NHs at a defined time period afte r their operationalization, especially in 
terms of issues such as gaps in construction, rutting and high number of potholes on the 
highway etc. Strict penal action may be taken against the road contractor as well as the 
approving authorities in case substa ntial degradation of the NH is observed within a short 
period of operationalization of a newly constructed NH. 
27. The Committee sought to know from the Ministry whether it has formulated a policy to 
build highways of cement/concrete in future instead of a sphalt due to the durability of concrete 
roads and whether the costs of road projects are assessed on the basis of cost of construction or 
lifetime costs of the project. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that its 
instant policy is to evaluate both options of cement concrete (rigid) and asphalt (flexible) 
pavement from life cycle costing and techno -economic considerations during project preparation 
and choose the better option. 
28. The Committee notes that bituminous roads (flexible pavements) are common in use 
in India since it is relatively cheaper as compared to concrete roads.  It is possible to 

10 
construct relatively thin bituminous layers over existing pavements therefore the road can 
be strengthened by constructing bituminous pav ement layers one after the other in stages 
in a certain period of time unlike the cement concrete or rigid pavement construction.  
Cement concrete pavement has a high initial investment but has excellent riding surface 
and longer life of 20 or so years in contrast with bitumen roads which have an average 
lifespan of 4 -5 years.  Cement concrete roads are prevalent in most developed nations. In 
India, Mumbai has switched to concrete roads. Flexible pavement failures are 
characterised by formation of potholes,  ruts, cracks and localised depressions while the 
main defect developed in rigid pavements is structural cracks.  Very little maintenance like 
maintenance of joints only is required in cement concrete roads. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Mi nistry may carefully analyze the cost -benefit analysis of the 
bituminous roads and cement concrete roads. The Committee feels that the road condition 
often witnessed on National Highways points to the need for a holistic review of the policy 
for evaluation  of materials to be used in order to ensure that best possible materials are 
being used and the National Highways being constructed are of best possible quality. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may take necessary steps to ensure 
that the choice of construction material used is made by factoring into account all long -
term pros and cons of choosing one material over the other, given the specific needs of the 
particular NH project. 
Road Safety 
29. The Ministry, in its background note, in formed the Sub-Committee that it has formulated 
a multi -pronged strategy to address the issue of road safety based on education, Engineering 
(both roads and vehicles), Enforcement and Emergency care. Accordingly, various initiatives 
have been taken by the Ministry as detailed below:- 
(i)      EDUCATION:   
● The Ministry is implementing a scheme for undertaking publicity measures and 
awareness campaigns on road safety to create awareness among road users through the 
electronic media, print media, NGOs etc. 
● Observance of National Road Safety Month every year for spreading awareness and 
strengthening road safety. 

11 
● A Certification Course for Road Safety Auditors has been started in Indian Academy of 
Highway Engineers (IAHE). 
(ii)    ENGINEERING (ROADS AND VEHICLES) 
Road engineering: 
● Road safety has been made an integral part of road design at planning, design and 
operation stage. 
● Roads are designed and constructed as per relevant IRC codes/Manuals, which prescribes 
for Design & Construction with Zero Accidents. 
● Guidelines for pedestrian facilities on National Highways for persons with disabilities 
have also been issued to all States / UTs. 
● High priority for identification and rectification of black spots (accident prone spots) on 
National Highways. 
● The threshold for four laning of National Highway has been reduced from 15,000 
Passenger Car Units (PCUs) to 10,000 PCUs. 
● The Ministry has delegated powers to Regional Officers of MORTH/NHAI/NHIDCL for 
technical approval of detailed estimates for rectification of identi fied Road Accident 
black spots. 
Vehicle Engineering: 
● Safety standards for automobiles have been improved. 
● Mandatory Airbags for Front Co-passengers. 
● Scheme for setting up one model Inspection & Certification Centre in each State/UT with 
Central assistance for testing the fitness of vehicles through an automated system. 
(iii)   ENFORCEMENT: 
● The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 provides for strict enforcement through use 
of technology and further provides for strict penalties for ensuring strict complianc e and 
enhancing deterrence for traffic rule violations. 
● Issue of Guidelines for protection of Good Samaritans and draft rules as per Motor 
Vehicle (amendment) Act, 2019 have been published. Launching of scheme for award to 
Good Samaritans. 
● Rules for accred itation of Driving Training Centres in the country have been notified to 
make the driving training scientific and systematic, vest the accredited Driving Training 

12 
Center with certain functions like testing of aspirants for issue of driving license and to 
make accredited driving Training Centre a commercially viable business proposition 
(iv)    EMERGENCY CARE:  
● The Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 provides for a scheme for the cashless 
treatment of victims of the accident during the golden hour. 
● The NHAI  has made provisions for ambulances at all toll  plazas on the completed 
corridor of National Highways.   
● Further, out of this, 310 ambulances have been upgraded to Basic Life Support as per 
AIS-125. 
30. In addition, various aspects of road safety are taken  care of during the preparation of 
DPR keeping in view available guidelines, latest developments in standards, as per which the 
road safety aspect is improved through development of NHs. 
31. The Committee appreciates the Ministry‟s efforts in terms of vari ous activities 
undertaken by it to bolster road safety in the country viz., spreading awareness about road 
safety, road and vehicle engineering, enforcement of the existing legal/legislative provisions 
for road safety and emergency care. However, India ran ks number 1 in the world in terms 
of road accident deaths as per a 2021 World Bank Report 1 and this highlights the need for 
much stronger, well-coordinated efforts to be put into minimizing the large number of road 
accidents taking place on Indian roads an d highways. The loss of so many lives in road 
accidents every year has a severe detrimental effect on the lives of a large number of 
families as well as the overall Indian economy. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry may formulate a holi stic multi -pronged strategy in coordination with 
State Governments and Union Ministries concerned in order to minimize the number of 
road accidents and resulting deaths on Indian roads.  
32. The Committee further recommends that a robust database may be maintained 
recording important details relating to all fatal accidents taking place on National 
Highways across the country and the information obtained may be analyzed to identify 
patterns poi nting to possible faults in road and vehicle engineering. Provisions may be 
made for a third -party survey of the stretch of NH where a fatal accident takes place, that 
                                                           
1 Source: World Bank 2021 Report titled “Traffic Crash Injuries and Disabilities: The Burden on Indian Society” 


13 
may be carried out immediately after such an accident, to assess the state of 
implementation of road safety provisions such as signages, street light, road quality etc. 
prescribed for that particular stretch. The survey would help find the reasons behind the 
lapse in road safety provisions, if any, on the NH stretch and accountability may be placed 
on the concerned officials and/or road contractors for any lapses. Inferences derived from 
such surveys can be utilized to find gaps in the existing road safety provisions on NHs 
which can be plugged to ensure that upcoming National Highways across the country are 
as safe as possible, with special focus on road safety from the DPR stage itself.  
33. The Committee may be apprised of the present status of  implementation of the 
scheme for the cashless treatment of victims of the accident during the gol den hour, as 
provided by the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 alongwith reasons for delay in 
implementation, if any. 
34. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in Para 277 of its 296 th Report 
on „Role of Highways in Nation Building‟, which is as follows: 
The Committee feels that the Ministry should lay much more emphasis on its 
road safety awareness initiatives. Social media may be utilized for this purpose. 
The Committee desires that the Ministry may, in coordination with Ministry of 
Education, introduce information pertaining to road safety, basic road 
etiquettes, action to be taken in case of an accident, etc. in school curriculum 
across the country.  
35. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may analyze the road safety 
provisions on hi ghways in developed countries where the accident rates are much lower 
than that of India‟s National Highways. A foolproof inspection and monitoring mechanism 
may be set in place to ensure that road safety provisions prescribed for the National 
Highways are strictly implemented as per the guidelines and rules in this regard.  
36. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may come up with provisions 
to make it mandatory to install street lights on the entire National Highways network in the 
country since poor lighting conditions lead to severe accidents. The regular maintenance of 
these street lights may also be suitably ensured in coordination with the concerned 
agencies. 

14 
37. The Committee also strongly recommends that the Ministry may thoroughly ass ess 
the requirements for ambulances on the NH network across the country and arrange for 
the same in coordination with the concerned agencies so as to enable quality care to 
accident victims during the golden hour. Availability of ambulances may especially  be 
ensured near accident -prone sites and black spots. The Ministry/NHAI may spread 
awareness regarding the helpline number to avail urgent medical assistance in case of road 
accidents, through suitable means. 
38. The Committee is of the view that having p rovisions for food joints, restrooms, 
toilets and other amenities alongside National Highways can reduce the menace of illegal 
parking of vehicles on NHs and help avoid accidents, since the drivers would be able to 
relax and refresh themselves without park ing outside the designated areas. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may chalk out a plan to have 
provisions for such spaces at regular intervals on NHs, possibly in partnership with the 
original landowners, on the entire NH network. Do ing so would provide NH passengers 
with a more comfortable experience while providing a regular source of revenue to the 
landowners whose land was acquired for the construction of the NH. 
39. The Committee feels that awareness of traffic rules would go a l ong way in 
improving the driving habits of drivers in the country, making the roads safer for 
everyone. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may partner with 
NGOs and educational institutions in order to raise awareness of traffic rules a nd road 
safety. 
40. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may issue guidelines to limit the 
number of hours commercial drivers can drive in a day to a reasonable limit, say, 10 hours 
a day. If a suitable mechanism can be devised to implement this in e arnest, this would 
ensure that commercial drivers are well rested, making the roads safer for all travellers. 
41. The Committee recommends that helicopter landing facilities should be developed 
at toll plazas across the country at a certain defined distanc e, so as to enable urgent 
medical assistance to accident victims. 
Rectification of Black Spots 

15 
42. The Ministry, in its background note on the subject, informed the Sub -Committee that 
there are total 1087 identified Accident Black Spots on NHs in the States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Bihar, Maharashtra and Telangana put together. Out of these, 1068 accident bla ck spots are  on 
NH network, temporary rectification measures have been completed for almost all black spots 
and permanent rectifications have been completed in 834 nos. of accident black spot locations, 
permanent rectification works are in progress in 118  nos. of black spot and 116 nos. of 
permanent rectification works are in the process of sanction/DPR. The permanent rectification 
works are likely to be completed by December 2024.   High priority has been accorded for 
identification and rectification of black spots (accident prone spots on National Highways). The 
Ministry has defined Protocol for identification and Rectification of Blackspot on NHs vide the 
policy letters dated 28.10. 2015, dated 07.12.2015 and dated 26.08.2019. In this regard, the 
Ministry has issued several guidelines/circulars for rectification of black spots so that the 
occurrence of road accidents could be minimized and precious lives of the road users are saved. 
The Ministry has taken up identification and rectification of Black Spots on war footing. Various 
Measures taken by the Ministry for rectification of Accident Black Spots are as below:  
(i)      MoRTH has made it mandatory to carry out all stage (Design, co nstruction, and operation) 
road safety audits for all National Highways and rectification of accident/black spots 
accordingly. 
(ii)     Provision of Rumble strips or bar markings at the approaches of junctions on NHs. 
(iii)    Provision of Speed Limit signs at desired locations of NHs network. 
(iv)     As per IRC-67 -2012, Sign Boards are provided in regional/local language and English to 
alert the drivers.  
(v)      Provision of speed breakers and associated signage on side roads. 
(vi)     Provision of amber beacons for traffic approaching a junction.  
(vii)    Encouraging Engineers for certificate course in Road Safety Audit for which MOUs 
(Memorandum of Understanding) are signed with IITs and other leading technical 
education/research institutions. 
(viii)   Developed a Blackspot MIS portal where details of all blackspots, ids, photographs, and 
rectification status and post rectification feedback is collected and monitored. 
  

16 
43. The Ministry informed the Committee that The rectification of road accident bl ack spots  
is done on the basis of outcome of Road safety Audits. Road safety Audit is conducted as per 
IRC SP 88: 2019 “Manual on Road safety Audit”. Vide Ministry‟s circular no RW/NH -
29011/08/2019-S&R(P&B) dated 26.08.2019, following corrective remedial measures have been 
suggested depending upon the location of black spot as under:- 
Depending upon the site condition/requirement the corrective measures may require only 
Short Term Measures, and in some cases Long Term Measures including Cautionary 
Measures or Short Term Measures. 
(a)Short term measures: 
The suggestive items/measures: (i) Pedestrian facilities like Zebra crossings (ii) 
Crash barriers/ railings (iii) Solar lights (iv) Junction improvements (v) Road signs 
inter-alia speed limits sign, pavement /road markings, delineators, studs/ cats eye. 
(vi) Traffic calming measures including rumble strips (vii) Repairing/maintenance 
of unsafe road/appurtenance including filling of berms/shoulders on National 
Highways (viii) Restriction of certain types of veh icles, one way streets, reversible 
lanes, bus lanes, restriction on movement of different types of vehicles by time/ by 
lane etc., specially in urban areas. 
(b) Long term permanent measure: Based on inspections, survey investigations etc., if it is 
concluded that the spot requires long term measures, a detailed estimate may have to be 
prepared for the same. In such situations some of the short term measures as mentioned in 
above para and following cautionary measures are considered . 
Some of the long term s uggestive measures depending upon the location of black 
spots are as under: 
 
Location of Black spot Corrective / remedial measures 

17 
Obstacles such as trees, poles, structure, etc. 
within the clear zone, encroachments etc. 
Shifting/removal of these obstacles or providing 
other safety measures including crash barriers etc. 
Further, set back distance at all locations should 
invariably be achieved 
At grade junction Flyovers, underpasses, overpasses at-grade junction 
improvements etc. 
Deficient geometry Improvement of horizontal/vertical alignment, 
curvature or other safety measures including crash 
barrier etc. 
Mix traffic Providing service lane, Footpath, crash barrier etc. 
Distressed/narrow Bridge/culvert Reconstruction, rehabilitation / widening of the 
bridges 
Crossing of pedestrians/habitant area/ school/ 
hospitals/ educational institute etc. 
Foot over bridges under passes, zebra crossings etc. 
Animal/ cattle crossing Cattle passes/VUP, fencing etc. 
Hill roads/sharp curves Various safety measures including crash barriers 
 
44. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take immediate steps to ensure 
that the black spots on National Highways across the country are rectified on a war 
footing. Data pertaining to black spots may be analyzed to ascertain why the particular 
spots ended up causing so many road accidents and what steps could have been taken at 
the road design and construction stage to avoid the same from becoming black spots. The 
inferences drawn may be utilized in futur e NH projects across the country in order to 
minimize the development of black spots therein. 

18 
45. The Committee recommends that CCTV cameras may be installed at accident 
prone sites, black spots which are yet to be rectified, and other important locations on the 
NHs to monitor road accidents and arrange urgent medical help. Drone services may also 
be utilized for watching and regulating vehicle movements on NHs and aqeuate budgetary 
provisions for the same may be ensured. 
46. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may onboard the State 
Government Departments concerned, to utilize the Blackspot MIS portal as well so that the 
State Departments can develop a similar system of identification, data collection and 
rectification of black spots on NHs maintained by PWDs, State Highways and other district 
roads. 
47. During the meeting of the Sub -Committee held on 9 th May, 2022, Chairperson, NHAI 
informed that NHAI has identified about 4,002 black spots out of which 2,569 black spots have 
been rectified while work is in progress to rectify about 689 black spots. She stated that there is a 
dearth of road safety auditors in the country and that NHAI has taken up training programme of 
road safety audit to create its own force of road safety auditors. 
48. The Committee hopes that the road safety audit training programme being taken up 
by NHAI suffices to mee t the requirement of road safety auditors in the country. The 
Committee recommends that NHAI may outsource any interim requirements for road 
safety auditors as road safety audits play a crucial role in ensuring safety provisions on 
NHs across the country a nd dearth of human resources cannot be an excuse to delay the 
audits. 
Encroachment of NHs and the issue of stray cattle/wildlife 
49. In its meetings held on 8 th April and 9 th May, 2022, various members of the Sub -
Committee raised the issue of stray cattle and animals on NHs often causing accidents and 
clogging of highways due to local markets, shops, hotels, parking of trucks at nights etc. In 
response to a query regarding the steps taken by the Ministry on the issue, the Ministry informed 
that during the DPR stage itself, it is envisioned to incorporate any special corridors for 
movement of wildlife / cattle, if required, and efforts are made to plan the highways with as 
much degree of access control as possible to prevent any animal -vehicle conflicts. Further, in 
case certain  specific locations develop into black spots due to repeated incidents, fencing/ 
boundary wall may be planned for rectification of black spots. As regard s encroachment, the 

19 
Ministry informed that the powers of highway administration have been decentralised to PIU 
level by Govt. of India and special drives are conducted at PIU level with the assistance of local 
police & administration to remove such encroachments from the National Highways. 
50. The Ministry further submitted that there is no provision of regulating parking on 
National Highways other than traffic regulation being carried out by State Police. Besides “No 
parking” signs which are mandatory/compulsory signs are installed to prevent parking at specific 
locations on National Highways in the interest of safety. However, amenities such as Truck as 
well as Bus Lay Byes along with wayside amenities are incorporated in the DPR stage itself as 
per the ou tcome of survey investigations so as to facilitate land acquisition for such facilities. 
These facilities are provisioned for construction in the tender documents. Parking outside the 
designated areas along the National Highways may attract fine under High way Administration 
rules, 2004  as per control of National Highways (Land & Traffic) Act, 2002. 
51. The Ministry informed the Sub -Committee that the access permission to all types of 
private properties including Hotels along National Highways is given as per latest guidelines 
issued by MoRTH vide letter No. RW/NH/33032/01/2017/S&R(R) dated 26.06.2020. Th e 
guidelines have been formulated keeping in view the aspects of road safety as well as unhindered 
smooth flow of traffic in mind. 
52. The Committee feels that the issue of stray cattle and animals on National Highways 
is very serious and often causes fata l road accidents. The Committee notes that special 
corridors for the movement of wildlife/cattle, if required, is envisioned by the Ministry at 
the DPR stage itself and in case certain specific locations develop into black spots due to 
repeated incidents, fencing/boundary wall is planned for rectification of the black spots. 
The Committee is dismayed to note that provisions for fencing/boundary wall to prevent 
wildlife/cattle is planned after several incidents of fatal accidents on a particular stretch 
cause it to become a black spot. There should be some mechanism to monitor the frequency 
of incidents of wildlife/ cattle straying on roads even when the same has not caused any 
fatal accident yet, and proactive steps may be taken to curb the same. Necessary a ction 
may be taken to coordinate with local law enforcement or concerned agencies to impose a 
penalty on cattle/animal-rearers for letting out their animals on National Highways. 
53. The Committee notes that provisions already exist for imposing fines for parking 
outside the designated areas on National Highways but the ground reality points to the lack 

20 
of proper implementation of the same. Trucks and vehicles parked on ill -lit highways at 
night time cause severe accidents and as such, tackling this problem  should be a matter of 
high priority. The Committee notes that this issue may be looked into and possible 
solutions may be devised and implemented in earnest, in coordination with the concerned 
agencies.  
54. The Committee recommends that the Ministry/NHAI  may take a serious look into 
the issue of encroachment of service roads by local markets and create an effective policy 
in order to curb the same, which may be implemented in coordination with concerned 
agencies.  
55. The Committee further recommends that provisions may be included in the NHAI‟s 
Sukhad Yatra app to allow highway users to post complaints about encroachment and 
stray cattles/animals on NHs. 
56. The Committee feels that the Ministry/NHAI should work on controlling access to 
National Highways to the extent possible, since doing so allows vehicles to travel at faster 
speeds, with lesser chances of accidents as merging traffic is controlled at entry points. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the feasibility of raising the heig ht 
of National Highways to generally control uncontrolled free access to the NHs. The 
Committee feels that this could lower the incidents of stray cattle/wildlife roaming on the 
NHs as well. 
Speed Breakers 
57. During its meetings, the Committee noted the l ack of adequate markings on speed 
breakers and sought to know the guidelines/rules in place for the construction of speed breakers 
on National Highways. In its written reply in this regard, the Ministry informed the Committee 
that Design and construction o f roads including National Highways (NHs) are carried out as per 
Indian Roads Congress (IRC) codes and Ministry of Road Transport & Highways‟ guidelines. 
The standards for construction of speed breakers are contained in IRC Code No. IRC:99 -1988 
“tentative guidelines on the provision of speed breakers for control of vehicular speeds on minor 
roads.” Wherever reduction of speed on NHs becomes unavoidable due to specific site 
constraints, States / UTs have been asked to provide rumble strips as per the Ministr y‟s 
guidelines as traffic calming measures. Further,  Ministry of Road Transport & Highways has 

21 
also requested vide letter no. RW/NH -33037/01/2016/S&R(R) dated 11 th April, 2016 to all the 
States to remove unauthorized speed breakers from National Highways and recommended the 
provision of Rumble strips at locations like approaches to sharp curves, level crossings, 
congested or accident prone locations etc., where control of speed is unavoidable on NHs. 
58. The Committee notes that the standards for construct ion of speed breakers are 
contained in IRC Code No. IRC:99 -1988 “Tentative guidelines on the provision of speed 
breakers for control of vehicular speeds on minor roads”. Since the aforementioned 
tentative guidelines had been published decades ago, the Comm ittee would like to know 
whether any steps have been taken by the Ministry/IRC to frame new guidelines for the 
provision of speed breakers on National Highways in light of new construction technologies 
and relevant data/studies in this regard. The Committe e is of the strong view that all 
codes/guidelines prescribed for the construction of National Highways and provisions 
relating thereto, should be periodically reviewed and necessary revisions must be made 
from time to time to make the most of modern techno logies and developments in the road 
sector. 
59. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may strongly take up the 
matter of removal of unauthorized speed breakers from National Highways with State 
Governments, since such speed breakers not only slows down the speed of the traffic on the 
NHs, but could also lead to accidents in absence of proper markings. The Ministry may 
implement a mechanism to periodically survey the National Highways for presence of 
unauthorized speed breakers, poor quality of roads, potholes, absence of signages etc. so 
that requirements of maintenance and remedial action can be identified and met. 
Service Roads  
60. The Ministry, in its background note, informed the Committee that Service Roads are 
meant for improving road safety by segregating the local traffic from the through traffic. 
Accordingly, the service roads are provided as part of the projects at built up locations along the 
highways in urban areas, in expressways to serve local traffic/population. Adequate care i s taken 
to assess the requirement of Service Roads along the NHs. 
61. In response to a query of the Sub -Committee regarding linkage of local roads to main 
highways, the Ministry, in its written reply, informed that connectivity between existing road 

22 
network and national highways is ensured during conceptualization of highway projects. It 
further stated that in some cases, connectivity includes provision of service roads and vehicular 
underpasses to provide connectivity to the local community. Provision of s ervice roads is made 
for National Highway projects wherever found necessary. In particular along Greenfield 
corridors, development of service roads is not in line with the concept of access -controlled 
corridors and would diminish the benefits of these flag ship corridors. In such cases Ministry has 
ensured development of underpasses along the corridor to ensure un-hindered movement of local 
population with additional provisions made as per site requirements. It is intended to provide 
sufficient crossing faci lities along the corridor in the DPR stage itself. However, for various 
reasons, such as, development of new industries, changes in development plans by the local 
district authorities etc., sometimes, the need for additional provisions arises during execut ion.  
To cater to these requirements expeditiously, authority for development of these underpasses has  
been delegated to field officers to expedite the process. 
62. Given the crucial role of service roads in improving road safety on the NH network, 
the Co mmittee reiterates its following recommendation made in para 117 of its 317th 
Report on DFG (2022-23) of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways: 
The Committee observes that the lack of service roads alongside 
National Highways causes inconvenience to local residents and is, at times, the 
cause of road accidents. The land required for development of National 
Highways is acquired from the local people and they should be given the 
benefits of service roads along National Highways. The Committee feels that  
service roads are an integral part of National Highways and therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may make it mandatory to have service roads 
along NHs to the extent possible and provisions for the same may be included 
in the tender document for NH projects. 
63. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry/NHAI may ensure that the 
quality of service roads is as good as the main National Highway especially in terms of load 
capacity as heavy vehicles plying on the NHs also use the service roads at ti mes. Special 
budgetary allocation may be made to ensure the provision of service roads alongside NHs, 
to the extent possible, at the DPR stage itself.  

23 
64. The Committee notes that the development of service roads along Greenfield 
corridors is not in line with the concept of access-controlled corridors and that the Ministry 
has ensured the development of underpasses along the corridor to ensure un -hindered 
movement of local population. In this regard, the Committee recommends that drainage 
provisions may be  made a core part of such underpasses, keeping in mind the rainfall 
statistics of the region. 
 
Research and Development 
65. The Ministry furnished the following details regarding the allocation and expenditure 
under budget head of “Research and Development” by the Ministry during the last 5 years are 
given below. The Ministry stated that However, these figures do not include the expenditure 
incurred by NHAI on their R&D projects. 
Amount in Rs. Crore 
Year RE Allocation Expenditure 
2017-18 78.32 8.05 
2018-19 40.88 8.71 
2019-20 39.28 29.52 
2020-21 79.00 34.36 
2021-22 48.96 41.43 
66. In reply to a query of the Committee regarding research activity carried out to minimize 
the damage caused to National Highways in flood -prone states such as Bihar, Maharashtra etc., 
the Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that Research activities carried out by 
MoRTH are aimed at sustainable development with development of new materials/technology, 

24 
use of waste/marginal materials, reducing carbon footprints, faster construction, longer 
durability, etc., which also help in building better  quality roads in flood prone states such as 
Bihar but no separate research activities to minimize the damage caused to National Highways in 
flood-prone states has  been carried out. However, in Wadkhal -Aligabh Section of NH -166A in 
Maharashtra, NHAI has s tarted research trials under supervision of CRRI (Central Road 
Research Institute - New Delhi) with an aim to minimize the damage caused to National 
Highways during floods/rains. 
67. The Committee notes that adequate research is required for construction a nd 
development of roads. Specifications/guidelines/codes prescribed by the Ministry/NHAI for 
construction of roads directly determine the quality of NHs and their longevity. It is crucial 
that due importance is given to research activities in the road sect or. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that more budget should be allocated for this purpose. 
Given the crucial role played by Indian Roads Congress (IRC) in conducting research and 
preparing and publishing technical specifications for road cons truction across the country, 
the Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that IRC is granted adequate 
budgetary allocation so that it can carry out its mandate effectively. It should also be 
ensured that the budgetary requirements of other roa d research agencies like Central 
Road Research Institute (CRRI), Indian Academy of Highway Engineers (IAHE), NHAI‟s 
Standards, Research and Development & Quality (SRD&Q) Division, are properly met. 
The Ministry may facilitate coordination between these age ncies through a suitable 
mechanism and encourage them to collaborate with leading road research institutions in 
the world so that global best road construction and safety standards can be implemented in 
the Indian road sector. 
68. The Committee notes that the majority of Indian roads face the most damage 
during the monsoon season.  Water logging in bitumen roads leads to potholes due to the 
eroding of the asphalt layer.  To prevent water damage, most Indian roads do have a 
Camber which is the slope provided  to the road surface to drain off water but lack storm 
water drains which take the water which is drained to the side by a Camber and carry it off 
to a water body. Without drainage, a road will suffer during a monsoon even if it is well -
constructed.  In Tamil Nadu, rainwater harvesting was made compulsory some years back 
and since then there is less damage to the roads. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that drainage provisions should be made mandatory at the DPR stage itself, especially for 

25 
NH projects in high -rainfall regions. The Committee further recommends that the 
Ministry may carry out thorough research in this regard in collaboration with expert 
research bodies and review its existing codes/guidelines, if any, for drainage provisions on 
NHs, based on the outcomes of the research.  
Arbitration between the Ministry/NHAI and the Contractors 
69. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that arbitration between the 
contractor and the NHAI / Ministry is governed by the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 
(Arbitration Act). In August 2013, NHAI & the National Highways Builders Fe deration (NHBF) 
had  set up a Society for Affordable Redressal of Disputes (SAROD) to conduct arbitration in a 
cost effective and time-bound manner and to ensure dispute resolution by technical experts. The 
SAROD has been incorporated under Societies Registration Act, 1860 on 25th October 2013  for 
settlement of Disputes through Arbitration in a cost effective and time bound manner. 
70. The Ministry informed the Sub-Committee that the main objectives of SAROD are: 
● To reduce cost of arbitration. 
● For expeditious disposal of disputes in just and fair manner. 
● To reduce pendency of disputes. 
● To evolve subject matter technical experts in arbitration process. 
71. With regard to the criteria for appointment of arbitrators, the Ministry stated that SAROD 
has a list o f empanelled arbitrators, who are field experts. Under SAROD rules, any dispute 
under INR 3 crores will be resolved by a single arbitrator appointed from the panel. If the dispute 
is worth more, parties shall appoint an odd number of arbitrators, but the p residing arbitrator 
must be from the panel maintained by SAROD. The SAROD rules also ensure neutrality and 
independence of the arbitrators by having a code of conduct and disallowing the arbitrator to 
make a unilateral agreement with any of the parties.  T he parties to the dispute are free to choose 
from the panel of arbitrators maintained by SAROD in order to respect the principle of party 
autonomy and ensure a fair dispute resolution.  The present & future Concession Agreements 
now have a „Dispute Resolut ion Clause‟ enabling referring of the disputes to „SAROD‟ for 
amicable dispute resolution.   
72. The Committee takes note of the mechanism presently in place for arbitration and 
resolution of disputes between the authority and road contractors. The Committ ee 

26 
observes that disputes between the concessionaire and the authority is one of the core 
reasons behind delays in road projects. Therefore, having an effective mechanism in place 
to minimize the delay resolution time to the extent possible is very importa nt to avoid cost 
and time overruns in execution of NH projects. The Committee desires the Ministry to 
holistically examine the efficacy of the existing arbitration and dispute resolution 
mechanism in settling disputes between the involved parties and strea mline the same so as 
to avoid litigations as far as possible. Further, it has come to the notice of the Committee 
that a significant portion of the amount of claims presently under arbitration pertain to a 
select few big concessionaires  (details are placed  at Annexure -III). The Committee notes 
that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has supplied the reasons for pending 
arbitration cases. The concessionaires raised the claims on ground of delay in declaration 
of appointed date, delay in obtaining environment clearance, prolongation of project due to 
various reasons, termination payment, loss of toll revenue, delay in commencement of toll 
operation, loss of productivity of machinery, loss of revenue to the concessionaires 
envisaged in the financial model before accepting the project, etc..  The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should study the reasons thoroughly  to identify the veracity 
of the reasons and ensure that such reasons should not become a reason in future for delay 
of projects or arbitrations.  
73. The Committee may be apprised of the steps being taken by the Ministry to penalize 
road contractors who habitually take road projects to litigation without solid basis for the 
same, causing undue delays in completion of road projects.  
74. The Committee further desires to be apprised about whether any mechanism is in 
place to ensure that road contractors, if blacklisted, do not start bidding for new projects 
by registering under a new name. 
 
Setting up Dedicated Underground Utility Corridors 
75. The Ministry, in its written reply regarding setting up dedicated underground utility 
corridors for laying of optical fiber cables, sewage lines etc. without frequent trenching of NHs, 
informed the Committee that for crossing of utilities across the gr eenfield highways utility ducts 
at suitable intervals are laid to avoid cutting of roads or costly drilling methods. The Ministry 

27 
further stated that for carrying out feasibility of laying of integrated utility corridor along 
highway in green field corridors, NHAI has engaged Andhra Pradesh Urban Infrastructure Asset 
Management Limited (APUIAML) for development of model framework/SOPs for laying of 
utility ducts along National Highways. As per feasibility report submitted by APUIAML, the 
combined utility corridor is capital intensive and as such is not viable. However, consultant has 
reported that among all utilities, laying of OFC lines in the utility corridor may be feasible. 
Accordingly, bids have been invited by National Highways Logistics Management Lim ited 
(NHLML), for laying of OFC on Delhi Mumbai Expressway and Hyderabad Bangalore 
Industrial Corridor on Pilot  basis. 
76. The Ministry further stated that at present no draft policy is in contemplation by NHAI 
related to utility corridor and monetization  thereof. However, a committee has been constituted 
by the Department of Telecommunications to prepare Designs and Standards for Common Ducts 
& Posts Infrastructure” to be established along public pathways. 
77. The Committee notes that the feasibility repo rt submitted by Andhra Pradesh 
Urban Infrastructure Asset Management Limited (APUIAML) has found the combined 
utility corridor to be capital intensive and not viable. The Committee hopes that 
APUIAML has considered the lifecycle cost of the utility corrido r and looked into the 
operationalization and monetization of underground utility corridors in developed 
countries. The Committee desires to know from the Ministry whether APUIAML or the 
Ministry factored in the cost borne by the public/private organization s in frequent 
trenching/digging of NHs for laying different types of cables/lines and repair thereof, while 
examining the feasibility of underground utility corridors.  The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may take steps to figure out how the undergr ound utility corridors are 
being viably implemented in other countries and analyze whether a similar approach could 
help make the underground utility corridors viable in India. 
 
Women Safety 
78. The Ministry, in its written reply, furnished the following b udget allocation and 
expenditure details under the head 'Scheme on Women Safety' for the last 5 years are as under:- 

28 
Allocation Details – Road Transport: Scheme for Women Safety on Public Road 
Transport 
S.No. Financial Year BE (in Rs Crore) RE (in Rs Crore) 
1 2022-23 20 -- 
2 2021-22 100 33 
3 2020-21 174.36 140 
4 2019-20 174.36 174.36 
5 2018-19 174.36 174.36 
6 2017-18 Funds received from MWCD, project-wise 
  
Expenditure Details - Road Transport: Scheme for Women Safety on Public Road 
Transport 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project/ Scheme Year-wise release of Funds (Rs. Cr.) 
2017-18 2018-
19 
2019-
20 
2020-
21 
2021-
22 
Total 
Release 
1. 
Abhaya Project Proposal for 
safety of women and girl 
child, Govt. of Andhra 
Pradesh 
58.64 NIL NIL NIL NIL 58.64 

29 
2. 
Women‟s safety in public 
transport, UPSRTC, Govt. 
of U.P. 
40.20 NIL 40.72 NIL NIL 80.92 
3. 
Bengaluru Metropolitan 
Transport Corporation, 
Govt. of Karnataka on 
Training women for heavy 
passenger vehicles 
NIL 33.64 NIL NIL NIL 33.64 
4. 
Development, 
customization, deployment 
and management of State-
wise vehicle tracking 
platform 
NIL NIL 25.704 139.332 22.07 192.06 
 
79. The Committee feels that a lot needs to be done to improve the state of safety of 
women on public road transport like installing proper signages , cell phone networks, street 
lights, highway patrol etc. The Committee is dismayed to note the declining trend of 
budgetary allocation under the „Scheme on Women Safety‟ in the last 5 years and desires 
to be apprised of the reasons behind the underutilization of the funds.  
80. From the expenditure details furnished by the Ministry, the Committee notes that 
only three States have been provided funds under this scheme, besides the expenditure 
incurred under „Development, customization, deployment and manage ment of State -wise 
vehicle tracking platform‟. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may come up 
with new schemes to improve safety of women on National Highways in coordination with 
State Government Departments concerned with public transportation. S uitable provisions 
may be made to prominently display helpline numbers for women on the NH network 
across the country using well-illuminated signages in multiple languages. 
81. The Sub -Committee further observed that Andhra Pradesh and Telangana are among 
seven States/UTs which have not opted for the Scheme for State-wise Vehicle Tracking Platform 

30 
under Nirbhaya Scheme which aims to improve safety of women in public transport.  The Sub -
Committee sought to know whether the Ministry had raised the issue with the respective State 
Government of AP and Telangana to ascertain the reasons behind their non -participation in the 
Scheme, as recommended by the Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture in its 317 th 
Report on DFG (2022 -23) of the Ministry. The Ministry,  in its written reply, informed the Sub -
Committee that Andhra Pradesh has applied for the funds for setting up the Monitoring Centre 
and the funds have been disbursed vide Sanction order dated 31.03.2022. The Ministry submitted 
that Telangana has not applied for funds for setting up the Monitoring Centre and that the 
Ministry has brought this to the notice of the State Government vide letter dated 26.02.2021 and 
reminders dated 23.03.2021, 30.07.2021, 30.09.2021, 02.11.2021 and 06.12.2021. The Ministry 
stated that further efforts are being made to get the State on board. 
82. The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons, if any, furnished by the 
Government of Telangana for not applying for funds for setting up the monitoring centre. 
The Committee recommends that the issue may be taken up at higher levels with the State 
Government in order to permit the implementation of the scheme in Telangana. 
Overloaded Trucks 
83. During the meetings of the Sub -Committee on the subject, some of the Members raised 
the issue of overloaded vehicles causing damage to the roads which are not built to withstand 
such heavy vehicles. The Committee strongly feels that overloaded vehicles not onl y cause 
severe damage to the roads, but also pose a significant safety risk to other vehicles plying on the 
road.  
84. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may undertake a systematic study of 
the damage caused by overloaded trucks on National Highway s and the negative impact of 
the same on the longevity and safety of the highways. 
85. The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may take immediate 
measures to curb the menace of overloaded vehicles on National Highways such as 
rectifying weighing machines which are non -functional for a long time. Hefty fines should 
be imposed on vehicles not abiding by the limits. The Ministry may coordinate with the 
concerned Ministries and State Departments to introduce provisions for penalty on the 
consignor and consignee as well, besides the truck owners. The Committee feels that doing 

31 
so would deter the loading of excess load from the source itself and prevent damage to NHs 
while also improving road safety. 
86. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may e xplore the possibilities of 
reforming the provisions to charge toll on the basis of weight of the vehicles, instead of 
axle-based toll collection. The Committee feels that the implementation of weigh -in motion 
system to issue automated challans/ penalty wo uld eliminate the possible collusion of 
corrupt officials with the heavy vehicle owners and help curb the menace of overloading.  
 
Poor quality of construction by Sub-Contractors 
87. Some Members of the Sub -Committee raised the issue that big road contract ors who are 
handling 20-25 projects, sublet large projects to small contractors who do not get paid on time by 
the big contractors, thus halting the progress of road projects. 
 
88. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the issue and, if 
possible, consider making direct payments to approved sub -contractors to mitigate the 
delays caused by the main contractors. The Committee also desires to be apprised of the 
reasons for which the Ministry/NHAI prefers allowing contractors to hire sub -contractors 
as compared to breaking down the project into smaller stretches on its own so that smaller 
contractors could also bid for the same. 
Miscellaneous Recommendations 
Road Connectivity to Tourist Destinations 
89. The Committee feels that robust road conn ectivity to tourist destinations is one of 
the prerequisites to developing the country as a tourism hub. In view of this, the 
Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may allocate special budgetary 
provisions for the purpose of improving National Hi ghway connectivity to important 
tourist places across the country, seeking requirements for such projects from the Union 
Ministry of Tourism as well as State Tourism Departments. 
 

32 
Implementation of Recommendations made by the Committee 
90. The Committee re commends that the Ministry may analyze the recommendations/ 
observations made in this Report and executive orders, where possible, may be issued in 
order to implement the same on an urgent basis since doing so will help improve the state 
of maintenance and quality of NHs and improve road safety. In case implementing some of 
the recommendations made by the Committee requires legislative amendment, 
consultations may be made with the concerned departments and if necessary, amendment 
of the Acts administered upon by the Ministry may be introduced in the Parliament. 
 
Spur Road for linking Samastipur with NH-119D 
91. One of the Members raised the issue of removing the provision for a 2.1 km spur for 
linking the city of Samastipur with Package 3 of NH -119D Amas-Darbhanga Expressway, from 
the project and sought to know the reasons for the same. 
 
92. The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons for removing the provisions for 
the 2.1 km spur for linking the city of Samastipur with Package -3 of NH -119D A mas-
Darbhanga Expressway and recommends that the Ministry may consider including the 
provisions for the spur road to connect the city with the NH that is passing at a distance of 
just 2.1 km from it. 
*** 
  

33 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
Review of awarded/ongoing projects 
The Committee takes note of the ongoing NH projects in the States of Andhra Pradesh, 
Telangana, Bihar and Maharashtra and the various steps being taken by the Ministry to 
minimize delays in execution of the ongoing projects. The  Committee recommends that all 
the ongoing NH projects may be monitored closely, the onset of any sort of deviation from 
the scheduled timeline for a NH project may immediately be looked into and necessary 
remedial action may be taken at the earliest so as  to avoid significant time and cost 
overruns. 
(Para 9) 
The Committee recommends that due provisions for underpasses or flyover should be 
included at the DPR stage itself for all NH projects, for uninterrupted flow of both 
pedestrian and vehicular traffic f or every village/town near the highway as well as on 
accident-prone junctions, to minimize accidents. 
(Para 10) 
The Committee further recommends that CCTV cameras may be installed every few 
kilometers at the construction stage of road projects for close monitoring by NHAI officers/ 
engineers and other stakeholders including public representatives (MPs/MLAs). Doing so 
would permit round -the-clock ground -level monitoring of the progress being made in 
ongoing road projects and also inculcate fear amongst wrongdoers. If required, the CCTV 
project may be implemented with funds available under the Nirbhaya Scheme. The CCTV 
cameras thus installed can be made a part of the fully constructed road once the road 
project gets completed and can be used to monitor traffic movements/accidents/thefts etc. 
(Para 11) 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the present status of important road projects such 
as the Hajipur -Chhapra Highway (NH -19), Nagpur Outer Ring Road Package -I and II, 
six-lane road sanctioned from Diwancheruvu to Anakapalle, Greenfield NH 516E between 
Rajahmundry-Rampachodavaram, bridge across the Kanhan river, repair works at 
Nagpur-Bhandara Road, Patna -Gaya NH  etc., alongwith reasons for delay, if any, in 
execution of the same. 
(Para 12) 

34 
Maintenance & Quality of Road  
Maintenance and Repair (M&R) of Road 
The Committee takes note of the present mechanism for Maintenance and Repair (M&R) 
of National Highways in I ndia. However, the Committee is deeply concerned to note that 
the Ministry/NHAI is managing the maintenance and repair of NHs across the country 
with an allocation of just about 40% of the actual requirements estimated by the Ministry. 
The Committee feels that the shortfall of sufficient budgetary allocation is reflected in the 
sub-par quality of National Highways that is often witnessed across the country, especially 
in Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Bihar and Maharashtra. Maintenance and Repair of the 
existing National Highways is of utmost importance in order to keep them in a safe, pliable 
condition and to permit good average traffic speeds. This should be given higher priority 
than construction of new National Highways. In this regard, the Committee notes t hat it 
has repeatedly recommended a much higher budgetary allocation for Maintenance and 
Repair of National Highways in its previous Reports viz., para 75 of 317 th Report on 
Demands for Grants (2022 -23) of the Ministry, para 12 of 296 th Report on „Role of 
Highways in Nation Building‟, para 45 of 287 th Report on DFG (2021 -22) of the Ministry, 
para 55 of 278 th Report on DFG (2020 -21) of the Ministry, etc. The Committee has 
repeatedly observed that in the „Strategy for New India @ 75‟, NITI Aayog advocates tha t 
India should begin with earmarking 10 percent of its annual budget for Road and 
Highways for maintenance, to move towards the developed country norm of earmarking 40 
percent to 50 percent of the budget for roads and highways for maintenance. However, 
year-after-year, the actual budgetary allocation made for Maintenance and Repair of 
National Highways remains less than even 4 percent of the annual budget. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry must give much more priority to M&R 
of NHs across the country, allocate substantially higher budgetary allocation for M&R and 
utilize the same to implement a robust monitoring mechanism to identify and meet the 
M&R requirements on NHs across the country. The Ministry should be proactive in its  
approach towards M&R of NHs, carrying out well -defined maintenance checks and 
periodic M&R activities on NHs. 
(Para 17) 
The Committee recommends that 100% requirement for Maintenance and Repair 
projected by the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways shou ld be allocated in the 

35 
budget. Any reduction in the budget for M&R may result in deterioration of the roads 
constructed with hundreds of crores of National Budget which will be national wastage. 
(Para 18) 
The Committee feels that NHAI‟s „Sukhad Yatra‟ smar tphone application can be utilized 
to gain insights into requirements for M&R on NHs by making the general public a source 
of information for such requirements. In this regard, the Committee reiterates the 
following recommendation made in para 51 of its 31 7th Report on DFG (2022 -23) of the 
Ministry: 
The Committee is of the considered view that wide adoption of the application 
can help NHAI gain free actionable information regarding the issues being 
faced by NH users across the country, which can be quickly acted upon, thus 
ensuring a well -maintained a nd safe driving experience on the NHs. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may work upon improving 
the usability of the Sukhad Yatra smartphone application at the earliest and 
come up with innovative means to promote the application to N H users across 
the country. An option to seek feedback from the person posting a complaint 
using the app, may also be added so as to gain insight into whether the problem 
pointed out by the complainant has actually been resolved or not. 
(Para 19) 
The Commi ttee recommends that using the data collected through the Electronic Toll 
Collection (ETC) and other suitable means, the Ministry may analyze the average traffic 
speed of various stretches of National Highways. The Committee feels that the stretches 
with low average traffic speeds can then be monitored on a closer level to understand the 
issues throttling the traffic speed, which should lead to identification of M&R requirements 
on different stretches of NHs across the country.  
(Para 20) 
The Committee desi res to know the mechanism existing at present to identify M&R 
requirements on NHs across the country. The Committee further recommends that the 
Ministry may collaborate with leading research institutions to devise mechanisms to 
efficiently identify and exe cute the M&R requirements of the extensive NH network in the 
country. 

36 
(Para 21) 
Quality of Roads 
The Committee notes the existing mechanism to ensure that the road works are executed as 
per prescribed specifications and standards. However, in light of the sub-par quality of 
road construction often witnessed on NHs across the country, the Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may undertake a thorough review of the existing monitoring mechanism 
for road construction quality and come up with ways to plug the gaps in the same so as to 
ensure higher quality NHs in the future. The Committee further recommends that the 
Ministry may enact provisions for imposing severe financial penalty on the individuals 
appointed as Authority‟s Engineer/Supervision Consultants in  cases where gross 
negligence of the prescribed specifications and standards is observed in roads approved by 
them. 
(Para 23) 
The Committee appreciates the recent initiative of the Ministry to strengthen the Quality 
Control set up of NH projects by engagin g the services of Mobile Inspection Vans (MIVs) 
for Inspection and Quality assessment of NH projects. The Committee hopes that the pilot 
project for engaging the services of MIVs turns out to be a success so that the MIVs can be 
utilized across the country  for better quality control of ongoing and future NH projects in 
the country.  
(Para 25) 
The Committee recommends that provisions may be introduced to assess the condition of 
new NHs at a defined time period after their operationalization , especially in terms of 
issues such as gaps in construction, rutting and high number of potholes on the highway 
etc. Strict penal action may be taken against the road contractor as well as the approving 
authorities in case substantial degradation of the N H is observed within a short period of 
operationalization of a newly constructed NH. 
(Para 26) 
The Committee notes that bituminous roads (flexible pavements) are common in use in 
India since it is relatively cheaper as compared to concrete roads.  It is possible to construct 
relatively thin bituminous layers over existing pavements therefore the road can be 
strengthened by constructing bituminous pavement layers one after the other in stages in a 

37 
certain period of time unlike the cement concrete or rigid pa vement construction.  Cement 
concrete pavement has a high initial investment but has excellent riding surface and longer 
life of 20 or so years in contrast with bitumen roads which have an average lifespan of 4 -5 
years. Cement concrete roads are prevalent in most developed nations. In India, Mumbai 
has switched to concrete roads. Flexible pavement failures are characterised by formation 
of potholes, ruts, cracks and localised depressions while the main defect developed in rigid 
pavements is structural crack s.  Very little maintenance like maintenance of joints only is 
required in cement concrete roads. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may carefully analyze the cost -benefit analysis of the bituminous roads and 
cement concrete roads. The Committee feels that the road condition often witnessed on 
National Highways points to the need for a holistic review of the policy for evaluation of 
materials to be used in order to ensure that best possible materials are being used and the 
National Highw ays being constructed are of best possible quality. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may take necessary steps to ensure that the choice 
of construction material used is made by factoring into account all long-term pros and cons 
of cho osing one material over the other, given the specific needs of the particular NH 
project. 
(Para 28) 
Road Safety 
The Committee appreciates the Ministry‟s efforts in terms of various activities undertaken 
by it to bolster road safety in the country viz., spreading awareness about road safety, road 
and vehicle engineering, enforcement of the existing legal/legislative provisions for road 
safety and emergency care. However, India ranks number 1 in the world in terms of road 
accident deaths as per a 2021 World B ank Report 2 and this highlights the need for much 
stronger, well -coordinated efforts to be put into minimizing the large number of road 
accidents taking place on Indian roads and highways. The loss of so many lives in road 
accidents every year has a severe detrimenta l effect on the lives of a large number of 
families as well as the overall Indian economy. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the Ministry may formulate a holistic multi -pronged strategy in coordination with 
State Governments and Union Ministries co ncerned in order to minimize the number of 
road accidents and resulting deaths on Indian roads.  
                                                           
2 Source: World Bank 2021 Report titled “Traffic Crash Injuries and Disabilities: The Burden on Indian Society” 


38 
(Para 31) 
The Committee further recommends that a robust database may be maintained recording 
important details relating to all fatal accidents taking place on  National Highways across 
the country and the information obtained may be analyzed to identify patterns pointing to 
possible faults in road and vehicle engineering. Provisions may be made for a third -party 
survey of the stretch of NH where a fatal accident  takes place, that may be carried out 
immediately after such an accident, to assess the state of implementation of road safety 
provisions such as signages, street light, road quality etc. prescribed for that particular 
stretch. The survey would help find t he reasons behind the lapse in road safety provisions, 
if any, on the NH stretch and accountability may be placed on the concerned officials 
and/or road contractors for any lapses. Inferences derived from such surveys can be 
utilized to find gaps in the ex isting road safety provisions on NHs which can be plugged to 
ensure that upcoming National Highways across the country are as safe as possible, with 
special focus on road safety from the DPR stage itself.  
(Para 32) 
The Committee may be apprised of the pre sent status of  implementation of the scheme for 
the cashless treatment of victims of the accident during the golden hour, as provided by the 
Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 alongwith reasons for delay in implementation, if 
any. 
(Para 33) 
The Committe e reiterates its recommendation made in Para 277 of its 296 th Report on 
„Role of Highways in Nation Building‟, which is as follows: 
The Committee feels that the Ministry should lay much more emphasis on its 
road safety awareness initiatives. Social media m ay be utilized for this purpose. 
The Committee desires that the Ministry may, in coordination with Ministry of 
Education, introduce information pertaining to road safety, basic road 
etiquettes, action to be taken in case of an accident, etc. in school curr iculum 
across the country.  
(Para 34) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may analyze the road safety provisions on 
highways in developed countries where the accident rates are much lower than that of 

39 
India‟s National Highways. A foolproof inspectio n and monitoring mechanism may be set 
in place to ensure that road safety provisions prescribed for the National Highways are 
strictly implemented as per the guidelines and rules in this regard.  
(Para 35) 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry  may come up with provisions to 
make it mandatory to install street lights on the entire National Highways network in the 
country since poor lighting conditions lead to severe accidents. The regular maintenance of 
these street lights may also be suitably e nsured in coordination with the concerned 
agencies. 
(Para 36) 
The Committee also strongly recommends that the Ministry may thoroughly assess the 
requirements for ambulances on the NH network across the country and arrange for the 
same in coordination with the concerned agencies so as to enable quality care to accident 
victims during the golden hour. Availability of ambulances may especially be ensured near 
accident-prone sites and black spots. The Ministry/NHAI may spread awareness regarding 
the helpline nu mber to avail urgent medical assistance in case of road accidents, through 
suitable means. 
(Para 37) 
The Committee is of the view that having provisions for food joints, restrooms, toilets and 
other amenities alongside National Highways can reduce the menace of illegal parking of 
vehicles on NHs and help avoid accidents, since the drivers would be able to relax and 
refresh themselves without parking outside the designated areas. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may chalk out a plan  to have provisions for such 
spaces at regular intervals on NHs, possibly in partnership with the original landowners, 
on the entire NH network. Doing so would provide NH passengers with a more comfortable 
experience while providing a regular source of rev enue to the landowners whose land was 
acquired for the construction of the NH. 
(Para 38) 
The Committee feels that awareness of traffic rules would go a long way in improving the 
driving habits of drivers in the country, making the roads safer for everyone.  The 

40 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may partner with NGOs and 
educational institutions in order to raise awareness of traffic rules and road safety. 
(Para 39) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may issue guidelines to limit the number of 
hours commercial drivers can drive in a day to a reasonable limit, say, 10 hours a day. If a 
suitable mechanism can be devised to implement this in earnest, this would ensure that 
commercial drivers are well rested, making the roads safer for all travellers. 
(Para 40) 
The Committee recommends that helicopter landing facilities should be developed at toll 
plazas across the country at a certain defined distance, so as to enable urgent medical 
assistance to accident victims. 
(Para 41) 
Rectification of Black Spots 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take immediate steps to ensure that the 
black spots on National Highways across the country are rectified on a war footing. Data 
pertaining to black spots may be analyzed to ascertain why the pa rticular spots ended up 
causing so many road accidents and what steps could have been taken at the road design 
and construction stage to avoid the same from becoming black spots. The inferences drawn 
may be utilized in future NH projects across the country  in order to minimize the 
development of black spots therein. 
(Para 44) 
The Committee recommends that CCTV cameras may be installed at accident prone sites, 
black spots which are yet to be rectified, and other important locations on the NHs to 
monitor road  accidents and arrange urgent medical help. Drone services may also be 
utilized for watching and regulating vehicle movements on NHs and aqeuate budgetary 
provisions for the same may be ensured. 
(Para 45) 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may onboard the State Government 
Departments concerned, to utilize the Blackspot MIS portal as well so that the State 

41 
Departments can develop a similar system of identification, data collection and rectification 
of black spots on NHs maintained by PWDs, State Highways and other district roads. 
(Para 46) 
The Committee hopes that the road safety audit training programme being taken up by 
NHAI suffices to meet the requirement of road safety auditors in the country. The 
Committee recommends that NHAI may outsou rce any interim requirements for road 
safety auditors as road safety audits play a crucial role in ensuring safety provisions on 
NHs across the country and dearth of human resources cannot be an excuse to delay the 
audits. 
(Para 48) 
Encroachment of NHs and the issue of stray cattle/wildlife 
The Committee feels that the issue of stray cattle and animals on National Highways is very 
serious and often causes fatal road accidents. The Committee notes that special corridors 
for the movement of wildlife/cattle, i f required, is envisioned by the Ministry at the DPR 
stage itself and in case certain specific locations develop into black spots due to repeated 
incidents, fencing/boundary wall is planned for rectification of the black spots. The 
Committee is dismayed to  note that provisions for fencing/boundary wall to prevent 
wildlife/cattle is planned after several incidents of fatal accidents on a particular stretch 
cause it to become a black spot. There should be some mechanism to monitor the frequency 
of incidents o f wildlife/ cattle straying on roads even when the same has not caused any 
fatal accident yet, and proactive steps may be taken to curb the same. Necessary action 
may be taken to coordinate with local law enforcement or concerned agencies to impose a 
penalty on cattle/animal-rearers for letting out their animals on National Highways. 
(Para 52) 
The Committee notes that provisions already exist for imposing fines for parking outside 
the designated areas on National Highways but the ground reality points to the lack of 
proper implementation of the same. Trucks and vehicles parked on ill -lit highways at night 
time cause severe accidents and as such, tackling this problem should be a matter of high 
priority. The Committee notes that this issue may be looked into and possible solutions 
may be devised and implemented in earnest, in coordination with the concerned agencies.  
(Para 53) 

42 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry/NHAI may take a serious look into the issue 
of encroachment of service roads by local markets and create an effective policy in order to 
curb the same, which may be implemented in coordination with concerned agencies.  
(Para 54) 
The Committee further recommends that provisions may be included in the NHAI‟s 
Sukhad Yatra app to allow highway users to post complaints about encroachment and 
stray cattles/animals on NHs. 
(Para 55) 
The Committee feels that the Ministry/NHAI should work on controlling access to National 
Highways to the extent possible, since doing so allows vehicles to travel at faster speeds, 
with lesser chances of accidents as merging traffic is controlled at entry poin ts. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the feasibility of raising the height 
of National Highways to generally control uncontrolled free access to the NHs. The 
Committee feels that this could lower the incidents of stray cattle/wildlife  roaming on the 
NHs as well. 
(Para 56) 
Speed Breakers 
The Committee notes that the standards for construction of speed breakers are contained 
in IRC Code No. IRC:99-1988 “Tentative guidelines on the provision of speed breakers for 
control of vehicular speeds on minor roads”. Since the aforementioned tentative guidelines 
had been published decades ago, the Committee would like to know whether any steps have 
been taken by the Ministry/IRC to frame new guidelines for the provision of speed 
breakers on National  Highways in light of new construction technologies and relevant 
data/studies in this regard. The Committee is of the strong view that all codes/guidelines 
prescribed for the construction of National Highways and provisions relating thereto, 
should be periodically reviewed and necessary revisions must be made from time to time to 
make the most of modern technologies and developments in the road sector. 
(Para 58) 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may strongly take up the matter of 
removal of unauthorized speed breakers from National Highways with State Governments, 
since such speed breakers not only slows down the speed of the traffic on the NHs, but 

43 
could also lead to accidents in absence of proper markings. The Ministry may implement a 
mechanism to periodically survey the National Highways for presence of unauthorized 
speed breakers, poor quality of roads, potholes, absence of signages etc. so that 
requirements of maintenance and remedial action can be identified and met. 
(Para 59) 
Service Roads  
Given the crucial role of service roads in improving road safety on the NH network, the 
Committee reiterates its following recommendation made in para 117 of its 317th Report 
on DFG (2022-23) of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways: 
The Committee observes that the lack of service roads alongside 
National Highways causes inconvenience to local residents and is, at times, the 
cause of road accidents. The land required for development of National 
Highways is acquired from the local people an d they should be given the 
benefits of service roads along National Highways. The Committee feels that 
service roads are an integral part of National Highways and therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry may make it mandatory to have service roads 
along NHs to the extent possible and provisions for the same may be included 
in the tender document for NH projects. 
(Para 62) 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry/NHAI may ensure that the quality 
of service roads is as good as the main National Highw ay especially in terms of load 
capacity as heavy vehicles plying on the NHs also use the service roads at times. Special 
budgetary allocation may be made to ensure the provision of service roads alongside NHs, 
to the extent possible, at the DPR stage itself.  
(Para 63) 
The Committee notes that the development of service roads along Greenfield corridors is 
not in line with the concept of access -controlled corridors and that the Ministry has 
ensured the development of underpasses along the corridor to ensure un-hindered 
movement of local population. In this regard, the Committee recommends that drainage 
provisions may be made a core part of such underpasses, keeping in mind the rainfall 
statistics of the region. 

44 
(Para 64) 
Research and Development 
The Committee notes that adequate research is required for construction and development 
of roads. Specifications/guidelines/codes prescribed by the Ministry/NHAI for construction 
of roads directly determine the quality of NHs and their longevity. It is crucial that due  
importance is given to research activities in the road sector. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly recommends that more budget should be allocated for this purpose. Given the 
crucial role played by Indian Roads Congress (IRC) in conducting research and pre paring 
and publishing technical specifications for road construction across the country, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that IRC is granted adequate 
budgetary allocation so that it can carry out its mandate effectively. It should also be 
ensured that the budgetary requirements of other road research agencies like Central 
Road Research Institute (CRRI), Indian Academy of Highway Engineers (IAHE), NHAI‟s 
Standards, Research and Development & Quality (SRD&Q) Division, are properly met . 
The Ministry may facilitate coordination between these agencies through a suitable 
mechanism and encourage them to collaborate with leading road research institutions in 
the world so that global best road construction and safety standards can be implemented in 
the Indian road sector. 
(Para 67) 
The Committee notes that the majority of Indian roads face the most damage during the 
monsoon season.  Water logging in bitumen roads leads to potholes due to the eroding of 
the asphalt layer.  To prevent water dama ge, most Indian roads do have a Camber which is 
the slope provided to the road surface to drain off water but lack storm water drains which 
take the water which is drained to the side by a Camber and carry it off to a water body. 
Without drainage, a road will suffer during a monsoon even if it is well -constructed.  In 
Tamil Nadu, rainwater harvesting was made compulsory some years back and since then 
there is less damage to the roads. The Committe e, therefore, recommends that drainage 
provisions should be made mandatory at the DPR stage itself, especially for NH projects in 
high-rainfall regions. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may carry out 
thorough research in this regard in co llaboration with expert research bodies and review 
its existing codes/guidelines, if any, for drainage provisions on NHs, based on the outcomes 
of the research.  

45 
(Para 68) 
Arbitration between the Ministry/NHAI and the Contractors 
The Committee takes note of the mechanism presently in place for arbitration and 
resolution of disputes between the authority and road contractors. The Committee 
observes that disputes between the concessionaire and the authority is one of the core 
reasons behind delays in road projects. Therefore, having an effective mechanism in place 
to minimize the delay resolution time to the extent possible is very important to avoid cost 
and time overruns in execution of NH projects. The Committee desires the Ministr y to 
holistically examine the efficacy of the existing arbitration and dispute resolution 
mechanism in settling disputes between the involved parties and streamline the same so as 
to avoid litigations as far as possible. Further, it has come to the notice of the Committee 
that a significant portion of the amount of claims presently under arbitration pertain to a 
select few big concessionaires (details are placed at Annexure -III). The Committee notes 
that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has suppl ied the reasons for pending 
arbitration cases. The concessionaires raised the claims on ground of delay in declaration 
of appointed date, delay in obtaining environment clearance, prolongation of project due to 
various reasons, termination payment, loss of  toll revenue, delay in commencement of toll 
operation, loss of productivity of machinery, loss of revenue to the concessionaires 
envisaged in the financial model before accepting the project, etc.. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should study t he reasons thoroughly to identify the veracity 
of the reasons and ensure that such reasons should not become a reason in future for delay 
of projects or arbitrations.  
(Para 72) 
The Committee may be apprised of the steps being taken by the Ministry to pena lize road 
contractors who habitually take road projects to litigation without solid basis for the same, 
causing undue delays in completion of road projects.  
(Para 73) 
The Committee further desires to be apprised about whether any mechanism is in place to 
ensure that road contractors, if blacklisted, do not start bidding for new projects by 
registering under a new name. 
(Para 74) 

46 
Setting up Dedicated Underground Utility Corridors 
The Committee notes that the feasibility report submitted by Andhra Pradesh Urban 
Infrastructure Asset Management Limited (APUIAML) has found the combined utility 
corridor to be capital intensive and not viable. The Committee hopes that APUIAML has 
considered the lifecycle cost of the utility corridor and looked into the operationalization 
and monetization of underground utility corridors in developed countries. The Committee 
desires to know from the Ministry whether APUIAML or the Ministry factored in the cost 
borne by the public/private organizations in frequent trenching/digging of NHs for laying 
different types of cables/lines and repair thereof, while examining the feasibility of 
underground utility corridors.  The Committee recommends that the Ministry  may take 
steps to figure out how the underground utility corridors are being viably implemented in 
other countries and analyze whether a similar approach could help make the underground 
utility corridors viable in India. 
(Para 77) 
Women Safety 
The Committee feels that a lot needs to be done to improve the state of safety of women on 
public road transport like installing proper signages, cell phone networks, street lights, 
highway patrol etc. The Committee is dismayed to note the declining trend of budgetar y 
allocation under the „Scheme on Women Safety‟ in the last 5 years and desires to be 
apprised of the reasons behind the underutilization of the funds.  
(Para 79) 
From the expenditure details furnished by the Ministry, the Committee notes that only 
three States have been provided funds under this scheme, besides the expenditure incurred 
under „Development, customization, deployment and management of State -wise vehicle 
tracking platform‟. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may come up with new 
schemes to improve safety of women on National Highways in coordination with State 
Government Departments concerned with public transportation. Suitable provisions may 
be made to prominently display helpline numbers for women on the NH network across the 
country using well-illuminated signages in multiple languages. 
(Para 80) 

47 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons, if any, furnished by the Government 
of Telangana for not applying for funds for setting up the monitoring centre. The 
Committee recommend s that the issue may be taken up at higher levels with the State 
Government in order to permit the implementation of the scheme in Telangana. 
(Para 82) 
Overloaded Trucks 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may undertake a systematic study of the 
damage caused by overloaded trucks on National Highways and the negative impact of the 
same on the longevity and safety of the highways. 
(Para 84) 
The Committee strongly recommends that the Ministry may take immediate measures to 
curb the menace of overloaded  vehicles on National Highways such as rectifying weighing 
machines which are non -functional for a long time. Hefty fines should be imposed on 
vehicles not abiding by the limits. The Ministry may coordinate with the concerned 
Ministries and State Departments to introduce provisions for penalty on the consignor and 
consignee as well, besides the truck owners. The Committee feels that doing so would deter 
the loading of excess load from the source itself and prevent damage to NHs while also 
improving road safety. 
(Para 85) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may explore the possibilities of reforming 
the provisions to charge toll on the basis of weight of the vehicles, instead of axle -based toll 
collection. The Committee feels that the implementation of  weigh-in motion system to issue 
automated challans/ penalty would eliminate the possible collusion of corrupt officials with 
the heavy vehicle owners and help curb the menace of overloading.  
(Para 86) 
Poor quality of construction by Sub-Contractors 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the issue and, if possible, 
consider making direct payments to approved sub -contractors to mitigate the delays 
caused by the main contractors. The Committee also desires to be apprised of the reasons  
for which the Ministry/NHAI prefers allowing contractors to hire sub -contractors as 

48 
compared to breaking down the project into smaller stretches on its own so that smaller 
contractors could also bid for the same. 
(Para 88) 
Miscellaneous Recommendations 
Road Connectivity to Tourist Destinations 
The Committee feels that robust road connectivity to tourist destinations is one of the 
prerequisites to developing the country as a tourism hub. In view of this, the Committee 
strongly recommends that the Ministry m ay allocate special budgetary provisions for the 
purpose of improving National Highway connectivity to important tourist places across the 
country, seeking requirements for such projects from the Union Ministry of Tourism as 
well as State Tourism Departments. 
(Para 89) 
Implementation of Recommendations made by the Committee 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may analyze the recommendations/ 
observations made in this Report and executive orders, where possible, may be issued in 
order to implement the  same on an urgent basis since doing so will help improve the state 
of maintenance and quality of NHs and improve road safety. I n case implementing some of 
the recommendations made by the Committee requires legislative amendment, 
consultations may be made with the concerned departments and if necessary, amendment 
of the Acts administered upon by the Ministry may be introduced in the Parliament. 
(Para 90) 
Spur Road for linking Samastipur with NH-119D 
The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons for removing the provisions for the 2.1 
km spur for linking the city of Samastipur with Package -3 of NH -119D Amas-Darbhanga 
Expressway and recommends that the Ministry may consider including the provisions for 
the spur road to connect the city with the NH that i s passing at a distance of just 2.1 km 
from it. 
(Para 92) 
***** 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES  

 
49 
 
I 
FIRST MEETING 
 
The Sub–Committee on Road Sector of the Department –related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture met at 10:00 A.M. on  Friday, 
the 8th April, 2022 in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe,  
New Delhi. 
 
Members present: 
1. Sh. Rajiv Pratap Rudy – Convener 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
LOK SABHA 
3. Shri Margani Bharat 
4. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
5. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
6. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
7. Shri Prince Raj 
8. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B, Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
At the outset, the Convener extended a warm welcome to the Members of the  
newly constituted Sub –Committee and informed them that the mandate of the Sub - 
Committee is to study issues present in the  road infrastructure s ector in terms  of 
review of awarded projects, black spots, service roads, road safety, maintenance and  
quality of roads, safety of women etc. in the States of Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, 
Telangana and Maharashtra. The Committee has been given time upto 28th May, 2022 
for examination and report. He further informed that the agenda of the first meeting of  
the Sub-Committee was to have a preliminary discussion on the issues pertaining to 
the road infrastructure sector and decide the future course of action. The Convener  
mentioned that the Members of the Sub –Committee have vast social and political  
experience in their fields and can give valuable input on the issues affecting the road  
sector. He inv ited their views  and suggestions on  the subject so  as to  fulfill the 

 
50 
 
mandate of the Committee. 
2. In the ensuing discussion, the Members agreed that the condition of roads was  a 
matter of concern and study was needed  in all four states and the consensus was that 
the Sub–Committee should visit all the States under its mandate i.e. Andhra Pradesh, 
Telangana, Bihar and Maharashtra for on the spot study of the issues and hold 
meetings with all the stakeholders in the respective states in order to understand the 
issues at the ground level. The Members opined that the NHAI and the Ministry of 
Road Transport & Highways should arrange for the Committee to  inspect one Model 
Road on a bench mark in every State, which sets the standard for all the attributes like 
access control , exit and entry points on the highway, toll plaza, toilets on the  
Highways at regular intervals, provision for ambulances, proper drainage,  service 
roads, quality construction, under-passes, flyovers, etc. 
3. The Committee also noted that the Sub-contractors are giving poor quality in the 
road sector. Also the issue of overloaded trucks damaging the city roads which do not 
have the construction standards of National Highways. The Committee also  noted that 
parking of vehicles during night on the National Highways, is causing     a lot of 
accidents throughout the country. The Members discussed the problems  of the poor 
quality of construction of roads causing rutting and collapse of  roads soon after they 
are c onstructed, gaps in construction, the lack of  monitoring of roads under 
construction, stray cattle and animals on the  highways causing accidents and the 
clogging of highways due to local markets and shops. 
4. The Members opined that the height of National Highways should be raised  to 
generally control uncalled free access and  bypass roads and service roads should be 
constructed for all towns and villages; flyovers or underpass should be constructed at 
every accident-prone junction; and signboards, streetlights, and toilet facilities should 
be provided. At the DPR stage itself, underpasses or flyover should be included for 
uninterrupted flow of  both pedestrian and vehicular traffic for every village/town near 
the highway. One Member suggested that N GOs and college students could be 
involved in  raising awareness of road safety. The Committee also discussed 
installation of  cameras every few kilometers at the construction stage itself so that 
surveillance of construction on site could be monitored by not only the NHAI officers 
and engineers but also the Members of Parliament in their respective constituencies. 

 
51 
 
5. The Committee instructed that a comprehensive report should be obtained from  
all four States in the mandate with complete details on the number of roads  under 
construction in the state; the number of roads proposed for construction;  at the DPR 
stage; the completed projects; and the budgetary allocation for the  proposed 
upcoming projects both under NHAI and Ministry of Road Transport and Highways . 
As a case study , few Power point presentations from the Consultants of  the projects 
may also be arranged by the Ministry of Road, Transport &  Highways, alongwith 
information regarding the projects included under CRIF, Bharat Mala Phase –I, Roads 
of Ministry of Road, Transport & Highways etc. 
6. This Committee may study three categories of road projects – (i) Completed  
Projects, (ii) Ongoing Projects and (iii) Upcoming Projects, the details of which may 
be obtained from the Ministry of Road, Transport & Highways on each of the four 
States. The Sub-Committee also desired that the criteria for deciding the categories 
of roads such as access controlled roads, super expressway  etc. and advantages of 
Greenfield projects may also be obtained from Ministry of Road, Transport & 
Highways and National Highways Authority of India (NHAI). 
7. The Committee stressed that it was essential to conduct a ground survey of the  
condition of roads in all four States in order to appreciate the actual state of  affairs and 
all the issues involved, preferably with a qualified civil engineer to  brief the 
Committee on technical issues. On being informed by the Secretariat  that there could 
be only two tours of a Committee, including its Sub -Committees, in a year, the 
Committee suggested that the Hon'ble Chairman,  Rajya Sabha, may be requested for 
permission for tour by the Sub -Committee as it was handling a specialized subject, 
which necessitated visits to all the four States to assess the ground level situation. The 
Committee also agreed that as a contingency, meetings with the Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways and NHAI may be conducted in Delhi and the State PWDs and 
all agencies  including the contractors connected with road construction and 
maintenance in the states may be called for meetings with the Committee. 
8. The Committee noted that adequate research is required for construction and 
development of roads. More budget can be allocated for the purpose and  agencies like 
Indian Road Congress (IRC) may be brought in to conduct research. The Sub-
Committee should also study some international examples of best practices in road 
infrastructure sector. 

 
52 
 
9. The Sub Committee authorised its Convener to approach the Hon'ble Chairman  
Rajya Sabha through proper channel to get his approval (i) for study tours of the Sub 
Committee and (ii) to take oral and written evidence of the representatives of State 
Governments of Bihar, Andhra Pradesh, Telengana and  Maharashtra. 
10. The Sub-Committee directed the Secretariat to obtain the relevant inputs from 
the Ministry of Road, Transport & Highways and National Highways Authority of 
India (NHAI). 
11. The meeting adjourned at 11:30 A.M. 

53 
 
II 
SECOND MEETING 
  
The Sub –Committee on Road Sector of the Department –related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture met at 11:00 A.M. on Monday, the 
9th May, 2022 in Committee Room ‘4’, First Floor, Block A, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Sh. Rajiv Pratap Rudy             –         Convener 
RAJYA SABHA 
- 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri Margani Bharat 
3. Shri Prince Raj 
4. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B, Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
WITNESSES: – 
  
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
  
1. Shri Giridhar Aramane Secretary 
2. Shri S. K. Nirmal Additional Director General 
3. Shri P.V.V.S. Ravi Prasad Additional Director General 
4. Shri Sudip Choudhary Chief Engineer 
5. Shri Kaushik Basu Chief Engineer 
6. Shri P. R. Meena Chief Engineer 
7. Shri O. P. Shrivastava Chief Engineer 
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) 
  
8. Ms. Alka Upadhyaya Chairperson 
9. Shri Mahabir Singh Member 
10. Shri Manoj Kumar Member 

54 
 
11. Shri Alok Kumar Member 
12. Shri L.P. Padhy CGM  
13. Shri Ashish Asati  CGM 
14. Shri Vinay Kumar Bansal CGM 
  
At the outset, the Convener extended a warm welcome to the Members of the Sub –
Committee and Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways; Chairperson, National 
Highways Authority of India (NHAI) and senior officials of the Ministry and NHAI and 
informed them of the agenda of the meeting i.e.to hear   the views of the Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways, NHAI and stakeholders related to the various aspects of Road Sector 
in terms of review of awarded projects, black spots, service roads,  road safety, maintenance 
and quality of roads, safety of women etc., especially with reference to the States of Andhra 
Pradesh, Telangana, Bihar and Maharashtra. 
 
2. The Secretary, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways informed the Sub -
Committee that as pe r the commitment to the Stockholm Convention, road accidents have to 
be reduced by 50 percent by 2030.   He acknowledged that the number of deaths on Indian 
roads was almost 10 times that of the USA and informed that the Ministry has taken various 
steps in the last few years to improve road safety, the first and foremost being road 
engineering.  Road safety is now an integral part of road design and the construction process 
and the road safety audit team is also part and parcel of both the design and constru ction 
teams. The existing National Highway network is also being upgraded as per the standard.  He 
also informed the Committee that around 7,500 black spots have been identified so far and 
that temporary measures are taken at first to immediately prevent loss of lives due to accidents 
and permanent rectification measures such as widening of roads, improving junctions, grid 
separation, traffic control measures, necessary signages, traffic staff, are taken thereafter. The 
Secretary further apprised the Commit tee that the second primary reason for accidents was 
vehicle engineering as many of the vehicles in India were not upto international standards.     
The   Ministry has however proposed to make it mandatory to have six airbags in all cars both 
on front and s ides from October, 2022 and several other measures for safer vehicles.    
Emergency care for accident victims was the third most important aspect and the Ministry is 
coming up with broad scheme which will take care of all trauma care activities and till suc h 
time, the NHAI has been requested to come up with a cashless insurance scheme.   Another 
important aspect of road safety is enforcement, especially at black spots, which is a difficult 
task in India due to less number of police officers per lakh population as compared to Western 
Nations.  The Supreme Court has appointed a Committee on Road Safety which has issued 
several guidelines and State Governments have been advised to form Committees to entrust 
responsibility to specific nodal Departments and officer s which is likely to bring down the 
number of accidents. He further stated that the number of accidents in the current and 
previous financial year has gone down by about 20 -25 percent due to various reasons 
including COVID, improved road quality and enforc ement in traffic rules and expressed 
optimism that the trend of decreasing road accidents will continue.  
 

55 
 
3. Chairperson, NHAI informed the Committee that NHAI has identified about 4,002 
black spots out of which 2,569 black spots have been rectified while wo rk is in progress to 
rectify about 689 black spots. She stated that there is a dearth of road safety auditors in the 
country and that NHAI has taken up training programme of road safety audit to create its own 
force of road safety auditors. 
4.   Members of the Committee highlighted that while new projects are being sanctioned,  
progress is not being made in projects going on since several years. The Members stated that 
big road contractors who are handling 20 -25 projects, sublet large projects to small 
contractors who do not get paid on time by the big contractors, thus halting the progress of 
road projects. One of the Members highlighted the issue of no repair work being carried out 
on Ujjain -Nagpur Bhandara Road   for three years and lack of service lanes an d toilets on 
National Highways.  He stated that arbitration cases of NHAI should be critically scrutinised 
to know the types of claims being raised by road contractors. 
5. The Committee also noted that often there is encroachment of National Highways by 
vegetable/fruit markets etc. which leads to accidents and opined that the height of National 
Highways should be raised for controlled access. One of the Members raised the issue of 
removing the provision for a 2.1 km spur for linking the city of Samastipur with  Package 3 of 
NH-119D Amas-Darbhanga Expressway, from the project and sought to know the reasons for 
the same. A Member of the Committee suggested that flyovers should be constructed to 
rectify all black spots. He raised the issue of stray cattle on NHs an d suggested that Road 
Under-Bridges should be constructed on NHs for village traffic. He suggested that NGOs 
should be roped in to educate the public regarding road safety and traffic rules. Members of 
the Committee enquired about the present status of the  Nagpur Outer Ring Road Package -I 
and II, six -lane road sanctioned from Diwancheruvu to Anakapalle, Greenfield NH 516E 
between Rajahmundry-Rampachodavaram, bridge across the Kanhan river.  
6. The Convener noted that the Sub -contractors are in general construc ting poor quality  
roads and enquired about the control exercised by the Ministry and NHAI on such contractors. 
The Committee also highlighted the issue of overloaded trucks damaging the city roads which 
are not upto the construction standards of National Highways. The Committee also noted that 
parking of vehicles during night along the National Highways is causing     a lot of accidents 
throughout the country. The Members discussed the problems of the poor quality of 
construction of roads causing rutting a nd collapse of roads soon after they are constructed, 
gaps in construction, the lack of monitoring of roads under construction, stray cattle and 
animals on the highways causing accidents. The Committee enquired about the feasibility of 
the Ministry issuing  guidelines for State Governments to notify some stretch of land parallel 
to the National Highways as area of non -construction, to be acquired at some future point of 
time for construction of service roads. The Committee also discussed about installation o f 
CCTV cameras at every few kilometers in the construction stage itself for monitoring the 
progress of construction on site and desired to know whether such plans can be included at 
DPR stage itself. A Member also enquired about utilisation of CRIF Fund in  the country and 
the criteria for selection of CRIF works and sought clarifications on some of the provisions 
under it. He pointed out the large number of litigations pending in courts involving 
contractors engaged   in road construction and   desired to kno w about the process of 
appointment of arbitrators. The Committee also sought more information and a presentation 

56 
 
from the Ministry regarding the software which has come up with the Gati Shakti National 
Master Plan. A Member further enquired about the visio n of the Ministry with regards to 
having utility ducts under National Highways for gas pipeline, storm water drainage, water 
pipelines etc. and the possible creation of a Special Purpose Vehicle for the monetization of 
such ducts.  
7. The Convener informed th e Ministry and the NHAI that the Members desired to visit 
one model road in all four states which could set the benchmark for roads fulfilling all 
parameters and standards.  He also sought a Comprehensive Report from all four States with 
complete details on the number of roads under construction/proposed for construction and the 
budgetary allocations etc.   The Convener also referred to a Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways guidelines dated 31 st January, 2020 regarding ‘Criteria for allocation of funds f or 
development of State Roads under the CRIF Act, 2000’ and sought explanation from the 
Ministry relating to certain points of the guidelines as the operative part of the circular 
regarding the criteria of selection involving sufficient length of road appe ared to be flawed 
and creating huge bottleneck in implementation.   He further highlighted the issue of NHAI 
issuing a Cure Period Notice to a concessionaire for a project while the project was under 
conciliation and asked for complete feedback on the subje ct. He enquired about the status of 
Bharatmala Phase-II and the planning for both phases of Bharatmala vis-à-vis the States. 
8. The Secretary, MoRTH responded to some of the queries raised by the Chairman and 
Members of the Committee. The Chairman then direct ed the Secretary to furnish written 
replies to other queries/points/issues raised by him and the Members of the Committee, which 
could not be replied during the meeting, to the Secretariat.   
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
9.  The Committee decided to forward a Questionnaire to the Ministry/NHAI for their 
replies. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10. The meeting adjourned at 12:41 P.M. 

57 
 
 III 
THIRD MEETING 
  
The Sub –Committee on Road Sector of the Department –related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, 
the 31st May, 2022 in Committee Room ‘4’, First Floor, Block A, Parliament House 
Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Sh. Rajiv Pratap Rudy             –                                        Convener 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
LOK SABHA 
3. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
4. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
5. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B, Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
WITNESSES: – 
  
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
  
1. Shri P.V.V.S. Ravi Prasad Additional Director General 
2. Shri Amit Vardan Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Mahmood Ahmed Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Sudip Choudhary Chief Engineer 
5. Shri V.K. Rajawat Chief Engineer 
6. Shri O. P. Shrivastava Chief Engineer 
  
  
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) 
  
7. Ms. Alka Upadhyaya Chairperson 
8. Shri Alok Kumar Member 
9. Shri H.M. Naqvi CGM 


58 
 
10. Shri L.P. Padhy CGM 
11. Shri Ashish Asati CGM 
12. Shri Vinay Kumar Bansal CGM 
  
At the outset, the Convener extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Sub–Committee; Additional Director General, Ministry of Road Transport & 
Highways; and Chairperson, National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) 
alongwith senior officials of the Mini stry and NHAI and informed them that the 
agenda of the meeting was to gain further insights on some specific issues which 
were raised during the previous meetings of the Sub -Committee and also in the 
questionnaire forwarded to the Ministry. The Convener no ted that while the 
upcoming NHs are access controlled, old NHs have uncontrolled access which leads 
to many accidents. He suggested that the Ministry should explore the possibility of a 
policy to bar construction works on land next to upcoming Greenfield N ational 
Highways for right of way of service roads in the future, on the lines of the 
restrictions imposed by Airports Authority of India on the funnel area of National 
Highways. In reply to the suggestion, the Chairperson, NHAI informed the Sub -
Committee that NHAI is acquiring land along Greenfield expressways for service 
roads and trying to protect it with boundary walls so that the service roads can be 
constructed when there is need for the same. Members of the Sub -Committee 
highlighted that fast-paced commercial development along National Highways create 
the need for service roads on NHs for which originally there was no provision for 
service roads, but that land is not easily available at such later stage and that a 
solution must be devised to avoid this problem in future projects. 
2.         A Member of the Sub -Committee desired to know about airplane landing 
facilities on certain sections of NHs,   in response to which the Chairperson, NHAI 
stated that some NH spots have been selected in Andhra Pradesh for development of 
emergency landing facility, in consultation with Indian Air Force. 
3.         The Sub-Committee sought to know the present status and reasons for delays 
in various National Highways projects such as Hajipur -Muzaffarpur Section of the 
existing NH -77, Chhapra -Hajipur NH and NH -527(C) passing through Sitamarhi 
district. Chairperson, NHAI informed that Chhapra-Hajipur project was facing delays 
because of some contractual issue and that efforts are being made to resolve the same 
and complete the project at the earliest. The Convener stated that there should not be 
a situation where the concessionaire takes an advantage of hundreds of crores of 
rupees due to an Act or decision of NHAI and that the cost of construction of the 
project which is due  now, which the concessionaire should have completed, should 
not exceed what legitimately should have been invested in completing the project. 
The Sub -Committee expressed serious concerns over the huge delays in case of 
Hajipur-Muzaffarpur Bypass project a nd recommended that the project should be 
completed at the earliest. 
4.      The Sub -Committee suggested that NHAI must look into the proposal of 
creation of a utility duct along Greenfield NHs to carry optical fibres, Low Tension 

59 
 
(LT)/High Tension (HT) ca bles etc. which could be created as a Special Purpose 
Vehicle. The Convener  suggested that Detailed Project Report of all road projects of 
national importance should be run through the Gati Shakti software for vetting so 
that possible obstructions such as  forests, mines, rivers etc. can be identified and 
dealt with. He proposed that CCTV cameras should be installed on NHs at 
construction stage using funds from Nirbhaya Scheme and that the cameras can later 
be shifted to the highways as an asset for monitoring. 
5.         The Sub-Committee enquired the Ministry and NHAI about the total amount 
of arbitration claims made by the MoRTH/NHAI against concessionaires and by the 
concessionaires against MoRTH/NHAI, the process of settlement of arbitration 
claims, number of benches created for settlement and the time for which proceeding 
is going on for important cases. 
6.        The Convener enquired about the action taken by the Ministry with regard to 
the issues pointed out by the Sub -Committee in the ‘Criteria for allocation of funds 
for development of State Roads under the CRIF Act, 2000’ in terms of a limitation of 
10 kilometers under which projects were getting disapproved and availability of land 
prior to the finalization of alignment and project scope. Chief Engineer, MoRTH 
informed the Sub-Committee that a clarification had been issued by the Ministry on   
30th May, 2022 in this regard.  
7.         The Chairperson, NHAI and senior officials of MoRTH responded to several 
queries raised by the Convener and Members of the Sub -Committee. The Convener 
then directed the Secretary to furnish written replies to other queri es/points/issues 
raised by him and the Members of the Sub -Committee, which could not be replied 
during the meeting, to the Secretariat.  
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
8.          A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
9.          The meeting adjourned at 4:14 P.M. 
  
 

60 
 
 IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
  
The Sub –Committee on Road Sector of the Department –related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture met at 10:30 A.M. on Wednesday, 
the 1st June, 2022 in Committee Room ‘4’, First Floor, Block A, Parliament House Annexe 
Extension, New Delhi. 
  
Members present:                                                                     
RAJYA SABHA 
 
  1. Shri TG Ventakesh - Chairman , presided over the meeting 
  2.  Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala   
 
  
LOK SABHA  
  
3.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
4.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
5.   Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
SECRETARIAT 
      Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary  
      Shri Swarabji B, Director 
      Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
      Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
         
            At the outset, the Convener extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Sub-Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt 
the draft Report on ‘Road Sector’. 
2.         The Sub-Committee, thereafter, considered the aforesaid draft Report and after a brief 
discussion, adopted the same with minor changes. 
3.         The meeting adjourned at 11.00 A.M. 

61 
XXIV 
TWENTY FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 2:30 P.M. on Wednesday, the 8th June, 2022 in Committee 
Room – ‘4’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
 Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                  –   Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shrimati Priyanka Chaturvedi 
4. Shri Shaktisinh Gohil 
5. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
7. Shri Anto Antony 
8. Shri Tapir Gao 
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
10. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
11. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
12. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
13. Shri Prince Raj 
14. Shri Ramdas C. Tadas 
15. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Puneet Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt 
the following Draft Reports on:- 
 
(i) Issues relating to Road Sector; 
(ii) *    *1    *; and 
(iii) *    *    *. 
                                                           
1 * Relates to other matters 

62 
 
2. The Committee suggested some minor changes in the abovementioned draft Reports. 
The Committee authorized the Chairman to carry out the changes. The Committee, thereafter, 
adopted the draft Reports alongwith some minor modifications/additions. 
3. The Committ ee also authorized its  Chairman to present the aforesaid Reports to the 
Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha, during the ongoing inter-Session period.  
4.         The meeting adjourned at 3:07 P.M. 
 

 
 
 
ANNEXURES

49 
 
Annexure-I 
 
The details of projects sanctioned, awarded and constructed during the last three years in 
the country:  
Year Projects sanctioned Projects awarded 
(Length in km) 
Length constructed in 
km Number Length in 
km 
Cost in Rs. crore 
2021-22 682 13034 269549 12731 10,457 
2020-21 613 11838 188039 10965 13327 
2019-20 545 10165 84472   10237 
  
  
63

50 
 
Annexure-II 
The details of projects sanctioned, awarded and constructed during the last three years in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Biha r, Maharashtra and 
Telangana.   
State: Andhra Pradesh 
Year Projects sanctioned               Projects awarded Length constructed in km 
  Number Length in km Cost in Rs. crore Number Length in km Cost in Rs. crore   
2021-22 22 694 7571 40  1049  19270  346.63   
2020-21 23 514 4366 19  414.40  4500  514.19  
2019-20 18 417 1367 15  259.1  3222  584.11  
  
State: Bihar 
Year Projects sanctioned Projects awarded Length constructed in 
km Number Length in km Cost in Rs. crore Number Length in km Cost in Rs. crore 
2021-22 29 562.873 12,045.26 30 707.37 11,898.10 576.16 
2020-21 33 932.63 17,709.67 25 824.34 20,746.80 689.45 
2019-20 11 308.18 
 
1452.32 15 267.71 1723.75 201.45 
  
 
 
64

51 
 
State: Maharashtra  
Year Projects sanctioned Projects awarded Length constructed in km 
  Number Length in km Cost in Rs. crore Number Length in km Cost in Rs. crore   
2021-22 38 571 6098 64 1245 12885 1534 
2020-21 54 823 4581 38 679 8543 2880 
2019-20 110 1481 2312 115 2211 9880 2417 
  
State: - Telangana 
Year Projects sanctioned Projects awarded Length constructed in km Number Length in km Cost in Rs. crore Number Length in km Cost in Rs. crore 
2021-22 32 860 13753 14 408 6853 236 
2020-21 11 284 1733 5 140 2742 227 
2019-20 8 165 1520 5 96 1404 340 
  
 
65

Annexure-III 
52 
 
 
66

 
53 
 
 
67

 
54 
 
 
68

69 
 
ANNEXURE-IV  
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE SUB-COMMITTEE ON 
ROAD SECTOR OF THE DEPARTMENT RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
9th May, 2022 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways  
1. Shri Giridhar Aramane Secretary 
2. Shri S. K. Nirmal Additional Director General 
3. Shri P.V.V.S. Ravi Prasad Additional Director General 
4. Shri Sudip Choudhary Chief Engineer 
5. Shri Kaushik Basu Chief Engineer 
6. Shri P. R. Meena Chief Engineer 
7. Shri O. P. Shrivastava Chief Engineer 
   
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI)  
8. Ms. Alka Upadhyaya Chairperson 
9. Shri Mahabir Singh Member 
10. Shri Manoj Kumar Member 
11. Shri Alok Kumar Member 
12. Shri L.P. Padhy CGM  
13. Shri Ashish Asati  CGM 
14. Shri Vinay Kumar Bansal CGM 
  
 
31st May, 2022 
  
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
  
1. Shri P.V.V.S. Ravi Prasad Additional Director General 
2. Shri Amit Vardan Joint Secretary 
3. Shri Mahmood Ahmed Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Sudip Choudhary Chief Engineer 
5. Shri V.K. Rajawat Chief Engineer 


70 
 
6. Shri O. P. Shrivastava Chief Engineer 
  
  
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI) 
  
7. Ms. Alka Upadhyaya Chairperson 
8. Shri Alok Kumar Member 
9. Shri H.M. Naqvi CGM 
10. Shri L.P. Padhy CGM 
11. Shri Ashish Asati CGM 
12. Shri Vinay Kumar Bansal CGM 
  
 
**** 