 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA       162 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
 
  
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED FIFTY FOURTH REPORT ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-2011) OF  
THE MINISTRY OF TOURISM 
 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA)       
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in  
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in  
 
 

 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT - RELATED  PARLIAMENTARY STANDING 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE  
 
  
ONE HUNDRED SIXTY SECOND REPORT 
ON 
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED FIFTY FOURTH REPORT ON 
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2010-2011) OF  
THE MINISTRY OF TOURISM 
 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 04.03.2011) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA  SABHA  SECRETARIAT 
NEW  DELHI 
 
MARCH, 2011/PHALGUNA, 1932 (SAKA)  
 

 
CONTENTS  
  PAGES  
1. C OMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii) 
2. I NTRODUCTION ................................................................................................................. (iii) 
3. R EPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ................................................................................................ 1-19 
4. O BSERVATIONS /C ONCLUSIONS /R ECOMMENDATIONS ––  AT A GLANCE ............................................ 20-22 
5. M INUTES ......................................................................................................................... 23-26 
 
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2010-2011)  
 1. Shri Sitaram Yechury   ----------      Chairman  
  RAJYA  SABHA  
 2.  Shri Ramdas Agarwal 
 3.  Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 4.  Shri Narendra Kashyap 
 5.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra 
 6.  Shri Syed Azeez Pasha 
 7.  Shri Thomas Sangma 
 8.  Shri Satish Sharma 
 9.  Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 10.  Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK SABHA  
 11. Yogi Aditya Nath 
 12.  Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana 
 13.  Shri V. Kishore Chandra S. Deo  
 14.  Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil  
 15.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
 16.  Shri P. Karunakaran 
 17.  Shri Jose K. Mani 
 18.  Shrimati Ranee Narah 
 19.  Shri Rajaram Pal 
 20.  Shri Bal Kumar Patel 
 21.  Shri Nama Nageswara Rao 
 22. Shri Sharief-ud-din Shariq 
 23.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma 
 24.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
 25.  Shri Jitendra Singh 
 26.  Shri Rakesh Singh 
 27.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 28. Shri K. Sugumar 
 29.  Shri Kabir Suman 
 30.  Shri Anurag Singh Thakur 
 31.  Shri K.C. Venugopal* 
  SECRETARIAT  
  Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary 
  Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
  Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
  Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 

INTRODUCTION  
  I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary  Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Cultu re, having been 
authorised by the Committee to present on its behal f, do hereby present this One Hundred Sixty Second Report on “Action 
Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hund red Fifty Fourth 
Report on Demands for Grants (2010-2011) of the Ministry of Tourism”. 
2.   The One Hundred Fifty Fourth Report of the Dep artment-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on  Transport, 
Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 20th April, 2010. 
3.   The Action Taken Replies on the recommendation s of the Committee contained on its One Hundred Fif ty Fourth Report 
were received from the Ministry of Tourism on the 1 August, 2010. 
4.   The Committee considered and adopted the Repor t at its meeting held on the 20th December, 2010. 
 
 
 
  SITARAM  YECHURY 
 
NEW DELHI ; Chairman,  
December  20, 2010 Department-related  Parliamentary Standing  
Agrahayana 29 , 1932 (Saka)  Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture. 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
REPORT  
1.  The Report of the Committee deals with the Acti on Taken by the Government on the observations/reco mmendations as 
contained in its One-Hundred and Fifty-fourth Repor t on Demands for Grants 2010-11 of the Ministry of Tourism which was 
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 20th April, 2010. 
2.  Action Taken Replies have been received from th e Government on the 1st August, 2010 in respect of all the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report, which have been categorized as follows:- 
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been a ccepted by the Ministry: 
 Para Nos.10,16,29,30,37,54 and 66 Total- 7 
(ii)  Recommendations/observations which the Commit tee does not desire to pursue in view of the Ministry replies: 
 Para Nos. 27,33,35,52,65,68,71,83,84,88,103 and 10 4 Total-12 
(iii)  Recommendations/observations in respect of w hich replies of the Ministry have not been accepted  by the 
Committee: 
 Para Nos. 17, 20 and 98 Total-3 
(iv)  Recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich final replies of the Ministry are still awaited: 
 Para Nos. 22,25,43,53,63,72,91,95 and 106 Total-9 
3.  The Committee desires that final replies in respect  of those recommendations/observations which have b een 
categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the earliest.  
4.  On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Co mmittee has made observations on each item of Action taken/proposed to 
be taken by the concerned Ministries. The recommend ations of the Committee contained in the One Hundre d and Fifty-fourth 
Report, action taken thereon by the Ministry and re commendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken 
has been given in the succeeding paragraphs. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
5.  The Committee notes that during the year 2009-1 0, the allocation was reduced to Rs.950.00 crore at  RE stage, out of 
which, an amount of Rs.776.16 crore is likely to be utilized till Feb. 2010. Thus, 19% of allocation is likely to be utilized in just 
one month. The Committee does not approve the pract ice of last minute spending at the fag end of the f inancial year. The 
Committee in its earlier Reports, has conveyed this  feeling to the Ministries concerned. The Ministry should follow the exiting 
norms strictly to ensure that the funds are utilize d, as far as possible, evenly throughout the year. The Committee also does not 
find any reason for reducing the allocation at RE s tage. Tourism is the largest service industry with a contribution of 6.23% of 
the GDP and 8.78% of the total employment in India.  Since Tourism projects are implemented by the Stat es, there is need to 
sensitize them to ensure optimum utilization of fun ds and issuing utilization certificate on time. The  Ministry should make 
concerted efforts and evolve a coordination mechanism with States. 
(Recommendation at para 10 of 154th Report)  
Reply of the Government  
6. The recommendation has been noted. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
7. The Committee notes the reply. 
 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
8.  The Committee, however, finds that in the case of utilization of fund for product/infrastructure d evelopment for circuit 
during 2007-08, 2008-09 and 2009-10, expenditure ha s been more than what was allocated in the budget. The Committee 
recommends that if the schemes are chalked out well  in time by the Ministry, they can approach the Pla nning 
Commission/Ministry of Finance for allocation of more funds at BE stage itself. 
      (Para 16 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
9. The recommendation has been noted. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
10.  The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Mi nistry will be careful while formulating their sche mes to 
ensure that correct projection of required fund are made at BE stage itself. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
11.  The Committee is of the view that the Ministry  should make all out efforts for the development of  a particular circuit 
which is approved for implementation. Moreover various States should coordinate and develop inter-state circuits. Southern and 
central circuits need to be developed with more emphasis on travel connectivity. 
(Para 17 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
12.  The Ministry is making concerted efforts to de velop the identified circuits including inter-State  circuits with the help of 
concerned States Governments. Efforts are also bein g made to improve the connectivity of tourist desti nations and circuits in 
coordination with Ministries of Civil Aviation, Railways and Road transports and Highways. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
13.  The Committee would likes to be informed about the circuits particularly inter-State circuits identifi ed for 
development. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
14.  The Committee finds no justification for makin g provision of plan outlay in the Budget under the Head-Creation of Land 
Bank for Hotels when the plan allocation remained u nutilized since the inception of the scheme. The Co mmittee, therefore, 
recommends the scheme may be revised and modified w ith view to ensure that development of accommodatio n for tourists is 
not affected. 
(Para 20 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
15. The recommendation has been noted. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
16.  The Committee is not satisfied with the reply and w ould like to know about the action taken or propose d to be 
taken on the recommendations of the Committee to revise and modify the Scheme ‘Creation of Land Bank for Hotels’.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
17.  The Committee came to know that ITDC is doing the illumination work in some of major monuments in  Delhi. Further, 
ITDC also host light & sound show in some of the mo numents which is being appreciated. Particularly De lhi will be hosting 
XIX Commonwealth Games this year the light and Soun d show can be used to attract more tourist and to a cquaint them with 
the history as well as majesty of our famous monume nts. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should 
ensure that this year sufficient funds are allocated to ITDC for this job. 
(Para 22 ibid ) 

Reply of the Government  
18.  The Ministry of Tourism sanctioned an amount o f Rs.23.75 crore to ITDC for illumination of 13 num bers of monuments 
in Delhi. The work is being completed in a phased m anner. Illumination work of 04 monuments in Phase-I  viz. (i) Sher Shah 
Gate (ii) Sub Burz (iii) Purana Quila and (iv) Safd arjung Tomb has been completed. Tenders for illumin ation works of 
remaining 09 monuments have been floated. 
19.  The Ministry of Tourism has further sanctioned  funds amounting to Rs.3.75 crore in the current fi nancial year for 
illumination of 03 more monuments i.e. Jantar Mantar Complex, Delhi Gate and Wazirabad Bridge Tomb and Mosque to ITDC. 
20.  With respect to Sound and Light Shows, ITDC is  enagaged in implementation of new Sound and Light Show at Purana 
Quila and upgradation of existing Sound & Light Show at Red Fort. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
21.  The Committee is concerned over the fact that many of the projects undertaken by the ITDC were lagging  behind 
the schedule. The Committee may be apprised of the status of illumination of the monuments and the number of visitors 
during Commonwealth Games 2010. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
22.  The Committee notes the projects and funds san ctioned to various Sates. However, the Committee is  not aware of the 
targets fixed for completion of these projects. It has also come to the notice of the Committee that i n some cases projects 
received from the State Government are not processe d/sanctioned in time which results in delay and non -utilization of funds. 
The Committee, therefore, recommended that the prog ress of these projects need to be monitored regular ly to ensure that there 
is no delay and cost overrun in the projects. 
(Para 25  ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
23.  The Ministry is making all out efforts to stre ngthen the monitoring mechanism. This issue is also  discussed in the 
Regional Conferences of Tourism Ministers. The obje ctive is to expedite the implementation of projects  sanctioned by the 
Ministry in various States and Union Territories. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
24.  The Committee reiterates its concern in this regard  and desires to know the major decisions taken in t he light of 
conclusion arrived at the Conference for strengthening the monitoring mechanism. It would also like to  know the status 
of projects in various States/U.Ts. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
25.  The way-side facilities may appear to be insig nificant things in comparison to other tourism infr astructure, these are, 
however, very important from the tourist’s points o f view. The Committee desires that this scheme need s to be widely 
publicized and the States be impressed upon to take benefit from this. In fact, the Ministry of Tourism should set target for each 
State and implementation of the scheme should be monitored in a time-bound manner. 
(Para 27 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
26.  The Ministry is treating construction of waysi de amenities on a priority basis. State Governments  are encouraged to send 
more proposals for setting up wayside amenities on roads leading to important tourist destinations. 
27.  The Ministry is also in regular contact with t he Ministry of Road Transport and Highways for sett ing up wayside 
amenities on land of National Highways Authority of India in public private partnership. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
28.  The Committee notes the reply and hopes that wayside amenities would be developed in a time bound manner. 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
29.  On being asked about the region-wise and State -wise plans for tourism infrastructure development in the country, the 
Ministry of Tourism replied that there was no such plan with them. The Committee, however, recommends that Ministry may 
consider evolving the approach for development of region/state-wise tourism infrastructure development in order to promote the 
domestic tourism more vigorously which has a great potential. The Committee is of the view that such a pproach may generate 
interest among the local people and Government of t he State concerned which can ensure the speedy deve lopment and timely 
completion. 
(Para 29 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
30.  Development of tourist infrastructure is prima rily undertaken by State Government/Union Territory Administrations. The 
Ministry sanctions projects on the basis of proposa ls received from them. However, the Regional Confer ences of Tourism 
Ministers may be helpful in developing regional approach to tourism development. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
31.  The Committee notes the reply. The Committee howeve r hopes that, the Ministry will keep pursuing the m atter 
with State Governments. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
32.  It appears that presently the infrastructure d evelopment is mainly focused on five star and such high cost accommodation 
which are out of common man’s access. So, the tax-h oliday benefits and such concessions are ultimately  not reaching to the 
majority. The Committee is of the view that Ministr y of Tourism should concentrate on promoting accomm odation for the 
domestic tourists who usually prefer affordable and  safe accommodation rather than the costly star hot els. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that budget hotels aimed at t he domestic tourists should also be given priority by the Ministry of 
Tourism and accordingly all the promotional measure s and tax benefits should also to be extended to th e budget hotels and 
restaurants also. 
(Para 30 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
33.  The Ministry of Tourism (MOT) is making all ef forts to address the shortage of budget accommodati on in the country. 
Accordingly in order to encourage the growth of bud get accommodation, MOT has been in regular touch wi th the State 
Governments/UT administrations and various Land Owi ng Agencies to create Land Banks for budget hotels,  provide land on 
long lease, allocation of land on joint venture/rev enue sharing basis and also to provide incentives a nd benefits to facilitate the 
growth of budget accommodation sector in the country.  
34.  Further, to encourage the growth of budget hot els, the Government had during the budget 2007-08, announced a Five 
Year Tax Holiday under Section 80-ID of the Income Tax Act to new hotels of two, three and four star c ategory and 
Convention Centres coming up between 1.4.07 to 31.0 3.2010 in the National Territory Region of Delhi an d the districts of 
Faridabad, Gurgaon, Gautam Budh Nagar (NOIDA) and G haziabad which during the budget of 2010-11 been ex tended from 
31.03.2010 to 31.07.2010. 
35.  To encourage the growth of budget hotels, a Fi ve Year Tax Holiday was also announced during the budget 2008-09 for all 
hotels of 2,3 and 4 star category located in all UNESCO declared World Heritage sites (except Mumbai and Delhi). Recently, in 
the Union Budget 2010-11, the Government has also a nnounced an investment linked deduction under Secti on 35 AD to the 
hotel sector allowing 100% deduction in respect of the whole of any expenditure of capital nature excluding (land, goodwill and 
financial instruments) incurred during the year for establishing new hotels of 2 star category and above, all over India. 
36. With the objective to make available standardiz ed budget accommodation in the National Capital ter ritory of Delhi, the 
MOT has recently announced a scheme of Interest sub sidy on loan taken by licensed/approved Guest House s in Delhi for 
upgradation in view of the Commonwealth Games, Delhi -2010 under which as per the scheme, an interest subsidy @5% would 

be provided to the Guest Houses if the loan was sanctioned and first installment released by 31.07.2010 and all the works would 
be completed by 20.09.2010. Efforts have been made regularly by MOT to extend incentives to the hotel sector in order to 
encourage the growth of budget category accommodation in the country. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
37.  The Committee notes the reply and recommends that t he thrust may be on increasing the budget accommoda tion 
hotels in the country.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
38.  The Committee notes that huge amount is pendin g with various State Governments and they are yet t o complete the 
projects and submit the utilization certificates. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should pursue with the 
State Government to identify the reasons for delay of each of the projects and if it is found that the project is not feasible due to 
one or the other reasons, alternate projects may be  allowed for the States. The Committee also recomme nds that in future 
projects may be allowed only after getting all the necessary clearance from various agencies. 
(Para 33 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
39.  This matter is discussed in detail with the St ate Governments in review meetings/Prioritization m eetings. The projects 
which are not taken up for implementation for a lon g period are dropped in consultation with them and the amount released for 
such projects are normally adjusted against other new or ongoing projects. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
40. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
41.  The Committee also pointed out that in many ca ses the projects are approved without doing adequate home work and later 
on abandoned midway, because of functional and oper ational difficulties. The Committee noted that in c ertain cases even 80 
percent of the total sanctioned amount was released  to the project, but later on it was abandoned due to unknown reasons. This 
is because of poor planning and implementation meth odology adopted by the ministry while sanctioning t he projects. The 
Committee in this respect is of the view that befor e a project is approved by the ministry, they shoul d ensure the feasibility of 
the project and get all the necessary clearances from other related agencies before releasing the money. 
(Para 34 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
42.  The Ministry now examines the proposals more t horoughly and projects are sanctioned only when nec essary documents 
are provided by the State Governments/UT Administrations. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
43.  The Committee conveys its displeasure over the  way the projects are sanctioned and implemented by  the Ministry where 
there are lots of wastages of money and manpower. L and related issues and environmental clearances sho uld be dealt with in 
order to ensure a smooth implementation and completion of the projects. 
(Para 35 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
44.  Implementation of projects is the responsibili ty of the concerned State Governments/UT administra tions. However, they 
are impressed upon to send proposals only if land i s available. Land availability certificate is there fore, obtained before 
sanctioning the projects. 
 
 

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
45.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry and desires that proper monitoring of the projects should be 
done.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
46.  The Committee is constrained to say that the w ork Ajanta-Ellora Phase-II which was started in 200 3-04, is yet to be 
completed. It appears that the project progress has  not been monitored properly and expected obstacle in its completion could 
not be identified. Now the project is scheduled to be completed by June 2010. The Committee recommends  that the Ministry 
should coordinate with the Ministry of Culture for timely completion of its project. 
(Para 37 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
47. Recommendation of the Committee are noted for c ompliance. Ministry of Tourism has been monitoring the Project in 
consultation with Archeological Survey of India, Ma harashtra Tourism Development Corporation, Airport Authority of India 
and project consultants M/s Oriental consultants. 
48. An agreement has been signed on 31st March, 200 3 between. the President of India and JICA, for a total loan amount (all 
Categories) of Rs. 299.9 crore (6252 Millon Yen). The expenditure incurred till March, 2010 is Rs.22.00 Crore approx. (458.62 
Million Yen). Most of the components included in the project have been completed. Some of the major pending work includes. 
/circle6 Problem of falling boulders in the caves for which  tender has been called for firms/experts in rock management. 
/circle6 Completion of Ajanta-Ellora Visitor Center for whi ch consultants have been appointed, 
/circle6 Chemical Lab construction for monument would start shortly as all clearances have been given to CPWD etc. 
49.  Hon’ble Minister of Tourism and HUPA had a rev iew meeting on 14th May 2010 in respect, of the Aja nta Ellora 
Development Project. All concerned have been directed to expedite project completion. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
50.  The Committee notes the reply and emphasizes the ne ed to get the work completed as soon as possible si nce it has 
already been delayed. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
51.  The Committee notes that out of Rs.54 crore ap proved for domestic campaign for the year 2009-10, only an amount of 
Rs.16.11 crore was expected to be utilized till December. It presents a very dismal state of affairs. The Committee finds that the 
actual utilization, in the domestic tourism promoti on measures up to the month of February 2010, is on ly 30 percent of 
budgetary provision during 2009-10 and how the rema ining funds would be utilized within a month in a s uitable and effective 
manner, is not known. It seems that the Ministry’s main focus is on overseas campaigning and has negle cted the domestic 
tourism promotion activities. It must be noted that  domestic tourism has great importance as a large n umber of people are 
visiting places in connection with marriage, pilgrimage and other such occasions where overtly or covertly tourism is promoted. 
The Committee feels that there is need to tap the e xisting domestic market by informing domestic trave lers through sustained 
campaigning. The Committee recommends that the promotion of domestic tourists should be the main agenda of the Ministry of 
Tourism as compared to the domestic tourists, the number of foreign tourists is very miniscule. The state governments must also 
be involved in the process. The domestic campaign s hould also concentrate on the facilities etc. avail able at major tourist spots 
and the means and modes of transportation to reach those places. The malpractices and misleading propa ganda of touts and 
middlemen at tourist places also be brought out through domestic campaigns. 
(Para 43 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
52. The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. 

53.  In the year 2009-10, the Ministry of Tourism r eleased Social Awareness Campaign in the Domestic M arket to sensitize 
masses and stakeholders about the importance of tou rism. In addition an Incredible India generic campa ign and a campaign to 
promote North East of India was also released. Duri ng the year, the Ministry had incurred an expenditu re of Rs.10.41 crore till 
December, 2009. In addition, an amount of Rs.23.75 Crore had also been placed as advance in the form of LOA with DAVP for 
the release of domestic campaigns. The domestic campaigns is print and electronic media are released through DAVP for which 
LOA is placed at the disposal of DAVP as advance payment. 
54.  Domestic promotion is a focus area for the Min istry of Tourism. In the year 2009-10, Ministry of Tourism completely 
utilized the budget available under Domestic Promotion and Publicity including Hospitality (DPPH) head. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
55.  The Committee notes the reply. However, the Committ ee would like to know the details of expenditure ma de 
during the months of February and March, 2010 on the domestic campaign.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
56.  The Committee notes that the Incredible India campaign launched abroad has brought in foreign tou rists. to various parts 
of country. This has also helped tourist and gained  popularity amongst travellers all over the world. The Committee 
recommends that allocation made under this head sho uld be utilized scrupulously for continuing the ove rseas campaign so that 
more foreign tourists are attracted and in turn help foreign exchange earnings. 
(Para 52 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
57.  Recommendation of the committee have been note d. In the year 2009-10; the Ministry of Tourism con tinued its overseas 
promotions and launched 7 international campaigns i n Print as well as electronic media in potential ma rkets such as Americas, 
Europe and Asia pacific. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
58.  The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the ov erseas promotion campaign would attract more foreig n 
tourists. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
59.  India also, like China and USA, need to do a l ot like development of infrastructure at the touris t places, etc. Private 
participation needs to be encouraged. 
(Para 53 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
60. This matter comes primarily under the jurisdict ion of States/Union Territories. They are, therefor e, encouraged to 
facilitate private sector participation in development of infrastructure at tourist places. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
61.  The Committee recommends that a pro-active approach by the Ministry of Tourism is required in this regard. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
62.  The Committee expresses its serious concern fo r over sensitizing even local issues which hampers the tourism promotion. 
The Committee criticizes the way in which the terro rist attacks, the swine flu and stray cases of hara ssment of foreign tourists 
etc. were handled, had quite an adverse impact over  the image of India abroad. The committee is of the  view that the Ministry 
should take necessary steps in ensuring that media should not unnecessarily create panic. 
(Para 54 ibid ) 

Reply of the Government  
63.  The Ministry of Tourism endeavours to position  India as preferred tourism destination in major so urce markets. The 
above objective is met through an integrated marketing and promotional strategy which includes advertising in print, electronic 
and interactive media highlighting the myriad attractions of India. 
64.  The Ministry of Tourism through its overseas o ffices and in collaboration with the Ministry of Ex ternal Affairs & our 
Indian Missions abroad and the major Tour Operators , Airlines etc. organize guided FAM tours for Journ alists, Photographers, 
Travel writers & TV Teams in order to give them first hand experience of the warmth & hospitality of India. 
65.  Any adverse Travel Advisories issued by other Government are taken up through Ministry of Externa l Affairs and the 
local Indian Mission to avoid/dilute their adverse impacts on India tourism. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
66. The Committee notes the reply.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
67.  The Committee is not satisfied with the effort s made by the Ministry regarding human resource dev elopment. The 
Government has not made sufficient plan outlay unde r the head ‘assistance for manpower training’. In t he year 2009-10, an 
amount of Rs.100.70 crore was allocated. For the 20 10-11 there is negligible increase in the plan outl ay i.e. Rs.102.50 crore. 
The Committee is constrained to note that up to Feb ruary 2010, ones 64% of plan outlay is likely to be  utilized. Government 
have plans to set up new IHM in various parts of th e country. However, the Committee has not been info rmed whether any 
target has been fixed for completion of these insti tutes. The Committee feels that the huge shortage o f about Rs.1.9 lakhs can 
not be met only by the Government’s initiatives alone. The Committee recommends that the universities under the UGC and the 
technical institutions under AICTE may be encourage d to open courses on hospitality industry and neces sary financial 
assistance for infrastructural and other required f acilities may be extended by the Ministry of Touris m. They should come out 
with ambitious courses in coordination with the hos pitality industry which will provide employability to those opting for the 
.courses in those universities and technical instit utions. External support may be extended by the Min istry of Tourism to these 
agencies as they have the men and material for conducting quality courses. 
(Para 63 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
68. Following has been the Budget allocation for CB SP and Assistance to IHMs etc.:- 
(Rs. in lakh)  
2009-10 BE RE Actuals  
CBSP 1200.00 1200.00 1200.00 
Asst. to IHMs etc 10200.00 8270.00 8270.00 
  
69.  The plan Budget (2009-10) of the Ministry of T ourism was reduced by Rs.50 crores and there was a pro-rata cut, specific 
to IHM scheme. However, in the scheme of capacity B uilding for Service Providers though the allocation  was reduced at the 
RE stage the actual releases rose to Rs.1200 lakhs. 
70.  Generally, a duration of 2 or 3 years is grant ed to complete the construction of a Food Craft Ins titute/Institute of Hotel 
Management. 
71.  The Division shares the concern of the committ ee that the huge shortage of about 1.9 lakhs manpow er cannot be met by 
the Government’s initiatives alone. It may be state d here that the Ministry of Tourism not only extend s assistance to create 
institutional infrastructure to foster and facilita te professional education and training specific to tourism, travel and hospitality 

industry to meet the increasing demand of skilled personnel/professional but also meets the need to strengthen an upgradation of 
the institutions to enable them to retain/acquire internationally acceptable benchmark of quality. 
72.  Under broad basing of hospitality education, c entral assistance was extended to some Universities  like Jamia Millia 
University, Delhi Bhagat Phool Singh Mahila Vishavi dayala, Sonepat, Haryana, Punjab University, Univer sity of Jammu, 
Rewan Shaw University, Orissa, H.P. University, Luc know University, Chatrapati Shahu Ji Maharaj Univer sity, Kanpur, 
Mohan Lal Sukhadia University, Rajasthan, Similarly some of the Government Colleges and Industrial Training Institutes in the 
states of Punjab, Haryana, Orissa and Madhya Pradesh benefited by the MoT sponsored schemes. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
73.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry . It, however, would like to know the criteria adop ted for the 
selection of Universities for providing this assist ance. The Committee recommends that assistance for more training 
institutions may be extended to Universities in oth er parts of the country also so that the benefit of  this sector may be 
ensured throughout the country. There is a need to encourage the Universities/Institution across the c ountry to offer 
courses on hospitality sector.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
74.  The Committee is concerned that with a huge ma npower and resources within the country, it seems t he will to facilitate 
tourist visiting India is lacking on the part of Go vernment. Tourism sector cannot grow without the su pport of guides. Often 
foreign visitors -complain of lack of guides as the y are made to suffer from the hands of touts. With thousands of, historical 
places and monuments all over the country, there is  need to have interpretation centers from where tou rists can obtain all 
information regarding a particular site. 
(Para 65 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
75.  Ministry of Tourism strives hard to increase t he quantity and quality of tourist guides with the regular training 
programmes at the Indian Institute of Tourism & Tra vel Management (IITTM), Gwalior and its centres. II TTM Gwalior will 
soon conduct a training programme for Part Time Foreign Language Linguist Guides. The process of selection of candidates has 
been completed through examination conducted on 12.06.2010. 
76.  Information desks / counter at the tourist off ices in India provide information on tourist places  and monuments all over 
India. Such centres are sanctioned as part of Produ ct, Infrastructure, and Development for Destination s & Circuits (PIDDC) 
scheme to State Governments / UTs in most projects. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
77. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
78.  The Committee feels that in consultation with UGC and AICTE, the Ministry should devise short dur ation courses to 
overcome the shortage of tourist guides. Further, f oreign language courses should also be encouraged b y introducing suitable 
schemes in colleges and educational institutions. T he Ministry of Tourism should also come forward to provide financial 
assistance to those institutions and universities for starting foreign language courses/imparting training in foreign languages. 
(Para 66 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
79.  Recommendation has been noted. In the year 200 9-10, 602 Regional Level Guides (RLGs) have been tr ained by the 
Indian Institute of Tourism & Travel Management (IITTM). 
80.  Further Ministry of Tourism through IITTM, Gwa lior conducted a written examination for the select ion of Part Time 
Foreign Language Linguist Guide for the Northern Re gion on 12th June, 2010. As per the result declared  on 17th June, 2010, 
411 candidates have qualified the examination. Requirement is being re-assessed by Ministry of Tourism, Government of India 

and the State Government. Ministry of Tourism, Gove rnment of India however has no scheme at present to  provide financial 
assistance to institutions and universities for sta rting foreign language courses / imparting training  in foreign language and the 
position is being ascertained from Ministry of Human Resource Development. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
81.  The Committee notes the reply and reiterate its rec ommendation that Ministry of Tourism should also co me 
forward to provide financial assistance to institut ions and universities for starting foreign language  courses/imparting 
training in foreign languages.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
82. The computerization and IT are essential compon ents of promotion and publicity campaign and for co llecting data. The 
Committee, however, notes that the allocation and its utilization for the schemes under computerization and IT has been falling 
year by year. The actual expenditure of Rs.21.56 crore during 2007-08 has gone down to Rs.9.91 crore (upto Feb. 2010) against 
an allocation of Rs.14 crore for the year 2009-10. The actual expenditure upto the month of December was a mere Rs.0.58 crore 
while within a period of two months, upto Rs.9.33 c rore was expended till February 2010. The Committee  recommends that 
higher allocation may be made for the scheme. The G overnment should also take adequate steps to monitor the implementation 
of the programme to ensure that amount allocated is not only utilized fully but evenly throughout the year, last minute spending 
must be avoided. 
(Para 68 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
83.  The Ministry of Tourism utilizes the budget fo r Information Technology mainly in undertaking a ca mpaign on the world 
wide web to utilize the power of Information Techno logy and drive traffic to the website of the Minist ry. The campaign is 
usually undertaken in the last two quarters of the calendar year as this is generally believed to be t he best period to undertake 
such a campaign so as to build awareness and encour age travelers to plan their next years’ holiday to India. This also dovetails 
with the print and television campaigns in order to  achieve an holistic result. As a result of the cam paign being run in the last 
two quarters, the bills are received only by Januar y and February and therefore the expenditure is boo ked only during the last 
two months of the financial year. It is also propos ed to substantially increase the component for onli ne campaigns from this 
financial year onwards in tune with the general tre nd of internet being the most powerful medium of co mmunication in the 
twenty first century. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
84. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
85.  The Committee recommends that Ministry of Tour ism take up the issue of private website which look  alike official 
website of Ministry of Tourism to ensure that they are not misguiding and misleading the tourist both domestic and foreign. The 
Committee should be apprised of the remedial action taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
(Para 71 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
86.  It has been the endeavour of the Ministry of T ourism to project an image of exclusivity in the de sign and feel of its 
website. It may be possible that some unscrupulous private agencies are imitating the look of the mini stry’s website but the 
Ministry gives wide publicity to the address of it’ s information website www.incredibleindia.org in all its campaign so that the 
public is not mislead. According to the guidelines related to the use of incredible India logo, all Mi nistry of Tourism approved 
tour operators and travel agencies are allowed to u se the Incredible India logo on their websites as m ark of approval by the 
Ministry. A list of the approved agencies is also a vailable on the website of the Ministry of Tourism for tourists to cross check. 
Others who wish to use the Incredible India logo for promotional purposes have to take specific permission from the Ministry of 

Tourism and this permission is granted only if such  usage is helpful for the promotion of tourism into  and in India. The 
Incredible India logo has been registered as a trademark allowing the Ministry to take legal action against misuse of the logo. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
87. The Committee notes the reply.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
88.  The Committee also recommends that Ministry of  Tourism to take steps to make the website more att ractive and user 
friendly. The websites of other agencies and privat e tour operators should be upgraded and a link prov ided between them to 
facilitate tourists. 
(Para 72 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
89.  Recognizing the need for having an attractive and user-friendly website, the Ministry has already  initiated procedures for 
completely revamping the website. The website also provides links to the various state tourism departm ents in its helpdesk 
section and also has lists of the approved Tour Ope rators, Transport Operators and Tourist Transport O perators alongwith link 
to the official website of the Federation of Hotel and Restaurants Association of India for the list of classified hotels in order to 
help tourists. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
90.  The Committee suggests that in addition to the steps taken by the Ministry to make the website more user friendly, 
a software to calculate the approximate time taken by Air, Road and Rail should be got developed and b e provided in 
the website so that the tourists could plan their j ourney accordingly. Moreover, link to official Rail ways and Indian 
Airlines websites, link to helpline numbers of the particular area authorities, etc. will be more bene ficial to the 
travellers. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
91.  The Committee notes the efforts so far made by  the Ministry of Tourism in view of the Commonwealth Games 2010. The 
Committee is of the view that the Commonwealth Games should not be seen only as one time sporting event, but efforts should 
be made to utilize the influx of the people who wil l be coming here, as an opportunity to showcase Ind ia and promote tourism. 
All out efforts may be made to ensure that the tour ism potential is exploited to the maximum and the e ntire administrative 
machinery of the Ministry of Tourism should be sensitized to meet that goal. 
(Para 83 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
92.  During the year 2009-10; the print creatives o f the Ministry of Tourism focused on the traditional sports of India and were 
released in the overseas markets in view of the Com monwealth Games, 2010. The Commonwealth logo with dates of the event 
was also prominently displayed in the print creatives as well as TV commercial used by the Ministry to create higher awareness 
about the event. Ministry of Tourism has commissioned Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management (IITTM), Gwalior 
to conduct a study on “Assessment of number of tour ists expected to visit Delhi during Commonwealth Ga mes 2010 and 
requirement of rooms for them”. As per the report, the expected number of foreign and domestic tourist s hotel accommodation 
during Commonwealth Games 2010 are estimated to be 52951 and 139754 respectively. The average number o f hotel rooms 
required per day for these tourists is estimated at 40190. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
93. The Committee notes the reply. 
 
 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
94.  The Committee also notes that the Ministry has  not made any study or assessment about the arrival  of domestic tourists 
during the Games and they are ignorant about the fa cilities and amenities required for the domestic to urists. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry may take ad equate measures to ensure that the domestic tourist s are also having a 
pleasurable experience during the Games. 
(Para 84 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
95.  At the behest of the Ministry of Tourism in 20 09, the Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Mana gement (IITTM) has 
conducted a study “Assessment of number of tourists  expected to visit Delhi during Commonwealth Games 2010 and 
Requirement of Rooms for them”. The study has analy zed the expected domestic and international tourist  arrivals vis-a-vis the 
expected requirement of accommodation. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
96. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
97.  The Committee is of the view that policing of tourists is an important aspect and it should be given paramount importance 
to ensure that India is recognized as popular touri st destination. Many of the States have not constit uted the tourism police and 
wherever they are constituted it is just tokenism. The Committee, therefore recommends that all the State Governments may be 
pursued to create effective police mechanism to protect the tourists. 
(Para 88 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
98. In order to make India a safe destination where  tourists would feel secure and feel free to move a round, the Ministry of 
Tourism in consultation with State / UT Administrations has proposed to set up Tourist Police at prominent tourist spots. 
99.  The State Governments / Union Territory Admini strations of Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Karnataka, Kerala , Maharashtra, 
Himachal Pradesh, Rajasthan, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttar  Pradesh, Delhi, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh and Orissa have deployed 
Tourist Police, in one form or the other. 
100.  For the safety and security of tourists, the guidelines for formation of Tourist Security Organi zation(s) comprising ex-
servicemen have been formulated by the Ministry of Tourism, Government of India in consultation with t he Ministries of 
Defence and Home and Directorate General of Re-sett lements and forwarded to State Governments / Union Territory 
Administrations in May, 2008. 
101.  While a few of the State Governments have taken initiative to deploy ex-servicemen as Tourist Security personnel or have 
separate earmarked Tourist Police, Ministry of Tourism is contemplating to launch a scheme of Central Financial Assistance for 
having Tourist Facilitation Security Organization ( TFSO) at identified tourist destinations for all th e States and Union 
Territories. 
102.  Further, a detailed note along with the guide lines for setting up of Tourist Facilitation & Security Organizations under CF 
A Scheme was forwarded to the Planning Commission f or in-principle approval. Planning Commission did n ot consider the 
Ministry of Tourism proposal for setting up of Tourist Facilitation & Security Organizations citing the following reasons:- 
1. The scheme provides for “Tourist Police” but the  jurisdiction between the State Police and Tourist Police has not 
been clarified and the chain of command has not been specified. 
2. Since Security is a State subject whether State Government / Ministry of Home Affairs will agree to  this 
dispensation or not. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
103. The Committee notes the reply. 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
104.  The Committee notes the initiative of the Gov ernment in bringing “Delhi Prevention of Malpractic e and Touting Bills 
2009”. The Committee recommends that other State Governments may also be persuaded to bring out the si milar legislation so 
that the menace of touts and middlemen are controlled throughout India. 
(Para 91 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
105.  Recommendation has been noted. Ministry of To urism had written to the Chief Secretaries of Rajas than, Haryana and 
Uttar Pradesh in this regard. The matter is being f ollowed up. The recommendation will be taken up wit h other State 
Governments / UTs also, in due course. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
106.  The Committee notes the reply and desires to know t he latest developments and the reaction of the Stat e 
Governments over the issue.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
107.  The Committee notes ITDC is getting revived d ue to CWG and hopes that they will be able to stand  on its feet and 
compete in the market in term of hospitality and facilities. The Committee recommends that all the ITDC hotels may be allowed 
to function on a professional way and any procedura l difficulties and bureaucratic interference may be  minimized to enable 
them to compete with the private sector players in the sector. 
(Para 95 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
108.  Involvement of ITDC with Commonwealth Games i n a big manner alongwith declaration of its three h otels i.e.  the 
Ashok, Janpath and Samrat in Delhi as Games Family Hotels will not only help it to enhance its brand i mage but also 
consolidate its business. 
109.  The Committee recommendation on functioning o f ITDC in professional manner is accepted by the Co rporation. ITDC 
has assured that procedural difficulties and bureau cratic interference would be minimized to withstand  the competition. ITDC 
has already started working in this direction by de vising new training policy for employees, reviewing  delegation of powers of 
operational heads and upgradation of technology etc. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
110.  The Committee notes the reply and desires to know t he progress made by the ITDC in professionalizing t heir 
activities. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
111.  The Committee recommends that the tourism sho uld be eco-friendly and it should not interfere wit h the ecosystem. The 
Committee also recommends that strict action should  be taken against all who are violating the prescri bed norms and setting 
hotels etc. in the restricted area, and ecologically sensitive forest areas. 
(Para 98 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
112. With the objective to ensure the growth of res ponsible and sustainable hospitality infrastructure, the Ministry of Tourism 
has taken various measures to address the eco-frien dly practices in the hotel industry. The MOT regula rly reviews various 
policy matters and Guidelines and accordingly durin g the revision of the Guidelines for Project Approv al/Classification of 
Hotels, approval of Guest Houses etc. it has been m ade mandatory to follow eco-friendly practices viz.  water conservation and 
harvesting, use of solar energy, use of non-polluti ng green technologies, use of eco-friendly material s in operations and for the 
construction of hotel building which are in accordance with the local environmental requirements. 

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
113.  The Committee notes the reply. The Committee, howev er, recommends that there should be a monitoring 
mechanism to ensure that the above guidelines are b eing followed by the hoteliers, etc. after the init ial 
approval/classification of their hotels. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
114.  The Committee notes that there is enough scop e for linking the historical and religious place of  Jammu and Kashmir in 
the world tourism by giving sufficient infrastructural facilities adequate publicity and authoritative information. The Committee 
recommends that Bangus valley and Neelnag, (District Budgam) in Jammu and Kashmir need to be developed as a major tourist 
destination. 
(Para 100 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
115.  One project for Development of Bangus valley has been sanctioned in J&K in 2006-07 with Central Financial Assistance 
of Rs.231.28 lakh. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
116.  The Committee notes the reply and desires to know the current status of the schemes sanctioned and the utilization 
of the funds so far, out of the total amount sanctioned under the Bangus Valley project and the status of Neelnag project. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
117.  The Committee observes that LTC concessions f or the Government employees has a major role in dom estic tourism 
promotion. The scheme for a particular region shoul d be kept live for a considerable period of time so  that other concerned 
agencies like Indian Airlines, hoteliers, Railways etc. could also introduce some long term measures. It is also pertinent to 
mention that the LTC package as provided by the AI does not have enough seat availability under the pa ckage and that 
employees some times not able to find a suitable itinerary. The matter need to be taken up with the Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
(Para 102 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
118. The Ministry of Tourism is aware of the positi ve impact of LTC in development and promotion of domestic tourism. The 
Ministry of Civil Aviation is being advised to look  into the matter relating to non-availability of se ats on Air India flights on 
LTC tickets. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
119.  The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministry . The Committee also desires to know the steps take n by the 
Ministry of Tourism in the matter and the response of the Ministry of Civil Aviation thereto.  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
120.  The Committee had observed that the present f orm in which budget related data is given to the Co mmittee while 
examining Demands for Grants of the Ministry does not provide a clear picture about actual performance/achievements during a 
particular year. 
(Para 103 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
121. The recommendations of the Committee have been  noted for future compliance. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
122. The Committee notes the reply. 
 

RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
123.  Domestic tourism is getting comparatively les ser importance by the Ministry, which leaves the mo st local tourism 
potential unexploited. More infrastructure development is needed, keeping in view the domestic tourists potential. The target set 
for each and every projects need a review and a mor e scientific approach should be adopted. Even small  countries are able to 
achieve their targets within a stipulated time; it is matter of concern that India is lagging behind i ts project implementation 
ultimately resulting cost escalation and revenue losses. 
(Para 104 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
124.  Development of infrastructure is primarily th e responsibility of State Government/UT Administrat ions. The Ministry of 
Tourism, however, provides them, financial assistan ce also encourages them to implement the projects e xpeditiously for 
exploiting the potential of respective tourist dest inations/ Circuits/regions. The assets created with  financial assistance from 
Ministry of Tourism are used both by domestic and foreign tourists. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
125.  The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Mi nistry of Tourism would actively engage the State 
Governments to develop tourism infrastructure. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
126.  The Committee also pointed out that travel by  train is an integral part of the domestic tourism. Moreover, many exclusive 
tourist trains have started plying exclusively for the tourists. The committee recommends that Ministr y of Tourism should 
coordinate with the Railways authorities in order to provide safe, secure and enjoyable to the tourists. 
(Para 105 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
127.  The Ministry of Tourism has been taking up th is matter with the Ministry of Railway at various f ora. The 
recommendation of the committee is well taken. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
128.  The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
129.  The Committee notes that connectivity to tour ist destination is the pivotal aspect of the develo pment of tourism. Many of 
the areas which have huge tourism potential are left out by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Railways and Ministry of 
Road Transport and Highways. For instance, Thekkady  and Bekal Fort are the two major tourist destinati ons in Kerala. If 
helicopter services are started in these areas lot of tourists will be attracted to these areas and it will be a big boost for tourism in 
these two places. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism may take up with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and 
Airport Authority of India to construct airstrips in Thekkady and Bekal Fort in Kerala. 
(Para 106 ibid ) 
Reply of the Government  
130.  Development and promotion of tourism is prima rily undertaken by the State Government/Union Terri tory 
Administrations themselves. However, Ministry of To urism provides Central Financial Assistance for tou rism projects, 
identified/prioritized in consultation and interact ion with them under the various schemes of the Mini stry of Tourism. Projects 
which are complete in all respect are processed on inter-se-priority and funds released, subject to av ailability under the 
respective head. . 
131.  As recommended by the Committee, the issue ha s been taken up with the Ministry of Civil Aviation , Airports Authority 
of India and the State Government for taking necessary action in the matter. 

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE  
132.  The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the issues taken up with other Ministries/Department should 
be followed in a time bound manner.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS –– AT GLANCE  
Budgetary allocation and analysis of Annual Plan 2010-11 
 The Committee notes the reply. (Para: 7) 
Tourist Infrastructure 
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the M inistry will be careful while formulating their sch emes to 
ensure that correct projection of required fund are made at BE stage itself.    
      (Para: 10) 
 The Committee would like to be informed about the circuits particularly inter State circuits identifi ed for 
development.    (Para: 13) 
 The Committee is not satisfied with the reply and would like to know about the action taken or propos ed to be 
taken on the recommendations of the Committee to revise and modify the Scheme ‘Creation of Land Bank for Hotels’. 
      (Para: 16) 
 The Committee is concerned over the fact that many  of the projects undertaken by the ITDC were laggin g behind 
the schedule. The Committee may be apprised of the status of illumination of the monuments and the number of visitors 
during Commonwealth Games 2010. (Para: 21) 
 The Committee reiterates its concern in this regar d and desires to know the major decisions taken in the light of 
conclusion arrived at the Conference for strengthening the monitoring mechanism. It would also like to  know the status 
of projects in various States/U.Ts. (Para: 24) 
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that waysi de amenities would be developed in a time bound manner. 
      (Para: 28) 
 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee howev er hopes that, the Ministry will keep pursuing the matter 
with State Governments.  (Para: 31) 
 The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the thrust may be on increasing the budget accommod ation 
hotels in the country.   (Para: 37) 
 The Committee notes the reply. (Para: 40) 
 The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministr y and desires that proper monitoring of the projects should be 
done.      (Para: 45) 
 The Committee notes the reply and emphasizes the n eed to get the work completed as soon as possible s ince it has 
already been delayed.   (Para: 50) 
Tourist Information and Publicity 
 The Committee notes the reply. However, the Commit tee would like to know the details of expenditure m ade 
during the months of February and March, 2010 on the domestic campaign.    
      (Para: 55) 
Overseas Campaign 
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the o verseas promotion campaign would attract more forei gn 
tourists.     (Para: 58) 
 The Committee recommends that a pro-active approac h by the Ministry of Tourism is required in this regard. 
      (Para: 61) 

 The Committee notes the reply. (Para: 66) 
Training 
 The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministr y. It, however, would like to know the criteria ado pted for the 
selection of Universities for providing this assist ance. The Committee recommends that assistance for more training 
institutions may be extended to Universities in oth er parts of the country also so that the benefit of  this sector may be 
ensured throughout the country. There is a need to encourage the Universities/Institution across the c ountry to offer 
courses on hospitality sector. (Para: 73) 
Tourist Guide 
 The Committee notes the reply. (Para:77) 
 The Committee notes the reply and reiterate its re commendation that Ministry of Tourism should also c ome 
forward to provide financial assistance to institut ions and universities for starting foreign language  courses/imparting 
training in foreign languages. (Para: 81) 
Computerization and Information Technology 
 The Committee notes the reply. (Para: 84) 
 The Committee notes the reply. (Para: 87) 
 The Committee suggests that in addition to the ste ps taken by the Ministry to make the website more user friendly, 
a software to calculate the approximate time taken by Air, Road and Rail should be got developed and b e provided in 
the website so that the tourists could plan their j ourney accordingly. Moreover, link to official Rail ways and Indian 
Airlines websites, link to helpline numbers of the particular area authorities, etc. will be more bene ficial to the 
travellers.     (Para: 90) 
Commonwealth Games 2010 
 The Committee notes the reply. (Para: 93) 
 The Committee notes the reply. (Para: 96) 
Tourism Police 
 The Committee notes the reply. (Para: 103) 
 The Committee notes the reply and desires to know the latest developments and the reaction of the Sta te 
Governments over the issue.  (Para: 106) 
ITDC Hotels 
 The Committee notes the reply and desires to know the progress made by the ITDC in professionalizing their 
activities.     (Para: 110) 
Environmental Friendly Initiatives 
 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee, howe ver, recommends that there should be a monitoring 
mechanism to ensure that the above guidelines are b eing followed by the hoteliers, etc. after the init ial 
approval/classification of their hotels. (Para: 113) 
Development of Tourism in J&K 
 The Committee notes the reply and desires to know the current status of the schemes sanctioned and the utilization 
of the funds so far, out of the total amount sanctioned under the Bangus Valley project and the status of Neelnag project. 
      (Para: 116) 

Tourism Promotion and LTC 
 The Committee notes the reply given by the Ministr y. The Committee also desires to know the steps tak en by the 
Ministry of Tourism in the matter and the response of the Ministry of Civil Aviation thereto.  (Para: 119) 
General Observation and Recommendations 
 The Committee notes the reply. (Para: 122) 
 The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the M inistry of Tourism would actively engage the State 
Governments to develop tourism infrastructure. (Para: 125) 
 The Committee notes the reply. (Para: 128) 
 The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the issues taken up with other Ministries/Department should 
be followed in a time bound manner.        (Para: 132) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
V 
FIFTH MEETING  
  The Committee met at 3:30 P.M. on Monday the 20th  December, 2010 in Committee Room ‘B’, Ground Floor , 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  MEMBERS PRESENT  
 1.  Shri Sitaram Yechury  ––    Chairman 
  RAJYA SABHA  
 2.  Shri Shadi Lal Batra 
 3.  Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra  
 4. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz 
 5.  Shri Vikram Verma 
  LOK SABHA  
 6.  Yogi Aditya Nath 
 7.  Shrimati Bhavana Gawali Patil 
 8.  Dr. Mahesh Joshi 
 9.  Shri Rajaram Pal 
 10.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma 
 11.  Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
 12.  Shri K. Sugumar 
SECRETARIAT  
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director 
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director 
 * * * 
 * * * 
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Member s of the Committee and informed them about the agen da of the 
meeting. Thereafter, the Committee considered and adopted the following Draft Reports: 
(i) 162nd Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred  Fifty 
Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Tourism; 
(ii) 163rd Report on Action Taken by the Government  on the recommendations contained in the One Hundre d Fifty 
Fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways; 
(iii) 164th Report on Action Taken by the Governmen t on the recommendations contained in the One Hundr ed Fifty 
Sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Shipping; 
(iv)  165th Report on Action Taken by the Governmen t on the recommendations contained in the One Hundr ed Fifty 
Seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Culture; and 
(v) 166th Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations contained in the One Hundred  Fifty 
Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2010-11) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
3. * * * 

4. * * * 
5. * * * 
6. * * * 
7. The meeting adjourned at 5: 10 P.M. 