Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY FIFTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained 
in its One Hundred Seventy-fourth Report on the Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation (2012-13)
 
REPORT NO. 
185
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th December, 2012)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY FIFTH REPORT
Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained
in its One Hundred Seventy-fourth Report on the Demands
for Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation (2012-13)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 4th December, 2012)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
December, 2012/Agrahayana, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ......................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—27
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ........................ 28—29
6. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 30—36
7. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 37—40

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2012-2013)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
10. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
14. Shri Khagen Das
15. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
16. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
17. Dr. Kruparani Killi
18. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
19. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
20. Shrimati Ranee Narah
21. Shri Prabodh Panda
22. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
23. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
24. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
25. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
26. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
27. Shri Dushyant Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri K. Sudhakaran
31. Shri Dinesh Trivedi

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Eighty Fifth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred Seventy Fourth
Report on the Demands for Grants of Ministry of Civil Aviation (2012-13).
2. One Hundred Seventy Fourth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 27
th April,
2012 in Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its
One Hundred Seventy Fourth Report were received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation, on
1
st October, 2012.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report as its meeting held on the 18 th October 2012.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
October 18, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Asvina 26, 1934  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture

(iv)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
AAI – Airports Authority of India
ASA – Air Service Agreement
ATF – Aviation Turbine Fuel
BCAS – Bureau of Civil Aviation Security
CHPL – Commercial Helicopter Pilot Licence
CAR – Civil Aviation Requirement
DGCA – Director-General of Civil Aviation
FAA – Federal Aviation Authority
GBS – Gross Budgetary Support
HCI – Hotel Corporation of India
MoCA – Ministry of Civil Aviation
MoDoNER – Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region
MRO – Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul
RFQ – Request for Quotation

1
REPORT
1. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations as contained in its One-Hundred and Seventy fourth Report on
Demands for Grants 2012-13 of the Ministry of Civil Aviation which was presented to both the
Houses of Parliament on 27
th April, 2012.
2. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on the 1 st October, 2012 in
respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report.
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those recommendations/observations
which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it at the
earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the concerned Ministries. The recommendations of
the Committee contained in the One Hundred and Seventy fourth Report, action taken thereon by
the Ministry and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken has
been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
5.  The Committee notes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation was able to spend Rs.40.673.04
crores (anticipated) as against the allocation of Rs.49,267 crores for the Eleventh Plan period
resulting in a huge saving. The Committee finds that except Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi
which spent Rs.41.00 crore against the budgetary allocation of Rs.42.00 crore for the plan period,
all other organizations under the Ministry could not spend the allocated money fully. This is a
disturbing scenario. The Committee notes that Air India was able to spend Rs.25,603 crores only
against the allocation of Rs.32,730.71 for the Eleventh plan period, again saving a sum of Rs.7,127
crores. The Committee is surprised to note that when the national carrier was knocking the doors
of financial institutions to bail it out, it was unable to spend money it had been allocated during
the Eleventh Plan period.
(Recommendation at para 6 of 174
th Report)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
6. The Eleventh Plan approved outlay of Rs.32730.71 crores of Air India Limited did not
include any budgetary support from the Government. The entire outlay was proposed to be met
from the internal and extra budgetary resources of the company. The actual outlay during this
period 2007-08 to 2011-12 was Rs.24,763.36 crores including equity infusion of Rs.3200.00 crores
by the Government of India. The reduction in the actual expenditure as compared to the Eleventh
Plan Outlay is primarily due to delay in delivery of B787 aircraft due to production related issues.
Further there was a reduction in the other capital projects due to the liquidity crisis faced by the
company during this period as only operationally essential projects were undertaken.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
7. Another case of under-spending is that of Airports Authority of India, the leading
infrastructure provider for aviation industry in the country. AAI could spend Rs.11,873.41 crores
against the allocation of Rs.12,964.21 crores for the plan period. The Committee is not able to

2
understand the logic behind Airports Authority of India’s inability to spend even the budgetary
support of the Government; they could spend roughly 50% only. The Committee feels that such
under utilization of funds by AAI could have definitely slowed the pace and process of developing
airport infrastructure at various places including Chennai and Kolkata. A curious case in this respect
is that of the Hotel Corporation of India which was able to spend Rs.43.75 crores against Rs.75.00
crores. The Committee feels that time has come to assess the performance of this PSU in a
broader perspective and it should not be allowed to become a liability to pave the way for its
privatization. Air India Charters Limited is another example in this respect. They could spend only
Rs.2088.16 crores against the plan outlay of Rs.2475.26. Neither the Low Cost Carrier of the
Government is expanding its services nor able to spend the allocated plan outlay. The Committee
would like to be informed about the reasons for such under-utilization of funds by various
organizations of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the remedial measures taken to prevent such
happenings in future. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will ensure that the organizations
under its control were able to spend their allocations to the maximum possible extent in the Twelfth
Plan. The Committee feels that any laxity on spending of allocation will have the direct impact on
aviation sector of the country.
 (Para 7 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
8. AAI incurred an amount of Rs. 11868.41 crores as capital expenditure for development of
airport Infrastructure in the country during Eleventh Plan as against plan outlay of Rs.12964.21
crores which is 92% of plan outlay. The shortfall of 8% has been mainly on account of non-
availability of site, delays in obtaining necessary regulatory and statutory approval, environmental
clearance, and approval from Planning Commission etc. During the period 2007-08 to 2009-10, AAI
spent the entire amount approved in BE by MoCA in respect of schemes for which Government
Budgetary Support (GBS) was provided. However during the year 2010-11 and 2011-12, AAI was
able to spend only 50% of the funds allotted for GBS Schemes mainly on account of delay in
approval from the Planning Commission for various new projects i.e. Jalgaon, Gondia, Puducherry,
Itanagar, Cheitu (Kohima), Jammu airport schemes. The pace of work at mega projects namely
Kolkata and Chennai did not slow down due to non-availability of funds as the funding of these
projects was met out of the internal resources of AAI and borrowings. The delays occurred due
to other reasons.
9. The total outlay in the eleventh plan for Hotel Corporation of India (HCI) was Rs.75 crores
to be spent out of the Company’s own internal resources. However, due to the lower internal
generation during the Eleventh Plan period, HCI was able to spend only Rs 43.75 crores. At no
stage has the Company received any grants from the Government in the Eleventh Plan. The
approved outlay for Eleventh Plan for AICL was Rs. 2475.25 crores. The actual outlay for the plan
period was Rs. 2070.27 crores. The main reasons for reduction in actual expenditure as compared
to the Plan outlay were as follows:
(a) The plan outlay for aircraft induction was estimated based on certain aircraft prices
at certain exchange rate. The actual delivery price was slightly lower on account of
concessions/discounts obtained from Boeing on Aircraft list price compared to our
estimates and exchange fluctuation.
(b) It was assumed that five spare engines would be acquired in the plan period. As
against this, only four spare engines were acquired.
(c) The budgetary outlay was proposed based on estimates of internal revenue generation
which did not materialize. No Government budgetary support was given to AICL
separately.

3
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
10. The Committee notes the reasons furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation for
under-utilization of funds by Air India and Airports Authority of India during the Eleventh
Plan period. The Committee notes that most of the outlays that Airports Authority of India
and Hotel Corporation of India could not spent were to be arranged out of internal
resources. However, Public Sector Undertaking which set up out of tax payers’ money can
not be absolved over the lack of commitment merely because no Government budgetary
support was given to them. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will impress all the
organizations under its purview to spend the allocated funds during the Twelfth Plan to the
maximum extent.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
11. The Committee notes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation was not able to spend fund allocated
in respect of DGCA, BCAS and AAI – three main organizations. It is not a welcome sign since
allocation under these heads constituted major share of the allocation under Plan, excluding Air
India. The reasons submitted by the Ministry for under-utilization of funds such as delay in
clearances to various projects, delay in acquisition of land for airport projects and delays in getting
necessary regulatory and statutory approvals may be understandable but not acceptable, if repeated
every year, For example, the project of construction of office buildings for DGCA and BCAS could
not be taken up for last two to three years. The Committee feels that failure to spend the allocated
moneys by these organizations shows a lack of proper planning for timely execution of major
programmes/projects. Delay on account of various administrative problems and procedural
difficulties cannot be acceptable as excuse as these could be visualized at initial stages and
precautions taken well in time. The Committee recommends that the long pending construction of
headquarters for DGCA and BCAS be started at the earliest in coordination with agencies concerned
and be completed in a fixed schedule. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should
impress upon all the organizations under its purview to spend the allocations cent percent in a
planned manner.
(Para 9 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
12. Construction of DGCA and BCAS Headquarters building is held up because the land at
Safdarjung Airport has been declared as “recreational green” by Ministry of Urban Development.
Secretary, MoCA, Chairman, AAI and DGCA, all have made collective efforts to get the title of
Safdarjung Airport changed in Delhi Master Plan but have not succeeded. Hence the construction
of above offices could not commence for the proposed buildings, though environmental clearance
has been obtained, drawings finalized and approved. AAI is ready to take up the construction and
the day the title for Safdarjung Airport is restored as Airport, the actual construction work will
commence.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
13. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
14. The Committee after scrutinizing the allocations for 2012-13 finds that apart from equity
infusion to the tune of Rs.4000 crore for Air India under the budgetary support, the allocation for
the Ministry is inadequate. The allocation of Rs.738.80 crores under the Non-plan for the year

4
2012-13 is lesser than the allocation at Revised Estimates of Rs.764.86 crores for the year 2011-12.
The Committee expresses its concern over the static allocation to the Ministry which concerns with
one of the fastest growing sectors having lot of potential for further growth. The Committee hopes
that the Ministry will take up its case with Planning Commission for allocations of adequate funds
at RE stage so that ongoing aviation projects are not hampered and new ones are taken up.
(Para 14 i bid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
15. The observation of the Committee has been noted for compliance and its recommendation
will be conveyed to the Department of Expenditure/Planning Commission for seeking enhanced
budgetary allocations at RE stage. Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation has already written to the
Planning Commission seeking higher allocation in the Twelvth Five Year Plan.
Air India
16. The approved outlay Annual Plan 2012-13 for Air India is Rs. 4928 crores, of which
Rs.4000 crores is the budgetary support in the form of equity infusion. Financial Restructuring Plan
and Turnaround Plan of Air India has been approved by the GOI in April, 2012. As per the Plan,
the total amount receivable as equity from GOI in 2012-13 would be as under:
1. Upfront Equity Rs. 5,550 crores
(Rs. 6,750 crores – Rs. 1,200 crores)
provided in the Budget 2011-12 and already received
2. Equity for guaranteed loans
FY 2011-12 Rs. 1,786 crores
FY 2012-13 Rs. 1,787 crores
3. Equity for cash deficit (FT 2012-13) Rs. 1,539 crores
4. Equity for NCD’s Rs. 352 crores
T
OTAL Rs. 11,014 crores
17. Of the above, Rs. 4000 crores has already been provided in the Plan budget of 2012-13.
Ministry of Finance shall be approached to provide for remaining amount of Rs.7,014 crores as
Supplementary Grant in 2012-13.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
18. The Committee feels that Air India is still in critical phase. Any laxity in any matter
relating to Air India can play havoc to the public sector carrier. The Committee notes the
reply of the Ministry. The Ministry, therefore, should pursue with Planning Commission
vigorously for allocation of requisite funds at RE stage so that the ongoing Air India
projects are not delayed.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
19. The Committee notes that the national carrier had to undergo a tough period during the last
year mainly on account of merger related issues, ever increasing ATF prices, employees’ resentment
over non-payment of dues, allotment of profitable routes to private carriers, its over-ambitious
aircraft acquisition plan, inability to raise funds from the open market and the reluctance of
financial institutions’ and Oil Marketing Companies to help the ailing Air India. The Committee finds

5
that though the company was able to increase its passenger load factor it witnessed a dip in share
in domestic and international aviation markets.
(Para 30 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
20. Air India, the national carrier of India, has proposed to induct capacity in an effort to re-
capture the market share in the domestic and international market. To achieve this, various
measures are being taken as per the Turnaround Plan approved by the Government.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
21. The Committee notes that a large number of amendments to Air Service Agreements with
foreign countries were signed for expansion of international air services by the national carrier
during the last year. The Committee finds that Air India operates almost 500 departures daily
offering more than 78000 seats per day connecting about 150 domestic city-pairs and 125
international city pairs with a 143 strong fleet but still not in a position to attain a visible
competitive edge vis-àvis other airlines. The Committee notes some serious efforts being made both
by Air India management and the Government for taking the national carrier out of the current
mess. There are improvements on some parameters indicating that things have started moving into
required direction, which is why the Government has decided to support the airlines’ recovery
process. But in view of the several challenges and over all slow down in the Sector, Committee
would like to caution the Air India management and the Government to be very careful while
implementing its restructuring/revival plans. The greatest challenge it must overcome on priority is
that relating to HR issues created due to ill-conceived merger plan. The Committee hopes that
allocation of unutilized bilateral /traffic rights to Air India will benefit it in regaining its lost market
share in international market.
(Para 31 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
22. Air India is given first preference while allocating the traffic rights for international sector.
Air India has submitted their proposed operation plan upto winter 2013. Grant of traffic rights for
other airlines is considered only after taking into consideration the operational requirements of Air
India. Most of the amendments to ASAs done in recent years has not been done for the expansion
of Air India’s services. In view of its losses, Air India has been conservative and has 
not asked
for more traffic rights. It may be mentioned that rapidly increasing capacity, as recommended,
could escalate the losses. The aim should be to increase profitability and competitiveness by service
quality, reliability and revenue generation. Once a profitable model is established, the capacity could
be scaled up rapidly to increase profits further.
23. As regards attaining visible competitive edge vis-à-vis other airlines, following actions have
been taken by AI with respect to network and schedules:
(a) The aircraft on AI’s fleet are mostly new and standardized in term of in-flight comforts
and facilities.
(b) All the major domestic and international routes are operated with the newly acquired
aircraft.
(c) The timings of international services have been rationalized. AI now offers convenient
late evening/midnight hour departures with arrival in morning hours at destinations on
most of the international routes. Further uniform timings are also offered on all days
on almost all international routes.

6
(d) Multiple daily services with uniform timings are offered on all major domestic routes
providing convenient same day return facility.
(e) Conveniently scheduled non-stop services have been introduced on India-N America
routes which is perceived as a Unique Selling Proposition (USP).
(f) The network of AI and its subsidiaries now spreads over to 64 domestic (covering all
remote areas of country) and 33 international destinations (covering North America,
Europe, Far east, South-East Asia, South Asia and Middle East) connecting 159
domestic city-pairs and 127 international city pairs on 305 domestic departures and 175
international departures daily.
(g) Delhi hub operationalized with 2 arrival/departure banks for long haul services. AI now
connects Delhi with 23 international and 48 domestic destinations. AI handles 2800
transfer passengers every day at the Delhi hub comprised by feeder traffic from/to
interior points in India and destinations in neighboring countries mainly Bangkok and
Kathmandu at this stage.
(h) With the merger and integration of the networks of erstwhile AI and IC, operation of
Hub and Spoke services have been increased to provide for convenient connections at
DEL/BOM for passengers originating at other metro cities including Ahmedabad, Goa
and Amritsar. The passengers traveling by the Hub and spoke services avail of
customs/immigration facilities at their point of origin/destination.
(i) Further, services carrying through flights numbers to onward international destinations
are operated from select interior points in India so as to improve AI’s ability to more
effectively market these destinations at the interior points.
Improved website
24. For enhancing customer satisfaction and for improving sales through website, effective
September, 2011, new webmaster and core team was designated with the objective of making the
website as customer friendly and making it as a marketing tool to enhance direct sales thereby
reducing distribution costs and other costs related to bookings through other channels i.e. agents,
portals, booking offices etc.
Initiatives taken so far
• The travel/ticketing rules and regulations related to customers are being updated on real
time basis (which has become an ongoing process now) to enhance customer
satisfaction.
• Constant development and modification of Website and Web page contents as per
market and commercial requirement (which has become an ongoing process) which in
turn enhances customer satisfaction.
• To make it comprehensive platform and single window for all e-business activities and
major source of revenue for AI.
• To enhance the speed and processing time the website has been migrated to NIC
platform (Government of India) effective January, 2012 which in turn enhances
customer satisfaction.
• The refund processing time has been reduced to couple of days to restore customer
confidence.

7
• The helpdesk response time (to respond to customer queries) has been reduced to
24 hours by augmenting the entire set-up to tune it to market requirement.
• A short term web based scheme has been launched effective January, 2012 to
encourage customers for web based bookings/ticketing.
• Aggressively using website as e-marketing tool for advertising promotional schemes,
destinations, new flights, schedule, fares etc.
25. These initiatives have helped Air India to restore confidence of e-customers, change the
focus of website i.e. customer related and above all increase direct sales i.e. web sales. At present
the percentage of web sales is approximately 10% of the total passenger sales on network basis
now. In order to enhance the direct sales (web sales) further, some of the major initiatives under
process or in the near future are:
• To make our site truly global and globally accessible site with regional foreign
languages option.
• To make it interactive and user friendly.
• To make it as major channel of revenue generation, competitive and at par with other
booking portals.
• Use as an effective platform to reduce unsold inventory levels.
• In the long run to develop website as interactive tool for
o Customers
o Prospective business clients
o global networking
o Press releases/information tool about our products, features etc.
o Blog writing, linking and development
o Platform to patronise and bring people closer, who matter for our business on
global basis
o As international tool for marketing, sales, publicity and promotion etc.
o Platform for developing business, partnerships and associations
o Platform for co-promotional, co-branding activities, launches etc.
o Developing data base for promotional activities.
• To link website to other social media networking sites for getting increased traffic with
objective of enhancing sales, constructive publicity and brand building.
• To develop website as tool for electronic media publicity for AI to reduce costs.
• To develop ancillary revenues for Air India by extending options like travel insurance,
visa processing, in-bound tourism etc for its customers.
26. The constant improvisation and modification of website enhances customer satisfaction and
enables the airline to increase its revenues i.e. direct web sales and at the same time reduces
distribution and ticket/booking related costs.

8
Advertising
27. In 2009-10 it was felt that due to the severe cash crunch being faced by the company,
expenditure towards publicity and sales promotion should be kept to the bare minimum. However,
in the current year 2011-12, the company has embarked upon major advertising campaigns in the
various media channels like Television, Print, Radio and Hoardings. Air India has also been
advertising in its website and online channels and just completed an Advertisement campaign on the
recent schemes and product upgrades in all the media channels. Another campaign in the beginning
of February 2012. Air India has also tied up with major events as part of sales promotion. It may
be noted that in contrast to Rs.460.80 lacs spent on Advertising and Sales Promotion during period
April – December, 2010, a sum of Rs.860.70 lacs has been spent on Advertising and Sales
Promotion, during April – December, 2011.
Schemes to promote executive class...
28. AI offers a number of schemes for promotion of Executive Class product on the domestic
network. These include:
– ‘Get Up Front’ Offer:  Air India has launched  an airport upgrade scheme, where
passengers at select domestic airports can pay a prefixed amount of Rs.4000 (distance
up to 750 km.)/Rs.6000 (distance above 750 km.) and upgrade their domestic travel
to Business class, subject to availability of seats and on First Come First Served Basis
at the airport. This scheme is available from 16 Airports in India.
– Upgrade through Option Town: In partnership with Option Town, this is a scheme
to solicit Business class upgrade through Email/SMS. A passenger registers at the
Option Town website and pays the upgrade amount.
– Super Saver Offers:  Air India offers special edition Super Saver ticket booklets with
variants of 4 coupons/8 coupons, which are issued in both Economy and Business
class. These are very competitively priced tickets that offer immense convenience as
each coupon can be used for any city pair on a direct flight,with a few restrictions
within India, as also each coupon can be used by a different person (multiple user
facility).
– Normal Super Saver – 4 and 8 coupons in Business  (valid on all domestic
sectors)
 – Mini Super Saver M1 – 4 and 8 coupons in Business class (travel between 21
city pairs)
– Mini Super Saver M2 –   4 and 8 coupons in Business class (travel between 47
city pairs)
– Companion Free Scheme : A person travelling on a full First/Business/Economy class
fare paid ticket within India is allowed a free ticket for a companion in the same cabin,
where only airport taxes and fee for the companion’s ticket are payable by the
passenger.
Other measures are:
(i) Entered into a number of Corporate Deals by offering discounts/incentives on volumes.
(ii) Promotional fares offered based on seasonality to augment loads.
(iii) Upgrade offers for passengers to sample our product at a price so that they convert
to regular First/business class passengers.

9
(iv) At times agents are incentivized so that Air India captures the market share of First
and Business Class traffic.
29. As regards HR issues of Air India, consequent to amalgamation of erstwhile Indian Airlines
and Air India into Air India Ltd., in order to address all the HR issues, the Government of India
has constituted a Committee headed by Justice Dharmadhikari. The Committee has submitted its
report to the Government of India on 31.01.2012 and the recommendations of the said Committee
have been accepted by the Government and are under implementation by Air India. A Committee
has been formed for implementation of the recommendations. The employees representations are
being examined before decisions are taken. It is hoped that the HR issues will be resolved to the
satisfaction of the employees and the management.
30. As far as allocation of unutilized bilateral/traffic rights to Air India is concerned, Air India
does not seek allocation of unutilized rights. It has requested the Government not to further
escalate parallel sector operations of private carriers, which leads to fare wars and more losses.
Private carriers should create new hubs (apart from BOM and DEL) and operate on new sectors,
not operated by Air India.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
31. The committee feels that infusion of Government equity to the tune of Rs.30,000 crore over
a nine year period, induction of 27 Boeing 787 Dreamers, proposal to hive off Air India’s
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) business and its Engineering services as two wholly-
owned subsidiaries will yield the much desired results in the long run.
(Para 32 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
32. It is true that the Equity Infusion by the Government over the next nine years which is as
per the Turnaround Plan of the company and the Financial Restructuring Plan would help Air India
in the long run. As per the TAP, the company would be EBIDTA positive in 2013 and PBT positive
in 2019. The Interest burden is estimated to reduce substantially (Rs 1000 crore in the first year).
33. The induction of the B 787 Dream liners would also help Air India as the Dreamliners are
fuel efficient aircraft and there is a saving of almost 20% on fuel costs alone. This would
substantially reduce the operating costs and the routes can make cash profits as fuel constitutes
a major part (almost 40%) of the operating costs and 20% savings would be substantial. As regards
hiving off of the Ground Handling and MRO activities, Air India proposes to focus on its core air
transport operations and hive off these SBUs into its subsidiaries and establish them as self
sufficient and profitable entities, in line with international standard practices. The transfer of SBUs
into subsidiaries would also result in an enhanced focus on MRO and GH operations, which by
themselves are a growing market.
34. In addition, it would have the following advantages:
• Improve quality of services benchmarked to international/global standards;
• Create a new work culture with customer focus;
• Facilitate improved productivity on a low cost platform;
• Create accountability for growth and profits;
• Future induction of employees into subsidiaries will provide opportunities for more
efficient recruitment and service terms;

10
• Leverage scope economies by offering complete spectrum of services under one roof;
• Leverage scale economies by segregation of demand from various sources thereby
reducing cost of operations.
35. It is proposed that the subsidiary company would enter into joint ventures with local/
foreign firms and would undertake engineering services for Air India as well as for third parties/
airlines in India and abroad. The intent of hiving off the MRO/GH operations into a separate
subsidiary is to attract a significant amount of third party work from India and its neighboring
countries. Due to the above we agree with the Committee’s observations that all the above steps
would yield the desired results in the long run and bring back Air India into profitability.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
36. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the planned executing of Turn Around
Plan of Air India will help the national carrier to improve its financial health and dwindling
market share. The Committee, however, feels that commencement of MRO and Engineering
Services through subsidiaries at the earliest will give the early bird advantage to Air India
in these sectors.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
37. The Committee notes that allocation of funds under the Plan for the airport
infrastructure provider was reduced to Rs.208.65 crores at RE level from Rs.280.15 crores at
BE level in the year 2011-12. However, Airports Authority of India was able to spend
Rs.120.99 crores only during 2011-12. The Committee feels that a cut in plan outlay for the
Airports Authority of India at RE and spending merely 60% of plan allocation does not augur
well for the development of required airport infrastructure in the country. The Committee was
informed that delay in getting requisite clearances and land acquisition for airport projects were
the reasons for under utilization of funds by the Airports Authority of India during the year
2011-12. The Committee emphasizes the need for a better coordination with various Ministries
and concerned State Governments by the Airports Authority of India for speedy clearance of
projects. The Committee hopes that AAI will ensure to utilize the allocated funds to the
maximum extent during the current fiscal.
(Para 46 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
38. During the year 2011-12 AAI has spent an amount of Rs. 211.75 crores as against an
approved RE of Rs. 208.65 crores for GBS schemes. However, amount released by the Ministry
is Rs. 120.99 crores to AAI for approved GBS schemes and the remaining amount has been spent
by AAI from its own resources. The balance amount of Rs.87.66 crore could not be released for
want of approval of the projects by the Government.
39. AAI will make all out efforts to get timely approval of projects included in GBS schemes
during the year 2012-13.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
40. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee had already taken
note of the issue of non-utilization of an amount of Rs.87.66 crore approved for GBS
schemes. The Committee hopes that Government will ensure that Airports Authority of
India get all necessary clearance in time so that it is able to utilize the GBS optimally.

11
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
41. The Committee finds that much emphasized financial autonomy to Airports Authority of
India to plan and execute its projects has not materialized so far. The Committee is of the opinion
that the Government should lend a helping hand to AAI in recovering its outstanding dues from
various agencies for the services rendered to them so that cash flow of the agency is maintained
at the desired level. The Committee hopes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation will impress the
Ministry of Finance in granting permission to AAI to float tax-free bonds to raise funds so that
the on-going and planned airport projects are not stalled or delayed for want of funds.
(Para 47 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
42. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted.
43. Ministry of Civil Aviation is pursuing the matter with the Ministry of Finance seeking
permission to float Tax-Free bonds for AAI.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
44. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and feels that permission to float tax-
free bonds by Airports Authority of India may help them to strengthen their financial
position to take care of airport infrastructural requirements.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
45. The Committee is happy to note that GPS Aided Geo Augmentation Navigation (GAGAN)–
the Indian Satellite Based Navigation System (SBAS) is progressing as per schedule and hopes that
system for aviation application is commissioned by June, 2013.
(Para 48 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
46. Airports Authority of India (AAI) and ISRO is making all out efforts for commissioning of
GAGAN project by the schedule date. The G SAT-10 carrying the payload of GAGAN has been
successfully launched by ISRO, the Ministry is optimistic that AAI would be able to operationalise
GAGAN by June, 2013, as planned.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
47. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
48. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that the Patna Airport was in dangerous state
where a catastrophe was waiting to happen as the existing runway is not fit for landing/take-off
of long-bodied aircrafts. The Committee finds that the existing airport can not be developed further
in view of land constraints. The Committee hopes that Airports Authority of India with the help
of State government will come out with a solution so as to expand the air services from this
important airport connecting ancient and important places of our country.
(Para 49 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
49. Patna Airport is capacity-constrained. Its runway is short (less than 6000 ft) and

12
consequently A 320 type of aircrafts operate through this airport with load – penalty. Its terminal
as well as apron capacity are highly inadequate. Its runway cannot be extended nor its terminal
can be expanded for paucity of land. The total land available with it hardly 260 Acres.
50. The State government has been advised to consider developing of Bihta airport as a proper
airport for Patna or alternately look for a Greenfield airport for the city. Response of Bihar
Government is awaited.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
51. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation will
pursue the issue with the State Government of Bihar keeping mind the safety of travelling
public in this sector.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
52. The Committee was further informed about the problems faced by Airports Authority of
India in getting necessary land for the expansion of Leh airport from Defence authorities. The
Committee desires that issue may be taken up with Defence officials at the earliest so that the long
pending modernization of Leh airport gets priority as the existing terminal is not a position to
accommodate more than 250 passengers at one time. The Committee recommends that Airports
Authority of India may take up the expansion of Kargil airport in consultation with Defence
authorities on priority to bring this important tourist place on the aviation map.
(Para 50 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
53. Regarding Leh Airport which is a Civil Enclave, land is a major constraint. AAI had
requested IAF for transfer of land and sought working permission. IAF have expressed their
inability to spare land. Efforts are being made to create infrastructure within the limited land
available as well as to continue to pursue with IAF for giving working permission. Kargil Airport,
it is a Defence Airport. The expansion works will have to be undertaken by Ministry of Defence.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
54. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee is of the view that
air connectivity to Leh and Kargil are very critical for promotion of tourism in this region.
The Committee recommends that the matter may be pursued with the Ministry of Defence
so that the matter of expansion of airports at Kargil and Leh is resolved at the earliest.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
55. The Committee may be apprised of the status of construction of new airport at Navi
Mumbai to decongest the Mumbai airport.
(Para 51 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
56. The Government of India has granted “in-principle” approval to Government of
Maharashtra for setting up of new Greenfield airport at Navi Mumbai airport through Public
Private Partnership (PPP) on 31.5.2007. The State Government has appointed the City and
Industries Development Corporation of Maharashtra (CIDCO) as nodal agency for development
of this Greenfield airport. Ministry of Civil Aviation has also constituted a Steering Committee

13
comprising of officials of State Government of Maharashtra, Ministry, CIDCO and AAI to
oversee the structure and implementation of the project including funding proposals, preparation
of tender and other documents, bidding and selection of strategic partners. While granting in-
principle approval for the airport, Government of India decided that, at an appropriate stage, an
EGoM assisted by an IMG be constituted to look into all the relevant issues for the development
of the airport. In the light of above decision the matter is under further examination in Ministry
in consultation with Cabinet Secretariat.
57. The present status and project activities are as under:
Land:  The State government is yet to fully acquire the land for the Project. The total land
required for the entire airport project is 2040 Ha, covering the core airport, non-aeronautical
activities, re-coursing of Ulwe River Mangrove Park and for off-site physical infrastructure.
Project Cost : CIDCO has prepared a draft RFQ and other transaction documents of the project.
The basic cost of airport project is Rs.14,500 crore spread in four phases. The cost of first phase
of the project is Rs.9500 crores and pre-development cost of project is Rs.4500 crores.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
58. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation will
pursue the matter seriously giving much consideration for decongesting Mumbai airport.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
59. The Committee desires that development of airports in North-Eastern Region gets due
priority since air connectivity plays a vital role in promotion of trade and tourism in this region.
The Committee feels that there is an urgent need for having an integrated plan to expand aviation
connectivity in this region by identifying places in a fixed time schedule. The Committee would like
to be informed about this, if there was already one in place. The Committee hopes that Airports
Authority of India’s role in developing non-metro airports will play a positive role in enhancing air
connectivity to these cities as scheduled operators have evinced more interest in starting services
to these cities.
(Para 52 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
60. As desired by Ministry of DoNER and under the directives of Ministry of Civil Aviation, AAI
has drawn up a consolidated plan for the development of Operational, Non-operational and
Greenfield airports in the NER based on ‘Hub and Spoke Model towards the direction of enhance
Air-connectivity in the best possible manner within and out of the region. During the 12th plan the
Ministry proposes to create the following projects in NER:–
(a) (i) Upgrade Guwahati international Airport (Assam) as inter-Regional Hub with 3
aircraft maintenance Hangar facilities for Air Bus 321, Fire Station, Technical Block
and Control Tower and a New Integrated Terminal Building.
(ii) Upgrade Agartala (Tripura) (Assam) as Intra-Regional Hub with one aircraft
Maintenance Hangar facilities for A321/ATR type of aircraft.
(b) Upgrade and develop other Operational airports:
(i) Shillong (Meghalaya) – being upgraded for operationalization of Air Bus 321 which
includes major works like extension of runway, apron expansion, new fire station
Control Tower, lsolation Bay.

14
(ii) Silchar (Assam) – Strengthening of Runway and New Terminal Building.
(iii) Jorhat (Assam) – Expansion of apron and New Terminal Building subject to
provision of additional land for city side development as requested from State
Government.
 (c) Operationalization of non-Operational airports.
(i) Arunachal Pradesh: Tezu airport is under construction. Daparizo airport will be
developed by AAI subject to provision of additional land as requested from State
Government Along and Passighat will be developed by IAF and civil enclaves will be
developed by AAl. Additional land requested from State Government for Along airport
and Lease agreement is under finalization for Passighat airport.
(ii) Tripura: Kamalpur airport will be developed by AAI subject to providing additional
land by the State Government.
(iii) Meghalaya: Ture airport will be developed by AAI subject to providing additional
land by the State Government.
(d) Greenfield airports planned in NER :
(i) Paykong (Sikkim) – under construction.
(ii) Itanagar (Arunachal Pradesh) – Inter Ministerial Committee comprising DGCA,
Planning Commission, State Government and DoNER have visited the site to carry out
the study for difficulties in acquisition at Holongi site and to report on the feasibility
of developing the new Greenfield airport.
(iii) Cheithu (Kohima) (Nagaland) – At estimated cost of Rs. 1134.64 crores. Cost
benefit is to be reviewed.
61. It is hoped that with the completion and operationalisation of these projects, the connectivity
to and among the N.E. States would improve considerably.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
62. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the timely completion
of the above projects will help service providers to expand air connectivity in this region.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
63. The Committee notes that with a fleet of 42 helicopters, PHHL’s fleet serviceability has
marginally declined from 83 % in 2010-11 to 82 % in 2011-12(RE). The profit of the company
has also taken a dip to 36.89 crores in 2011-12 from Rs.49.46 crores in 2010-11. The Committee
feels that though the helicopter industry has immense potential to expand and grow in different
areas as has been done in western countries. The PHHL being the leading helicopter operator in
the country can venture into such areas as patrolling, evacuation, medical emergency, tourism in
unexplored and inaccessible destinations and the like. The Committee reiterates its recommendations
made in its 169th Report on the Helicopter Operations in India for construction of heliports in a
big way. In North-Eastern part of the country, helicopter operations are more viable than regular
air services to remote and popular tourist destinations.
(Para 60 ibid)

15
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
64. Being the largest Helicopter operator in India, Pawan Hans has been providing its services
in areas of Offshore, Onshore, VIP Operations, Medivac, Passenger Transportation etc. In order
to promote tourism, Pawan Hans has been providing its regular services to Mata Vaishno Devi, Sri
Kedarnath ji, Sri Amarnath ji, Andaman and Nicobar, Lakshadweep and North Eastern Part of the
country. Pawan Hans has one dedicated Helicopter for Medivac service, deployed with ONGC,
which is fully equipped with necessary life saving equipments.
65. To further promote heli- tourism in the country, Pawan Hans has taken various initiatives
in the area of promoting tourism and providing connectivity to inaccessible areas. In addition, PHHL
has been exploring the possibilities of deploying Helicopter services in the various new areas
(subject to commercial viability) to promote tourism in the country e.g. Tamil Nadu, Tourist
attractions in Himachal Pradesh, Religious Circuits in the States of Bihar, West Bengal, Goa,
Madhya Pradesh etc., with the help of the State Governments. Pawan Hans, in association with
Directorate of  Tourism, Government of Uttar Pradesh, is also exploring the possibility of
connecting neighboring district towns of UP with the State Capital, Delhi.
66. For Disaster Management, Pawan Hans has submitted a detailed proposal to NDMA for
deploying 5-6 Helicopters at strategic locations across the country during any disaster. Pawan Hans,
by providing helicopters to the State Governments, played a crucial role in the Orissa Flood
(September, 2011) and Sikkim Earthquake (September, 2011). During Orissa Flood, PHHL’s Mi-172
Helicopter was pressed into emergency services. During this natural calamity at Orissa, Pawan
Hans Helicopter (Mi-172) carried a load of 61 tons of relief material and other essential items.
During the Sikkim earthquake, PHHL deployed 3 Helicopters for rescue Operations and rescued
approx 500 people from different locations, with a total 63 hours of flying during this operation.
For the maintenance of Law and Order, Pawan Hans has deployed one  Mi-172 Helicopter with
Government of Orissa for anti-naxal operations. Pawan Hans is also operating one Dauphin/Bell
Helicopter for Government of Maharashtra at Gadchiroli and Dhruv Helicopters for BSF, positioned
at Ranchi and Raipur for maintaining Law and Order.
67. As far as services in  North Eastern part of the country is concerned, presently Pawan Hans
has given helicopter to the State Governments/its agencies and is operating regular passenger
services in the State of Sikkim and Tripura. Further, to serve other States in North East. Pawan
Hans has requested the State Government of Meghalaya, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh to assign
the task of providing helicopter services on nomination basis instead of inviting tender. However,
as the State Governments have not agreed for the same due to MHA directions of hiring of
helicopters through tender, Pawan Hans submitted its offer against the tenders floated by
Government of Meghalaya, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh.
68. Further keeping the vital importance of infrastructure facilities for  operation of helicopters,
Pawan Hans has entered into the area of development of infrastructure and constructed helipads
in Rohini and at Commonwealth Games (Akshardham) in New Delhi and created helipads in Phata
for operating commercial services for Kedarnath.
69. Initial work of the Rohini Heliport has already been completed well in time for XIX
Commonwealth Games, Delhi, with the availability of basic helipads/apron. Work under Phase-I is
expected to commence shortly and will lead to development of Heliport in due course of time. In
addition to the above, Pawan Hans has also initiated the project for creation of infrastructure at
the Gliding Centre owned by DGCA and located at Hadapsar, Pune It is proposed to develop a
Helicopter Training Centre for Pilots and Engineers at the Heliport. Pawan Hans has completed
three helipads and construction of the proposed Hangar is underway as part of the initial phase of
the Project.

16
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
70. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
71. The Committee desires to know the status of the restructuring plan of Centaur Hotels in
Delhi and Srinagar and also the status of employees currently working in Centaur Lake View Hotel,
Srinagar. The Committee would like to know the latest position about the way the Lake View
Centaur Hotel will now be managed and how does Rs.5 crores outlay for 2012-13 fit into this. The
Committee would also like to have information on the viability/necessity of running the Hotel
Centaur, Delhi Airport.
(Para 63 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
72. An outlay of Rs.25.00 crores has been approved for the Annual Plan 2012-13 of Hotel
Corporation of India Ltd. (HCI) to implement the various plans drawn up for upgradation of its
four existing properties i.e. Centaur Hotel Delhi Airport (CHDA), Chefair Flight Catering Delhi
(CFCD), Chefair Flight Catering Mumbai (CFCM) and Centaur Lake View Hotel (CLVH), Srinagar.
Centaur Hotel Delhi Airport
73. The Centaur Hotel, having 376 saleable rooms, was commissioned as an ASIAD Project in
the year 1982 and is located in an area admeasuring 30,000 sq mt. of land leased out from Airports
Authority of India (AAI). The staff strength of the hotel as on 31 March, 2012 was 592, which
include 92 contractual/casual employees. The Hotel is in need of urgent renovation/upgradation
work. Now an amount of Rs.11.00 crores as budgetary support has been allocated in the financial
year 2012-13 for carrying out various renovation work/purchase of equipments for the Hotel. On
completion of this, it is expected that the hotel will be able to attract substantial business with the
added advantage of being located in the vicinity of Terminal-3 airport. Being a wholly owned
subsidiary of Air India, in case Air India increase the volume of their business presently being given
to the hotel in terms of layover accommodation for delayed flight passengers, crew and officials,
it will fetch additional revenue. It is assumed that implementation of the aforesaid commercial
action by Air India in letter and spirit will definitely help the Hotel to sustain themselves financially
and earn net profit.
Centaur Lake View Hotel, Srinagar
74. As decided by the Committee of Secretaries (COS) under the Chairmanship of Cabinet
Secretary on 13.1.2011 and conveyed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation, a proposal was made by
HCI to the State Government of J&K in April, 2011 offering the Centaur Lake View Hotel, Srinagar
property alongwith its employees and liabilities. A final decision on the same is yet to be taken. No
renovation/upgradation work was carried out in the Hotel since its inception in 1983 due to various
constraints. Over a period of time due to normal wear and tear, the physical condition of the
property was continuously getting deteriorated. Therefore, it is absolutely necessary that this
condition is reversed to keep the business going. Accordingly, the amount of Rs.5.00 crores being
allocated in the Annual Plan 2012-13 will be utilized for renovation of the Hotel and upgradation
of its equipments.
75. Since normalcy is being restored in the Valley, the business in the hotel has improved
substantially. With the renovation/upgradation of the property, it is expected that the Hotel will be
able to sustain itself financially and also make profit.

17
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
76. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that allocated funds will
be fully utilized for the renovation of Centaur Hotel Delhi and Srinagar so that they regain
their lost glory and become important properties in the hospitality market.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
77. The Committee finds that the performance of Air India Express needs special attention. Its
market share in international passengers dwindled from 6.2% in 2010-11 to 5.6% in 2011-12 (till
January, 2012). The number of flights per weeks and the number of passengers carried has also
gone down, resulting in increase of its losses. The Committee feels that the main reason attributable
to this situation is the withdrawal of its services from the lucrative gulf routes. This could be due
to lack of adequate attention, management being mostly occupied with ailing ‘Maharaja’. The
Committee is of the opinion that the company with a fleet strength of 21 B737-800 aircraft could
be used efficiently as a Low Cost Carrier in the domestic market to strengthen its business
operations.
(Para 68 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
78. In the past year, Air India Express has had to curtail operations due to an acute shortage
of cockpit crew. The problem was aggravated with the implementation of new Civil Aviation
Requirement (CAR) guidelines by the DGCA in February 2012. The new CAR stipulates that rest
hours for the pilots be increased. Further, the number of landings permitted for a pilot at night time
have been restricted from 3 to 2. Pilots are also restricted from operating on two consecutive night
flights. Most importantly, their duty hours have been severely curtailed when they fly in the
“Window of Circadian Low” which has been determined to be between 0200 hours to 0600 hours.
There are further restrictions on their travel as passengers, weekly and daily rest hours etc. These
restrictions have further dwindled the availability of cockpit crew for flying duty. The restricted
capacity is the primary reason for the drop in market share. As the crew situation improves, more
and more flights will be reinstated and new flights introduced. This will definitely provide a boost
to the revenues and market share of the airline. Increased domestic operations are also under active
consideration. Despite the crew constraints, effective April 2012, Air India Express has increased
the Mumbai-Mangalore-Mumbai service from twice weekly to daily. Similar expansion is being
considered for other domestic sectors depending on cockpit crew availability.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
79. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and still feels that Air India Express
can become a keen competitor in LCC segment once the issues of crew availability are
sorted out.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
80. The Committee only hopes that performance of IGRUA would see an improvement after its
management had been handed over to CAE, Canada to scale up the standards at par with
international standards since 1
st March, 2008. The Committee desires that upgradation plan of
Akademi into Air University should be materialized at the earliest and the plan to establish MRO and
CARGO Hub should be prioritized. The Committee hopes that re-introduction of CHPL course will
address the needs of helicopter industry.
(Para 72 ibid)

18
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
81. The achievements of IGRUA after its Management Contract with CAE, Canada and present
status of expansion is as under:–
(a) Induction of 100 students per course:
(b) IGRUA has already achieved the target of inducting 100 students per course from the
earlier target of 40 students per course.
(c) Increase in flying operations :
(d) The flying operations have increased from 9556 hours (2007-08) to 16790 hours
(2011-12).
(e) Quality and Safety:
(f) Quality of training has seen a quantum jump with the introduction of modern
standardised training methodology with the aid of technology.
(g) Flight Safety – a major worry factor in aviation has also seen vast improvements at
IGRUA.
(h) Reduction in training period :
(i) Training period has been reduced from 2 years to 15/16 months.
(j) Construction of Buildings/Procurement of Furniture for AME School – Rs.5.00
crores (2012-13) :
(k) Consultant for preparation of plan and expenditure estimate has been appointed and is
in progress. Once the plan and expenditure estimate is finalized, the same will be
forwarded to MoCA for administrative approval and release of funds.
(l) Extension of runway to 9000 ft. – Rs.1.00 crore (2012-13) :
(m) Uttar Pradesh Government has agreed, in principle, to acquire the land and hand over
the same to AAI for this purpose and is in progress.
(n) Upgradation of Akademi into Air University :
(o) This is directly linked to acquisition of land. Once the land is acquired, this will be
materialized.
(p) Establishment of MRO and CARGO Hub :
(q) This is also directly linked to acquisition of land. As soon as the land is acquired, the
process of establishment of MRO and CARGO will be initiated.
(r) Re-introduction of CHPL Course :
(s) Procurement of Helicopters has been assigned to Pawan Hans Limited. CHPL course
will be commenced immediately on procurement and delivery of helicopters to the
Akademi by Pawan Hans Limited.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
82. The Committee may be apprised on the status of purchase programme of helicopter
for re-introduction of CHPL course.

19
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
83. The Committee notes that the construction of headquarters of DGCA is pending for many
years. One or the other hindrance is mentioned as the reason for the delay. It has been brought
to the notice of the Committee that some vested interests were trying to ensure that the land
allotted to DGCA is not handed over to it for the construction of the headquarters. Perhaps they
want to use the centrally located prime land for commercial purposes. The other theory doing the
rounds in Media is that the lack of office space and the resultant chaos and confusions at the
DGCA is suitable for the unscrupulous elements to take advantage. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that the reasons as well as agencies responsible for the delay in the project may be
identified and brought to its notice within two months. The Ministry must make all out efforts for
ensuring that DGCA gets its office building at the earliest.
(Para 80 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
84. The proposal for constructions of DGCA Bhawan was conceptualized in 2008. The work
for construction at the existing site of DGCA office was allocated to CPWD. Subsequently,
considering that the existing site is under Lutyens Zone and footprints of the existing building
cannot be changed, Safdarjung Airport Complex was considered as alternative site for construction
of DGCA building. DPR for the project has already been prepared. However, Ministry of Urban
Development has raised objection to allocation of land for the project at Safdarjung Airport
complex. Land and Development Office, Ministry of Urban Development has proposed that
Safdarjung Airport land could be segregated into operational area for VVIP flights, which would
remain in control of Airport Authority of India (AAI) and entrust the remaining area to CPWD for
development of District Park.
85. AAI has accordingly prepared a master plan and has requested DDA to approve the same
so that Ministry of Urban Development could look into the matter for re-categorization of
Safdarjung airport from recreational activities to airport land in the Delhi Master Plan and for
restoring Safdarjung Airport to AAI.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
86. The Committee notes the reply. The Committee, however, recommends that the land
related issues for construction of headquarters for DGCA may be settled at the earliest.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSRV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
87. The Committee notes that a large part of plan allocation of Rs.60 crores for DGCA will be
expended for strengthening/ modernization of premier aviation regulatory authority. The Committee
notes that the aviation regulator has taken a number of measures that have started showing positive
results in respect of curbing malpractices in DGCA including making examination, inspection and
certification processes more transparent, increasing aviation safety, enforcing discipline in airline
operators, both domestic and international. The committee reiterates its earlier position for
strengthening the DGCA for making it more effective. The Committee hopes that the proposed Civil
Aviation Authority will have sufficient powers to develop/regulate Indian skies far more efficiently
and effectively. The Committee feels that DGCA should play a more pro-active role in fare
determination and routes re-scheduling of private players, as many a times air travelers are taken
for a ride by these players. The Committee also likes to know the status of filling up of vacancies
at various levels in DGCA so that the functioning and performance of this agency is not adversely
affected by the manpower shortage.
(Para 88 ibid)

20
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
88. The proposal for establishment of Civil Aviation Authority of India is under active
consideration of the Government and to this pursuit a draft cabinet note is being prepared so as
to provide, inter alia, more financial and administrative autonomy to the existing DGCA. In view
of the rapid growth in the Indian Civil Aviation Sector and consequent increase in the workload
of the organization and also to overcome the shortcomings pointed out in the audit Report of United
State’s Federal Aviation Authority (FAA), a total of 427 Group ‘A’ and 48 Group ‘B’ posts were
created in May, 2009.
(a) Action for filling up the posts was initiated in 2009. Filling up of Group ‘A’ posts
requires formulation of Recruitment Rules, where required, in consultation with the
Department of Personnel and Training, Ministry of Law and UPSC. Thereafter,
requisitions for recruitment to the posts are sent to UPSC for advertisement and
completion of other mandatory formalities before recommending the name of selected
candidates for appointment in Government Services.
(b) In this regard, action for filling up of these Group ‘A’ posts was expected to be
completed in phased manner by 30.04.2012. The process could not be completed
within stipulated period because the recruitment process is a time consuming
procedure which requires participation/consultation of various Ministries/ Departments.
The UPSC has recommended for appointment in respect of 43 posts of Air Safety
Officer, 06 posts of Assistant Director of Air Safety(Engineering)/Senior Air Safety
Officer (Engineering), 01 posts of Director of Flying Training, 04 posts of Operation
Officer, 11 posts of Assistant Director of Operations, 07 posts of Aeronautical Officer
and 07 posts of Deputy Director (Aircraft Engineering). Further, UPSC has also issued
advertisement for filling up of 130 posts of Airworthiness Officer and 43 posts of Air
Safety Officer in DGCA. Written examination for 130 posts of Airworthiness Officers
has been conducted.
(c) Proposal for filling up of one post of Director (AED) on direct recruitment basis has
been taken up with this Ministry as the same could not be filled upon deputation basis
for lack of available suitable candidate.
(d) As regards the unfilled posts which were required to be filled up to 30.04.2012 (as
per phasing Plan) and are still vacant, further extension of period of one year, i.e. up
to 30.04.2013 for filling up of the same is being sought from Competent Authority.
(e) The details of designation, number of posts vacant and their status is placed at
Annexure-I.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
89. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee is, however, not
happy with pace of recruitment in DGCA. The Committee is of the view that vacancy in
crucial positions may affect the efficiency of DGCA. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that efforts may be made to fill up the vacancies at the earliest.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
90. The Committee notes that the construction of BCAS building has been delayed mainly due
to non-finalization of the project and the same reason is being cited for the last 2 – 3 years. The
Committee was not informed about the actual reasons for non-finalization of the project for so
many years and the efforts made to expedite it. The Committee would like to have a status report

21
on this aspect detailing where and how actually it is being held up. The Committee hopes that with
the enhanced budgetary support for the current year, works for the construction of new building
and setting up of Civil Aviation Security Training Academy will speed up.
(Para 94 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
91. The issue of construction of BCAS building is linked with the land at Safdarjung Airport
where the DGCA building is to come up. As regards the setting up of Training Academy, the
competent authority has approved the proposal for construction of integrated academy both for
DGCA and BCAS at the constant price of Rs.84.14 crores plus departmental charges. MOU for
the building is being signed and funds shall be released.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
92. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
93. The Committee notes that 70 additional posts in various grades have been created in the
BCAS and hopes that new regional offices created at Amritsar, Guwahati, Hyderabad and
Ahmadabad would be operationalized at the earliest with the required man power to strengthen the
existing security apparatus of BCAS.
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
94. Four new regional offices at Amritsar, Guwahati, Hyderabad and Ahmadabad have been
started with the existing staff strength of BCAS. Efforts are being made to fill up the additional
posts to strengthen the security apparatus of BCAS. The Ministry has noted the concern shown
by the Committee in this regard.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
95. The Committee may be apprised on the steps taken to fill up vacant posts in BCAS.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
96.  The Committee notes that Aero Club of India was able to spend Rs.0.84 crores only out
of Rs.6.00 crores received from the Government as Grant-in aid for the year 2011-12. Now for
2012-13 it has been allocated Rs.12.00 crore under the same head. The Committee feels that the
allocated amount for the current fiscal will be spent fully for the purpose it has been allocated.
The Committee hopes that purchase of infrastructure related equipments will improve quality in
flying training and developing aerosports.
(Para 100 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
97. The BE provision for Aero Club of India (ACI) was Rs.6.00 crore, earmarked for
procurement of Aerosports Development Project. ACI received sanction to the tune of Rs.0.84
crore only. Due to under utilization of some of the equipment procured earlier, ACI has decided
to defer all procurement proposals included in Annual Plan 2012-2013 to next year.

22
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
98. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that quality of training
imparted in Aero club of India do not suffer due to under-utilization of training equipments.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
99. The Committee noted that Comptroller and Auditor general of India during its audit of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation have made some serious observations. CAG while scrutinizing the
implementation of Operation, management and Development entered into by Airports Authority of
India with Delhi International Airport Limited (DIAL) observed that DIAL was unduly benefited due
to non-levy of interest on excess annual fee actually received as per the provision of OMDA, AAI
was not in a position to levy penal interest on delayed payment by DIAL due to the absence of
enabling provisions etc. In another observation on the unauthorized withdrawal from the Escrow
Account held in a fiduciary capacity on behalf of the Government of India by MIAL, the CAG has
state that the orders of the government regarding expenditure from Passenger Service Fee (Security
component) Escrow account were violated by the airport operator - Mumbai International Airport
Limited, resulting in loss to Government / Airports Authority of India by 15.22 crores.
(Para 101 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
100. Claim has been preferred on DIAL by Airports Authority of India for recovery of interest
amounting to Rs.2.66 crores and Rs.1.39 crores respectively. The reply to the Audit observation
has already been furnished to CAG through this Ministry. The Ministry has also directed the
airport operators, including MIAL, that any expenditure incurred on acquisition and installation of
security equipment and deployment of private security not approved by BCAS/MoCA is not to
be charged to PSF (Security component) and the amount so debited may be reversed. MIAL has,
however, approached the Court against the said directions which is being defended by the
Government.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
101. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
102. The Committee was informed that replies to the CAG’s audit observations are being finalized
by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Committee notes that the audit observations are serious in
nature which shows that undue benefit has been shown to private airport operators causing notable
loss to Government exchequer. The Committee may be apprised about the action taken by the
Government on both the observations of CAG.
(Para 102 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
103. The Ministry has also directed the airport operators, including MIAL, that any expenditure
incurred on acquisition and installation of security equipment and deployment of private security not
approved by BCAS/MoCA is not to be charged to PSF (Security component) and the amount so
debited may be reversed. MIAL has, however, approached the Court against the said directions
which is being defended by the Government.

23
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
104. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
105. The Committee no tes that various recommendations and provisions made in the Budget has
raised lot of expectations on the aviation sector. Direct import of ATF by Indian carriers, moderate
budgetary support for Air India and customs duty exemption for the MRO industry will send some
positive signals to the aviation industry. The Committee also notes that provision has also been
made for setting up of the Air Freight Stations which may provide much needed fillip for the
developing air cargo industry and easy facilitation of cargo movements. One adverse impact of the
Union Budget on aviations sector is the hike in service tax rates to 12 per cent plus cess which
will result in hike in airfares.
(Para 103 ibid)
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
106. Recommendation of the Committee has been noted.
107. Regarding increase of service tax, the Minister of Civil Aviation had written to Finance
Minister to roll back the service tax on air travel. However, the Finance Ministry has not acceded
to the request of this Ministry. As regards the permission for import of ATF, the Aviation industry
would be benefited by the provisions in the Finance Bill. The direct Import of ATF would need
a lot of logistics to be put in place like arranging for storage at port, transportation on high seas
and then from Port to Airport. There are benefits arising out of the same but it may take almost
6 months for tying up all the logistics and only then the benefits can be seen. It is estimated that
the imported ATF may be cheaper by 8-10%.
108. Ministry also agree that hike in service tax rates will increase the expenses of the airlines
by 2%. It may, however, be noted that fares are determined by the competition in the market
and are not cost driven and as such all the increase on account of Service tax in the expenses
would not be passed on to the passengers. This would adversely affect the profitability of the
airline.
109. The budget provides a service tax for Economy class passengers at a rate of 4.94%
compared to the current levels of a fixed amount of Service tax pegged at Rs 150 per pax for
domestic and Rs 750 per pax for International flights. Therefore the service tax element in the
tickets for Economy class passengers has gone up. However, for First and Executive class
passengers, the service tax element in the ticket has come down from 10.3% to 4.94%.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
110. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
111. The Committee feels that Ministry should take up the issue of uniform taxation of ATF
with the Ministry of Finance so that air fares do not see much fluctuation specially upward, quite
often. The Committee hopes that scheduled infusion of equity into Air India will give some fresh
lease of life to the ‘Maharaja’ and with the structured implementation of turnaround plan, Air
India could be in a position to re-establish its position in both the International and domestic
markets.
(Para 104 ibid)

24
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
112. The observation of the Committee is noted.
113. On request of the Ministry to review the pricing of ATF and accord it the status of
‘Declared Goods’ i.e. imposition of uniform tax rate of 4%, it was informed by Ministry of Finance
that a view had been taken with the approval of the Finance Minister that it might not be expedient
to bring ATF under the list of ‘Declared Goods’. The matter to bring ATF in the list of “Declared
Goods” was also taken up with the Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers earlier. In
this regard, this Ministry made a presentation before the Empowered Committee of State Finance
Ministers in its meeting held on 5.5.2008 in Kerala and subsequently on 23
rd June, 2008 in Srinagar.
The matter was also considered in the meeting of the Committee constituted to examine various
issues related to the current financial crisis being faced by domestic airlines  held under the
chairmanship of Cabinet Secretary on 18.11.2009 wherein it was considered that Department of
Revenue should continue to explore the possibility of reducing sales tax on ATF. The reply of
Department of Revenue in this regard is reproduced below:
“The issue of reducing sales tax on ATF is a State subject by virtue of Entry 54 of
State list of Seventh Schedule of Constitution. This issue is already being discussed at the
Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers (EC). In general, on the basis of the
latest round of discussions at the EC, the states do not seem inclined at the present to
reduce the Sales tax on ATF nor are they willing to consent to the proposal from Ministry
of Civil Aviation to bring ATF in the list of “declared goods” under the central Sales Tax
Act, 1956. Any formal decision taken in the matter will be duly informed.
114. In addition, to the above, a letter was written by Secretary (Civil Aviation) on 15
th July,
2011 to the Chief Secretaries of State Governments regarding rationalization of V AT on ATF. On
18th November, the then Minister of Civil Aviation Shri Vayalar Ravi wrote to the Chief Ministers
for the same. Recently another letter has been written by Minister for Civil Aviation Shri Ajit Singh
to the State Chief Ministers. In reply to the same almost all the Chief Ministers have shown their
inability to lower down the rate of V AT on ATF. Chhattisgarh is the only state which has brought
down V AT on ATF to 5%.
115. The observation of the committee in respect of Air India Limited is noted.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
116. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
117.  The Committee notes that the air connectivity to major cities of North-Eastern parts of the
Country still remain as a distant dream only. The scheduled operators in the country had to deploy
their services to meet the requirements of Route Dispersal Guidelines but they resort to what is
described as ‘Cherry picking’ or ‘Cream skimming’. In other words, the private airline operators
deploy their services only on the profitable routes in North-Eastern Region depriving air
connectivity to tier-II cities there. The Committee hopes that the Government should come out with
an innovative initiative to expand air connectivity in North-Eastern Region by Strengthening the
airport infrastructure to develop the tourism and trade of that region. Promotion of helicopter
services in the North-Eastern Region is another viable option before the Government to include
more cities from that region in the aviation map of the country.
(Para 105 ibid)

25
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT
118. Present status of air connectivity in NER is annexed. To ensure air connectivity to smaller
cities and towns, Government has laid down Route Dispersal Guidelines(RDG) wherein it has been
made mandatory for the airlines to deploy certain minimum percentage of ASKM deployed on
Trunk Routes onto smaller cities and towns. Under the RDG, the operator has to deploy on routes
in category-II (which includes North-Eastern Region, Jammu and Kashmir, Andaman and Nicobar
Island and Lakshadweep) at least 10% of the capacity it deploys on routes in category-I routes,
and at least 10% of category-II would be deployed on services or segment thereof operated
exclusively within the cat-II region. Current operations of scheduled airlines in the NER are
annexed.
Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited
119. As far as Pawan Hans is concerned its main objective is to provide helicopter support
services to connect far flung and inaccessible areas, it is presently running regular passenger
services under the agies of the State Government of Sikkim and Tripura. Further. it has also
participated in the recent tenders floated by Government of Mizoram, Meghalaya and Arunachal
Pradesh Pawan Hans has also taken up with these State Govts, to assign the task on nomination
basis. However, due to non agreement of these states as per direction of Ministry of Home Affairs,
Pawan Hans offered its services by participating in the tenders.
120. Pawan Hans had also submitted its Proposal for Plan Outlay for Acquisition of Helicopters/
Aircrafts and Other Infrastructure during Xllth Five Year Plan Period and its entire funding through
GBS. Pawan Hans has proposed several projects in national interest under Ministry of Development
of North Eastern Region for improvement of air connectivity/infrastructure in the NE Region of
India with full funding through Budgetary Support of Government of India. Details are as under:
Acquisition of 21 (05 Nos. Light Single Engine and 16 Nos. Medium Twin Engine) helicopters-
Rs. 1020 Crores, through Budgetary support of GOI:
121. Acquisition of 05 Nos. Light Single Engine and 16 Nos. Medium Twin Engine helicopters
are proposed for improving air/helicopter connectivity to the North Eastern Region. Pawan Hans
(Nodal Agency appointed by NEC) has also submitted a concept paper in this regard. AAI has
drawn up a consolidated long term plan covering the balance Eleventh Five Year Plan and Twelfth
Five Year Plan for development and strengthening of airport infrastructure as per the ‘Hub and
Spoke’ Model desired by Ministry of DoNER. Guidelines to schedule airlines for coverage of
maximum cities/towns in NER for expansion of air-connectivity and promotion of Helicopter
services does not pertain to AAI and is under the purview of policy decision of Government of
India.
Air India Limited:
The current operations of Air India to/from the North Eastern states are as follows:
Route Frequency/wk Aircraft Type
12 3
Delhi-Bagdogra and vv Daily A321
Delhi-Guwahati-Imphal and vv Daily A320
Kolkata-Imphal and vv Daily A320

26
12 3
Kolkata-Agartala and vv  Daily A320
Kolkata-Aizwal-Imphal-Kolkata 3 A319
Kolkata-Imphal-Aizwal-Kolkata 4 A319
Kolkata-Guwahati and vv Daily A320
Kolkata-Dibrugarh-Dimapur-Kolkata 3  A319
Kolkata-Dimapur-Dibrugarh-Kolkata 2  A319
Kolkata-Silchar vv 4 A319/A320
Kolkata-Bagdogra and vv 4 A320/A319
122. Air India’s subsidiary, Alliance Air operates air services in the North East with 4 leased ATR-
42 aircraft, under an MOU with the North Eastern Council. These flights have been operating since
the year 2002. Three aircraft provide connectivity to the smaller and remote cities of the region,
while one is under maintenance by rotation. Two aircraft are based in Kolkata and one is based
at Guwahati. This has been done in order to optimize the maintenance activities and to provide early
morning services ex Guwahati. Alliance Air operates a total of 71 services a week to/from and
within North East Region with ATR and CRJ aircraft to the following states/cities. State wise
connectivity is also given as under:
State Cities
• Assam Silchar, Guwahati, Tezpur, Jorhat, Lilabari
• Mizoram Aizawl
• Nagaland Dimapur
• Tripura Agartala
• Manipur Imphal
• Meghalaya Shillong
12
ASSAM
ATR Aircraft
Kolkata/Guwahati/Lilabari and v.v. 5 flights per week
Kolkata/Silchar/Kolkata 4 flights per week
Kolkata/Silchar/Tezpur and v.v. 3 flights per week
Kolkata/Guwahati/Kolkata 4 flights per week
Silchar/Imphal/Silchar 4 flights per week
Guwahati/Aizawl/Guwahati 7 flights per week
Guwahati/Tezpur/Lilabari/Guwahati 1 flight per week
Guwahati/Jorhat/Tezpur/Guwahati 2 flights per week

27
12
Guwahati/Silchar/Guwahati 4 flights per week
Guwahati/Agartala/Guwahati 7 flights per week
Guwahati/Silchar/Agartala and v.v. 3 flights per week
Guwahati/Dimapur/Imphal and v.v. 3 flights per week
CRJ Aircraft
Delhi/Guwahati/Delhi 6 flights per week
NAGALAND
ATR Aircraft
Kolkata/Dimapur/Kolkata 4 flights per week
Guwahati/Dimapur/Imphal and v.v 3 flights per week
MANIPUR
ATR Aircraft
Silchar/Imphal/Silchar 4 flights per week
Guwahati/Dimapur/Imphal and v.v 3 flights per week
MEGHALAYA
ATR Aircraft
Kolkata/Shillong/Jorhat/Kolkata 3 flights per week
Kolkata/Shillong/Kolkata 3 flights per week
TRIPURA
ATR Aircraft
Kolkata/Agartala/Kolkata 7 flights per week
Guwahati/Agartala/Guwahati 7 flights per week
Guwahati/Silchar/Agartala and v.v. 3 flights per week
MIZORAM
ATR Aircraft
Guwahati/Aizawl/Guwahati 7 flights per week
123. Out of 11 operational airfields in the North East, Alliance Air operates to 10 airfields.
Arunachal Pradesh and Sikkim do not have an operational air field.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
124. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that scheduled completion
of Greenfield airport at Sikkim will improve air connectivity scenario to North-Eastern
states and strengthen airport infrastructure in this region.

28
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
The Committee notes the reasons furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation for
under-utilization of funds by Air India and Airports Authority of India during the Eleventh
Plan period. The Committee notes that most of the outlays that Airports Authority of India
and Hotel Corporation of India could not spent were to be arranged out of internal
resources. However, Public Sector Undertaking which set up out of tax payers’ money can
not be absolved over the lack of commitment merely because no Government budgetary
support was given to them. The Committee hopes that the Ministry will impress all the
organizations under its purview to spend the allocated funds during the Twelfth Plan to the
maximum extent. (Para 10)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 13)
The Committee feels that Air India is still in critical phase. Any laxity in any matter
relating to Air India can play havoc to the public sector carrier. The Committee notes the
reply of the Ministry. The Ministry, therefore, should pursue with Planning Commission
vigorously for allocation of requisite funds at RE stage so that the ongoing Air India
projects are not delayed. (Para 18)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the planned executing of Turn Around
Plan of Air India will help the national carrier to improve its financial health and dwindling
market share. The Committee, however, feels that commencement of MRO and Engineering
Services through subsidiaries at the earliest will give the early bird advantage to Air India
in these sectors. (Para 36)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee had already taken
note of the issue of non-utilization of an amount of Rs. 87.66 crore approved for GBS
schemes. The Committee hopes that Government will ensure that Airports Authority of
India get all necessary clearance in time so that it is able to utilize the GBS optimally.
(Para 40)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and feels that permission to float tax-
free bonds by Airports Authority of India may help them to strengthen their financial
position to take care of airport infrastructural requirements. (Para 44)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 47)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation will
pursue the issue with the State Government of Bihar keeping mind the safety of travelling
public in this sector. (Para 51)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee is of the view that
air connectivity to Leh and Kargil are very critical for promotion of tourism in this region.
The Committee recommends that the matter may be pursued with the Ministry of Defence
so that the matter of expansion of airports at Kargil and Leh is resolved at the earliest.
(Para 54)
The Committee notes the reply and hopes that the Ministry of Civil Aviation will
pursue the matter seriously giving much consideration for decongesting Mumbai airport.
(Para 58)
28

29
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the timely completion
of the above projects will help service providers to expand air connectivity in this region.
(Para 62)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 70)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that allocated funds will
be fully utilized for the renovation of Centaur Hotel Delhi and Srinagar so that they regain
their lost glory and become important properties in the hospitality market. (Para 76)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and still feels that Air India Express
can become a keen competitor in LCC segment once the issues of crew availability are
sorted out. (Para 79)
The Committee may be apprised on the status of purchase programme of helicopter
for re-introduction of CHPL course. (Para 82)
The Committee notes the reply. The Committee, however, recommends that the land
related issues for construction of headquarters for DGCA may be settled at the earliest.
(Para 86)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee is, however, not
happy with pace of recruitment in DGCA. The Committee is of the view that vacancy in
crucial positions may affect the efficiency of DGCA. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that efforts may be made to fill up the vacancies at the earliest. (Para 89)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 92)
The Committee may be apprised on the steps taken to fill up vacant posts in BCAS.
(Para 95)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that quality of training
imparted in Aero club of India do not suffer due to under-utilization of training equipments.
(Para 98)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 101)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 104)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 110)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 116)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that scheduled completion
of Greenfield airport at Sikkim will improve air connectivity scenario to North-Eastern
States and strengthen airport infrastructure in this region. (Para 124)

30
30
ANNEXURE-I
(vide para-88)
Sanctioned strength, filled up and Vacancy position of Gr. “A” posts in
DGCA as on 22.8.2012
Sl. Post RR Sanctioned Filled up V acancy Remarks
No. Position Strength
Regular Adhoc Contract
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
1 Director General 1 1
2 Jt. Director Under 6 3 3 Proposal to fill up two
General Publication posts (DP) on regular
basis is with UPSC.
Proposal for adhoc
promotion also sent to
MoCA.
3 Dy. Director 10 6 5 Proposal to fill up three
General post being sent to MoCA
Airworthiness
Directorate
4 Director To be 8 2 6 Proposal sent to MoCA.
discussed To be discussed with
with UPSC.
UPSC
5 Dy. Director 38 34 4 Promotion order on
regular basis issued to
17 officers on 4.8.2012.
6 Sr. Airworthiness 73 46 9 28 Proposal was sent to
Officer UPSC who have returned
the proposal on 6.8.2012
for submiting the same
through single window
system.
7 Airworthiness 130 1 49 129 UPSC has  conducted
Officer written exam on 29.7.2012
Air Safety
Directorate
8 Director Notified 6 1 1 5 Proposal was sent to
UPSC but was returned
due to below benchmark
report of one of the
officers. The report has
since been upgraded and
revised proposal being
submitted. Vigilance
clearance pending.

31
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
9 Dy. Director 10 5 5 Pro posal to fill up 5
posts by DR method
under failing which
clause was sent to
UPSC who have raised
certain queries on
educational quali-
fications. Letter sent to
AICTE and AIIU on
22.8.2012.
10 Asst. Director 22 7 1 15 UPSC has recommended
6 candidates. Offer of
appointment issued to
all. Two officers have
been issued appointment
letter.
11 Air Safety 43 17 43 UPSC has recommended
Officer 43 candidates. Offer of
appointment issued to
all. On receipt of
acceptance letters for
Police verification/
Medical examination are
sent.
Operations
12 Director Notified 8 3 2 5 Proposal was sent to
UPSC who raised some
queries. Reply sent to
MoCA on 22.8.2012.
13 Dy. Director 28 7 2 1 21 Revised proposal pending
due to non receipt of
ACR in respect of one
of the officers.
14 Asst. Director 65 5 60 Recommendation of 11
candidates received from
UPSC. 5 have since
joined and apopointment
letters to other 6
candidates have already
been sent.
15 Operations 5 1 4 Four candidates had been
Officer recommended by UPSC.
One has since joined
three others are yet to
join.
Information
and
Regulation
Directorate
16 Director Notified 1 1 Proposal to fill up
through DR method is
with UPSC. The post

32
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
has since been advertised.
Last date of submission
of application was
17.7.2012
17 Dy. Director 3 2 1 Proposal was sent to
UPSC who have returned
the proposal stating that
the revised RR is not as
per the RR approved by
UPSC.
18 Asst. Director 5 5 Proposal was sent to
UPSC who have returned
the proposal for submiting
the same through single
window system.
19 Legal Officer 2 2 Proposal was sent to
UPSC who have returned
the proposal for submiting
the same through single
window system.
Directorate
of Flying
Training
20 Director Notified 1 1
21 Dy. Director 2 2
(FT)
Aircraft
Engineering
Directorate
22 Director To be 4 1 3 Proposal sent to UPSC
discussed for filling up of one post
with UPSC under failing which clause.
Other two posts are to
be filled up on depu-
tation basis. Proposal
submitted to MoCA
23 Dy. Director Notified 11 7 4 Revised proposal for 03
posts after discussion
with UPSC sent to
MoCA
24 Asst. Director To be 20 12 8 Proposal was sent to
discussed UPSC who have returned
with UPSC the p roposal for submiting
the same through single
window system.
25 Aeronautical 26 10 16 Proposal was sent to
Officer UPSC who have returned
the proposal for submiting
the same through single
window system.

33
12 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Directorate of
FSD
26 Chief Flight Notified 1 1 The proposal being
Operations submitted.
Inspector
27 Flight 17 8 9 The proposal being
Operations submitted.
Inspector
28 Cabin Safety 7 7
Inspector
29 Dangerous 5 5 Has to be filled up by
Goods the method of Deputation.
Inspector Vacancy has been
circulated.
Directorate
of Training
and Licencing
30 Medical Officer 2 2
31 Dy. Director 1 1
(Skill
Enhancement)
32 Asst. Director
(Skill
Enhancement) 1 1
Directorate of
Air Space and
Air Traffic
Management
33 Dy. Director 1 1
(Meteorology)
34 Asst. Director 1 1
(Meteorology) 
35 Accounts Officer 1 1 1 Has to be filled up by
the method of Deputation.
Vacancy has been
circulated.
36 Programme 1 1
Coordinator
37 System Analyst/ 4 2 4
Software
Developer
38 Administrative 6 6 Has to be filled up by
Officer the method of Deputation.
Vacancy has been
circulated.
576 152 19 83 409

34
34
ANNEXURE-II
(vide para-118)
CURRENT OPERATIONS OF SCHEDULED AIRLINES
IN NORTH-EAST REGION (SS-12)
Airline Sector Aircraft Flights/
Week
12 3 4
Air India Kolkata-Agartala-Kolkata A319 7
Kolkata-Aizwal-Imphal-Kolkata A319 3
Kolkata-Imphal-Aizwal-Kolkata A319 4
Kolkata-Guwahati-Kolkata A320 7
Kolkata-Dibrugarh-Dimapur- Kolkata A319 3
Kolkata-Dimapur-Dibrugarh-Kolkata A319 2
Kolkata-Silchar-Kolkata A320 2
Kolkata-Silchar-Kolkata A319 2
Delhi-Guwahati-Imphal & VV A320 7
Kolkata-Imphal-Kolkata A-320 7
Kolkata-Imphal-Kolkata (Army Charter) A320 1
Kolkata-Imphal-Kolkata (MHA Charter) A320 5
Kolkata-Aizwal-Kolkata (MHA Charter) A320 1
Kolkata-Silchar-Kolkata (MHA Charter) A320 1
Kolkata-Agartala-Kolkata (MHA Charter) A319 6
T
OTAL 58
Alliance Air Guwahati-Agartala-Guwahati A TR42 7
Guwahati-Aizwal-Guwahati A TR42 7
Guwahati-Silchar-Guwahati A TR42 4
Guwahati-Dimapur-Imphal & VV A TR42 4
Guwahati-Silchar-Agartala & VV A TR42 3
Guwahati-Jorhat-Tezpur-Guwahati A TR42 2
Guwahati-Lilabari-Tezpur-Guwahati A TR42 1

35
12 3 4
Kolkata-Agartala-Kolkata A TR42 7
Kolkata-Dimapur-Kolkata A TR42 4
Kolkata-Guwahati-Kolkata A TR42 4
Kolkata-Guwahati-Lilabari &VV A TR42 5
Kolkata-Silchar-Kolkata A TR42 4
Kolkata-Silchar-Tezpur & VV A TR42 3
Kolkata-Shillong-Jorhat-Kolkata A TR42 3
Kolkata-Shillong-Kolkata A TR42 3
Silchar-Imphal-Silchar A TR42 4
Delhi-Guwhati-Delhi CRJ700 6
TOTAL 71
Jet Airways Delhi-Guwahati-Delhi B737 7
Kolkata-Guwahati-Kolkata B737 20
Kolkata-Aizwal-Guwhati &VV A TR-72 7
Kolkata-Agartala-Kolkata A TR42 7
Kolkata-Silchar-Kolkata A TR72 7
Kolkata-Dimapur-Kolkata A TR72 6
Kolkata-Imphal-Kolkata A TR72 6
Silchar-Guwahati-Silchar A TR72 7
Guwahati-Imphal-Guwahati A TR72 3
Guwahati-Jorhat-Guwahati A TR72 4
TOTAL 74
JetLite Delhi-Guwahati-Dibrugarh & VV B737 7
Kolkata-Guwahati-Imphal & VV B737 5
Kolkata-Guwahati-Jorhat & VV B737 2
Kolkata-Jorhat-Kolkata B737 3
Kolkata-Agartala-Guwahati & VV B737 4
Kolkata-Agartala-Kolkata B737 3
T
OTAL 24
KingfisherAirlines Delhi-Guwahati-Imphal & VV A320 7
TOTAL 7

36
12 3 4
Spicejet Delhi-Guwahati-Bagdogra-Delhi B737 7
Delhi-Bagdogra-Guwahati-Delhi B737 7
Delhi-Guwahati-Delhi B737 7
Kolkata-Guwahati-Kolkata B737 21
Kolkata-Agartala-Kolkata B737 14
Agartala-Guwhati-Agartala B737 7
T
OTAL 63
IndiGo Delhi-Guwahati-Imphal & VV A320 14
Kolkata-Guwahati-Kolkata A320 21
Kolkata-Agartala-Imphal-Kolkata A320 3
Kolkata-Imphal-Agartala-Kolkata A320 4
Kolkata-Agartala-Kolkata A320 14
Kolkata-Dibrugarh-Kolkata A320 7
T
OTAL 63
Go Air Delhi-Guwahati-Bagdogra-Delhi A320 4
Delhi-Bagdogra-Guwahati-Delhi A320 3
TOTAL 7
GRAND T OTAL: 367

37
MINUTES

38

39
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 18 th October, 2012 in Room No. 074,
Ground Floor, Parliament Library Building, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
3. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
4. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
5. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
6. Dr. Kruparani Killi
7. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
8. Shrimati Ranee Narah
9. Shri Prabodh Panda
10. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
** *
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. Thereafter, the
Committee considered and adopted the draft reports on the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its (i) One Hundred Sixty Eighth
Report on the Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) – Issues and Challenges; (ii) One
Hundred Sixty Ninth Report on the Helicopter Operations in India; (iii) One Hundred Seventy
Fourth Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) – Ministry of Civil Aviation; and (iv) One Hundred
Seventy Eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2012-13) – Ministry of Road Transport and
Highways, with minor modifications.
39
*** Relate to other matters.

40
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
7. The meeting adjourned at 5.20 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.