SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
 PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA
                                                                                               
DEPARTMENT-RELATEDPARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON
 TRANSPORT, TOURISM & CULTURE
 
 
SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
ON
 THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (AMENDMENT) BILL, 2000 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON   21.11.2002)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON  21.11.2002)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
NOVEMBER, 2002/ KARTIKA, 1924 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                 
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                                     
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                             
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE     
5.         MINUTES                                                                                                      
 
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY       STANDING
 COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2002)
 
*1.    Shri Dipankar Mukherjee  - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad
     #3.    Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4. Shri S.S. Chandran
5. Shri K. Rahman Khan
6. Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
7. Dr. A.K. Patel
8. Shri Satish Pradhan
9. Shri K. Kalavenkata Rao
  **10.Shri Balwant Singh Ramoowalia

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
@11.            Dr.C.Narayana Reddy
@@12.            Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
     $13.  Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
14.Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi
  ^15.            Vacant
 
LOK SABHA
16. Shri Raj Babbar
17. Shri G.M. Banatwalla
18. Shri Anil Basu
19. Shri Suresh Chandel
20. Shrimati Reena Choudhary
21. Shri T.T.V. Dhinakaran
22. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
23. Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
24. Shri Akbor Ali Khandokar
25. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
26. Shri S.P. Lepcha
27. Shri Vijay Kumar Malhotra
28. Shri Shivaji Mane
29. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
30. Shri Vilas Muttemwar
31. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
32. Shri Sundar Lal Patwa
33. Shri Braj Mohan Ram
34. Shri Gunipati Ramaiah
35. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
36. Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
37. Capt. Satish Sharma
 
*Appointed as the Chairman w.e.f. 19.3.2002 vice
  Shri Khagen Das who ceased to be a Member of Rajya Sabha
 w.e.f.                      25.2.2002 consequent upon his election to the Lok Sabha.
        **Nominated w.e.f. 4th April 2002.        # Nominated w.e.f. 22nd April 2002.
        $ Nominated w.e.f. 14th May 2002.       @ Nominated w.e.f. 17th July 2002
@@ Nominated w.e.f. 20th July 2002.
^Vacancy caused due to the induction of Shri Vikram Verma in the Council of Ministers on 26.8.2002
(i)
38. Shri Th. Chaoba Singh
39. Shri Vinay Kumar Sorake
40. Shri Kalava Srinivasulu
41. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh
42. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
43. Shri Sunder Lal Tiwari
44. Shri A.K.S. Vijayan
45. Shri S.D.N.R. Wadiyar
 
 
SECRETARIAT
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
(ii)
INTRODUCTION
 
         I, the Chairman of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture,
 having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Sixty-first Report of the
 Committee.  The Report is on the Airports Authority of India  (Amendment) Bill, 2000*. 
2.      In pursuance of rules relating to the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committees, the Hon’ble
 Chairman, Rajya Sabha, in consultation with the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha, referred** the Bill, as introduced in the
 Lok Sabha on the 30 th November 2000 and pending therein, to the Committee on 6 th February 2001 for examination
 and report.
 
3.      The Committee took oral evidence of the officers of the Ministry of Civil Aviation in its meeting held on the 21 st
 January 2002, where the Secretary, Civil Aviation could not present himself and as such the evidence remained
 inconclusive. 
 
4.    The Committee also heard the views of the representatives of the employees’ unions of the Airports Authority of
 India in its meeting held on the 25
th June 2002. 
 
5.    The Committee heard oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, in its meeting held on the 26th June
 2002. 
 
5.1   During the evidence of the Secretary, the Members sought several clarifications on the provisions of the Bill
 pertaining to security concerns and other important issues.  While the Ministry furnished the responses but on detailed
 examination by the Committee the same were not found satisfactory.  The Committee therefore, had to repeatedly
 request the Ministry for clarifications on the points which had remained unexplained.  This exercise took almost five
 months – from June 2002 to September 2002.
 
6.    The Committee also deliberated upon the subject during its meetings held on the 9
th May, 27th May, 25th July and
 6th August 2002.  The Committee took up clause-by-clause consideration of the Bill during its meeting held on the 25 th
 October 2002.  The Committee considered the draft Report on the subject in its meeting held on the 11 th November
 2002 and adopted the same on the same date.
 
7.         The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Civil Aviation for the assistance
 provided from time to time during deliberations on the provisions of the Bill. The Committee also acknowledges the
 contribution of the representatives of the employees’ unions of the Airports Authority of India, who submitted their
 valuable suggestions on the provisions of the Bill.
 
NEW DELHI;
November 
11, 2002
Kartika 20, 1924 (Saka)
DIPANKAR MUKHERJEE
Chairman
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
                                                                       .
_________________________________________________________________________________________
*     Published in the Gazette of India Extraordinary Part II, Section-2, dated 30.11.2000.
**   Rajya Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part II, No.38648 dated 6.2.2001.
 
R E P 
O R T

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
             
 The Airports Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2000 seeks to enable the Airports Authority of India with
 the prior approval of the Central Government, to lease the airport premises to private investors as well as the State
 Governments and to assign the required functions to such lessees. 
           
2.         The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill states any money payable by such lessees on this account will
 accrue to the Airports Authority of India to undertake the development of other airports.  The lessee shall have all the
 powers of the Authority necessary for the performance of such functions in terms of the lease.  This has been proposed
 to be done through insertion of a new section 12A in the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994. The Airports Authority
 of India (AAI), the apex statutory organisation under the administrative control of the Government of India, Ministry of
 Civil Aviation, at present manages 94 civilian airports and 28 civil enclaves at Defence airports in the country.
 
3.         The Statement of Objects and Reasons of the Bill further states that there is a general feeling of perceptible lack
 of standard of services and facilities at the airports which is not at par with international standards.  The need is,
 therefore, for the infusion of private sector investments as also for restructuring of airports.  The Government feels that
 this will go a long way in speeding up airport infrastructure development, improving managerial efficiency, increasing
 local responsiveness and improving service levels.  It will, in turn, generally stimulate the economy by boosting tourism
 and trade.  Accordingly, it has been decided to undertake the task of restructuring the airports of Airports Authority of
 India through a long-term lease.  Since the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 does not explicitly provide for long-
term lease of the airports, it has been proposed to amend the Act.
 
4.         In their background note furnished to the Committee giving the reasons for the introduction of the Bill, the
 Ministry of Civil Aviation have brought out the following points:-
4.a       Where do our airports stand
4.a.1    International Air Transport Association (IATA) conducts passenger surveys on an ongoing basis and results are
 published in the IATA Global Airports Monitor annually.  The report published by Global Airport Monitor measures
 passenger satisfaction through 60000 interviews at 57 major airports worldwide, for a wide range of customer service
 attributes.  For most airports, the sample sizes are typically between several hundred respondents and several thousand. 
 The IATA surveys include 19 service elements for airports like overall satisfaction with airport, wash rooms, signages,
 availability of baggage carts, government passport/customs inspections, baggage delivery surveys, parking facilities,
 sense of security, ambience of the airport, etc.
 
4.a.2    The results of the survey for the year 1999, reveals that Mumbai and Delhi ranked amongst the three least
 favourable airports in the Asia Pacific region for all 19 service elements.  According to the Survey, these airports
 continue to offer the lowest service levels in terms of overall satisfaction with the airport and the rating for Mumbai and
 Delhi were 2.3 and 2.6, respectively on a scale of 1 (='very poor') to 5 (='excellent').  These results ought to be seen in
 the context of an average of 3.5 for airports in Asia Pacific region and 3.8 for world airports.  Copenhagen, Singapore's
 Changi and Helsinki rank top for overall passenger satisfactions amongst the 57 airports covered in the 1999 survey
 with a rating about 4.3 to 4.4. In case of duty free sales, the average sale per passenger at Delhi and Mumbai is 3.06 and
 1.46 USD, respectively against the average of 8.67 USD for Asian airports and 17.97 USD for world airports. In respect
 of number of employees per million passengers also, Mumbai airport has 273 employees per million passengers, Delhi
 289, Chennai 365 and Kolkata 545 as compared to Kuala Lumpur airport having 105 employees per million passengers,
 Beijing 84, Brisbane 11, Perth 19.  However, a large number of services have been contracted out in case of Brisbane
 and Perth.
 
4.a.3    As such, there is an ample scope for improvement in the service levels of our airports as well as their overall
 standing not only in the Asia Pacific, but also in the world at large.  Given the critical role of the aviation industry for
 the national development, there is an imperative need to improve the standings of our airports vis-à-vis the best in the
 world.  There is a paramount need to augment service performance of airports by evolving vital interlinkages between
 aviation industry and other allied sectors.  Modern quality management systems not only require continuous monitoring
 of users' satisfaction levels to maintain appreciable standards and to identify areas for improvement, but also a bench
 mark to put the service performance in context.  Airport managements need to position themselves in the global market
 in terms of customers' satisfaction and to learn from the world's leading airports how to improve satisfaction levels for

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
 their customers, if the airports are to meet the ever-widening expectations of the users in the years to come.
4.b       Present Management Structure
4.b.1    At present, Airports Authority of India, undertakes the management of 94 airports and 28 civil enclaves at
 Defence airfields and provides air traffic services over the entire Indian airspace and adjoining oceanic areas.  However,
 various airlines are operating through 61 airports only.  Fifty two percent of entire traffic of about 39 million is handled
 at just two international airports in Delhi and Mumbai.  
 
4.b.2    The Ministry have brought out that the present system of management of all airports by a public sector entity
 such as the Airports Authority of India has several inbuilt lacunae.  Some of which are as follows:
(i)
                  The service conditions of employees are governed by the general directions of Department of Public
 Enterprises and it is very difficult to reward/punish the staff leading to lack of professionalism and poor
 service standards.
(ii)
                Being a public sector, every aspect of their functioning is open to scrutiny under an elaborate institutional
 system, which may at times focus on procedural formalities  rather than  substantive results, leading to
 following a  very cautious attitude on the part of management. Invariably, such attitude stifles initiatives and
 risk innovation.  This also leads to delay in decision making and further results in the airports' functioning
 uncompetitive in the fiercely competitive world of today. 
(iii)
               Because of inherent service conditions, there is relative lack of sensitivity about needs and aspirations of
 the passengers and other users, leading to poor service standards despite heavy investments in the facilities,
 notwithstanding.
(iv)
              Lack of professionalism and initiative create an ambience not conducive to quick and total absorption of
 new technology as well as new management techniques.
(v)                Being a public sector, the Airports Authority of India has to go through the lengthy procedures involving
 the Ministry, Public Investment Board and Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs etc. for clearance of
 their major investments.  This leads to delayed or over/under investment. 
4.c       Resource Gap
4.c.1    Investment in airports being capital intensive, has to be planned well in advance to meet demand requirements. 
 The Airports Authority of India had an investment plan of Rs.3421.87 crores under the 9
th Five Year Plan to meet the
 future growth demand of air traffic, overcome current congestion at specific airports and to upgrade existing facilities
 including communication and air traffic facilities.  About two-third's of the total five-year investment plan amounting to
 Rs.2037.29 crores was to be financed from internal resources of the Airports Authority of India and Rs.283.37 crores
 from the Central Government budgetary resources.  The resource gap of Rs.1101.21 crores was expected to be financed
 by borrowing funds from the domestic capital markets and by increasing airport charges.
           
4.c.2    About 65 per cent of the total five-year investment plan, generated from the Airports Authority of India's internal
 resources, is for expansion, modernisation and construction of new terminal buildings mainly located at Delhi, Mumbai
 and Thiruvananthapuram.  An additional 28 per cent  has been allocated for upgrading navigational aids and cargo
 warehouses.  In addition to the planned outlays, preliminary feasibility studies and proposals were being reviewed by
 the state governments and the private sector.  "Other" initiatives, not included in the Airports Authority of India's plan,
 are in the range of about Rs.19,100 crores.  These investments are contemplated for new airports - Mumbai, Bangalore,
 Goa and Hyderabad amounting to about Rs.14,600 crores, terminal buildings at various airport locations amounting to
 Rs.2,400 crores, related supporting airport infrastructure of Rs.1,500 crores and cargo facilities of Rs.600 crores.  If all
 these investments proposals were to be realised, the total investment gap would increase significantly from the original
 estimate of Rs.1101 crores to Rs.20,201 crores.
           
4.c.3    The Ministry's brief further states that the Airports Authority of India's 9
th Five Year Plan is, on the one hand,
 unrealistic when compared to its past investment performance and, on the other, unambitious  in relation to investment
 being undertaken/contemplated in other countries.  Besides, it is doubtful that the proposed investments levels will help
 upgrade the principal international gateway airports to world-class standards.

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
 
 
4.d       Financial Performance of the Airports Authority of India
4.d.1    The financial performance of the Airports Authority of India during the last five financial years is as under :-
Year Net Profits
(Rs. in crores)
1995-96 Rs.276.05
1996-97 Rs.245.70
1997-98 Rs.316.19
1998-99 Rs.335.78
1999-00 Rs.344.73
 
4.d.2    It has also been brought out by the Ministry that while there has been modest increase in revenues by 68 per cent
 from Rs.1003.33 crores in 1995-96 to Rs.1691.28 crores in 1999-00, costs (mainly staff) have increased significantly
 by 185 per cent from Rs.727.28 crores in 1995-96 to Rs.1346.55 crores in 1999-2000.
 
4.d.3    As regards the Airports Authority of India's performance against plan investment is concerned, during 8
th five-
year plan, the planned investment outlay was Rs.1950 crores, while the actual expenditure was only Rs.1496 crores. 
 Similarly in the 9 th five-year plan, the anticipated achievement is likely to be Rs.2120 crores against the planned
 investment of Rs.3421.87 crores, which is about 60 per cent only.  Some of the reasons for these delays can be
 attributed to the inefficiencies in the construction industry, long bureaucratic delays for approval of contracts, delay in
 Government approval for projects and complex public procurement procedures. Some of these inefficiencies are
 endemic in the present management structure of airports, Airports Authority of India and the Government.  In fact, it is
 evident that the limited investments, which are so very unambitious, are also not being optimally utilised.
 
4.e       Need for change in the structure
4.e.1    In view of the foregoing, the Ministry feels that Indian airports face formidable challenges both internally and
 externally.  The internal challenges stem from ownership and management related issues, lack of commercial
 orientation, undeveloped revenue sources, inefficient provision of services, distorted pricing schedules, the absence of
 underlying regulatory structures, and insufficient investment to achieve world class standards.  Historically, the Airport
 Authority was able to manage despite these internal weaknesses, since there were few compelling reasons to alter the
 status-quo.  However, external challenges resulting from capacity, efficiency, and resource constraints and changes in
 market access necessitate a review, revision and restructuring the existing ownership, management and regulatory
 structures.
 
4.e.2    On the demand side, Indian airports are faced with growing capacity constraints due to increase in air traffic
 growth, the globalisation of industry, and the global trend towards deregulation and liberalization of the airline
 industry. At the very least, strains on capacity will necessitate upgradation of air traffic control services to reduce
 congestion and ensure the safe movement of aircraft.  With the progressive liberalization of Indian economy and
 globalisation, international trade is poised to enhance the importance of air cargo transport.  International Civil Aviation
 Organisation (ICAO) estimates that a           1 per cent increase in exports has a concomitant 1.5 per cent increase in the
 demand for air cargo.  The growth in air cargo operations has several important implications for airports, including
 operations and handling, dedicated investments and facilities, and inter-modal connections.
 
4.e.3    Another external challenge facing our airports is the rapid changes taking place in the airline industry.  In the
 domestic aviation market, new domestic carriers have entered the market which also need to be provided fair and equal
 access to terminals and passenger facilities.  In the international market, strategic alliances among airlines have altered
 the traditional nature of traffic flows, requiring a proactive promotion of airlines to airport destinations.  Besides, the
 development of large aircraft will require new taxiways, aprons, gates, runways and terminal facilities.
 
4.e.4    With anticipated changes in the airline industry to meet future growth capacities, environmental concerns will

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
 come into sharp focus, commending airport authorities to evolve airport development strategies especially the
 construction of new airports and the extension of existing facilities.  Several vital issues such as human habitat around
 airports excessive noise pollution, waste disposal, air emissions, and water pollution will need to engage undivided
 attention to facilitate smooth supply of airport services.
 
4.e.5    To meet the growing challenges of growth in air traffic resulting from the globalisation of aviation industry, low
 levels of investments, spectacular advances made in the field of technology to improve safety and communication
 standards and limited public funds to keep pace with the investment priorities urgently call for initiating farsighted
 programmes to impart strength and dynamism to aviation industry to remain technologically contemporaneous and
 qualitatively top class.
 
4.f        Action Taken by the Government
4.f.1     Against this background, there are no two views that massive investments are required to create world-class
 airports and to bring services at par with the international standards. For this, there is a compelling need to create
 favourable investment climate and also to restructure the existing management structure of major airports.  In January
 1999, the Government decided to achieve the same through corporatisation of the major airports at Delhi, Mumbai,
 Chennai and Calcutta.  The idea was that the corporatisation would bring about effective changes in the management,
 contribute to an overall productivity growth and attract investments in order to improve the standards of service and
 facilities.
 
4.f.2     Later, it was realized that the objective of having world-class international airports would be better achieved by
 restructuring through long-term lease instead of corporatisation.  The restructuring of the management structure would
 be achieved in a shorter time-span and more effectively by dispensing with the intermediate step of corporatisation. 
 Since the idea behind corporatisation was ultimate private sector participation in the ownership and management of
 airports, it would have to be followed by disinvestment of the newly created corporations.  Restructuring through long-
term lease is undoubtedly a more direct approach.  Moreover, in this process the ownership of the airports would remain
 with the Airports Authority of India and the lease income would accrue to the Authority, thus enabling it to undertake
 the development of rest of the airports without depending upon budgetary support.  With this rationale, it was decided
 in January 2000 to restructure the airports through long-term lease route.  It was also noted by the Government that the
 retention of lease rentals by the Airports Authority of India would have to be subject to a clear definition of the
 respective obligations of Airports Authority of India and the lessee airports and of Airports Authority of India in respect
 of all other airports, including the non remunerative ones, without gross budgetary support, as far as possible. 
 
4.g       The need for amendment in Airports Authority of India Act, 1994
4.g.1    The Ministry have further stated that the issue as to whether Airports Authority of India has the power under the
 Airports Authority of India Act, 1994, to transfer the airports on long-term lease to private investors was examined
 from the legal point of view.  According to the legal opinion*, "the provisions of the Act make it clear that the airport-
assets have been vested in the Authority for better management of the airports by it and for the discharge of its functions
 under the Act, the Authority may enter into contracts.  In this light of the matter, it can be said that that the Authority
 can lease out assets vested in it for efficiently discharging its functions/duties under the Act, but the Authority cannot
 divest itself of its responsibilities under the Act.  It would do violence to the whole intent and purpose behind
 enactment of the Act if the functions/duties of the Authority are privatized."  Therefore, it was opined that for carrying
 out the proposal of the Administrative Ministry, suitable amendment in the Act would be required.  Hence, the Airports
 Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2000 was introduced in the Parliament.
 
5.         In its meeting held on the 21
st January 2002, the Committee heard the views of the representatives of the
 Ministry of Civil Aviation on the Bill.  The Committee decided to invite the views of individuals and institutions
 interested in the subject matter of the Bill through advertisement in all major national dailies and vernacular
 newspapers all over the country.
 
___________________________________________________________________
*Background Note furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation vide their OM No.AV-24013/001/2000-AAI dated
 20.3.2001.

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
 
6.         Views of the employees' unions of the Airports Authority of India
6.1       The Committee heard the views of the representatives of the employees' unions of the Airports Authority of
 India i.e. Airport Authority Employees' Union and Airports Authority of India Workers' Union during the visit of the
 two study groups of the Committee to Mumbai and Chennai on the 11 th and 9th June 2002, and also in its meeting held
 on the 25 th June 2002.  Briefly, the representatives of the two employees' unions opposed the Bill on the following
 grounds: -
(i)      Security and safety of the country is likely to be compromised in the event of leasing out of the airports. 
 The Government had handed over the security of the airports to the Central Industrial Security Force
 (CISF) to improve the security at the airports, which may now go into unscrupulous elements.
(ii)          International bidders may not be complying with Government policies with regard to employment,
 recruitment, welfare and assistance schemes etc. and as such the safety and security of the jobs may not
 be there.
(iii)          The international airports which are likely to be leased out are earning profit and are the main sources
 of revenue of the AAI.  Approximately     70 per cent of the profit of the AAI is generated by the 4 metro
 airports which are proposed to be leased out by the Government.
(iv)
        Leasing out so much areas of land with building, fixtures and fittings will lead to litigation in the long
 run.
(v)          The Government's earlier proposal to hand over the ground handling contract to a private NRI firm had
 been withdrawn for similar reasons.
6.2         The following alternatives were also suggested by the two unions :-
(i)                  The Government should think of mobilizing the required resources to develop the airports through other
 methods like issue of shares, budgetary support for specified period etc. so that the national security is
 not compromised.
(ii)
                The Airports Authority of India should be given more flexibility and administrative/financial autonomy
 for better functioning and increased efficiency.
(iii)               Efforts should be made to increase the non-traffic revenue at the airports.
(iv)              To begin with a model airport can be developed by the private operators to make a competitive market
 for Airports Authority of India.
 
7.         In the light of the earlier discussions held on the subject and the discussion held with the representatives of the
 employees' unions of the Airports Authority of India, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary and other officers
 of the Ministry of Civil Aviation at its meeting held on the 26
th June 2002.  The Committee also discussed the subject
 in its meeting held on the 6th August 2002.
8.         Some of the major concerns expressed by the Members of the Committee were that the Bill should incorporate
 the details about specific functions to be assigned or not to be assigned to the lessee, protection of the interests of the
 employees of the Airports Authority of India, security at the airports, effect on security of the country due to leasing of
 the airports, role of the Airports Authority of India in respect of airports after the same are leased out to the private
 operators, absence of any regulatory mechanism in the Bill, the utilisation of income from leasing etc. 
 
9.   
Specific mention of the functions which should/should not be assigned to the lessee
 
 
One of the major concerns expressed by the Committee was that the Bill did not specify as to which functions of
 the Airports Authority of India would be assigned to the lessee of the airports. The Committee noted that the Clause (1)
 of Section 12A of the Airports Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2000, states that "…...the Authority may, in the
 interest of better administration of airports and generally for carrying out any or all of its functions under Section 12
 make a lease of the premises of an airport to ..…".  The Committee observed that it was not clear as to which functions

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
 under Section 12 would be assigned to the lessee after the leasing out of the airports and requested the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation to furnish the information in this regard.  The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation that
 on the advice of Ministry of Law, only for providing the enabling provisions in the Act for leasing of airports, the Bill
 has been introduced. However, the functions which will be allowed to be performed by the lessee shall be governed
 under the lease agreement.  The Bill intends to provide a basic structure to reflect primary objectives and concerns of
 the Government.  At the same time, it is felt that there should be flexibility to define the functions of the lessee in detail
 on case-to-case basis as per requirement, within the laid down legal framework. The detailed delineation of all the
 functions in the Act would make it too rigid, which would require frequent and time consuming amendments leading to
 inevitable delays in the restructuring process.  It was explained that it was not the intention to lease all the functions of
 the Airports Authority of India to the private operators.  That will vary from airport to airport on a variety of factors
 specific to that airport like viability of that option, interest of the public, attractiveness of the same etc.  Therefore, the
 intention of the Government is to keep the options with it as to which functions to be leased out and which to be kept
 with Airports Authority of India.  For a particular airport, it will be specified in the agreement and which will be
 approved by the Government. In view, it was felt neither possible nor desirable to specify in the Act itself the list of
 specific functions to be assigned to a lessee. It will be mentioned in the lease agreement for that particular airport.  On a
 further query on the issue, the Committee was informed that since the lessee would operate the airports on a concession
 basis, the role of Airports Authority of India would be to discharge the vital function of Air Traffic
 Control/management exclusively. The other functions which are more commercial in nature and some of which are
 already given out on contract basis to outside agencies by Airports Authority of India, would be that of the private
 operators. The statutory functions such as Customs, Immigration, plant and animal quarantine, Public Health, etc. were
 not with Airports Authority of India and hence cannot be leased out. These statutory functions would continue to be the
 exclusive preserve of the various agencies of the Government of India.
 
10.       The Committee was of the view that the inclusion of the word "all" in Clause (1) of Section 12A of the Bill
 could be misinterpreted at a later date and required a specific change.  The apprehension was brought to the notice of
 the Secretary, Civil Aviation.  The Secretary* concurred with the view of the Committee and stated as under:-
"………There are two types of functions.  One which shall not be handed over to the lessee. The others are
 functions which may or may not be assigned to the lessee. Basically, when we say that there should be an
 enabling provision, it only refers to the second part.  That is, those which in any case cannot be assigned,
 will not be assigned. ………. Even in regard to those which can be assigned, all of them need not
 necessarily be assigned. In some airports, those may be assigned; in some other airports, those may not be
 assigned. "
 
11.       As regards the security at the airports, the Committee was informed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation that the
 present arrangement for providing security at the airports will continue.  Bureau of Civil Aviation Security under
 Ministry of Civil Aviation will prescribe and enforce standards for airport security.  In order to provide uniform
 standards of security at all airports throughout the country, the Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) is being
 deployed at various airports in phases.  This arrangement will be further emphasised in the lease agreement in no
 uncertain terms. 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________
*  Extracts from the verbatim record of the evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation before the Committee
 on 26
th June 2002.
 
12.       As regards the airspace control, the Committee was informed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation that Air Traffic
 Services at present are exclusively provided by Airports Authority of India.  But in case of leased airports it has been
 envisaged that though at present Airports Authority of India will continue to be responsible for this, but in future it may
 be required to further subdivide these functions - route navigational services and approach and aerodrome control
 services for efficient operations.  Route Navigational Services means guiding the aircraft in the airspace when the
 aircraft is away from aerodrome.  Approach and Aerodrome Services means guiding the aircraft when it is approaching
 for landing/taking off from the aerodrome and also guiding the movement of aircraft at the aerodrome.  The Policy on
 Airport Infrastructure does provide that approach and aerodrome control services may be provided by licensed Air
 Traffic Controllers (ATCs) engaged by the airport operators.  This may be required in future for efficient functioning of

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
 the airport.  There will be no danger to security of the country due to this as the airspace control through Route
 Navigation would still continue with the Airports Authority of India, and the existing arrangement of civil-military
 controllers sitting in the same building and controlling the movement of aircraft in all stages will also continue.  All
 these licensed ATCs will also be security cleared.  Adequate safeguards will be taken while introducing this concept. In
 view, it had not been felt necessary to mention in the Act that Air Traffic Services will continue to be provided by
 Airports Authority of India. The point relating to the airspace control was also brought to the notice of Secretary, Civil
 Aviation during the course of the evidence held on the     26th June 2002.  The Secretary, while briefing the Committee
 about the broad objectives of the Bill stated as under:-
"…….When we are doing this, what is very clear is that the Government has no plans to hand over either
 the security operations, even in a limited sense, or the Air Traffic Control to the private operators. In the
 Air Traffic Control, as you know, there are two parts. One is the navigational management; the other is
 the terminal management. At the moment, we are not planning to give either of them to the lessee. But it
 is not an uncommon practice, perhaps it is quite a common practice that the terminal air traffic
 management is also done by the airport operator. But the air space, being a major security issue,
 everywhere, is handled by the national airports authority. There is no question of handing it over to
 anybody at any point of time. Even the terminal air traffic management, at the moment, we have not
 planned to hand it over to a lessee, if and when such a lessee is found. The idea is that we should gain
 some experience of working with private parties before we can think of that.  And, I once again reiterate,
 as regards security, there is no question of handing it over to the private people in the short term or in the
 long term……"
 
13.       While replying to a further query on the subject, the Ministry of Civil Aviation, vide their O.M. No.AV-
24013/001/2000-AAI dated the 4
th September 2002, agreed with the suggestion of the Committee that the functions,
 which it is felt should not be given to lessee at all e.g. security/ATC could be specifically excluded in the Bill and stated
 that it would require the approval of the Cabinet.
 
 
14.       The Committee held a very critical view of the piecemeal approach adopted by the Government and felt that the
 amendments proposed in this Bill should be more comprehensive.  It was suggested to the Ministry of Civil Aviation
 that the functions to be performed by the lessee should be clearly specified and incorporated in the Bill itself.  Since
 airports of a country are the gateway to the nation, security and the Air Traffic Control at the airports assume critical
 importance.  The Committee notes the categorical assurance given by Secretary, Civil Aviation that the Government
 has decided that the Air Traffic Control and security functions will remain with the Airports Authority of India.  The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that a separate clause should be incorporated in the Bill stating that the security and
 Air Traffic Control at the airports shall not be handed over to the private operator at all.  The Committee further
 emphasised that financial security aspects should be addressed carefully.  It should be guaranteed that the source from
 which the money comes or the potential bidder for lease should not be hostile to the national interest.
 
 
15.
       Effect on Security of the country due to leasing of airports
15.1     The Committee expressed apprehension that the security of the country could be compromised if the airports are
 leased out to foreign companies. In response the Ministry of Civil Aviation stated that the unconditional right of
 Defence forces to utilise the leased airports would continue.  Central Government has absolute powers under section 5A
 and 6 of the Aircraft Act 1934 and Section 37 of Airports Authority of India Act 1994 to issue directions in the interest
 of the security of the country and to make orders in emergency.  There is no dilution of the same.  Even now all public
 aerodromes, which means all non-government aerodromes licensed public use are also at all reasonable times open to
 use by any aircraft in the service of the Central Government under Rule 81 of the Aircraft Rules, 1937.  Moreover these
 airports will continue to be government aerodromes owned by Airports Authority of India.  All the provisions of
 Airports Authority of India Act will continue to be applicable to these airports as far as security of the country is
 concerned.   Ministry of Civil Aviation have further vide their O.M. No.AV-24013/001/2000-AAI dated the 18
th
 February 2002 stated that the provisions regarding the unconditional right of Defence forces to utilise the leased
 airports will also be further emphasised in the lease agreement.

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
 
15.2     As regards the selection of the lessee is concerned, Ministry of Civil Aviation have stated that the selection of
 the prospective airport operator(s) is proposed to be undertaken in a 2-stage process.  In the first stage Expressions of
 Interests will be invited from prospective bidders. Based on the information received from the prospective bidders,
 requisite security clearance of the various agencies of the Government of India shall be obtained before Stage-2
 selection process is completed. Further, before awarding the concession to the selected bidder(s), approval of the
 Cabinet shall be obtained.    Moreover, even after selection, provision will be there in the lease agreement for
 cancellation of the lease on the ground of security of the country.  The lessee will continue to be under surveillance
 from the point of view of the security of the country.  Adequate safeguards are available even in the present Acts and
 Rules and they will be emphasised in the lease agreement.
 
 
16.       Mention of “State Government or any person” in the Bill
 
16.1     The Committee observed that the Bill inter-alia states that "the Authority may  ……. make a lease of the
 premises of an airport to a State Government or any person …….".  The Committee was of the view that the State
 Governments neither have the necessary expertise to develop/manage the airports nor do they have sufficient funds to
 carry out the objectives of infusion of funds and improvement in services as contained in the Bill. The Committee
 enquired from the Ministry of Civil Aviation the justification for including the term "State Government or any person"
 in the Bill and whether the State Governments would be given priority over the private operators for leasing of airports.
 The Committee also observed the term "any person" appearing in the Bill as ambiguous.  In response Secretary,
 Ministry of Civil Aviation remarked that "the 'person' means a 'juridical person' or 'legal entity' or 'an institution' etc." 
 He also stated that the term 'State Government' had been included to the Bill because some of the State Governments
 had expressed the desire to develop some other airports than the metro airports.  These State Governments had taken
 the initiative to develop the airports by utilizing the expertise of Airports Authority of India and some the international
 operators/investors.  He further stated that the Bill was basically an enabling provision so that it should be possible to
 involve the State Governments in the process, taking with account their aspirations.
           
16.2     In reply to the query that whether in the opinion of Ministry of Civil Aviation the State Governments were in a
 better position than the Airports Authority of India to develop/maintain the airports, the Ministry of Civil Aviation
 stated that so far, no State Government had come forward to develop/maintain airports in different parts of the country.
 In fact, a few airports that are with the State Government (e.g. Sholapur, Kolhapur) are sought to be transferred to the
 Airports Authority of India since the State Government does not have the expertise to operate/manage them. Some of
 the recent initiatives of the State Governments to set up new airports at Bangalore and Hyderabad basically are in the
 nature of joint sector projects with the private sector partners holding a majority stake of 74 per cent in the projects. As
 regards priority to the State Governments over the private operators for leasing of airports, the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation stated that the prospective bidders for the metro airports are to be selected by way of a competitive global
 bidding process, based on clearly laid down selection criteria.  For the purpose of their selection, the State Governments
 would have to qualify the requisite selection criteria since the purpose of leasing through global bidding process is to
 ensure a level playing field to all the bidders.
 
16.3     The Committee is of the opinion that the term "person" used in the Clause(1) of Section 12A of the Bill does not
 clearly bring out the meaning that it intends to convey and recommends that the term "person" should be further
 qualified in the Bill itself.
 
17.       Extent of Foreign Equity participation
17.1     The Committee enquired from the Ministry of Civil Aviation the extent of foreign equity participation in the
 proposed leasing of the airports.  It was clarified to the Committee that enabling provisions for leasing of airports are
 only being made as legal framework required for such venture. The suggestions regarding equity participation will be
 governed by the policy of the government as may be framed from time to time and hence inclusion of such policy
 matters in the legal framework would be too restrictive and may not be required.  The Policy on airport Infrastructure
 promulgated by the Ministry of Civil Aviation in December 1997 already provides for foreign equity participation in
 the airport sector upto 74 per cent with automatic approval and upto     100 per cent with special permission.

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
 
17.2     The Committee further enquired from the Ministry of Civil Aviation whether the management control of the
 airports after the leasing would be in the hands of Indians or foreign partner.  The Committee was informed by the
 Ministry of Civil Aviation that it was not the Government's intention to restrict the privatization process exclusively to
 foreign or Indian companies through insertion of new Section 12A in the Act.  The premises of an airport may be leased
 to even State Government or any person. It is open for State governments, local bodies, public sector undertaking,
 private companies etc. to participate in the process.  Such Indian participants who may not be having the requisite
 technical or managerial expertise of managing world-class airports can have foreign partners with the requisite
 expertise and form a consortium for management of airports. It may, however, be mentioned that this does not preclude
 foreign companies from participating in the bidding.  It would be, however, ensured that all firms/bidders are security
 cleared so that undesirable agencies do not take advantage of the leasing process to gain access to Indian airports.
 Further, the lessee's function in India would be subject to all Indian laws, rules and regulations and they could be
 proceeded against under the relevant laws in case of any violation.  Besides, the lessee will have to function within the
 parameters of the lease agreement to be signed between the Airports Authority of India and the lessee.  Details of the
 lease agreement for each airport will be examined and approved by the Government at the highest level. 
 
17.3     The Committee is of the view that the management control of the proposed operators of the airports should
 remain in the control of Indian nationals, thereby protecting the safety, security and sovereignty of the country. 
 Therefore, the Committee recommends that the foreign equity participation should, under no circumstances, be allowed
 to exceed the limit of 49 per cent.
 
 
18.       Specific mention in the Bill that lease income should be used for development of other airports
 
18.1     The Committee observed that para 3 of the Statement of Objects and Reasons stated "any money payable by
 such lessees on this account will accrue to the Airports Authority of India to undertake the development of other
 airports."  However, the intention of the Government to undertake the development of other airports was not reflected
 in the Bill.  The Committee further noted that according to clause (3) of Section 12A of the Bill, the money received
 from the lessee shall form part of a fund and will be utilised for all purposes of section 24 of the principal Act.  Section
 24 (2) of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 says as under :-
" The Authority shall have power, subject to the provisions of this Act, to spend such sums as it thinks fit
 to cover all administrative expenses of the Authority and on objects or for purposes authorised by this
 Act and such sums shall be treated as expenditure out of the fund of the Authority."
           
18.2     The Committee was thus of the view that Clause (3) of Section 12A of the Bill contradicts para 3 of Statement of
 Objects and Reasons.  The Committee also expressed apprehension that the sum received on account of lease could also
 be utilised even for administrative expenses or for purposes other than the developmental activities at the airports. 
 Replying to this apprehension, the Ministry of Civil Aviation stated that the intention of the government is that the lease
 income should accrue to Airports Authority of India and not to the general revenue of the Government so that Airports
 Authority of India continues to discharge its existing functions by fulfilling the developmental needs as well as day-to-
day operational needs of the other airports.  At present also, Airports Authority of India takes care of these needs of
 other airports through earning which include earnings from these airports which are proposed to be leased out.  The
 AAI Act clearly states that "to spend such sums as it thinks fit to cover all administrative expenses of the Authority and
 on objects or for purposes authorised by this Act".  Any further restriction that the lease income should only be for new
 development works would prove to be counter-productive.  The reason is that majority of airports of Airports Authority
 of India do not make profit.  For day-to-day operation of these airports also, the earning from other airports is utilised
 besides for taking new development works.  The reason for losses is lack of enough number of flights.  The airport has
 to made functional even if there are only one or two flights a day.  Strictly on the commercial lines, such loss making
 airports would have to be closed down if the lease rental is utilised only for new development works and not for day-to-
day operation.
 
18.3     In view of the above, it was not felt necessary to have a specific mention in the Act itself that lease income
 should be utilised only for new development works at the airports as it is already included in the Act to utilise this

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
 money for such development as part of the functions of the Authority.  The Authority is undertaking such development
 works at airports out of its total income and will continue to do so as per the functions assigned to it under the Act.
 
18.4     Ministry of Civil Aviation further clarified that Section 24(2) of Airports Authority of India Act empowers
 Airports Authority of India to spend the sum credited to its fund to cover all administrative expenses of the Authority
 and on objects or for purposes authorised by the Act. This Clause read with Section 12 of the Act makes it amply clear
 that the functions of the Authority are to manage the airports, civil enclaves and aeronautical communication stations
 and provide air traffic services and air transport services at airports and civil enclaves.  There is, therefore, no
 contradiction with the objects mentioned in the Statement of Objects and Reasons as development of other airports as
 mentioned therein also include the maintenance as well as development.
 
18.5     The Committee is not in agreement with the clarifications furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation.  The
 Committee is of the view that the statement "Any money payable by such lessees on this account will accrue to the
 Airports Authority of India to undertake the development of other airports", as appearing in para 3 of Statement of
 Objects and Reasons certainly contradicts Clause (3) of Section 12A of the Bill which envisages that funds received
 from the lessee will be utilised for all purposes of Section 24 of the Principal Act.  The Committee recommends that the
 money accruing on account of the leasing of the airports should be utilised only for undertaking developmental
 activities at other airports but not for general administrative expenses and the Bill should be suitably amended to this
 effect.
 
 
19.       Absence of any regulatory mechanism in the Bill
19.1     The Committee brought to the notice of the Ministry of Civil Aviation that in terms of Clause (4) of Section 12A
 of the Bill, "the lessee, who has been assigned any functions of the authority under sub-section (1), shall have all the
 powers of the Authority necessary for the performance of such functions in terms of the lease" and enquired whether
 the lessee will have the power to regulate the tariff etc. also in terms of the above clause.
 
19.2     The Committee was informed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation that the power of the Airports Authority of India
 to charge fees, rent etc. under section 22 of Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 is subject to approval of the Central
 Government. Similarly Section 12A will not empower the lessee to charge fees, rent, etc. without the approval of the
 Central Government.  There are time-tested mechanisms available internationally for regulating fees/charges.  The
 fixation of tariff etc. will be governed and controlled under the terms of the lease agreement which would provide for a
 mechanism for fixation of charges/fees also. There will be a well-defined formula for levying of aeronautical charges.
 The initial rate will be same as the existing rates being charged by Airports Authority of India.  Subsequent maximum
 increase permissible will be based on the index of inflation.  Full effects of inflation will not be passed to the lessee. 
 There will be a factor for improving the efficiency of operations.  So the lessee will be encouraged to improve the
 services to enable him to earn profits.  No free hand will be given in this respect.  Detailed formulations were being
 formalized in consultation with the legal and financial consultant which will be incorporated in the lease agreement
 which will be finally placed before the Cabinet for approval.  These formulations will be subject to a periodic review in
 accordance with well laid out procedures.   Accepting the need for a regulatory authority, the Ministry of Civil Aviation
 added that the constitution of a regulatory authority was under contemplation.  The question whether it requires a
 separate legislation or it can be done under the existing rules is being examined. 
 
19.3     To another query on the subject, the Committee was further informed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation that a
 proposal is separately under consideration for setting up an Airport Economic Regulatory Authority to provide an
 appropriate regulatory regime for all airports, keeping in view the service standards also.
 
19.4     The Committee is concerned about the absence of any regulatory mechanism in the Bill for regulation of
 fees/charges/levying of aeronautical charges by the private operator.  The Committee is of the view that the present
 legislation should contain a mechanism about a regulatory body for fixing and checking the parameters defined for the
 investments made and improvement in the performance of the airports.  The Committee appreciates that a proposal is
 separately under consideration for setting up an Airport Economic Regulatory Authority to provide an appropriate
 regulatory regime for all airports.  The Committee recommends that a regulatory authority must be in place before the

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
 Bill is passed by the Parliament and that a suitable clause regarding regulation of tariff etc. by the said authority should
 be incorporated in the Bill. 
 
20.       While discussing the various provisions of the Bill, the Committee was also concerned about certain other issues
 which have not been covered in the Bill i.e., inclusion of aims and objectives in the Bill, protection to the interests of
 the employees of the Airports Authority of India, Ministry going ahead with the leasing process without final approval
 of the Parliament and the direction of the Ministry of Civil Aviation to AAI in respect of ongoing and new projects at
 the airports.
 
21.       Attention of the Committee was also drawn to the proposal forwarded by the Government of Karnataka to the
 Ministry of Civil Aviation requesting for amendments to the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 to facilitate
 finalizing the agreement with foreign partners for Bangalore International Airport.  The Committee recommends that
 the Government needs to take a firm view in the matter and amend the Airports Authority of India Act accordingly.
 
22.       
Inclusion of aims and objectives in the Bill
22.1     The Committee observed that the aims and objectives of the Bill had not been specifically mentioned in the Bill. 
 The Committee suggested to the Ministry of Civil Aviation that since the Bill aims at improvement in services and
 bringing in more investments at the airports, the terms 'infusion of private sector investments' and 'improve service
 levels' should be reflected in the Bill itself.  In response, the Ministry of Civil Aviation informed that generally the aims
 and objectives are written in the beginning of the main Act, which are already written in the main Airports Authority of
 India Act.  With each amendment, a Statement of Objects and Reasons is enclosed.  The same has been done.  The
 interpretation of every clause is done within the broad contours of objects and reasons.  Therefore, it is generally not
 felt necessary to mention the aim and object in the beginning of every clause.  Moreover, the amended clause, inter
 alia, states "in the interest of administration and generally for carrying out any or all of its functions under Section 12". 
 Section 12(4) of the main Act already states that "In the discharge of its functions…., the Authority shall have due
 regard to the development of air transport service and to the efficiency, economy and safety of such service." In view of
 the above, it was not felt necessary to include further in section 12A "for improvement in services and for bringing in
 more investment" as it is already provided in the main Act and is the constant endeavour of the Authority and the
 Government.
 
22.2    The Committee brought to the notice of the Ministry of Civil Aviation that the two objectives of the Bill, namely
 'improvement in services' and 'bringing in more investment' at the airports did not form part of the original AAI Act,
 1994.  Ministry of Civil Aviation was of the opinion that infusion of private sector investment and improvement of
 service levels through world-class technology and managerial expertise is inherent in the philosophy of privatization. It
 was, therefore, not considered necessary to mention this specifically.  However, Ministry of Civil Aviation have
 further stated that they have no objection prime-facie to include this in the Bill, but as per the laid down procedure this
 will have to be considered and approved by the Cabinet.
 
22.3     The Committee recommends that the basic objectives of the Bill i.e. 'infusion of private sector investments' and
 'improve service levels' should be incorporated in the text of the Bill in a suitable form.
 
23.       Protection to the interests of the employees of the Airports Authority of India
 
23.1     The Committee was also concerned about the interests of the employees of the Airports Authority of India
 working at the four metro airports. The representatives of the employees Unions of the Airports Authority of India had
 also expressed apprehension about the safety and security of their jobs after the leasing of the airports.  The Committee
 enquired from the Ministry of Civil Aviation as to what would be the fate of the employees of the Airports Authority of
 India working at the airports proposed to be leased out.  In reply the Ministry of Civil Aviation stated that in order to
 prevent any misgivings amongst the employees of the Authority working at the airports, appropriate provisions will be
 incorporated in the service regulations for deputation of employees, so as to ensure that the rights of the employees are
 in no manner compromised or put in peril. The details were being worked out in accordance with the different laws in
 consultation with legal and financial consultants.
 

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
23.2     During the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the 26 th June 2002, the
 Committee suggested to the Ministry that the terms and conditions of the proposed lease agreement should clearly
 indicate that the rights of the employees working under the new dispensation would not be tinkered with even after the
 lease agreement.  The Chairman, Airports Authority of India, while briefing the Committee on the issue stated as under.
"…….Sir, the interest of the employees are fully protected through a lease agreement. The employees will be
 on deputation with the new operator or the lessee, for a period of three years. The employees will have the
 option to come back to the Airports Authority of India if they do not want to be absorbed, under the terms
 and conditions of the new operator.  After three years, if they come back, they would be absorbed in the
 Airports Authority of India, on the same terms and conditions that they are enjoying. If they want to get
 absorbed in the new dispensation, under the new operator, with new terms and conditions, they can very
 well do so."
           
23.3     The Committee takes note of the fact that there has been vehement opposition to the Bill from the employees
 unions of the Airports Authority of India.  The Committee is of the view that the exercise of leasing of airports cannot
 succeed without the participation of the employees of the Authority.  The Committee feels that a more transparent
 interaction should be held with the representatives of the employees.  The Committee recommends that the interest of
 the employees should be taken care of and that the existing terms and conditions of the employees of the authority
 should not be altered at all after the leasing of the airports.   Further the thinking of the Ministry with respect to
 protecting the interests of the employees should come out in concrete terms in the Bill so as eliminate any doubts in the
 minds of the employees.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that a provision for protecting the interests of the
 employees should also be incorporated in the Bill itself on the same lines as appearing in Sub-clause (5) of Clause
 111(C) of the Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2001.
 
24.       Ministry going ahead with the leasing process without final approval of the Parliament
24.1     The Committee took note of the fact that the Ministry of Civil Aviation had been going ahead with the process
 of long term leasing of the airports without waiting for the final approval of the Parliament.  On being enquired from
 the Ministry of Civil Aviation about the reasons for going ahead with the leasing process when the Bill on the subject
 was under consideration of the Parliament, the Ministry replied that the privatization of four metro airports through
 long term leasing  is an ongoing process and a commitment has been made to complete the process during the year
 2002-03 in the Budget document. Moreover, the leasing exercise which has been approved, in principle, by the Cabinet
 involves complex strategic issues which require substantial preparatory work including Opportunity Briefing meetings
 (as a marketing strategy), drafting of lengthy bid documents which have legal implications, two stage global bid and
 evaluation process etc. This exercise is a considerable time consuming one and in order to adhere to the time frame, it is
 imperative that the preparatory work is simultaneously taken up for effective implementation of the project at the final
 stage.  The work connected with leasing was preparatory work in this context.  Neither any firm commitment had been
 made in this regard, nor any final decisions taken. It was further informed that it would be useful to continue with this
 work so that required decision can be taken at an appropriate time, and there is no delay for want of prior preparatory
 work.
 
24.2     The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation and took a serious note
 of the fact that Ministry of Civil Aviation did not wait for the approval of the Parliament and went ahead with even
 drawing the various schedules of the leasing process and taking action thereon.
 
25.       Direction to AAI in respect of ongoing and new contracts
25.1     The Committee also came to know that the Ministry of Civil Aviation had directed the Airports Authority of
 India to put on hold major construction works at the four metro airports, pending the finalisation of the decision
 regarding the long-term lease of the airports.  When the Committee enquired from the Ministry of Civil Aviation
 whether any such instructions had been issued to the Airports Authority of India and if so, how the developmental
 programmes at the airports had been affected, it was informed that in the backdrop of Government's decision to lease
 the four metro Airports to private operators in order to improve management and upgrade facilities at these airports to
 world-class standards, Ministry of Civil Aviation had initiated preparatory steps. Accordingly, consultants had been

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
 appointed, who in turn had completed the due diligence work in relation to these airports. Based on the parameters and
 principles identified by the consultants, capital works are required to be undertaken by the prospective operators on
 leasing.
25.2     In the first three years of the lease period, the private operator shall be mandated to complete all the ongoing
 capital works. In addition, Airports Authority will identify certain works to create a visible impact from the users
 perspective, which shall also be undertaken by the private operator. The private operators shall prepare a long term
 Master Plan incorporating major capital works and facilities to be created in the long term, taking into consideration the
 future traffic growth.         
25.3     In view of the above, Ministry of Civil Aviation had issued a directive to the Airports Authority of India to put
 on hold major construction projects, in which work had not commenced yet. The directive was also made applicable to
 major contracts of commercial nature. The basic objective behind issuing this directive was to ensure that the value
 realization to the Airports Authority of India is not adversely affected on account of leasing and also that the projects
 are not taken up in adhoc manner. Besides such a decision would also allow operational flexibility to the private
 operator to draw up a comprehensive plan of action for incorporating their vision.
25.4     Ministry of Civil Aviation have further stated that the aforesaid directive has not resulted in any delay and
 consequent cost and time overrun for any ongoing project. Further, Airports Authority has the freedom to approach the
 Ministry with any specific proposal for approval with necessary justification keeping in mind the operational
 requirements at Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata airports.  It is felt, on the other had, that there is a need for re-
prioritization of projects to be taken up at these four airports in the light of the due diligence work undertaken by the
 consultant. Hence there was the need for vetting by the Ministry.
 
25.5     The Committee is not in agreement with the replies furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation and is of the
 view that developmental activities at the airports should not be brought to a halt pending the leasing process.  The
 Committee recommends that the developmental projects which have been already sanctioned by the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation be allowed to continue and not made to suffer due to the leasing of airports.
 
26.       General Observation
The Committee is of the view the objectives behind the Bill i.e. "speed up airport infrastructure development,
 improve managerial efficiency, increase local responsiveness and improve service levels" are commendable but the
 legislation introduced for the purpose falls short of many essential requirements.  It appears that no proper thinking has
 gone into the preparation of the Bill and that it has been very hastily drafted.  The Bill in its present form even fails to
 mention the basic aims and objectives behind the Bill.  The Bill does not address to a number of important functional
 and economic issues that would arise as a result of the leasing of the airports to the private operators.   The term 'person'
 used in Clause (1) of Section 12A of the Bill has not been clearly specified.  The Bill also does not contain any
 provision with regard to tariff regulation mechanism and only now the Government is considering the setting up of an
 Airport Economic Regulatory Authority.  The Ministry have admitted that certain functions such as security and Air
 Traffic Control will, in no case, will be transferred to the private operator, but the Bill does not clearly specify as to
 which functions of the Airports Authority of India would be handed over to the private operators and which functions,
 in no case, will be transferred to the private operators.  The Committee strongly feels that the Government has come up
 with a piecemeal legislation.  The Committee, in the interest of the nation, is not in favour of proceeding ahead with the
 Bill in its present form.  The Committee urges upon the Government to carefully consider all the points mentioned
 above and recommends that the Government should come up with a comprehensive legislation incorporating all the
 suggestions made in the preceding paragraphs in the Report.
 
* * * * * *
 
OBSER
VATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
Specific mention of the functions which should/should not be assigned to the lessee
 

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
The Committee held a very critical view of the piecemeal approach adopted by the Government and felt that the
 amendments proposed in this Bill should be more comprehensive.  It was suggested to the Ministry of Civil Aviation
 that the functions to be performed by the lessee should be clearly specified and incorporated in the Bill itself.  Since
 airports of a country are the gateway to the nation, security and the Air Traffic Control at the airports assume critical
 importance.  The Committee notes the categorical assurance given by Secretary, Civil Aviation that the Government
 has decided that the Air Traffic Control and security functions will remain with the Airports Authority of India.  The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that a separate clause should be incorporated in the Bill stating that the security and
 Air Traffic Control at the airports shall not be handed over to the private operator at all.  The Committee further
 emphasised that financial security aspects should be addressed carefully.  It should be guaranteed that the source from
 which the money comes or the potential bidder for lease should not be hostile to the national interest.
(Para 14)
 
Mention of “State Government or any person” in the Bill
 
The Committee is of the opinion that the term "person" used in the Clause(1) of Section 12A of the Bill does not clearly
 bring out the meaning that it intends to convey and recommends that the term "person" should be further qualified in
 the Bill itself.
                                                                                                                  (Para 16.3)
 
Extent of Foreign Equity participation
 
The Committee is of the view that the management control of the proposed operators of the airports should remain in
 the control of Indian nationals, thereby protecting the safety, security and sovereignty of the country.  Therefore, the
 Committee recommends that the foreign equity participation should, under no circumstances, be allowed to exceed the
 limit of 49 per cent.
(Para 17.3)
 
 
Specific mention in the Bill that lease income should be used for development of other airports
 
The Committee is not in agreement with the clarifications furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation.  The Committee
 is of the view that the statement "Any money payable by such lessees on this account will accrue to the Airports
 Authority of India to undertake the development of other airports", as appearing in para 3 of Statement of Objects and
 Reasons certainly contradicts Clause (3) of Section 12A of the Bill which envisages that funds received from the lessee
 will be utilised for all purposes of Section 24 of the Principal Act.  The Committee recommends that the money
 accruing on account of the leasing of the airports should be utilised only for undertaking developmental activities at
 other airports but not for general administrative expenses and the Bill should be suitably amended to this effect.
(Para 18.5)
 
Absence of any regulatory mechanism in the Bill
 
The Committee is concerned about the absence of any regulatory mechanism in the Bill for regulation of
 fees/charges/levying of aeronautical charges by the private operator.  The Committee is of the view that the present
 legislation should contain a mechanism about a regulatory body for fixing and checking the parameters defined for the
 investments made and improvement in the performance of the airports.  The Committee appreciates that a proposal is
 separately under consideration for setting up an Airport Economic Regulatory Authority to provide an appropriate
 regulatory regime for all airports.  The Committee recommends that a regulatory authority must be in place before the
 Bill is passed by the Parliament and that a suitable clause regarding regulation of tariff etc. by the said authority should
 be incorporated in the Bill.                                                                                         
(Para 19.4)
 
The Committee recommends that the Government needs to take a firm view in the matter and amend the Airports
 Authority of India Act accordingly.
(Para 21)

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
Inclusion of aims and objectives in the Bill
 
The Committee recommends that the basic objectives of the Bill i.e. 'infusion of private sector investments' and
 'improve service levels' should be incorporated in the text of the Bill in a suitable
 form.                                                           
(Para 22.3)
 
Protection to the interests of the employees of the Airports Authority of India
 
The Committee takes note of the fact that there has been vehement opposition to the Bill from the employees unions of
 the Airports Authority of India.  The Committee is of the view that the exercise of leasing of airports cannot succeed
 without the participation of the employees of the Authority.  The Committee feels that a more transparent interaction
 should be held with the representatives of the employees.  The Committee recommends that the interest of the
 employees should be taken care of and that the existing terms and conditions of the employees of the authority should
 not be altered at all after the leasing of the airports.   Further the thinking of the Ministry with respect to protecting the
 interests of the employees should come out in concrete terms in the Bill so as eliminate any doubts in the minds of the
 employees.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that a provision for protecting the interests of the employees
 should also be incorporated in the Bill itself on the same lines as appearing in Sub-clause (5) of Clause 111(C) of the
 Major Port Trusts (Amendment) Bill, 2001.          
                                                                              (Para 23.3)
Ministry going ahead with the leasing process without final approval of the Parliament
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation and took a serious note of the
 fact that Ministry of Civil Aviation did not wait for the approval of the Parliament and went ahead with even drawing
 the various schedules of the leasing process and taking action thereon.
(Para 24.2)
Direction to AAI in respect of ongoing and new contracts
The Committee is not in agreement with the replies furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation and is of the view that
 developmental activities at the airports should not be brought to a halt pending the leasing process.  The Committee
 recommends that the developmental projects which have been already sanctioned by the Ministry of Civil Aviation be
 allowed to continue and not made to suffer due to the leasing of airports.
                                                                                                                  (Para 25.5)
 
General Observation
 
The Committee is of the view the objectives behind the Bill i.e. "speed up airport infrastructure development, improve
 managerial efficiency, increase local responsiveness and improve service levels" are commendable but the legislation
 introduced for the purpose falls short of many essential requirements.  It appears that no proper thinking has gone into
 the preparation of the Bill and that it has been very hastily drafted.  The Bill in its present form even fails to mention
 the basic aims and objectives behind the Bill.  The Bill does not address to a number of important functional and
 economic issues that would arise as a result of the leasing of the airports to the private operators.   The term 'person'
 used in Clause (1) of Section 12A of the Bill has not been clearly specified.  The Bill also does not contain any
 provision with regard to tariff regulation mechanism and only now the Government is considering the setting up of an
 Airport Economic Regulatory Authority.  The Ministry have admitted that certain functions such as security and Air
 Traffic Control will, in no case, will be transferred to the private operator, but the Bill does not clearly specify as to
 which functions of the Airports Authority of India would be handed over to the private operators and which functions,
 in no case, will be transferred to the private operators.  The Committee strongly feels that the Government has come up
 with a piecemeal legislation.  The Committee, in the interest of the nation, is not in favour of proceeding ahead with the
 Bill in its present form.  The Committee urges upon the Government to carefully consider all the points mentioned
 above and recommends that the Government should come up with a comprehensive legislation incorporating all the
 suggestions made in the preceding paragraphs in the Report.
(Para 26)

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
*IV@
FOURTH MEETING
 
      The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Monday, the 12 th February 2001 in Room No.63, Parliament House, New
 Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.   Shri Md. Salim  ––Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.      Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad
3.      Shri Parmeshwar Kumar Agarwalla
4.      Shri Vikram Verma
5.      Shri Satish Pradhan
 
LOK SABHA  
6.
      Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudi
7.      Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
8.      Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
9.      Shri Suresh Chandel
10.  Capt. Satish Sharma
11.  Shrimati Margaret Alva
12.  Shri Anil Basu
13.  Shrimati Reena Choudhary
14.  Capt. Jai Narain Prasad Nishad
15.  Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
16.  Shri G.M. Banatwalla
SECRETARIAT
      Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
      Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
      Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Committee Officer
 
2.   At the outset the Chairman informed the Members of the Committee that the Chairman, Rajya Sabha in consultation
 with the Speaker, Lok Sabha, has referred two Bills namely, (i) The Airports Authority of India (Amendment) Bill,
 2000 and (ii) The Aircraft (Exemption from Taxes and Duties on Fuel and Lubricants) Bill, 2000 which were
 introduced and pending in Lok Sabha, to the Committee for examination and report.
3.   *                                                    *                                                          *
4.   *                                                    *                                                          *
5.   A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
6.   The meeting of the Committee adjourned at 5.00 P.M.
____________________________________________________________________________________________
*  Minutes of 1
st  to 3rd  meetings relate to other matters.
@  Fourth meeting of the Committee constituted on 1st January 2001 and lapsed on 31st December 2001.
*** Relates to matters not included in this Report.
 
*II

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
SECOND MEETING
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 21st January 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’, Parliament House
 Annexe, New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.
            Shri Khagen Das    -     Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.            Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad
3.            Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4.            Shri S.S. Chandran
5.            Shri Anantray Devshanker Dave
6.            Prof. A. Lakshmisagar
7.            Dr. A.K. Patel
8.            Shri Satish Pradhan
9.            Shrimati Ambika Soni
10.        Shri Vikram Verma
11.        Shri S. Viduthalal Virumbi
LOK SABHA
12.        Shri G.M. Banatwalla
13.        Shri Suresh Chandel
14.        Shrimati Reena Choudhary
15.        Shri P.S. Gadhavi
16.        Shri S.P. Lepcha
17.        Shri Shivaji Mane
18.        Shri Vilas Muttemwar
19.        Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
20.        Shri Sundar Lal Patwa
21.        Shri Gunipati Ramaiah
22.        Shri Sunder Lal Tiwari
23.        Shri A.K.S. Vijayan
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
            Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Committee Officer
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________
*Minutes of 1
st Meeting relates to other matters.
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
Shri Anurag Goel, Joint Secretary
Shri V. Subramanian, Joint Secretary (FA)
Shri Alok Chaturvedi, Director
Shri K. Ramakrishnan, Under Secretary
 

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
 
Shri S.K. Narula, Chairman.
Shri K. Ramalingam, Member (Plg.).
Shri V.D.V. Prasada Rao, Member (Fin.).
Shri J. Subramanian, Dy. General Manager (Kid).
Shri P.S. Nair, Executive Dir. (Kid).
Shri P.K. Ray, Executive Director (Law).
Shri Shardul S. Shroff, Legal Consultant
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF LEGAL AFFAIRS
 
Shri D.P. Sharma, Additional Secretary
 
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT
 
Shri N.L. Meena, Joint Secretary and Legislative Counsel
Shri K. Biswal, Assistant Legislative Counsel
 
 
2.               The Committee took up the Airports Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2000 for discussion.  The
 representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, while presenting their views, replied to the points raised by the
 Members on the subject.  The representatives of the Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs also assisted the
 Committee in its deliberations.
 
3.               There were number of issues on which the Ministry representatives could not give immediate clarifications. 
 On all those points, they were asked to send written replies with in fifteen days.
 
4.               After hearing the officials of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, the Committee decided to invite the
 suggestions/views/comments of individuals/institutions/ organizations interested in the subject through advertisement in
 the newspapers.  The Committee also decided to issue a Press Release.
 
5.               A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
 
6.               The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 4.35 P.M.
 
*IX
NINTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 9th May 2002 in Room No. 62, First Floor, Parliament House,
 New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1. Shri Dipankar Mukherjee    - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad
3. Shri K. Rahman Khan
4. Shri K. Kalavenkata Rao

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
5. Shrimati Ambika Soni
 
LOK SABHA
6. Shri Anil Basu
7. Shrimati Reena Choudhary
8. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
9. Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
10. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
11. Shri S.P. Lepcha
12. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
13. Shri Vilas Muttemwar
14. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
15. Shri Gunipati Ramaiah
16. Shri Kalava Srinivasulu
17. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
18. Shri Sunder Lal Tiwari
SECRETARIAT
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
            Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Committee Officer
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________________________
*Minutes of IIIrd to VIIIth Meetings relate to other matters.
 
 
 
2.               At the outset, the Committee considered the information received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation
 regarding the Airports Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2000, containing chronological order of events on the
 ongoing leasing process of four metro airports. The Committee observed that the action of the Ministry of Civil
 Aviation to actively proceed with the leasing process of four metro airports was against the propriety at the time when
 the Committee was seized of the matter. Then, Committee, therefore, decided to hear the Secretary, Ministry of Civil
 Aviation on the matter at its next meeting.
 
3.               *                                        *                                              *
 
4.               *                                        *                                              *
 
5.               *                                        *                                              *
6.               The Committee also decided to hold its next meeting on Monday, the                    27
th May 2002.
 
7.                              The Committee adjourned at 3.40 p.m.
 
 
 
           
_________________________________________________________________________
***Relates to matters not included in this Report.

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
 
X
TENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 27 th May 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.
            Shri Dipankar Mukherjee -     Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.            Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3.            Shri K. B. Krishna Murthy
4.            Shri Satish Pradhan
5.            Shri Balwant Singh Ramoowalia
6.            Shrimati Ambika Soni
7.            Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
8.            Shri Vikram Verma
      LOK SABHA
9.            Shri G.M. Banatwalla
10.        Shri Anil Basu
11.        Shri Suresh Chandel
12.        Shri P.S. Gadhavi
13.        Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
14.        Shri S.P. Lepcha
15.        Shri Vijay Kumar Malhotra
16.        Shri Shivaji Mane
17.        Shri K.H. Muniyappa
18.        Shri Vilas Muttemwar
19.        Shri Sundar Lal Patwa
20.        Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
21.        Shri Th. Chaoba Singh
22.        Shri Vijay Kumar Sorake
23.        Shri A.K.S. Vijayan
 
      SECRETARIAT
 
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary           
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
 
Shri K.Roy Paul, Secretary
Shri Sanat Kaul, Joint Secretary
Shri Anurag Goel, Joint Secretary
Shri V. Subramanian, Joint Secretary (FA)

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
Shri O. Ravi, Director
Shri S.K. Narula, Chairman, Airports Authority of India
 
 
2.               *                                        *                                              *
 
3.               The Committee then took the oral evidence of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation on the ongoing
 leasing process of four metro airports pending consideration of the Airports Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2000
 by the Committee.  The Secretary of the Ministry, while presenting his views, replied to the points raised by the
 Members on the subject. 
 
4.               A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
 
5.               The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3.55 P.M.
 
 
            _______________________________________________________________
***Relates to matters not included in this Report.
 
XI
ELEVENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 25 th June 2002 in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament House
 Annexe, New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1. Shri Dipankar Mukherjee   - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri S.S. Chandran
3. Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
4. Dr. A.K. Patel
5. Shri Satish Pradhan
6. Shri K.Kalavenkata Rao
7. Shri Balwant Singh Ramoowalia
8. Shrimati Ambika Soni
9. Shri Rajnath Singh 'Surya'
10. Shri S. Viduthalal Virumbi 
 
LOK SABHA
 
11. Shri G.M. Banatwalla
12. Shri Anil Basu
13. Shri Suresh Chandel
14. Shri Akbor Ali Khandokar
15. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
16. Shri Shivaji Mane
17. Shri K.H. Muniyappa

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
18. Shri Sundar Lal Patwa
19. Shri Braj Mohan Ram
20. Shri Gunipati Ramaiah
21. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
22. Shri Vinay Kumar Sorake
23. Shri Kalava Srinivasulu
24. Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
 
SECRETARIAT
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
            Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Committee Officer
 
Representatives of Airports Authority Employees' Union, New Delhi
 
Shri M.K. Ghoshal, General Secretary
Shri H.C. Khanduri, Financial Secretary
Shri Balraj Singh, Astt. Gen. Secretary
Shri Nitin Jadhav, Astt. Gen. Secretary
Shri Ranbir Singh, Regional Secretary(NR)
Shri Satish Bhatnagar, C.E.C. Member
Shri P.C. Lohmar, C.E.C. Member
Shri Satyender Kumar, L.S. (R.E.D.) Br.
Shri Jai Lal, L.S.(IGI) Br. IAD
Shri Promad Kr. Sharma, President (IGI Br)
 
Representatives of Airports Authority of India Workers' Union, New Delhi
 
Shri R.C. Sharma, All India President
Shri Khim Singh, General Secretary
Shri Sateshwar Prasad, Financial Secretary
Shri P.K. Mishra, President, Delhi Branch
Shri D.S. Negi, Branch Secretary, Delhi Branch        
 
2.               At the outset, the Chairman of the Committee welcomed the representatives of the Airports Authority
 Employees’ Union of Airports Authority of India  and requested them to present their views on the Airports Authority
 of India  (Amendment) Bill 2000.  The representatives of the union while presenting their views, replied to the points
 raised by the Members on the Bill and opposed leasing out of the four metro Airports in the country.
 
3.         Thereafter, the Committee also heard the views of representatives of the Airports Authority of India Workers’
 Union on the Bill.   While presenting their views they also presented their arguments before the Committee as to why
 the Union was totally opposed to the Bill and its objective of leasing of four metro airports in the country.
 
4.         A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
 
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3.45 P.M.
 
 
 
XII
TWELFTH MEETING

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
 
            The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 26 th June 2002 in Committee Room ‘B’, Parliament
 House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1. Shri Dipankar Mukherjee   - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2. Shri S.S. Chandran
3. Shri K.Rahman Khan
4. Dr. A.K. Patel
5. Shri Satish Pradhan
6. Shri Balwant Singh Ramoowalia
7. Shri Rajnath Singh 'Surya'
8. Shri Vikram Verma 
 
LOK SABHA
 
9. Shri G.M. Banatwalla
10. Shri Anil Basu
11. Shri Suresh Chandel
12. Shrimati Reena Choudhary
13. Shri Akbor Ali Khandokar
14. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
15. Shri Shivaji Mane
16. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
17. Shri Vilas Muttemwar
18. Shri Braj Mohan Ram
19. Shri Gunipati Ramaiah
20. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
21. Shri Th. Chaoba Singh
22. Shri Kalava Srinivasulu
23. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar 
24. Shri Sunder Lal Tiwari
 
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
            Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Committee Officer
 
MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
      Shri K.Roy Paul, Secretary
Shri Anurag Goel, Joint Secretary

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
Shri V. Subramanian, Joint Secretary (FA)
 
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
Shri S.K. Narula, Chairman
Shri V.D.V. Prasada Rao, Member (Fin.)
Shri P.S. Nair, Executive Director
Shri P.K. Ray, Executive Director (Law)
Shri M.C. Kishore, Company Secretary
 
2.               The Committee took up the Airports Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2000 for discussion.  The
 Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, while presenting his views, replied to the points raised by the Members on the
 Bill.  The Committee also desired to have written replies on the issues/points which the Secretary, Ministry of Civil
 Aviation could not give immediate replies, within one week. 
 
3.               A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
 
4.               The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 12.35 P.M.
 
 
 
XIII
THIRTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 25 th July 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’, Ground Floor,
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.
            Shri Dipankar Mukherjee -     Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
 
2.
            Dr. C. Narayana Reddy
3.            Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
4.            Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
 
LOK SABHA
5.            Shri Anil Basu
6.            Shri P.S. Gadhavi
7.            Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
8.            Shri S.P. Lepcha
9.            Shri K.H. Muniyappa
10.        Shri Vilas Muttemwar
11.        Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
12.        Shri Vinay Kumar Sorake
13.        Shri Kalava Srinivasulu
14.        Shri Kodikunnil Suresh

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
15.        Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary           
Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Committee Officer
 
 
2.               *                                        *                                              *
 
            _______________________________________________________________
***Relates to matters not included in this Report.
 
 
3.
                              The Committee noted that the clarifications on the points raised by the Members during the evidence of the
 Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation before the Committee on the 26 th June 2002, on the Airports Authority of India
 (Amendment) Bill, 2000, had still not been received from the Ministry.  Due to non-receipt of the above information,
 the Committee was not able to take up further consideration of the Bill.  The Committee, therefore, directed the
 Secretariat that the Ministry of Civil Aviation be requested to furnish the requisite information by the 30
th July 2002. 
 
4.
                              *                                        *                                              *
 
5.
                              *                                        *                                              *
 
6.
                              *                                        *                                              *
 
7.               The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3.40 p.m.
 
            _______________________________________________________________
***Relates to matters not included in this Report.
*XV
FIFTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 6 th August 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’, Parliament House
 Annexe, New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.
      Shri Dipankar Mukherjee   - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3.      Dr. A.K. Patel
4.      Dr.C.Narayana Reddy
5.      Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
6.      Shri Rajnath Singh 'Surya'
7.      Shri S. Viduthalal Virumbi  
 
 

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
LOK SABHA
8.      Shri G.M. Banatwalla
9.      Shri Anil Basu
10.  Shri K.H. Muniyappa
11.  Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
12.  Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
13.  Shri Th. Chaoba Singh
14.  Shri Vinay Kumar Sorake
15.  Shri Sunder Lal Tiwari
16.  Shri A.K.S. Vijayan
 
SECRETARIAT
 
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
            Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Committee Officer
 
 
___________________________________________________________
*Minutes of XIVth meeting relates to other matters.
 
 
2.               The Committee considered the replies furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the queries raised
 during the evidence of the Secretary, Civil Aviation held on the 26
th June 2002 in connection with consideration of the
 Airports Authority of India (Amendment) Bill, 2000 and decided to seek clarifications thereon.  The Committee desired
 that the comments of the Ministry of Civil Aviation be obtained on the matter of inclusion of functions to be performed
 by Airports Authority of India in the Bill, the extent of equity participation of the foreign partner of the lessee, the
 leasing period of the Airports and power of the Government to review the leasing period of the lessee, power of the
 lessee to regulate the tariff etc.
 
3.               *                                        *                                                          *
 
4.               *                                        *                                                          *
 
5.               The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3.35 P.M.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
            _______________________________________________________________
***Relates to matters not included in this Report.
*XVIII
EIGHTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday, the 25 th October 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’, Parliament House

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
 Annexe, New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1.
      Shri Dipankar Mukherjee   - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2.      Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad
3.      Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4.      Shri S.S. Chandran
5.      Shri K.Rahman Khan
6.      Dr. A.K. Patel
7.      Shri K.Kalavenkata Rao
8.      Shri Balwant Singh Ramoowalia
9.      Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
10.  Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi   
 
LOK SABHA
11.  Shri Raj Babbar
12.  Shri G.M. Banatwalla
13.  Shri Anil Basu
14.  Shrimati Reena Choudhary
15.  Shri Akbor Ali Khandokar
16.  Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
17.  Shri K.H. Muniyappa
18.  Shri Vilas Muttemwar
19.  Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
20.  Shri Th. Chaoba Singh
21.  Shri Vinay Kumar Sorake
22.  Shri Kalava Srinivasulu
23.  Shri A.K.S. Vijayan
 
SECRETARIAT
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
_____________________________________________________________________________________
*Minutes of  XVIth  and XVIIth  Meetings relate to other matters.
 
 
 
2.         *                                              *                                              *
 
3.               The Committee then considered the Airports Authority of India  (Amendment) Bill, 2000 clause by clause.
 The Committee observed that the Airports Authority of India  (Amendment) Bill, 2000 required several amendments on
 various provisions relating to Air Traffic Control, Security, foreign equity participation etc. The Committee was of the
 view that the functions should be specified, aims and objectives should form part of the Bill itself.  The Members were
 of the opinion that the provision regarding safety of interests of the employees should also be included in Bill. After

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
 some discussion, the Committee directed that draft report on the said Bill be prepared for consideration and adoption in
 the next meeting to be held on 11th November 2002.
 
4.               A summary record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
 
5.               The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3.40 P.M.
 
 
 
            _______________________________________________________________
***Relates to matters not included in this Report.
 
XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 11th November 2002 in Room No. 63, Parliament House, New
 Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
 
1. Shri Dipankar Mukherjee   - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad
3. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4. Shri K.Rahman Khan
5. Shri K.Kalavenkata Rao
6. Shri Balwant Singh Ramoowalia
7. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
8. Shri Rajnath Singh 'Surya'
9. Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi
 
LOK SABHA
10. Shri Raj Babbar
11. Shri G.M. Banatwalla
12. Shri Suresh Chandel
13. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
14. Shri Shivaji Mane
15. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
16. Shri Vilas Muttemwar
17. Shri Gunipati Ramaiah
18.  Shri Vinay Kumar Sorake
19. Shri Kalava Srinivasulu
20. Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
 
SECRETARIAT
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
            Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer

SIXTY-FIRST REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/61streport.htm[28-08-2018 13:00:17]
 
2.               The Committee considered its draft Sixty-first Report on “Airports Authority of India  (Amendment) Bill,
 2000” and after some discussion adopted the Report with some modifications.  The Committee decided to present the
 Report to both the Houses of Parliament on Thursday, the 21st November 2002.  The Committee also decided to lay the
 evidence tendered by the Secretary and other officers of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and representatives of the
 employees’ unions of the Airports Authority of India before the Committee on the Bill, on the Table of both the Houses
 of Parliament alongwith the Report.      
                 
*                                  *                                              *
                  The Committee authorised the Chairman to nominate the Members who would be presenting the Reports to
 the Parliament.
 
3.               A summary record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
 
4.               The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3.45 P.M.
 
_____________________________________________________________
***Relates to matters not inclu
ded in this Report.