 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2015/ Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
 
REPORT NO.  
225 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY FIFTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in 
its Two Hundred and Eighteenth Report on the  
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 02.12.2015 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 01.12.2015 ) 
 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in 
 
 
 
 
 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED TWENTY FIFTH REPORT  
ON 
Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained 
in its Two Hundred and Eighteenth Report on the  
Demands for Grants (2015-16) of Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 02.12.2015 ) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 01.12.2015 ) 
 
 
 
 
  
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2015/ Agrahayana, 1937 (Saka) 
 

C O N T E N T S 
 
       P A G E S  
 
1.  COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      (i) 
2. INTRODUCTION        (ii) 
3. ACRONYMS        
4. REPORT                                 1-              
5. OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GL ANCE   
 6. *MINUTES          
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
*To be appended at printing stage. 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2015-2016) 
 
1. Dr. Kanwar Deep Singh  - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Ritabrata Banerjee 
2. Dr. K. Chiranjeevi 
3. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap 
4. Shri Avinash Rai Khanna 
5. Dr. Prabhakar Kore 
6. Shri Kiranmay Nanda 
7. Kumari Selja 
8. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
9. Vacant 
LOK SABHA  
10. Shri Ram Charitra Nishad 
11. Shri Vinod Chavda 
12. Shri Rajeshbhai Naranbhai Chudasama 
13. Km. Arpita Ghosh 
14. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15. Shri P. Kumar 
16. Shri Faizal P.P. Mohammed 
17. Yogi Aditya Nath 
18. Shri  Kristappa Nimmala 
19. Shri Rajesh Pandey 
20. Shri Rajesh Ranjan 
21. Shri P. Srinivasa Reddy  
22. Shri Ram Kumar Sharma 
23. Shri Prathap Simha 
24. Shri Dushyant Singh  
25. Shri Kunwar Haribansh Singh 
26. Shri Rakesh Singh 
27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha 
28. Shri Dasrath Tirkey 
29. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30. Shri K.C. Venugopal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J.G. Negi, Joint Secretary 
 Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director 
Smt. Catherine John L., Assistant Director 
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer 
 Shri P.P. Raumon, Committee Officer 
 
(i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee 
on Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been auth orized by the Committee to 
present on its behalf, do hereby present this Two H undred and Twenty Fifth Report 
on “Action Taken Replies by the Ministry of Civil A viation on the 
observations/recommendations as contained in its Tw o Hundred and Eighteenth Report 
on Demands for Grants (2015-16) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation”. 
2.  The Two Hundred and Eighteenth Report  of the Department-related 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tour ism and Culture was presented 
on the 28 th  April, 2015 to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations  of the Committee contained 
in its Two Hundred and Eighteenth Report was receiv ed from the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation on  26 th  August, 2015. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 
24 th  November, 2015.   
 
 
KANWAR DEEP SINGH  
NEW DELHI;                      Chairman,  
November, 24, 2015                                  Department-related  Parliamentary Standing  
Agrahayana, 3, 1937 (Saka)                Committee on  Transport, Tourism and Culture. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 
 

REPORT 
 
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action T aken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations as contained in its Tw o Hundred and Eighteenth Report on 
Demands for Grants 2015-16 of the Ministry of Civil  Aviation which was presented to both 
the Houses of Parliament on 28 th  April, 2015. 
2.  Action Taken Replies were received from the Gov ernment on 26 th  August, 2015, in 
respect of all the observations/recommendations con tained in the Report. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:– 
(i) Recommendations/observations that have been accepted by the Government: 
       
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view of 
the Government replies:– 
 
          
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of wh ich replies of the Government have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
       
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of whi ch final replies of the Government are 
still awaited. 
 
3. The Committee desires that final replies in resp ect of those 
recommendations/observations which have been catego rized as interim replies by the 
Committee should be furnished at the earliest. 
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Com mittee has made observations on each 
item of Action Taken/proposed to be taken by the co ncerned Ministries. The 
recommendations of the Committee contained in the T wo Hundred and Eighteenth Report, 
action taken thereon by the Ministry and recommenda tions/observations of the Committee on 
each item of action taken has been given in the succeeding paragraphs: 
Annual Plan 2014-15  
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
5. The Committee notes that the Ministry was able t o spend 98.4 % of the funds allocated 
for Plan schemes and 86.48% under Non-Plan at RE st age in 2014- 15. The reasons submitted 
by the Ministry for under-utilization of funds whic h were increased at RE stage except in the 
case of equity infusion into Air India, are of rout ine nature. The Committee observes that 
under-utilization of funds in case of National Avia tion University and Bureau of Civil 
Aviation Security under Plan head was due to slow c onstruction and delay in finalization of 
schemes/projects respectively. The Committee notes with concern the under-utilization of 
funds by Hotel Corporation of India. The Committee feels that the Ministry should impress 
upon organizations under its purview to utilize the  allocated funds to the maximum extent 
possible.  
      (Recommendation at Para No.11 of the 218 th  Report) 
Paragraph Nos.11, 23, 82 and 115 Total: 4
Paragraph Nos. 33, 34, 35, 52, 55, 57, 58, 59, 83, 98, 99, 100, 102,120,121,124,125 and 126
Total:18
Paragraph No. :122 and 123 Total:2
Paragraph Nos: 12, 13, 53, 54, 56, 66, 101, 108, 113 and 118                        Total: 10

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
6. Noted. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
7. The Committee hopes that the spending pattern of  the Ministry and the 
organizations under its control will see an improve ment during the current fiscal.  The 
Committee desires to know the steps taken by the Mi nistry to ensure that the allocated 
funds are utilized optimally. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
8. The Committee would like to know the reasons for  not providing the grants-in-aid to 
IGRUA for 2015-16 and how the Institute would manage its expenses henceforth.  
     (Para No. 12 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
9. Regarding provisioning of grants-in-aid to IGRUA  it is to state that the management 
contract of IGRUA was awarded in the year 2008 with  the approval of the Cabinet. As per the 
terms of the management contract, Government will c ontinue to provide grants for the first 
three years from the date of contract and after tha t the IGRUA would be self-sufficient and no 
further grants is required to be paid by the Government.  Accordingly, grants were provided to 
IGRUA up to the 2010-11. However, as IGRUA could no t become self-sufficient after the 
year 2010-11 and Ministry of Civil Aviation took an  initiative to provide grants for next two 
years i.e. 2011-12 and 2012-13. In this connection the approval of the Cabinet for providing 
grants for the year 2011-12 and 2012-13 was obtaine d vide Cabinet note dated 7 
th  March, 
2014. 
10. Since the approval of the Cabinet for providing  grants-in-aid to IGRUA was up to the 
year 2012-13, no provision was made for the year 20 15-16. Regarding the management of 
expenses of IGRUA for the year 2015-16, it is to st ate that no decision has been taken in the 
Ministry as yet. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
11. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply o f the Ministry.  It is not clear from 
the reply whether the IGRUA is able to generate suf ficient funds to manage its 
functioning.  If not there is no ground for stoppag e of grants, the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation should take initiative to provide further grants till it becomes self-sufficient and 
no further grants is required by the IGRUA.  The Co mmittee urges the Ministry to 
expedite the decision on providing grants-in-aid to IGRUA. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
12. The Committee also notes that Rs.3 lakh was uti lized for Innovations in Governance 
during the year 2014-15. The Committee may be appra ised on the achievements made under 
this programme.  
   (Para No. 13 of ibid )  

 
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
13. Regarding the programme innovations in Governan ce under the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, it is to state that this programme has no t been initiated as yet and no expenditure 
was done under this programme.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
14. The Committee notes the reply and feels that al location of funds for programmes 
which have not been initiated may be avoided so tha t these funds are allocated to the 
needy sectors.  The Committee may be intimated abou t the reasons for not initiating the 
programme - Innovations in Governance.   
Annual Plan 2015-16 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
15. The Committee notes that Rs.3341.50 crores has been allocated for the Ministry of 
Civil Aviation during the current fiscal against th e allocation of Rs.6711.74 crores at R.E. 
stage in 2014-15. There, the Ministry was able to g et only 49% of the previous year’s 
allocation, which is too meager to undertake develo pment of airport infrastructure and other 
related projects. The Committee feels that the Mini stry should pursue for restoration of 
budgetary support for its major organizations and i mportant activities, on- going or new, at 
RE stage vigorously. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would be in a position to expend 
the allocation under various heads judiciously and optimally during 2015- 16.  
   (Para No. 23 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
16.  Regarding reduction in budgetary allocation fr om Rs. 6717.80 Crore at RE Stage 
2014-15 to Rs. 3341.50 Crore for the FY 2015-16, it is to state that the major cut was imposed 
by Ministry of Finance for the plan budget of the Ministry from Rs. 6000.00 Crore at RE stage 
of 2014-15 to Rs. 2720.00 Crore at BE 2015-16. The cut under plan budget has severely 
affected the Equity Infusion of Air India under TAP /FRP. The Ministry has noted the 
recommendations of the Committee to pursue with Min istry of Finance for restoration of 
budgetary support at RE Stage.  
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
17. The Committee may be apprised of the further de velopment with regard to 
allocation of additional funds at RE stage.   
Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
18. The Committee finds that DGCA was able to get o nly Rs.50 crore out of the projected 
allocation of Rs.117 crore under Plan. The Committe e feels that this substantial reduction in 
allocation will hamper the efforts being made to up grade their facilities and activities. The 
Committee hopes that the DGCA will also improve its  performance in utilization of funds. 
The DGCA was able to utilize Rs.32.24 crore out of Rs.44 crore allocated at RE stage and the 
reason attributed for this is the delay in construc tion of new building for DGCA. The 
Committee is surprised to note that the proposed ne w building for DGCA has been stuck for 

several years. The Committee hopes that the land re lated issues are settled with the concerned 
Ministry at the earliest and the project is completed without further delay. 
   (Para No. 33 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT 
19. Ministry of Civil Aviation has allotted Rs. 50 crore under Plan Budget 2015-16 against 
the projection made by DGCA of Rs. 117.00 crore.  D uring 2014-15, DGCA has utilized Rs. 
37.14 crore out of Rs. 44 crore allotted under RE a nd made its best efforts to utilize the 
maximum funds upto RE level which is 84.40% of Revi sed Estimates during the Financial 
Year 2014-15.  
• It was initially decided to construct the new DGCA Bhawan at the existing site 
through CPWD. Since CPWD could not succeed in getti ng clearances necessary for 
constructing the building in Lutyen's zone, an alternate site for the same was explored.  
• For constructing the DGCA Bhawan, Ministry of Urban  Development had been 
requested since March, 2013, to transfer the title and ownership of land, opposite 
Safdarjung Airport where DGCA Office is currently l ocated since pre-independence 
days, alongwith A-2, Karbala Lane, in favour of DGCA.  
• The Land issues between MoCA and MoUD were placed b efore COS. COS in its 
meeting held on 23-08-2013, vide point 8.2 recommen ded that "MoUD would take 
decision regarding other unresolved land related is sues in accordance with the rules 
and communicate the same to MOCA. If required the a dvice of Ministry of Law may 
be obtained". The committee also felt that the Land  issues have to be resolved based 
on the facts of ownership based on land records, al lotment/ transfer of land etc in 
respect of individual cases. MoUD was to decide on the issue based on the facts of the 
individual case in accordance with the legal positi on. It did not deliberate on it further 
to give any decision indicating therein that the ne cessary details are not available 
before the COS. DGCA has followed up the matter rep eatedly with Ministry of Urban 
Development. A meeting was held on 14th May, 2015, under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (Civil Aviation) to address the issues pe rtaining to construction of DGCA 
Bhawan. 
• In compliance to the deliberations of the meeting, a letter from DGCA has been issued 
to Ministry of Urban Development on 5th June, 2015,  requesting them to either 
declare Airports Authority of India as Civil Wing o f Ministry of Civil Aviation or 
agree to the request of a dedicated CPWD Wing under  administrative control of 
DGCA, transfer the title and ownership of plot of l and where the present DGCA 
building is located, to DGCA at the earliest. Respo nse of Ministry of Urban 
Development is awaited.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
20. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that is sues related to allocation of land 
for construction of new DGCA building are settled a t the earliest as the issue has been 
lingering on for quite some time. 
RECOMMENDATION/ OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
21. The Committee also hopes that the recruitment a nd filling up of vacancies in DGCA 
will be completed as per a stipulated timeframe so that the functioning of country’s aviation 
regulatory authority is not compromised. 
   (Para No. 34of ibid ) 

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
22. The recruitment process for filling up of vacan cies is still in progress as recruitment 
process is a time consuming process which requires participation / consultation of various 
other Ministries / Departments and also formulation  of recruitment rules in some cases in 
consultation with the Ministry of Civil Aviation, D epartment of Personnel & Training, 
Ministry of Law and UPSC. Recently, on 26th May, 20 15, Ministry of Finance (Department 
of Expenditure) has revived 159 posts. Taking all aspects into consideration, the present status 
is that in addition to 304 filled posts, the recrui tment process in DPC / DR cases in respect of 
20 Posts has been completed from January, 2015 till  date. In addition to this, the 
recommendations in respect of 54 posts of various g rades have been received from UPSC. 
Recommended candidates will join after completion of pre-appointment formalities, like C&A 
Verification, Medical Examination, etc. The proposa ls for filling up of 61 posts have already 
been accepted by UPSC. Action has been initiated to amend RRs wherever required. 
23. Keeping in view the procedural time to fill up the remaining vacancies on regular 
basis, DGCA have adopted an approach to appoint off icials on Short Term contract basis. 52 
posts of CFOI/Dy. CFOIs/SFOIs/FOIs have already bee n filled up on short term contract 
basis. A fresh Vacancy Circular for filling up the remaining posts on short-term contracts 
basis was issued on 27th March, 2015 and last date of receipt of applications was 30th May, 
2015. Out of the 25 applications received, only one candidate was selected after interview. 
24. Proposal to fill up 91 posts of MTS through DR basis (53 newly created and 38 vacant 
posts) has also been sent to SSC by MoCA. Separatel y, out of 8 candidates selected by the 
Committee to fill up the posts of MTS on compassionate grounds, 6 MTS have joined. 
25. In addition to this, 205 ministerial posts are to be filled by Department of Personnel & 
Training. The remaining posts belong to Regional Of fices and these are filled up by them 
through SSC directly. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
26. The Committee desires that the Ministry may pur sue the matter of filling up of 
vacancies in DGCA, with the Union Public Service Co mmission and Staff Selection 
Commission.  The Committee wants that the Governmen t should take advance action in 
anticipating vacancies and fill up the vacant posts in time. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
27. The Committee likes to congratulate the DGCA th rough the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
to have succeeded in getting its ‘A’ category in av iation safety restored by the Federal 
Aviation Administration, U.S.A. It reflects the vis ion, commitment and hard work done by 
DGCA in meeting the standard and specifications of FAA for the last several years.  
   (Para No. 35of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
28. Noted. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
29. The Committee desires that the DGCA shall maint ain its aviation safety 
standards in future also. 

Airports Authority of India (AAI)  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
30. The Committee observes that AAI was able to spe nd Rs.1106.13 crores only out of 
Rs.1973.48 crore allocated at RE stage in 2014-15, which stands at only 56% of spending 
allocated funds. The Committee finds that funds all ocated under Information Technology, 
GSS-Equipment and Technology and Airport System wer e spent poorly. The Committee 
would like to know the reasons for underutilization  of reduced allocation by AAI. The 
Committee feels that spending merely 56% of Plan al location does not augur well for the 
development of required airport infrastructure in the country.  
       (Para No. 52 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
31. The Revised Allocation (RE) 2014-15 was Rs 1576 .56 crore against which the total 
expenditure up to March’15 was Rs 1399.87 crore whi ch works out to 88.79% against the RE 
of Rs 1576.56 crore. An amount of Rs 1900.00 crore is the allocation for BE 2015-16. 
32. Under the revised allocation, Information and T echnology has achieved 145.15% by 
spending Rs 36.66 crore against the revised budget of Rs 25.26 crore. The progress of GSS 
Equipment and Airport system i.e 50.85% and 72.72% respectively at RE stage was quite 
slow due to the following reasons: 
• GSS Equipment: Non finalisation of award for crash fire tenders and other equipment 
which had taken more time than expected. The backlo g of expenditure will now be 
reflected in 2015-16. 
• Airport system: The slow progress of work is due to  delay in finalization of technical 
specification and BOQ. The backlog of expenditure will now be reflected in 2015-16. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
33. The Committee hopes that the allocation for pur chase of GSS equipments and 
airport system will be utilized fully after addressing the issues involved. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
34. The Committee finds that the AAI was allocated a budgetary support of Rs.80 crore 
under Plan Head against the projected allocation of  Rs.117 crore for the year 2015-16. The 
Committee was informed that Airports Authority of I ndia has more than 15 airports under 
construction or under upgradation, which needs subs tantial Plan support. The Committee 
hopes that necessary funds will be allocated to AAI  at RE stage, so that airport projects at 
various stages are not affected due to paucity of funds.  
   (Para No. 53 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
35. Airports Authority of India has sought the dema nd for grant of Rs 115 crore in BE 
2015-16 based on the progress of the works. MoCA wi ll take up with M/o Finance for 
additional allocation of funds at RE stage. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
36. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry a nd requests them to apprise the 
response to be received from the Ministry of Finance on this issue to the Committee.  

RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
37. The Committee hopes that filling-up of vacant p osts in Airports Authority of India 
would be completed as per the fixed time-frame for a better and safer air travel in the country. 
The Committee is of the opinion that the Government  should lend a helping hand to AAI in 
recovering its outstanding dues from various agenci es for the services rendered to them, so 
that it can maintain its cash flow at the desired level.  
   (Para No. 54 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
38. AAI Board has created 500 post of Jr. Executive  (ATC) to be inducted by 2016. The 
Recruitment action has been planned. 200 Jr. Execut ive (ATC) will be inducted by 30 
th  June 
2015 as the first phase, and in second phase of rec ruitment, 200 JE (ATC) will be inducted by 
March 2016, and thereafter, remaining 100 nos. will  be inducted subsequently in the calendar 
year 2016. 
39. Recruitment Action for 250 nos. of Jr. Executiv e (Electronics) for Communication 
Navigation & Surveillance (CNS) discipline has been  planned & will be inducted in this 
calendar year.  Government is making all possible efforts to recover the outstanding dues. 
 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
40. The Committee desires that the recruitment proc ess for filling up of various posts 
in Airports Authority of India is completed as per the schedule.  The Committee may be 
apprised of the steps taken to recover outstanding dues of Airports Authority of India 
from various user agencies of airports.  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE  
41. The Committee is not convinced with the reasons  submitted for privatization of 
services at Chennai and Kolkata Airports which were  recently modernized using the tax-
payers’ money. The Committee feels that functional autonomy should be given to Airports 
Authority of India to exploit more commercial and n on-traffic revenues from airports. The 
Committee, while appreciating the commitment of AAI  in developing airport infrastructure 
facilities in the country, still feels that the pot ential and expertise available with State-run 
airport operator is not being fully utilized by the  Government. The Committee feels that with 
the available expertise and manpower, the AAI can g ive tough competition to the private 
airport developers subject to financial and other operational freedoms available to them.  
   (Para No. 55 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
42. It is a fact that the AAI has recently moderniz ed the Chennai and Kolkata airports. 
However, the proposed implementation of PPP at Chen nai and Kolkata airports is based on 
the recommendations of the Task Force on Financing Plan for Airport Sector during 12th Five 
Year Plan under the Chairmanship of Shri B.K. Chatu rvedi, set up by the erstwhile Planning 
Commission. The Task Force inter-alia observed that  pursuant to modernization of Kolkata & 
Chennai airports, the next challenge for AAI would be to ensure their management and 
upkeep at a level commensurate with the high qualit y of these terminals. Moreover, the 
potential for non-aeronautical revenues cannot be f ully harnessed by AAI due to the inherent 
constraints of a public sector entity which may lea d to higher passenger and aeronautical 
charges. AAI would need to generate significant rev enues from these airports in order to 
invest in development of new airports in the remote corners of the country for improvement of 

regional connectivity. Further, Airports Authority of India is a mini-ratna Category-I company 
set up under an Act of Parliament namely, AAI Act, 1994. Therefore, AAI already has 
financial and administrative autonomy and it is emp owered to prepare a long term action plan 
for each of their airports and endeavor to increase  non-aero revenue. The Authority has 
sufficient autonomy to take its commercial decision s for operation and management of the 
airport. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
43. The Committee notes the reply.  The Committee i s of the opinion that the services 
of the Chennai and Kolkata airports may not be privatized. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
44. It was brought to the notice of the Committee t hat certain airports such as Adampur, 
Jabalpur and Calicut are in dire need of various de velopmental activities. The Committee may 
be apprised on the status of declaration of Chandig arh airport as an international one. The 
Committee desires that all out efforts be made so t hat the pending development works at all 
these Airports are completed without further delay.  The Committee would also like to know 
the status of construction of new Greenfield airpor t in Kushinagar which falls under Buddhist 
Circuit. If proposals for PPP are not forthcoming, Airports Authority of India should start the 
work without delay as there is no doubt about this airport being unviable in view of huge 
tourist potential of the place.  
   (Para No. 56 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
45. The status of development of the existing airpo rts at Jabalpur and Calicut and the 
proposed Greenfield airport at Khusinagar and that of Civil Enclave at Adampur are given 
below: 
Adampur Airport: 
46. Adampur (Jalandhar) Airport belongs to Indian A ir Force, Ministry of Defence having 
runway orientation 13/31 with runway dimension 2744 m x 45m. The airport is located at an 
aerial distance of about 83 km. and 61 km. from ope rational airports Amritsar and Ludhiana. 
In the year 2012, State Govt. of Punjab had request ed Air Force Authorities for NOC towards 
establishment of a new Civil Enclave at Adampur Air port subject to grant of permission for 
joint use of Adampur Airport by Defence Authorities .  As Jalandhar city is well connected by 
rail and road with New Delhi, Amritsar and Ludhiana  new civil enclave does not appear to be 
viable. 
Chandigarh Airport: 
47. Chandigarh Airport belongs to IAF (MoD) and AAI  maintains a Civil Enclave for civil 
operations. The present Civil Enclave is already de clared as Custom airport to handle limited 
International operations. Project for construction of a New International Civil Air Terminal 
(Mohali Side) has been completed & likely to be ina ugurated soon. This includes New 
Integrated Passenger Terminal Building capable to h andle 1600 peak hour passengers at a 
time (1150 Dom + 450 Int.), New Apron with link tax i track, Car parking and associated 
facilities.   
Jabalpur Airport: 
48. At Jabalpur Airport presently only ATR-72 type of aircraft can operate. The present 
Terminal Building is sufficient to cater 75 Arrival  & 75 Departing passengers at any given 
time. Planning for extension of Security hold and B aggage claim area is in progress to ease 

passenger congestion in these areas during delay/ r escheduling of any flight. Construction of 
New Terminal Building will be planned based on the passenger traffic growth. 
49. The State Government has acquired and handed ov er 368.38 acres of land on 
07.07.2014.  Apron in this newly acquired land suit able to parking 4 Nos.  AB-320 type of 
aircraft is at estimate stage.  Localizer Antenna will be installed shortly at Jabalpur to facilitate 
precision approach to enhance safety.  Proposal for  New ATC tower cum Technical Block in 
newly acquired land is at planning stage.  Runway resurfacing work is likely to be awarded by 
Sept. 2015.Runway extension from 1988m to 2286m to facilitate operation of AB321-200 
type of aircrafts shall be taken up on acquisition and handing over of balance 101.14 acres of 
land by State Govt. 
Calicut Airport: 
50. Proposal for construction of New Arrival Block and modification of existing terminal 
buildings to enhance passenger facilitation will be  awarded shortly.  AAI has a proposal to 
extend runway for safe operation of code 'E' type of aircraft and land request has been made to 
State Govt.  In addition, the proposal to construct  a New Terminal Complex with associated 
Apron and City side facilities to meet DGCA CAR compliance is also planned and request for 
acquiring 137 acres of land has been put up to State Govt.  
Kushinagar (Greenfield Airport): 
51. State Government of Uttar Pradesh had invited b ids for private participation. However, 
response was not received from the prospective bidd ers on account of non-viability of the 
project. Subsequently, the State Government approac hed AAI for developing the airport. AAI 
has ‘in principle’ agreed to develop the project by  forming a Joint Venture with the State 
Government. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
52. The Committee urges the Ministry to ensure that  the development works at the 
above cited airports are completed on priority in c o-ordination with the concerned State 
Governments.   The Committee notes that there are l ot of flight disruption in Calicut 
airport due to long drawn maintenance and construct ion works.  The Committee 
recommends that the Government should monitor the w ork seriously to ensure that the 
work is completed at the earliest so that full scal e flight operations are restored at the 
airport.  The Committee may also be apprised of the  status of construction of new 
airport at Kushinagar.   The Committee desires that  a time frame may be drawn up for 
the construction of the Kushinagar airport.   
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
53. The Committee would like to know the reasons fo r allowing Mumbai International 
Airport Limited to increase Floor Space Index (FSI)  in the vicinity of Mumbai International 
Airport for construction of more hotels.  
   (Para No. 57 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
54. Article 2.6.3 of Operation, Management and Deve lopment Agreement (OMDA), 
entered into between AAI and M/s Mumbai Internation al Airport Pvt. Ltd. (MIAL), provides 
that MIAL can request AAI for land from “Carved Out  Assets” at any time during the Term 
for providing any Aeronautical Services or developi ng any Aeronautical Assets. Accordingly, 
MIAL requested for additional leasing of land from the carved out land for aeronautical 
purposes in terms of the Master Plan submitted by t hem. The request of M/s MIAL for 

additional leasing of land out of Carved Out land o f AAI was considered as per the 
requirement for development of the aeronautical ass ets under clause 2.1.3 of Lease Deed and 
clause 2.6.3 of OMDA signed between AAI and JVC. 
55. Further, the issue was discussed at length in t he meeting held on 16.04.2008 under the 
Chairmanship of Minister of Civil Aviation and cons idering the purposes of the usage, it was 
decided to lease the said land for aeronautical pur poses to MIAL in terms of the provisions of 
OMDA in which premises were leased out. In terms of  the above decision, transfer of said 
land as demise premises was approved by AAI Board. 
56. As pointed out above, the Land given to MIAL by  AAI out of Carved out Assets has 
restricted use, i.e., only for providing Aeronautic al services or developing and/or constructing 
Aeronautical Assets. Notwithstanding the transfer, as per Clause 2.2.4 of OMDA, MIAL is 
permitted to use only 187.5 acres of the airport la nd for commercial development which is 
10% of the original demised premises. The stipulati on under the above Clause has been 
adhered to. Hence there has been no increase in FSI on any account. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
57. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
58. The Committee finds that major works at the air ports being/ to be developed by 
Airports Authority of India are pending for a long time for expediting which Airports 
Authority of India have to be proactive in getting the procedures fast-tracked with concerned 
agencies/Ministries and the State Governments. For example, airports at Kushinagar and 
Jabalpur and others are pending, for which approval  have been given long back. In Jabalpur, 
land for Terminal building and apron have already b een given by the State Government, but 
the Airports Authority of India’s efforts lack nece ssary urgency to start the work. The 
Committee recommends that such an attitude would ju stify the notion that Airports Authority 
of India lacks necessary capabilities in developing  and running our airports and hence, need 
for privatization of our airports.  
   (Para No. 58 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
59. The status of development of the existing airpo rts at Jabalpur and Khusinagar are 
given below:- 
Jabalpur Airport: 
60. At Jabalpur Airport presently only ATR-72 type of aircraft can operate. The present 
Terminal Building is sufficient to cater 75 Arrival  & 75 Departing passengers at any given 
time. Planning for extension of Security hold and B aggage claim area is in progress to ease 
passenger congestion in these areas during delay/ r escheduling of any flight. C/o New 
Terminal Building will be planned based on the pass enger traffic growth.  The State 
Government has acquired and handed over 368.38 acre s of land on 07.07.2014.  Apron in this 
newly acquired land suitable to parking 4 Nos.  AB-320 type of aircraft is at estimate stage. 
61. Localizer Antenna will be installed shortly at Jabalpur to facilitate precision approach 
to enhance safety.  Proposal for New ATC tower cum Technical Block in newly acquired land 
is at planning stage.  Runway resurfacing work is l ikely to be awarded by Sept. 2015.Runway 
extension from 1988m to 2286m to facilitate operation of AB321-200 type of aircrafts shall be 
taken up on acquisition and handing over of balance 101.14 acres of land by State Govt. 

Kushinagar (Greenfield Airport): 
62. State Government of Uttar Pradesh had invited b ids for private participation. However, 
response was not received from the prospective bidd ers on account of non-viability of the 
project. Subsequently, the State Government approac hed AAI for developing the airport. AAI 
has ‘in principle’ agreed to develop the project by  forming a Joint Venture with the State 
Government. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
63. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
64. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the n ecessary works at airports like 
Jabalpur should be started without waiting for part  pending clearance for developing its 
runway which can be taken up later on. Similarly, o ther such projects also be expedited. The 
Committee would like to have a status report about all proposed airports within a month.  
   (Para No. 59 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
65. The status of development of the existing airpo rts at Jabalpur and Calicut and the 
proposed Greenfield airport at Khusinagar and that of Civil Enclave at Adampur are given 
below: 
Adampur Airport: 
66. Adampur (Jalandhar) Airport belongs to Indian A ir Force, Ministry of Defence having 
runway orientation 13/31 with runway dimension 2744 m x 45m. The airport is located at an 
aerial distance of about 83 km. and 61 km. from ope rational airports Amritsar and Ludhiana. 
In the year 2012, State Govt. of Punjab had request ed Air Force Authorities for NOC towards 
establishment of a new Civil Enclave at Adampur Air port subject to grant of permission for 
joint use of Adampur Airport by Defence Authorities. 
67. As Jalandhar city is well connected by rail and  road with New Delhi, Amritsar and 
Ludhiana new civil enclave does not appear to be viable. 
Chandigarh Airport: 
68. Chandigarh Airport belongs to IAF (MoD) and AAI  maintains a Civil Enclave for civil 
operations. The present Civil Enclave is already de clared as Custom airport to handle limited 
International operations. Project for construction of a New International Civil Air Terminal 
(Mohali Side) has been completed & likely to be ina ugurated soon. This includes New 
Integrated Passenger Terminal Building capable to h andle 1600 peak hour passengers at a 
time (1150 Dom + 450 Int.), New Apron with link tax i track, Car parking and associated 
facilities.   
Jabalpur Airport: 
69. At Jabalpur Airport presently only ATR-72 type of aircraft can operate. The present 
Terminal Building is sufficient to cater 75 Arrival  & 75 Departing passengers at any given 
time. Planning for extension of Security hold and B aggage claim area is in progress to ease 
passenger congestion in these areas during delay/ r escheduling of any flight. C/o New 
Terminal Building will be planned based on the pass enger traffic growth.  The State 
Government has acquired and handed over 368.38 acre s of land on 07.07.2014.  Apron in this 
newly acquired land suitable to parking 4 Nos.  AB-320 type of aircraft is at estimate stage. 

70. Localizer Antenna will be installed shortly at Jabalpur to facilitate precision approach 
to enhance safety.  Proposal for New ATC tower cum Technical Block in newly acquired land 
is at planning stage.  Runway resurfacing work is l ikely to be awarded by Sept. 2015.Runway 
extension from 1988m to 2286m to facilitate operati on of AB321-200 type of aircrafts shall 
be taken up on acquisition and handing over of balance 101.14 acres of land by State Govt. 
 
Calicut Airport: 
71. Proposal for construction of New Arrival Block and modification of existing terminal 
buildings to enhance passenger facilitation will be  awarded shortly.  AAI has a proposal to 
extend runway for safe operation of code 'E' type of aircraft and land request has been made to 
State Govt.  In addition, the proposal to construct  a New Terminal Complex with associated 
Apron and City side facilities to meet DGCA CAR compliance is also planned and request for 
acquiring 137 acres of land has been put up to State Govt.  
Kushinagar (Greenfield Airport): 
72. State Government of Uttar Pradesh had invited b ids for private participation. However, 
response was not received from the prospective bidd ers on account of non-viability of the 
project. Subsequently, the State Government approached AAI f or developing the airport. AAI 
has ‘in principle’ agreed to develop the project by  forming a Joint Venture with the State 
Government. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
73. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.  The Committee desires that a 
detailed report on the modification and renovation of Calicut Airport with a definite 
time frame may be furnished to the Committee. 
Pawan Hans Limited (PHL) 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 
74. The Committee observes that Pawan Hans Helicopt er Limited has performed well in 
the last year. The revenue hours has increased from  30625 in 2013 to 30920 in 2014 and the 
average fleet monthly deployment has also increased  to 34 in 2014-15 corresponding to 32 in 
the previous year. The net profit has increased fro m Rs.38.57 crore in 2013-14 to Rs.43.54 
crore in 2014-15. The Committee feels that though P awan Hans Limited is showing good 
performance, but ground realities tell a different story. Its services leave much to be desired. 
The helicopter industry as a whole has immense pote ntial to expand and grow in different 
areas such as health tourism, security, disaster ma nagement, etc. Therefore, an action plan 
needs to be prepared for making helicopter travel m ore popular and safe. For this we have to 
develop more and more heliports in the country incl uding on top of buildings in metro cities. 
The Committee hopes that the construction of Helipo rt in Delhi will be completed as per 
schedule. The Committee feels that construction of more heliports at popular tourist 
destinations can also be explored by Pawan Hans, de pending on the availability of 
infrastructure facilities. 
   (Para No. 66 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
75. Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd on behalf of Ministr y of Civil Aviation are developing a 
standalone heliport on 25 acres land at Sector-36, Rohini, New Delhi through Govt support of 
80:20 ratio i.e 80% supported by Govt & remaining 2 0% to be borne by PHL. The proposed 
heliport is first of its kind in India. It will acc ommodate around 16 helicopters parking, 4 

hangars for maintenance / MRO activities. Design, C onstruction & Commissioning of Rohini 
Heliport has been awarded on EPC tender mode to M/s  Dinesh Chandra R Agarwal Infracon 
Pvt Ltd at awarded value of Rs 56.70 Crs and work is expected to be completed in Feb 2016.  
76. Scope of work: Sub-head wise scope of work whic h is briefly mentioned here i.e. 
Design, Construction & Commissioning of  
• FATO & Safety Area, Helicopter Parking Apron, Link taxiways. GSE Area. 
• Passenger Terminal Building(PTB), Air Traffic Contr ol Tower(G+6+cabin), Hangars 
(04nos), 
• Utility Building, Fire Building 
• Electrical High side Works (Transformers, DG, Panels), IT 
• And Communication work, Elevators 
• City Side Road. 
77. As on 30/04/2015, physical 60% work has been co mpleted & financially up to 34.2% 
payment released by Pawan Hans. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
78. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that wi th the timely completion of 
heliport at Rohini, Indian helicopter industry will  enter into a new phase.  The 
Committee may also be apprised of the steps taken t o provide air connectivity to 
unexplored tourist destinations in the country with  the active participation of Pawan 
Hans.  The Committee observes that the example of R ohini heliport can be repeated in 
many places of the country.   
 
Air India Limited 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
79. It was further informed that Air India makes ch anges to its network to rationalize 
capacity offered on various routes to maximize the benefits to the airline. Consequently, 
periodic adjustments are done to the schedule to ad d or reduce capacity from specific routes, 
introduce new routes, and restructure existing rout es based on the market dynamics and 
anticipated financial outcome.  
(Para No. 82 of ibid )  
80. The Committee notes the reply.   
 (Para No. 83 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
81. The Committee was informed that the performance  of Air India for the period April to 
December 2014 has shown considerable improvement co mpared to the corresponding period 
of the previous year and the Committee has noted the reply. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
82. The Committee notes the reply. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE 

83. The Committee finds that despite stiff competit ion from private air service providers 
both in domestic and international markets during t he last year, Air India was in a position to 
achieve the stipulated Parameters as per Turn Aroun d and Financial Restructuring Plans. The 
Passenger Load Factor was almost 87 % during the last year and Air India was able to offer its 
services to 68 destinations with available aircraft s. It was providing services to destinations 
where it was not able to meet operating costs for d ischarging its social obligation as a national 
carrier which no other airline does.  
   (Para No. 98 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
84. The performance of Air India has been improving  over a period of time and in the 
financial year 2014-15 there has been improvement i n all the parameters as compared to the 
corresponding period in the financial year 2013-14. 
85. The target and achievement of important paramet ers as per TAP for financial year 
2014-2015 are as under-: 
PARAMETER  TARGET AS PER TAP IN FY 
2014- 15  
ACHIEVEMENT  
LOAD FACTOR 73.00% 74.4 
YIELD (Rs / RPKM) 3.76 4.27 
86. The Passengers Load Factor for the FY 13-14 was  73.3. 
 Details of flights meeting cost of operations:  
 2014-15  
Capacity meeting Total costs 7.78 % 
Capacity meeting cash costs but not total costs 79.44% 
Capacity meeting fuel costs but not meeting cash costs 12.78 % 
Capacity not meeting fuel costs 0.00 % 
 
87. Air India currently operates to 66 domestic and  34 international destinations 
(Excluding Air India Express). 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
88. The Committee notes the replies of the Ministry  and hopes that Air India would 
be able to achieve a better performance in the current fiscal also.  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE   
89. The Committee notes that the Company had reques ted for an Equity Infusion of 
Rs.4277 crores in financial year 2015-16 in line wi th the recommendations of TAP/FRP. As 
against this, the Government has provided an amount of Rs.2500 crores in the Finance Bill for 
2015-16 as Equity Infusion in Air India thereby lea ving a deficit of Rs.1777 crores. The 
Committee recommends that since Air India is already on the path of recovery and performing 

well, the Government should provide Rs.1777 crores which stands as a deficit in equity 
infusion without any cut during the course of the c urrent financial year. The Committee hopes 
that continued Government support in the form of eq uity infusion as per TAP/FRP and a 
better synergy between employees and the management  will help the Air India to earn profits 
in the coming years.  
   (Para No. 99 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
 90.  In this regard it may be stated that the comp any had requested for an Equity Infusion 
of Rs 4277 crores in FY 2015-16 in line with the re commendations of TAP/FRP. As against 
this the Govt has provided an amount of Rs 2500 cro res in the Finance Bill for FY 2015-16 as 
Equity Infusion in Air India thereby leaving a defi cit of Rs 1777 crores.  Secretary(CA) vide 
D.O. dated 11.03.2015 has requested Secretary, Expe nditure to restore the equity support to 
AIL to the level envisaged in the turnaround plan a pproved by the Cabinet. The matter was 
taken up with Ministry of Finance for allocation of  the additional amount of Rs. 1777 crores 
for Air India against which Rs. 800.00 Crores has b een allocated through first batch of 
supplementary. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
91. The Committee desires that the Ministry  may ta ke up the matter of further 
allocation of Rs.977 crore for equity infusion into  Air India with the Ministry of Finance 
so that the parameters fixed under TAP/FRP are achieved by Air India. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE   
92. The Committee also notes that the shifting of t he headquarters of Air India Charters 
Limited from Mumbai to Kochi is pending since Janua ry, 2013. The Committee would like to 
have the details of the action taken in this regard . The Committee may be apprised of the 
financial performance of Air India Charters during the last two years and the facilities 
available to the passengers travelling in its aircrafts.  
   (Para No. 100 of ibid )  
 
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
 (i)           The Corporate HQ of AICL has been sh ifted to Cochin and the CEO for the Airline 
appointed in Mar 2014 is currently operating out of this Office in Cochin. 
(ii)        The financial performance of AICL in FY  2013-14 and FY 2014-15 (revised 
estimates) are detailed below:  
Operating 
Revenue                                             
FY 13-14    
FY 14-15   
Rs. 2364 Crore       
Rs. 2601 Crore (Revised Estimate) 
Operating 
Expenses                                            
FY 13-14   
FY 14-15 
Rs. 1997 Crore    
 Rs. 1850 Crore (Revised Estimate) 
Operating profit before revenue sharing 
with AI      
FY 13-14    
FY 14-15     
Rs.  368 Crore            
Rs.  752 Crore (Revised Estimate) 

(iii)      The facilities extended to passengers of  AICL include complimentary meal in boxes; 
on-line bookings directly through web; on-line faci lity to purchase ancillary services such as 
additional baggage allowances and seat selection; t ransactions through dedicated call center; 
on-line visa for UAE through the Airline's website.   
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
93. The Committee notes the reply and feels that Ai r India Express should spread its 
wings beyond the Gulf sector to strengthen its perf ormance. The Committee also 
recommends that the headquarters of the company at Kochi may be made fully 
functional one and all its activities may be carried out from there. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE   
94. The Committee would like to know the status of leased aircrafts of Air India which are 
still lying abroad. The Committee hopes that the pr ocess of appointment of cabin crew and 
pilots in Air India will be completed in time. The Committee may also be informed about the 
state-of-the-art training and skill development cou rses available to cabin crew of Air India to 
harness their profession.  
   (Para No. 101 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
95. Lease extension for a period of one year for ex isting CRJ 700 aircraft was approved by 
AASL Board during its 130 th meeting. Accordingly, the lessor for CRJ 700 aircra ft VT-RJC 
(MSN 10052) was approached for lease extension. The  lessor had agreed for extension of 
lease for this aircraft for a period of one year. 
96.  However, one week before the lease expiry date  for this aircraft, the subject aircraft 
was returned to lessor since AASL was unable to con tinue its operation due to crew 
constraints. Therefore, a last minute decision was taken to return this aircraft immediately to 
lessor and lease charges for redelivery period to b e paid by AASL as per lease 
agreement. Accordingly, the aircraft was ferry flow n to FAA/EASA approved MRO facility, 
M/s. Adria, Slovenia, who is our existing service provider for CRJ 700 aircraft major checks. 
 97. Since, C of A, C of R, Aeromobile Licence were  expiring on 13.02.2015 due to expiry 
of lease term, the aircraft VT-RJC was positioned a t Adria, Slovenia on 12.02.2015 for 
compliance of re-delivery requirements as per lease agreement. 
Non-availability of maintenance slot at Adria: 
98. Even though, due to the last minute decision to  return this aircraft to lessor, the aircraft 
was immediately positioned at Adria, the maintenanc e work did not start immediately due to 
non-availability of slots at Adria, at such a short notice. 
 Work-scope finalization with lessor: 
Operating profit after revenue sharing 
with AI        
FY 13-14    
FY 14-15    
Rs.   73 Crore  
 Rs.  428 Crore (Revised Estimate) 
Net Profit  FY 13-14    
FY 14-15    
Rs.  345 Crore - Net Loss 
Rs.96 Crore - (Revised Estimate)  
EBIDTA        FY 13-14    
FY 14-15     
Rs.  298 Crore 
Rs.  659 Crore        

99. The lessor M/s. Gladiator was informed about ou r decision to return the aircraft and 
they had positioned their representative at Adria t o work with AASL representative for 
finalization of work-scope for re-delivery of aircraft. 
 Renewal of approval of M/s. Adria by DGCA, India: 
100. The FAA / EASA approved MRO facility where we can send our aircraft for major 
checks is also required to be approved by DGCA Indi a.  The Adria facility which was earlier 
approved by DGCA, India, required renewal of their approval. After inspection of their 
facility by DGCA officials, the approval of M/s. Ad ria has been renewed by DGCA on 
12 
th June 2015. 
‘C’ Check work in progress: 
101. Representatives from M/s. Adria visited AASL, Delhi on 22.06.2015 in order to 
discuss and resolve the open issues pertaining to r e-delivery of VT-RJC. Currently ‘C’ check 
on this aircraft is being performed at Adria and the same is expected to be completed soon. 
 Re-delivery requirements (other than ‘C’ check) as per lease agreement: 
102. As per lease agreement, apart from the ‘C’ che ck there are other re-delivery 
requirements to be complied, which pertain to compl iance of applicable ADs/SBs, back to 
birth traceability of all major components installe d, the remaining life of the major 
components, restoration of Engine & APU to meet re- delivery conditions and also the white 
painting of the aircraft after completion of all other jobs. 
 103. AASL is trying to expedite the re-delivery pr ocess so that aircraft can be returned to 
the lessor as soon as possible.   
104. The process of recruitment of Pilot and Cabin Crew in Air India Ltd. is already in 
progress.  
105. With regard to training, all flight safety and  DGCA certified training is carried out by 
the Mumbai and Hyderabad Training Centres depending on the type of aircraft.  As far as skill 
development is concerned, we have groomed some of o ur experienced Cabin Crew who is 
imparting this training. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
106. The Committee notes there is lack of planning is returning the leased aircrafts.  
This shows inefficiency on the part of the manageme nt.  The Committee notes the reply 
and desires that the issues involved in returning t he leased aircrafts lying abroad are 
settled at the earliest.  The Committee may also be informed on the status of recruitment 
of Pilots and Cabin Crew in Air India. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE   
107. The Committee feels that adequate seats should  be reserved for last minute booking 
with affordable fares, for persons travelling in me dical emergency and persons accompanying 
a corpse or for the next of kin in case of bereavem ent in a family. The Committee also feels 
that large number of students from not so well to-d o background is going for higher studies to 
far off areas of the country and when they have to visit to their family, they lose at least 3-4 
days in travel to and fro; they cannot afford the air travel. The Committee is of the view that in 
such cases, some kind of concessional fare may be d evised (appropriately may be) under 
social obligation of the airlines. 
   (Para No. 102 of ibid )  

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
108. Air India always remains committed to assist c ustomers in times of need.   Air India 
offers fares that are competitive and market driven .  Offering specific fares, as suggested, 
entails reserving of seats to the last minute.  As seats are highly perishable commodity and 
once aircraft has departed, cannot be inventoried f or future sale by blocking of seats which 
may lead to loss of revenue and spoilage of seats. 
109. Air India offers 50% discount on the normal Ec onomy class fare on domestic sectors 
to Students studying in India for travelling betwee n Home Town and Place of Study and vice 
versa.  The concessional fare is 50% of Basic fare of normal economy class (Y RBD) fare and 
booking class is RBD ‘V’.  Tickets can be issued by  Air India offices, approved Travel 
Agents and through Air India website on 
www.airindia.in . 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
110. The Committee notes the reply.  The committee recommends that the facility of 
50% concession on basic fare may be extended to tho se persons travelling in medical 
emergency and persons accompanying a corpse or for next of kin case of bereavement in 
a family.  
Hotel Corporation of India 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE   
111. The Committee would like to be informed about the logic behind non-allocation of 
funds for HCIL during the current fiscal. The Commi ttee feels that the Government needs to 
revisit the necessity of the HCIL. The Committee ho pes that allocation of funds to Centaur 
Hotel Delhi, Centaur Hotel Srinagar and Chefair Fli ght Catering Delhi will be made 
accordingly. The Committee expects that the ongoing  renovation works in all the units of 
HCIL are completed on time.  
   (Para No. 108 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
112. Regarding allocation for the financial year 20 15-16 for HCIL, it is to state that the 
Annual plan projection was made to Ministry of Fina nce, but they did not allocate any fund 
for HCIL at BE stage.  However, in view of the reco mmendations of the Committee the 
requirement of funds for HCIL has been taken up wit h the Ministry of Finance in the 1 st  batch 
of Supplementary which has not been accepted by the m. However the proposal will again be 
taken up at RE stage. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
113. The Committee feels that Hotel Corporation of India is in dire need of funds to 
renovate its properties in order to face the stiff competition in the hotel industry.  The 
Committee desires that the Ministry may pursue the demand for allocation of funds for 
Hotel Corporation of India vigorously with the Mini stry of Finance and the action taken 
in this regard may be intimated to the Committee accordingly.   
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE   
114. The Committee notes that the BCAS was able to spend Rs.15.14 crore only out of 
Rs.32.00 crore allocated at RE stage under Plan Hea d during 2014-15. The Committee would 
like to know the reasons for under-utilization of funds under Plan Head. The Committee hopes 
that the funds allocated for current fiscal under v arious Heads are utilized by BCAS 

judiciously. The Committee feels that the construct ion of new building for BCAS should be 
expedited and the pending issues on the project may  be sorted out with the concerned 
agencies. The Committee desires that filling up of vacant posts at various levels in BCAS 
should get due consideration during the current fiscal also, to strengthen its security apparatus.  
   (Para No. 113 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
115. Rs 15.50 crores were earmarked for Biometric A ccess Control System for which 
tender process could not be finalized during the financial year 2014-15.  The location and land 
has not been finalized for Re-construction of new b uilding for BCAS HQ.  Filling up of 
vacant posts at various levels in BCAS is under consideration. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
116. The Committee hopes that the BCAS will be able  to spend the allocated funds 
fully during the current fiscal.  The Committee des ires that the pending issues with 
respect to the construction of new building for BCAS should be sorted out at the earliest.  
The Committee may be further informed on the steps taken to fill up the vacant posts in 
BCAS. 
 
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE   
117. The Committee finds that IGRUA has not been al located any grant-in-aid for the 
current fiscal and Rs.13.60 crore allocated for 201 4-15 could not be utilized fully. The 
Committee would like to know the sources through wh ich IGRUA will mobilize its funds so 
that it can take up its pending projects, for development/expansion.  
   (Para No. 115 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
118. A grant of Rs. 13.6 Crore was released on 30th  March 2015. This was the subsidy 
(Revenue) approved for Financial Year 2010-11 and 2 012-13. As this is revenue grant it is 
utilized for meeting its operational expenses.   Fo r development, IGRUA has recently been 
granted Rs. 5.10 Crore in Plan funds to set up an A ME School. Fully funded National 
Aviation University is being built on IGRUA campus. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
119. The Committee notes the reply. 
Aero Club of India 
 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE   
120. The Committee finds that Rs. 10 lakhs was prov ided as Grants-in-aid to Aero Club of 
India for flying training and aero sports development during 2014- 15 but the Club was able to 
spend Rs.3 lakhs only out of the allocation without  any valid reason. The Committee also 
feels that the Aero Club of India which is also wor king with the Ministry of Sports and Youth 
Affairs and State Governments to give training to p eople with gliders and other equipment, 
may be provided with necessary budgetary allocation at RE stage.  
   (Para No. 118 of ibid )  

REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
121. Regarding grants-in-aid to Aero Club of India for the financial year 2014-15 it is to 
state that the entire allocation of Rs. 10 Lakhs wa s released during the last financial year. 
Regarding allocation for the financial year 2015-16 for ACI, it is to state that the projection of 
Rs. 26.00 Crore was made to Ministry of Finance but  they did not allocate any fund for ACI. 
The Ministry has noted the recommendation of the Co mmittee to pursue with Ministry of 
Finance for necessary budgetary allocation at RE stage.  
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
122. The Committee desires that the allocation of f unds for ACI may be taken up with 
the Ministry of Finance on priority basis and that the Committee may be apprised of the 
response of the Ministry of Finance in this regard. 
Civil Aviation Policy  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE   
123. The Committee has been consistently emphasizin g the need to have a civil aviation 
policy for such a growing sector for which India ha s humongous potential. Now, it is happy 
that the formulation of Civil Aviation Policy is already in advance stage. The Committee feels 
that the views, comments and suggestions given by t he stakeholders from the aviation 
industry be given due consideration in finalizing the National Civil Aviation Policy.  
   (Para No. 120 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
124. Hon'ble Minister for Civil Aviation has unveil ed a Draft Civil Aviation Policy on 10th 
November, 2014 to address various issues related to the sector. Main features of policy related 
to Development of airports, Rationalizing the cost of Aviation Turbine Fuel (AM), 
Development of the Cargo sector, Institutional refo rms, Enhancing Regional Connectivity, 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) facilities, Modernization of Air Navigation 
Services (ANS), Development of Helicopter Aviation,  DGCA and e-Governance. The 
Ministry invited comments/suggestions of the public /stakeholders /State Governments on the 
draft policy. Finalization of Civil Aviation Policy  is being undertaken taking into account 
various suggestions received on the draft policy. T he matter is under consideration of this 
Ministry. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
125. The Committee notes the reply and hopes that t he draft Civil Aviation Policy 
uploaded in the Ministry of Civil Aviation’s Portal  for comments will be finalized at the 
earliest, after giving due consideration to the sug gestions/comments received from 
various stakeholders. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE   
126. As regards creating international hubs, Kochi International Airport which is handling a 
large number of domestic and international passenge rs and has already become a hub for 
international operations especially to Gulf countri es, the Committee feels, may be included. 
This airport has substantial international traffic and has immense growth potential. 
   (Para No. 121 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
127. Noted. 

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
128. The Committee reiterates its recommendation an d  hopes that the inclusion of 
Kochi Airport as an international hub will be expedited at the earliest.   
Regulation of Airfares  
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE   
129. The Committee finds that currently there is no  transparent mechanism to regulate the 
air fare in the country. As a result, airlines are free to charge as much as they can and the 
travellers also are caught unawares about it. The C ommittee does not agree with the argument 
of the Ministry that some rules/regulations under the Aircraft Act, 1934 regulate air fare in the 
country.  
   (Para No. 122 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
130. Presently, air fares are not regulated by the Government as they are determined by the 
interplay of market forces. Airlines offer fares on  various levels which are driven by demand 
and market forces and as the demand goes up the seats on lower fare levels get filled. This is a 
global practice in the aviation industry. Pricing f orms the strategic framework, day-to-day 
tactical changes in pricing to respond to demand/su pply and market dynamics is through the 
Inventory Management process. Airlines are required  to establish reasonable tariff under the 
provision of Sub-rule (1) of Rule 135, Aircraft Rul es 1937 having regard to all relevant 
factors, including the cost of operation, character istics of service, reasonable profit and the 
generally prevailing tariff. Airlines remain compliant to the regulatory provisions of Sub-Rule 
2 of Rule 135 as long as the fare charged by them d oes not exceed the fare established and 
displayed on their website. 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE   
131. The Committee in view of the hardship faced by  common travellers and the air travel 
becoming a necessity cannot agree with this lame ex cuse, which is purely technical. The said 
Act and the Rules framed is more than 80 years old and the civil aviation sector during this 
period has gone a sea change. The Committee, theref ore, strongly feels that this Act/Rule also 
needs to be overhauled now. Secondly, the idea of providing a competition between airlines in 
this sector has not worked. Therefore, we are facin g the problem of predatory airfare today. It 
may also be due to some kind of cartelization among st the airlines. Even the benefit of 
reduction in the price of ATF is also not passed on  to the passengers as reduced in air fares. 
Therefore, the Committee strongly feels that this i s high time now that the Ministry must step 
in by putting a regulatory mechanism in place to se e that airfares remain within a reasonable 
range. The existing system has not worked. 
   (Para No. 123 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
132. The facts regarding air fare is as follows:  
• The Rule 135, the Aircraft Rules 1937 was latest re vised on 16/04/2009. Though the 
Act & Rules indicate the year 1934 & 1937, the revi sion of the Act & Rules are 
continuous process and have been revised from time to time as deemed fit by the 
Government.  
• The domestic airline pricing runs in multiple level s (bucket or RBD) which is in line 
with the practice followed globally. The lower fare  in the fare bucket is available for 

advance booking much earlier. As time lapses and da te of journey approaches closer, 
the fare in higher side of fare bucket is made avai lable as per the respective airline 
policy. In order to identify the fare and condition s of travel on passenger tickets, 
airlines world over follow IATA Resolution 728 whic h contains information on 
various booking classes referred to as Reservation Booking Designator (RBD). The 
RBD is the code used in reservation transactions to identify the booking class. 
• While the Government no longer regulates the fares that are charged, it is ensured that 
considerable information is provided to the public in a transparent manner with respect 
to airline fares.  
• Air Transport Circular 05 of 2009 was issued for sc heduled domestic airlines to 
display the airfare as per the template given in th e circular, compliant to Rule 135. For 
both domestic and international markets, carriers m ust provide disclosure of the full 
price to be paid, including government taxes/fees c arrier charges, as well as fees 
payable to airport operators in their advertising, on their websites and on the 
passenger's e-ticket confirmation.  
• To ensure transparency and aid the travelers make a n informed choice, DGCA vide 
Air Transport circular 02 of 2010 has directed the airlines to upload fare sheet 
displaying fare offered across their network. The f are sheet contains information on 
various levels of fares starting from the lowest (discounted fares) to full fare offered on 
all sectors. This is done on a monthly basis and updated whenever there is any revision 
of fares. DGCA also ensures the fare sheet is updat ed and tracks any deviation 
between fares offered and uploaded on the website on a regular basis. 
Air Transport Circular 01 of 2015 requires carriers to disclose all fees for optional services 
on 'opt-in' basis through a prominent link on their homepage. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
133. The Committee notes the reply.  However, it is  of the considered view that some 
mechanism to cap the maximum fares on every sector is needed. 
GENERAL OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATION 
134. The Committee, on scrutinizing of budget paper s of Ministry of Civil Aviation finds 
that the overall performance of the Ministry during  the last year has been satisfactory, but 
utilization of funds needs further improvement. The  Committee also finds that the Union 
Budget 2015-16 shows a huge gap between projected d emand and actual allocation. For 
example, civil aviation sector was able to get mere ly 71% of the projected annual plan and 
49% of the previous year’s allocation at RE stage. The Committee hopes that allocation of 
additional funds for Directorate General of Civil A viation (DGCA), Bureau of Civil Aviation 
Security (BCAS), Air India and Airports Authority o f India will help these Organizations to 
complete various ongoing aviation projects under th eir jurisdiction. The Committee 
recommends the Ministry of Civil Aviation may take-up the requirement of budgetary support 
with the Ministry of Finance at RE stage vigorously. 
   (Para No. 124 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
135. The Ministry has noted the recommendation of t he Committee to take up the 
requirement of budgetary support with Ministry of Finance at RE stage. 

FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
136. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that additional 
budgetary support for various projects are received  at RE stage so that these projects 
are not stalled/delayed for want of funds. 
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE   
137. The Committee desires the creation of Civil Av iation Authority, absence of such an 
agency in India was pointed out by the Federal Avia tion Agency during its last audit. The 
Committee also had recommended about this. Subseque ntly, a Bill was brought before 
Parliament which was examined and reported by the C ommittee. The Committee hopes that 
the Bill including the recommendations of this Comm ittee in its 203rd Report (on the Civil 
Aviation Authority of India Bill, 2013) presented t o the Parliament in February, 2014 will be 
introduced in the Parliament at the earliest. 
   (Para No. 125 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
138. Cabinet Secretariat vide OM dt 20.05.2014 advi sed that the Bills, that has been cleared 
by the Cabinet in the recent past and are yet to be  enacted as laws, will need to be placed 
before the Cabinet for a decision as to whether the se Bills are to be pursued in their present 
form or any changes are required to be carried out therein. Accordingly, a revised Civil 
Aviation Authority of India Bill, 2014 incorporatin g some changes in the Civil Aviation 
Authority Bill, 2014 was circulated for inter-Ministerial consultation. 
139. During the course of inter-Ministerial consult ations, Department of Expenditure, 
Ministry of Finance has proposed that the matter ma y be first got appraised at the EFC/CNE 
prior to placing it before the Cabinet for its cons ideration. As per the advice of Department of 
Expenditure, an EFC Memo is being prepared, besides the CAA Bill is also being reviewed in 
view of comments received from other Ministries/Departments. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
140. The Committee notes that the Govt. is taking t oo much time to finalize Civil 
Aviation Authority which is unwarranted.  The Commi ttee hopes that the Civil Aviation 
Authority of India Bill will be placed before the P arliament at the earliest so that the 
proposed Authority can address all the grey areas in the aviation sector.   
RECOMMENDATION/OBSERVATION OF THE COMMITTEE   
141. The Committee also hopes that the Government w ill finalize the Civil Aviation Policy 
on priority so that all the issues concerning aviat ion sector in the country are duly addressed 
and the ever growing aviation sector gets much needed impetus from the Government. 
   (Para No. 126 of ibid )  
REPLY OF THE GOVERNMENT   
142. Noted. 
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
143. The Committee hopes that with the timely imple mentation of Civil Aviation 
Policy, the aviation sector will be able to overcom e the hurdles it is presently facing.   
The Committee also desires that Kochi may be made a s an international hub while 
formulating the Civil Aviation Policy.   
****** 