Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2013/Magha , 1934 (Saka)
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
RAJYA SABHA 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY EIGHTH REPORT
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on 6th February, 2013)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on 6th February, 2013)
Functioning of Commission of Railway Safety
REPORT NO. 
188
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 27th February, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 27th February, 2013)


Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

45
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTY EIGHTH REPORT
Functioning of Commission of Railway Safety
(Presented to the Hon’ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha on  6 th February, 2013)
(Presented to the Hon’ble Speaker, Lok Sabha on  6 th February, 2013)
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  27 th February, 2013)
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on  27 th February, 2013)
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
February, 2013/Magha, 1934 (Saka)
Hindi version of this publication is also available

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. L IST OF A BBREVIATIONS ......................................................................................................... (iv)
4. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—17
5. R ECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE C OMMITTEE — A T A G LANCE ........................ 18—24
6. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 25—28
7. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 29—44
(ii)

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2012-2013)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
5. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
6. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
7. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
8. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
9. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
10. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
13. Shri Subrata Bakshi
14. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
15. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
16. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
17. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
@18. Shrimati Ranee Narah
19. Shri Prabodh Panda
20. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
21. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
22. Shri Nilesh N. Rane
@23. Shri K.J.S.P. Reddy
24. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shri Rakesh Singh
27. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
28. Shri K. Sudhakaran
29. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
*30. Shri Sisir Kumar Adhikari
#31. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
@ Ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his/her inclusion in the Council of Ministers w.e.f.
28th October, 2012.
* Nominated on 14 th December, 2012 vice Shri Khagen Das.
# Nominated on 9 th January, 2013 vice Dr. Kruparani Killi, who ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon
her inclusion in the Council of Ministers w.e.f. 28 th October, 2012.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N. K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati A. S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred Eighty Eighth Report  on “Functioning of Commission of Railway Safety”.
2. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture in its meeting held on the 19
th October, 2011 decided to have an in-depth study on the
Functioning of Commission of Railway Safety in view series of railways  accidents some of them
leading to high causalities in the past.
3. Apart from a detailed background note obtained from the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry
of Railways and Commission of Railway Safety the Committee heard the views of the Secretary,
Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Railways and Commission of Railway Safety in its meetings
held on the 15
th November, 2011, 21 st February, 11 th October and 5 th November, 2012.
4.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the Chairman and Members of Railway
Board, Secretary and other officers of the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Chief Commissioner and
Commissioners of Commission of Railway Safety for providing necessary inputs and clarifications
during deliberations on the subject.
5. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 3
rd January, 2013.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
January 3, 2013 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Pausa 13, 1934 ( Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

(iv)
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ACD – Anti-Collision Device
CCRS – Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety
CRS – Commissioner of Railway Safety
CsRS – Commissioners of Railway Safety
EOI – Expression of Interest
ETCS – European Train Control System
HoD – Head of Department
IRCA – Indian Railway Conference Association
JPO – Joint Procedure Orders
KRCL – Konkan Railway Corporation Limited
RSA – Railway Safety Authority
RRDC – Railway Research and Development Council
RDSO – Research Designs and Standards Organization
SPAD – Signal Passed at Danger
TCAS – Train Collision Avoidance System
UMLC – Unmanned Level Crossing

1
REPORT
The Commission of Railway Safety which is under the administrative control of the Union
Ministry of Civil Aviation, deals with the matters pertaining to safety of rail travel and train
operation and is charged with certain statutory functions laid down in the Railways Act, 1989.
These functions are inspectorial, investigatory and advisory in nature. Formerly called the Railway
Inspectorate, it functioned under the control of the Railway Board till May, 1941. Pursuant to the
recommendations of the ‘Pacific Locomotive Committee’, the Inspectorate was separated from the
control of Railway Board to secure its independence from the authority administering the Railways.
It was endorsed by the Central Legislature also. After its separation, the Inspectorate was kept
under Department of Communications. It came under the administrative control of the Ministry of
Civil Aviation in May, 1967.
2. While the Railway Board in the Ministry of Railways is the safety controlling authority and
is responsible for laying down and enforcing safety standards for the Indian Railways, the main
task of the Commission of Railway Safety is to direct, advise and caution the railways
administration through its inspectorial, investigatory and advisory functions and thereby assists
them in ensuring that all stipulated measures are taken and standards are adhered to and
implemented in regard to the soundness of rail construction and safety in train operation.
3. The Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) is headed by a Chief Commissioner of Railway
Safety (CCRS), who also acts as the Principal Technical Advisor to the Central Government on
matters with which Commission is concerned. Apart from CCRS, there are nine Commissioners of
Railway Safety (CsSR), exercising jurisdiction over one or more zonal railways. Jurisdiction of
each CSRS is called a “Circle”. Details of the Circles and their geographical jurisdiction are placed
at Annexure-I.
4. There are five Deputy Commissioners of Railway Safety posted in the headquarters at
Lucknow for assisting the CCRS and the CsRS as and when required. In addition, there are nine
field Deputy Commissioners, one each in every Circle Offices to assist the Commissioners of
Railway Safety.
5. Due to series of Railways accidents, some of them leading to high casualties in the recent
past, the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture
decided to look into various aspects of the functioning of Commission of Railway Safety namely,
how far has this Commission been effective in inspecting tracks and rolling-stock from safety
angle; what has been the impact of its investigation and reports on improving rail safety; whether
this Commission enjoys intended autonomy in actual practice; how seriously its advice/
recommendations are taken by the Ministry of Railways; and how to further restructure/empower
the Commission to make it effective in real terms.
6. The Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and
Culture, it may be recalled, had presented its 83
rd Report on the functioning of the Commission
of Railway Safety in the year 2004 but nothing much appeared to have been done thereafter on
its recommendations.
7. The Committee, after it decided to further examine the functioning of the Commission of
Railway Safety, sought a status note from the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of Railways.
The Committee also heard the representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation, Chief Commissioner of
Railway Safety and Ministry of Railways in its meetings held on the 15
th November, 2011 and 21 st
February, 11 th October and 5 th November, 2012.

2
8. However, after the first round of discussions with the both the Ministries separately
and also with the CCRS, the Committee found that the two Ministries had quite different,
sometimes opposite views on certain crucial issues relating to effectiveness, autonomy and
need to empower and restructure the CRS. The Ministry of Railways maintained that the
CRS was fulfilling its mandate effectively and had enjoyed complete autonomy and that its
views are taken quite seriously and most of its recommendations are implemented and that
there was no need to disturb the existing arrangement to further restructure/empower CRS.
The Ministry of Civil Aviation which is also central government for the CRS had expressed
contrary views on many such issues.
9. The issues raised by the Committee on the functioning of Commission of Railway Safety
and the response of the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Railways thereon and the observations/
recommendations of the Committee have been enumerated in the succeeding paragraphs.
Duality of Command
10. The Committee was informed that the responsibility for safety in the working and operation
of Railways rests solely with the Railway Board and the Zonal Railway authorities. As per the
Allocation of Business Rule of Ministry of Railways, Commission of Railway Safety has been
excluded from it. The main task of the Commission of Railway Safety is to direct, advise and
caution the Railway executives with a view to ensure that all reasonable precautions are taken in
regard to soundness of rail construction and safety of train operation. The Railway Board refers
to the Commission matters relating to modification or enhancement of standards in respect of
operation of trains, track, locomotive, rolling stock and revision of rules embodied in the General
Rules, Rules for the opening of New Lines, Manuals, IRCA Regulations, Schedule of Dimensions
and other publications.
11. To a specific query on the role of Ministry of Civil Aviation, it was informed that Ministry
of Civil Aviation deals with administrative, establishment, financial issues and issues related to
Parliament. The Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety decides technical matters.
12. In cases of investigation of serious railway accidents, file is submitted to Secretary by
CCRS directly once after submission of preliminary investigation report by Commissioner of
Railway Safety and again after receiving the comments/Action taken by Railway Board on final
reports of the Commissioners.
13. Generally, technical issues between Commissioners of Railway Safety and Ministry of
Railways (Railway Board) are discussed and resolved by Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety.
However, on unresolved issues, Chief Commissioner may seek intervention by Secretary, Ministry
of Civil Aviation to settle the matter at higher level.
14. When asked about the interface between Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) and CRS,
the Committee was informed that mainly it was through Chief Commissioner. Except accident
inquiry reports, which are forwarded directly to Railway Board by Commissioners, all other reports
of the Commissioners come to CCRS, who forwards these to Railway Board with his
recommendation, if any. Coordination meeting between Railway Board and Commissioners has been
a mechanism for Commissioners to discuss technical issues directly with Members of Railway
Board to arrive at the agreeable position. Such meeting is proposed by Chief Commissioner,
whenever some technical issues are required to be discussed by Commissioners with Railway
Board.
15. The Committee was informed that Commissioner of Railway Safety and Chief
Commissioner of Railway Safety function under the following Acts/Rules:–

3
(a) The Railways Act, 1989 and rules made under Section 29 and Section 122 of the Act;
(b) Rules for the opening of a Railway or Section of a Railway for the public carriage
of passengers, 2000;
(c) Statutory Investigation into Railway Accidents Rules, 1998 (Issued by Ministry of Civil
Aviation); and
(d) Railway (Notices of and Inquiries into accidents) Rules, 1998 (Issued by Ministry of
Railways).
16. Thus, CRS functions under Rules framed by both the Ministries under the Railways
Act. While accident investigation related rules are issued by the Ministry of Civil Aviation,
accidents inquiry related rules were issued by the Ministry of Railways. Though the CRS is
under the administrative control of Ministry of Civil Aviation, it takes its origin and
discharges its duties as per the Rules and Regulations framed under the Railways Act. The
Committee feels that involvement of two Ministries – Ministry of Railways and Ministry of
Civil Aviation, leads to avoidable confusion and also makes it difficult to apportion the
responsibilities due to duality of control and command in the functioning of CRS. It also
leaves scope for conflict of interest for Ministry of Railways.
17. Besides, under the Railways Act the term Central Government means the Ministry
of Railways. There being some overlapping in safety related issues between the Railway
Board and CRS as it is, this confusion gets further confounded. Although Ministry of
Railways denied the existence of such a confusion, instances of unilateral action by the
Railway Board for deciding standards and codes and informing the Commission of Railway
Safety without any involvement/consultation with the latter were brought to the notice of
the Committee. The Committee is constrained to conclude that such an arrangement is
suitable to Ministry of Railways which is why, it does not want to disturb the existing
arrangement.
18. The Government of India (Transaction of Business) Rules clearly delineate the
functions of various Ministries/Departments of Government of India. The Committee
recommends that the term Central Government occurring in the Railway Act should
adequately be defined to demarcate the functions of Ministry of Railways and Ministry of
Civil Aviation to avoid any confusion in respect of powers, mandate and autonomous
working of CRS between the two Ministries.
19. The Committee raised the issue of adequacy of existing rules, legislations relating to
Railway Safety and a need, if any, to amend these to meet the present day requirements,
the Ministry of Railways informed that the existing rules, legislations relating to Railway
Safety were adequate and that there was no need to amend them. However, review of safety
standards is a continuous process and amendments in the manuals, codes, general rules, etc
are made as and when required.
20. It was brought before the Committee that whenever the Ministry of Railways propose
to change any rules relating to railway safety, the same is referred to CRS, but
modifications or changes in standards or codes pertaining to railway safety were not
referred. Thus the changes/modifications in safety codes are implemented without
consultation with CRS. As per the Government of India (Transaction of Business) Rules
when the subject of a case concerns more than one Department, no decision can be taken
or order issued until all such departments have concurred, or failing such concurrence, a
decision thereon has been taken by or under the authority of the Cabinet. As such any

4
modification/change of rules or standards by the Ministry of Railways needs the concurrence
of Ministry of Civil Aviation also.
21. The Annual Report of CRS for 2010-11, gives specific examples of amendment/
modification of rules/policy in respect of safety train operations without the information/
involvement of the office of CRS. One such examples was revised Policy Circular dated the
12
th July, 2010 on the ‘sanction of speed of nominated trains on specific routes’ and the
increase of speed of trains without the approval of Commissioner of Railway Safety of the
concerned Zone, resulting in danger to travelling public.
22. The Committee is of the view that any decision taken by the Ministry of Railways
in respect of matters relating to railway safety should have the concurrence (not merely
consultation) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation as per the Government of India (Transaction
of Business) Rules.
23. In view of the scope for confusion due to dual control in respect of CRS on many
respects, this Committee had recommended in its 83
rd Report to go for a stand-alone
legislation for Commission of Railway Safety in the year 2005. As such, the Ministry of
Civil Aviation had prepared a draft ‘Commission of Railway Safety Bill’ which, the
Committee was informed, did not find favour with the Ministry of Railways and eventually
the proposal was dropped in the year 2010. The Committee does not know the exact
reason for Railway’s reservation in this regard but is still convinced that in the present
rail safety scenario, having a separate legislation needs serious consideration for clearly
defining the role, powers and jurisdiction of CRS for ensuring its autonomy and effective
functioning.
CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF RAILWAY SAFETY
24. The Committee was informed that after its separation from the Railway Board in May,
1941, a post of Chief Government Inspector of Railways, later designated as Chief Commissioner
of Railway Safety, was created with headquarters with the Government of India and
Commissioners of Railway Safety made administratively subordinate to him. It was also envisaged
that Commissioners of Railway Safety directly communicated with the CCRS but not with the
administrative Department i.e. Department of Communications, then. The Chief Commissioner of
Railway Safety is the principal technical advisor to the Government in matters concerning
Commission of Railway Safety. No separate office was created for the Chief Commissioner of
Railway Safety and he was provided with assistance of regular Staff from the Ministry of Civil
Aviation. This scheme implies that the Chief Commissioners of Railway Safety is a part of the
Ministry though offices of the Commissioner of Railway Safety are subordinate offices under the
Ministry.
25. The Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety directs the technical activities of the
Organization and is responsible for advising the Central Government in all matters concerning
Commission of Railway Safety. Involvement of the Chief Commissioner in activities of the
Commission of Railway Safety broadly categorized into three functions given in the succeeding
paragraphs.
26. Opening of new lines, etc .:– Primary responsibility for inspection of new a line vests in
Commissioner of Railway Safety, who on receipt of reference from the concerned Railways and
after scrutiny, decides the date of inspection. After careful inspection, he submits detailed report
to Railway Board through Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety. As it has been stated earlier,
CCRS is the competent and independent authority under the Railways Act, 1989. However, being
the principal technical advisor to the Government, he may in his wisdom, record his views/

5
comments on the report submitted by CsRS and forward it to Railway Board along with the CsRS
Report.
27. Inspection report of the Commissioner of Railway Safety  :– Report of the inspection after
each occasion should be submitted to Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety who has no authority
to alter or modify or revise the report submitted by the CsRS. He can only record his views, if
has to say anything. If Chief Commissioner considers any issue to be serious, he brings it to the
notice of Railway Board for necessary action.
28. Accident investigation  :– Generally, the investigation of the serious railway accident is
undertaken by the CsRS holding geographical jurisdiction of accident site. However, CCRS may
direct any other Commissioner to hold an investigation or initiate inquiry by himself. Once the
process of investigation starts, Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety does not intervene in the
investigation. After completion of the inquiry, Commissioner of Railway Safety submits a
preliminary factual report to CCRS and forwards copies to Railway Board and concerned Railway
administration. Final report is submitted to CCRS and is simultaneously forwarded to Railway Board
and Zonal Railways. After obtaining the remarks of GM of concerned railway, CCRS prepares his
considered opinion and sends his note to Railway Board with such recommendations as he
considers necessary. Though CCRS has no authority to alter/modify/revise the report of the
Commissioner of Railway Safety, however, he may record his expert comment on the report of
the Commissioner of Railway Safety and forward it to Railway Board for necessary action.
29. Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety is consulted by Railway Board in matters pertaining
to corrections or amendments to General Rules, Rules for opening of a Railway, Schedule of
Dimensions, the Permanent Way, Works and Signal Engineering Manuals, Procedures for inquiries
into accidents, Codes of Practice for Engineering Works and other publications. As the
Commissioners of Railway Safety are the field officers and users of the rules and manuals, their
views are obtained by CCRS before forwarding his comments in the matter. CCRS also discusses
with Railway Board on matters related to Commission of Railway Safety.
30. Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety prepare in each financial year an annual report giving
full account of the activities of the Commissioners during the financial year and forward it to the
Central Government to be laid before each House of Parliament.
WORKING OF COMMISSIONER OF RAILWAY SAFETY
31. On the working of Commissioner of Railway Safety, it was informed that the detailed
procedure pertaining to the inspection of a railway, prior to opening to passenger traffic, had
been laid down in the Railway Act,1989 for opening of a railway or section of a railway for the
public carriage of passengers. While carrying out this inspection, the Commissioner of Railway
Safety has to satisfy himself that the safety of the travelling public has, as far as practicable,
been ensured; General Rules regulating train operations have been correctly applied; and the
maximum and minimum dimensions have been properly observed. It has also to see that the
works, structure, rolling stock and appliances belonging to the Railways are not only in proper
state when inspected, but have also been designed and constructed in such a manner as may,
so far as practicable, guard against accidents in future. He also decides about the limits of speed
and other working conditions, which in his judgment, would ensure necessary safety. A careful
scrutiny is made to ensure that all railway bridges have been designed to load specified in the
Bridge Rules and that the stresses under these loads shall not exceed those specified in the Indian
Railway Standard Code of Practice. He carries out as thorough an inspection as practicable and
test checks as many items of works and equipment as he may consider necessary to ensure
provisions mentioned earlier.

6
32. Commissioners have to carry out field inspections of newly electrified lines before the
introduction of passenger traffic and recommend to the Railway Board for sanction as also the use
of new locomotive and Rolling Stock on the existing lines, under such condition as may be
prescribed.
33. No works affecting safety of the passenger traffic can be undertaken on any railway line
which is open to passenger traffic without the prior sanction of the Commissioner of Railway
Safety, except under emergency where also the fact should be immediately reported to him. He is
empowered to sanction works without inspection, the opening for passenger traffic such as
deviation lines, regirdering and reconstruction of bridges, resignalling and remodelling and other
alterations and re-constructions, station yards, introducing new level crossing or eliminating them
and other items not materially affecting the character of works, but which form part of or are
directly connected with the working of a railway already open for public carriage of passengers.
34. All application for works in connection with new bridges, signals and interlocking,
installations and other works affecting the safety of traffic or any improvement required on such
works have to be scrutinized and sanctioned by the Commissioner of Railway Safety they are being
taken in hand.
35. Besides, for various oversize consignments which infringe running dimensions, approval of
the Commissioner of Railway Safety has to be obtained before they are permitted to be transported
over the railway.
37. Any work involving an infringement of the standard dimensions are sanctioned by the
Railway Board on the recommendations of the Commissioners, which are made after thorough
scrutiny and investigation of the safeguards proposed for the safety of traffic.
FIXING OF STANDARDS
38. When asked about the availability of parameters and technical specifications for quantifying
railway safety in the country, it was informed by the Ministry of Railways that Indian Railways
had a very well defined system to ensure safety. Safe working on Indian Railways is established
through the following:
(a) Rules of train operations including those during abnormal situations are laid down in
General and Subsidiary Rules.
(b) Specification and technical parameters of every safety equipment are laid down in
various manuals issued by Railway Board and Zonal Railways and these parameters are
kept within specified limits through regular maintenance.
(c) All safety equipments are procured as per technical specifications prepared by
Research Design and Standard Organization (RDSO) which is the R&D wing of Indian
Railways.
39. Apart from these, circulars/JPOs (Joint Procedure Orders)/Safety Bulletins are published
from time to time to ensure strict implementation of the instructions.
40. The Ministry of Railways further informed the Committee that review of safety standards
is a continuous process and amendments in the manuals, codes, General Rules, etc. are made as
and when required.
41. It was brought out before the Committee that the Ministry of Railways sometimes lowers
the standards of rolling stock and rail track once they are put in operation, without informing CRS.
Before any railway track or rolling stock are added into normal operations, the same are inspected

7
and certified by CRS to the effect that they meet the standards fixed by Ministry of Railways. As
such, altering standards of rolling stock or railway track after their induction into service for the
convenience of maintenance poses a serious threat to safety aspects of such stocks.
42. The Committee feels that minimum standards for railway tracks and rolling stock
should be codified in consultation with the Commission of Railways Safety, Ministry of
Civil Aviation with a view to rule out any possibility of lowering the required standards
as per its convenience by the Ministry of Railways. The Committee also feels that the
standards fixed should not be lowered on the plea of scarcity of resources to maintain
them. The CRS should be empowered to carry out periodic safety audit of Railways to
ensure the proper functioning of the railway safety apparatus of the huge railway network
in the country.
INSPECTION
43. The Committee was informed that in term of Section 4 (2) (b) of the Indian Railways Act,
1890, the annual inspections were being carried out by the officers of the Railway Inspectorate
(CRS) till July, 1953. The Committee learnt that such inspections were discontinued through a
Railway Board’s Order in 1953. The Ministry of Communications, the then administrative Ministry
informed the Inspectorate vide a letter dated 16 July, 1953. The Ministry of Communications
through the same letter instructed the Commissioners of Railway Safety (the then Government
Inspectors) to carry out annually, an inspection of 20% of the route kilometers of railway under
their jurisdiction. These inspections are required to be fitted in, as far as possible, with the
programme of the General Manager, Deputy General Manager and Head of the Department of the
railway concerned, and opportunity should be taken of their presence, on each occasion to discuss
matter with them. No detailed report on these inspection were required to be submitted to Railway
Board, Railway Administration or to any other outside authority. However, a report was submitted
to CCRS as soon as possible after each inspection.
44. During the deliberations, the Committee asked, how the power of “periodical routine
inspection” provided by an Act of Parliament could be withdrawn by an executive order without
amending the parent Act, the Ministry of Railways stated that Section 4(2)(b) of the Railway Act
1890 provided the duties of an Inspector of the Railways(now CRS) as under:
‘to make such periodical or other inspections of any railway or of any rolling stock used
thereon as the Government may direct’.
45. The Ministry of Railways further argued that the said executive order was issued under the
provision ‘as the Government may direct’ . It, therefore, did not require amendment of the Act. No
back reference in this regard had been received from the Ministry of Communication then, or
Ministry of Civil Aviation now.
46. The Ministry of Railways further argued that in any case the provisions of the earlier
Railways Act of 1890 and the executive order issued in 1953 have been superseded by the new
Railways Act 1989. Section 6(b) (Duties of Commissioner) and Section 7(a) (Powers of
Commissioner) of the Act empowers Commissioners to enter upon and inspect any Railway or any
rolling stock used thereon for any of the purposes laid down in the Railway Act. These provisions
are similar to Section 4(2)(b) and Section 5(a) of the Railway Act, 1890.
47. The CsRS are always invited for annual inspections conducted by the General Managers and
attended by all Principal Heads of Department. Besides this, they are extended all support whenever
they wish to inspect any section/rolling stock using his powers under Section 7(a) of Railways
Act, 1989 or during the course of an accident investigation.

8
48. The argument extended by the Ministry of Railways in respect of its order issued in
the year 1953 relieving CsRS of their duty of ‘annual periodical inspection’ is not legally
tenable. The said circular says very clearly that Government Inspectors (then) are being
“relieved of their responsibility under Section 4(2)(b) of the Indian Railways Act 1890”. It
took away, in fact, the duty of inspection provided to the Commissioners by the Act of 1890.
This amounts to by-passing the law making power of Parliament. Besides, the Committee
does not agree with the Ministry’s argument that this was done under the power to issue
direction by the Central Government, as provided in Section 6(b) of the Railways Act. The
Committee is of the view that the power to issue directions given to the Ministry by the
Act, cannot be used to take away something given by the same Act. This is against the basic
tenets  of subordinate legislation. This ‘power to issue direction’ should relate to such
details, procedures, manner, formalities, timings, etc. of the inspection and certainly not for
withdrawing these powers. And the Ministry is supposed to have laid down rules, etc. for
carrying out these functions. The Committee does not know if any rule, regulations etc.
have been framed under this.
49. Although the Ministry of Railways contended that the said circular of 1953 became
ineffective with the Railways Act 1989 coming into operation, the Committee was informed
that the said circular has continued to remain in operation till date. The Committee feels
that this circular should have been objected to by the then Ministry of Communication when
it was issued and later by the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the matter could have been
settled in consultation with the Ministry of Law, if needed. And if the 1953 Order became
inoperative with the new Railway Act coming into being in 1989, the Ministry of Railways
should have issued a fresh circular clarifying the position, which unfortunately was not
done. In the absence of such a clarification, the said Order continued to remain in
operation till date. The Committee fails to understand the silence of both the Ministries and
desires this issue to be settled on priority in consultation with the Ministry of Law and
Justice under intimation to this Committee.
50. The Committee is of the opinion that powers for annual inspections of open lines and
asset of the Railway by CRS should be strengthened. The Commissioner of Railway Safety
is “invited” by General Manager to the annual inspection conducted by them, as per the
existing practice. The Committee feels that such a practice makes CsRS dependent on the
GMs who may carry out inspection as per their desire and convenience. The Committee
feels that the CsRS should be given independence to carry out periodic or other inspection
of railway lines as provided in Section 6 (b) of Indian Railways Act 1989.
INVESTIGATION OF RAILWAY ACCIDENTS
51. When enquired about the procedure involved in investigation of railway accidents, the
Committee was informed that Commission of Railway Safety was mandated to conduct inquiry into
only train accidents carrying passengers and resulting in loss of human life or grievous hurt
causing total or partial disablement of permanent nature to a passenger or a serious damage to
railway property, in terms of Section 114 of the Railways Act 1989. A Commissioner submits his
inquiry report, which is a Confidential Document in terms of Rule 4 of Statutory Investigation into
Railway Accidents Rules 1998,  to the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety and simultaneously
forwards copies of the report to the Railway Board, railway administration and such other
authorities as are prescribed in the above rule.
52. The Committee learnt that while a large number of safety related events and occurrences
that lead to railway accidents are being investigated and handled by the Railways, the CRS
investigated only serious accidents. When asked to clarify, the Committee was informed that on

9
receipt of notice of Railway Accident from Railway Administration as defined in Section 113 of the
Railway Act 1989, the inquiry is conducted by CRS into accident as defined in Section 114.
However, under Section 114(1), it is open to the Commissioner to hold an inquiry into any other
accident, which in his opinion, requires holding of an inquiry by him. For accidents where no
inquiry is held by CRS or he communicates that he is not able to hold an inquiry, the Railway
administration has been empowered under Section 115 of the Act to conduct an inquiry in
accordance with the prescribed procedure. In some cases, inquiry has also been done by a
Commission, set up under the ‘Commissions of Inquiry Act, 1952’.
53. Section 113 of Railways Act, 1989 provides the type of accidents for which notices are to
be issued by Railways. Section 114 provides the type of accidents to be investigated by the
Commission of Railway Safety. Section 120 of Railways Act, 1989 deals with the inquiry into
accidents not covered by Section 113 and powers of railway administration to deal with such
cases.
54. It was further informed that any accident which involves passenger train resulting in a loss
of passengers lives or grievous injury or loss of property in excess of Rs. 25 lakhs, is to be
inquired by CRS. Moreover, there is no bar on inquiry of accidents involving goods train. CCRS/
CRS are at their liberty to investigate any accidents whatever they deem fit.
55. The Committee notes that the accident enquiry is done as per the provisions of
Railway Accident Rules, 1998 (Ministry of Civil Aviation) and Notice of and Inquiries into
Accidents Rules, 1998 (Ministry of Railways). As such, the investigator – the CRS, carries
out the accident inquiry on the basis of laid down procedure by the service provider – the
Ministry of Railways. Since CRS does not have any independent investigating mechanism
for accidents, it has to depend mainly on the Ministry of Railways for technical manpower,
infrastructure and other logistical support required for investigations as well as inspections.
56. The Committee notes that CRS has powers to investigate a railway accident but
normally it does so only after receiving a notice from the concerned GM. The accidents for
which no notice has been issued and those which the CRS is unable to investigate for some
reasons, are investigated by the Ministry of Railways themselves. It has also been provided
that the CRS investigates those accidents resulting in loss of passengers’ life, grievous hurt
or damage to property worth more than Rs. 25 lakhs. Besides, sometimes accidents are
investigated under Commissions of Inquiry Act also. Thus, in actual practice, CRS is able
to investigate only some accidents notified by the concerned GMs and a large number of
accidents are left to be investigated by the Ministry the Railways, the service provider
themselves. Although the Railways Act provides that the CRS can investigate any accident,
notified or not, CRS, in actual practice, is not able to do so in view of the limitations -
legal, infrastructural, technical, manpower, etc. under which it has to function. This
presents a highly disappointing picture, where the CRS’s powers relating to accident
investigation, the basic mandate of CRS, is greatly restricted. Therefore, the Committee
emphasizes the need for empowering CRS for increasing its autonomy and effectiveness as
an accident investigator.
57. The Committee also feels that delayed reporting of such accidents/incidents in
violation of Section 113(2) of Railways Act 1989 should be considered as serious and the
concerned zone of the railways should be penalized for such violations accordingly.
58. It has come to the notice of the Committee that the Ministry of Railways had
enhanced the financial threshold for investigating an accident to Rs. 2.5 crores from to
Rs. 25 lakhs as provided in the Rules, without making necessary changes in the concerned
rules. The Committee feels that through this enhancement, a large number of accidents

10
have been excluded from the purview of the CRS. The Committee feels that this is another
example of circumventing the Act of Parliament and Rules made thereunder, by an
executive order i.e. through internal manual of the Ministry of Railways. If it was felt
necessary to enhance the financial limits, it should have been done by amending both the
Rules and notifying them in the Gazette and placing them before the Parliament. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should amend the concerned Rules at
the earliest and place them before the Parliament instead of adopting the executive orders.
59. The Committee notes that there are large numbers of incidents which may be
serious enough but do not lead to human deaths etc. are not covered under Section 113.
There may be ‘accident’ under Section 120 and, therefore, may not be investigated by any
agency. The Committee is of the opinion that such serious incidents should also be
investigated with a view to take preventive measures so that minor incidents do not lead
to major accidents. The Committee feels that for this purpose ‘incidents’ need to be defined
appropriately in Section 120 and inquiry be made necessary for them as well.
IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS OF CRS
60. On the issue of recommendations of the CRS not being mandatory, the Ministry of Railways
argued that  an accident investigating authority could make only recommendations. Decision on a
recommendation is to be taken by safety controlling authority i.e. Ministry of Railways after
considering safety as well as executive/operational requirements. Overall public interest is also
required to be considered.
61. If Commissioner of Railway Safety, during an accident inquiry, finds anything which is
unsafe in his opinion and if he feels, an immediate action e.g. speed on a stretch of a line to be
reduced is necessary to be taken, he can do so by imposition of the condition under delegated
powers in rule 22 of ‘Railway (Opening for the Public Carriage of Passengers) Rules, 2000’. This
is done/should be done when there is only one layer of safety and that is likely to be breached.
Such condition is binding on a Railway administration. Such condition may include provisions under
which the imposed condition will be removed. Any such condition can be modified only by Central
Government (Ministry of Railways), but views of the Commissioner should be considered before
such modification, to meet the requirement of statute.
62. On matters of improving safety by modification of rule/standards/ equipment/procedures,
Commissioner makes recommendations in the accident investigation report.
63. It was further informed by the Ministry of Railways that recommendations made by the
CRS related to the whole spectrum of rail operation and maintenance. While majority of the
recommendations are accepted and implemented, some of them need thorough and detailed
examination from various angles i.e. technical feasibility, operational significance, evaluation of
extent of enhancement of safety, assimilation in the prevailing field environment and financial
viability, etc. Some of them also require design and development of technology, import, trials and
experiments, etc. involving considerable time period and funds.
64. For accidents occurring during last three years (2009-10, 2010-11 and 2011-12), out of 379
recommendations made by CRSs, 277 recommendations have been accepted and 12
recommendations have been partially accepted by the Ministry of Railways after the receipt of
CCRS’ note. 16 recommendations have not been accepted and 74 recommendations are under
examination by the Ministry of Railways.
65. Ministry of Railways informed the Committee that non acceptance of recommendations, is
primarily on consideration of practicability, feasibility and relative importance in enhanced safe
operation. Recommendations by CRS are taken very seriously and deliberated thoroughly at the

11
highest level and approval of the concerned Board Member is taken if any recommendation of the
CRS is not to be accepted.
66. When the Committee asked about the mechanism available with the CRS to ensure that
its recommendations accepted by the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) have been
implemented, it was informed that once a recommendation has been accepted by Ministry of
Railways, it issues instructions on the matter to Railway administrations. Responsibility for
ensuring compliance of the instruction rests with Railway Board. The mechanism with Ministry
of Railways as well as with Railway administration for checking implementation of new/modified
instruction is same as the one available to check compliance of already prescribed standards and
rules for working.
67. There is no formal mechanism available with Commissioners of Railway Safety for finding
out progress of implementation of particular instruction issued by Railway Board.
68. To a query on the avenues available for the Commission when its recommendations are not
implemented by Ministry of Railways, it was replied that there can be two kinds of non
implementation.
(d) Non-implementation after acceptance of a recommendation
Ministry of Railway issues instructions to Railway administrations based on the
recommendations of the Commission. But there is no avenue available for getting to
know implementation status of the instruction issued by Ministry of Railways.
Majority of recommendations made by Commissioners in their accident investigation
reports are for ensuring compliance of extant instructions/standards. This indicates
that there are many cases of noncompliance of existing standards/rules/instructions. In
such a situation, chances of compliance of a new instruction are much less, unless
it is very closely monitored. Percolation of new instruction to field level can take
substantial time.
(e) Other kind is non-acceptance of a recommendation
Generally Railway Board conveys reasons for not accepting a recommendation. The
position has mostly been accepted in such cases by CCRS. In case of disagreement,
issue can be taken up again by CCRS with Railway Board in the same context or
whenever some similar context rises. Besides, the recommendations made in accident
investigation reports, Commissioners, through Chief Commissioner or Chief
Commissioner on his own raises certain safety related issues, on which Commission
desires certain action by Ministry of Railways. Some of these get resolved through
discussions between Commissioners and Railway Board. Issues, which remain
unresolved, and the position is not satisfactory in the opinion of Chief Commissioner,
are included in Annual Report of Chief Commissioner.
69. To a specific query on forwarding the proceedings of all the technical committee meetings
of Railway on the railway safety issues to Commission of Railway Safety regularly, it was
informed that at present, proceedings of all the technical meetings of Railway Board on the
railway safety issues are not forwarded to the Commission of Railway Safety. It is because the
Commission of Railway Safety is functioning independently under Ministry of Civil Aviation.
Sending of minutes of all the meetings may adversely affect the independent thought process of
the Commission of Railway Safety which is the spirit behind keeping the Commission outside the
Ministry of Railways. However, the amendments in existing manual recommended by these
committees and accepted by the Competent Authority are sent to the Commission of Railway
Safety for information.

12
70. When enquired about reason for the delay in installation of anti-collision device and voice
recorders in locomotives, as recommended by the Commission of Railway Safety, Ministry of
Railways informed that Anti-Collision Device and voice recorder in locomotives, anti collision
device supplied by Konkan Railway Corporation Limited (KRCL) had been installed over 1736 Route
Kilometres on Northeast Frontier Railway. Based on the experience gained on Northeast Frontier
Railway, the specifications were modified for electrified, multiple line, automatic signalling sections
and trials were conducted on Southern Railway. The deficiencies noticed during trials are being
analysed by KRCL for modifying the software. Further, trials will be conducted after removal of
deficiencies. Besides this, to improve the functionality and dependability of ACD, a new
specification of Train Collision Avoidance System (TCAS) has been drawn which will also prevent
SPAD (Signal Passing at Danger) cases. Expression of Interest (EOI) has been called for
development of an indigenous system. As regards voice recorders, they said that suitable voice
recorders were not available due to the excessive noise condition of locos. Therefore, such
recorders are being developed and their trials are continuing.
71. The Committee notes that the recommendations of the CRS are not mandatory and
the Ministry of Railways takes its own decision on a recommendation of CRS on the basis
of executive and operational and other requirements. The Committee also notes that
majority of the recommendations made by the CRS are accepted by the Ministry of
Railways. However, there does not exist a formal mechanism to inform the CRS whether
the accepted recommendations have actually been implemented. The Committee emphasises
the need for putting a system for this purpose in place so that periodic status reports are
sent to CRS about the compliance of accepted recommendations. It would greatly help him
in shaping his opinion on different issues in his subsequent Reports.
72. The Committee is concerned to note that majority of the recommendations made by
the CRS related to “ensuring compliance of extant instructions/standards” concerning railway
safety. It means that non-observance of safety instructions/standards is the main cause of
railway accidents. The Committee is constrained to conclude that the safety standards and
instructions are not being followed by Ministry of Railways resulting into accident. This puts
the entire safety mechanism including the effectiveness of CRS in question.
73. The Committee finds that some of the advanced safety systems such as Complete
Track Circuiting in station yards, Auxiliary Warning System in suburban section, Audio
Visual Device in Locomotives, Data Loggers, Anti-Collision Device, etc. were recommended
by CRS for consideration by the Ministry of Railways. All of which remain unimplemented
so far on one pretext or the other. The Committee fails to understand why none of these
modern safety devices could be adopted in Indian Railways, wholly or partially. The
Committee notes that Anti Collision Device which was introduced in select rail routes on
trial basis could not be expanded to other routes due to some deficiencies noticed during
the trial period. The Committee hopes that further trials will be conducted after removal
of deficiencies and the device will be installed on the rail routes in the coming years.
SEPARATION OF ROLES OF OPERATOR, REGULATOR AND INVESTIGATOR
74. The Ministry of Civil Aviation argued that it was a modern trend world over that any public
service had two independent key players – the regulator and service provider. While the former lays
down the safety regulations and exercises oversight on the quality of service, the later ensures
compliance to those regulations. In cases of non-adherence to the laid down norms, generally the
regulations provide for enforcement mechanism and penalty. Since in this case, Railways is both
regulator as well as service provider, the conflict of interest is inbuilt in the existing set up.
Therefore, they should be completely independent of one another.

13
75. When asked the Ministry of Railways argued that the Indian Railways was very unique
system in the sense being fully owned by the Government of India. Independence of CRS and
duality roles of Ministry of Railways have been reconciled well under the present Act by keeping
Commission of Railway Safety under Ministry of Civil Aviation.
76. The Committee notes that currently Ministry of Railways, in actual practice, plays
the roles of regulator, the operator and the investigator, as the CRS is largely dependent
upon the Ministry of Railways in many ways for carrying out its mandate. Currently,
separation of these roles is being resorted to in other areas for better management. This
argument of the Ministry of Civil Aviation was not favoured by the Ministry of Railways.
77. The Committee, however, agrees in principle, with the idea of having a regulator
fully independent of the service provider. This has been recommended by the Kakodkar
Committee as well. The Committee recommends that this should be considered for
implementation at the earliest as the existing system does not demarcate clearly between
the roles of regulator and the service provider leaving thereby enough scope for conflict of
interest. That may be the reason why the Ministry of Railways is not in favour of disturbing
the existing structure in any manner.
HUMAN RESOURCES IN CRS
78. The Ministry of Civil Aviation when asked about the recruitment procedure for staff of the
CRS and agency responsible for this, informed that the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety was
selected in consultation with the Union Public Service Commission from amongst the
Commissioners of Railway Safety, who have put in minimum of three years of regular service in
the grade. The appointment is made with the approval of Appointments Committee of the Cabinet.
Commissioners of Railway Safety are appointed on absorption basis in consultation with the Union
Public Service Commission and with the approval of Appointments Committee of the Cabinet.
79. Thus, the Railways are the only source of officers for appointments to post of Chief and
other Commissioners of Railway Safety. Willing officers holding analogous post on regular basis or
with five years of regular service in Senior Administrative Grade of Indian Railways Service of
Engineers, Indian Railway Service of Mechanical Engineers, Indian Railway Service of Signal
Engineers, Indian Railway Service of Electrical Engineers and Indian Railway Traffic Service are
eligible for consideration for appointment as CRS. 60% of the posts of CRS (total 10 posts
including CCRS) are filled up from amongst IRSE and remaining 40% from amongst other
disciplines.
80. The Deputy Commissioners of Railway Safety are appointed on deputation basis from
amongst the officers of railways from signalling, electrical, mechanical, operating and civil
engineering departments. The normal period of deputation in the Commission of Railway Safety is
five years. The supporting staff of the Commission of Railway Safety is appointed through Staff
Selection Commission or other methods as applicable in the Government of India’s Offices.
81. The Ministry of Civil Aviation is responsible for appointment to the grade of Chief
Commissioner of Railway Safety and Commissioner of Railway Safety. Office of Commissioner of
Railway Safety is primarily responsible for appointment of supporting staff in Circle Office. The
category-wise sanctioned and existing staff strength is placed at Annexure-II.
82. Regarding strengthening of staff in CRS, the Ministry of Civil Aviation informed that
Railway Safety Review Committee 1998 had felt the need for strengthening the Commissioner of
Railway Safety at field level and recommended that each Commissioner of Railway Safety should
be assisted at least by one Deputy Commissioner of Railway Safety and two Senior Inspectors.
Ministry of Civil Aviation accepted 1
st part of the recommendation, i.e. assistance of one Deputy

14
Commissioner, and did not accept 2 nd part i.e.  assistance of two Senior Inspectors to
Commissioner of Railway Safety.
83. To a query on the training courses offered to officials of CRS and the allocation of budget
for training, it was informed by the Ministry of Civil Aviation that no training course was offered
to Commissioners of Railway Safety and Deputy Commissioners. There is no allocation for training
at present in the Budget. CRS had sometimes deputed officials for familiarisation with new
technology. Deputations of officials from CRS during the last three years were funded by Mumbai
Railway Vikas Corporation and Metro Railway organizations.
84. The Committee feels that the autonomy and effectiveness of CRS is greatly
constrained due to the fact that it has to depend mainly on the Ministry of Railways for
technical manpower and other support. It also has to adjust to the convenience of the
concerned railway administration for inspections etc. The Committee finds that
Commissioners are working without any technical support. The CRS is currently managing
with 111 staff as against the sanctioned strength of 145. Even the sanctioned staff is
inadequate and CRS needs more technical staff and adequate infrastructure mainly at field
level, to deal with its increased work due to ever expanding rail network. The Committee
recommends that the man- power in CRS at various levels should be increased and
vacancies filled on priority. The Committee emphasizes the need for strengthening and
expansion of office of Commissioner of Railway Safety at Zonal level with adequate officers
preferably from different technical background relevant for railways.
85. The Committee notes that Deputy Commissioners of Railway Safety are appointed on
deputation basis from amongst the officers of railways from signalling, electrical,
mechanical, operating and civil engineering departments. The Committee recommends that
possibility be explored to ensure that Railway Officers join the CRS at some junior level,
say below the Deputy CsRS rank so that such officer should be in a position to reach the
level of Commissioner of Railway Safety in the course of time. The Committee hopes that
this would widen the promotional avenues in CRS and the availability of more promotional
avenues will definitely attract talents to CRS.
86. The Committee recommends to upgrade the status of Chief Commissioner of Railway
Safety and Commissioners of Railway Safety to the level of Secretary and Special Secretary
to Government of India respectively, which would greatly help CRS to improve it efficiency
and effectiveness, while dealing with the Railways Board and Ministry of Railways. It would
also result in attracting the best talent to the Commission. The financial implication of this
recommendation will be insignificant as the CCRS normally draws the pay at the maximum
of the grade (Rs 80,000 which is also the grade of Secretary)) and the grade of CRS will
go up by only Rs.1000 (from 79,000 max. to 80,000 max.) This issue is hanging fire since
a long time and had been recommended earlier also by this Committee in its 83
rd Report
and also by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Railways in its
19
th Report. Railway Safety Review Committee headed by Justice Khanna in 1998 had also
made recommendations in this regard. The Committee would like to know the reasons for
non-implementation of these recommendations.
TRAINING AND SKILL UPGRADATION
87. The Committee was surprised to know that a major handicap in the current set up
is that there is no system of skill upgradation for the officers working in the Commission.
While the railway technology is constantly changing, the training needs of the CRS officials
in the new technology developing fast are not looked after. The Committee feels that
frequent exposure to specialized training courses are required for keeping the Commission

15
officials abreast of the developments in technology and best practices being followed in the
more developed railway systems. There is no budget for this purpose nor does the
Commission have any powers for arranging such trainings. The Committee notes that
Section 9 of Railway Act which deals with the facilities to be afforded to the Commissioners,
lays down that all reasonable facilities shall be afforded by railway administration for
discharge of the duties and exercise of power by the Commissioners but the railway
administration does not include the Commissioners in the study tours or technology
trainings arranged by them for railway officers. The Committee recommends that Railway
Board must reserve slots in relevant training course meant for its senior officers for
officers of the Commission for which budget may be shared with the Ministry of Civil
Aviation. The Committee feels that it should be taken up on urgent basis.
RECOMMENDATIONS OF HIGH LEVEL SAFETY REVIEW COMMITTEE ON SAFETY ARCHI-
TECTURE ON INDIAN RAILWAYS (DR. ANIL KAKODKAR COMMITTEE)
88. The Kakodkar Committee has made 106 recommendations, of which 5 relate to the
Commission of Railway Safety. When asked about the comments of the Ministry of Railways, the
Committee was informed that these are under consideration and Ministry had yet to finalise its
opinion on them. The Ministry of Civil Aviation on the other hand, furnished its responses to the
Kakodkar Committee Report relating to Railway Safety Commission. The Kakodkar Committee
recommendations pertaining to or having a bearing on the Commission of Railway Safety are as
follows:–
(a) A Railway Safety Authority (RSA) should be set up as a statutory body independent
of Indian Railway Board under the Ministry. The Authority shall have a separate
budget fully funded by the Ministry of Railways and shall be backed by a full-fledged
Secretariat;
(b) New post of Member (Safety and Research) in Railway Board should be created who
will be the link between Railway Board, Railway Safety Authority (RSA) and Railway
Research and Development Council (RRDC) at the apex level;
(f) Existing posts of Chief Safety Officers on Zonal railways should be upgraded to
Additional General Manager (Safety) as part of the new Safety Architecture;
(g) The Institution of Commissioner of Railway Safety should be merged with Railway
Safety Authority and should be strengthened and empowered. There should be CRS
for each Zonal railway and each CRS should have a Regulatory inspection consisting
of HODs of the concerned technical department;
(h) Role of Commissioner of Railway Safety should be withdrawn from the routine
clearance proposals from the railways such as changes in Plan, Working Rules, etc.
which consume lots of his time. These should be dealt and finalized by the concerned
Principal Head of the Department who should full responsibility of the changes.
89. To a specific query on the steps taken to address the flaws in the existing railway safety
system as pointed out by the Kakodkar Committee Report, it was informed that action has already
been initiated on some of the recommendations like setting up an IT based system for reporting
of safety related issues and maintaining Accidents data base, redundancy in track circuits, filling
up of safety categories vacancies, issue of list of safety category items, sanctioning of works of
ETCS level 1 (on 3397 route kilometres covering Automatic Signalling System), Elimination of
Unmanned Level Crossing gates etc.(1360 UMLC gates have been manned since April 2010 upto
September, 2012 whereas 1529 Level Crossings have been eliminated by way of closure/merger/
provision of subways in the same period).

16
90. The Ministry of Civil Aviation while reacting to the recommendation of the Kakodkar Committee
submitted that since in this case Railways is both regulator as well as service provider, the conflict of
interest is inbuilt in the existing set up. These should be completely independent of each other.
91. In case of Ministry of Railways, the role of the Government and the service provider are
all merged in one entity, namely the Railway Board. Now it has been proposed to create a RSA
under the Ministry of Railways, which would have a Board represented by members from the
Railway Board. This will not ensure independence of the RSA, and the safety regulator would be
practically under the control and supervision of the service provider. It has been further proposed
that the RSA would act as ‘an independent authority under the Government’ and would be
responsible for all aspects pertaining to railway safety regulation and enforcement ‘while the prime
responsibility for safety continues with the Railway Board’. This is a self-contradictory statement
for the reasons already mentioned. Hence the independence of the safety regulator sought to be
achieved through the proposed RSA would be a non-starter.
92. The Ministry of Civil Aviation submitted the following as the necessary administrative
reforms to make the Railway Safety Authority an effective and independent regulator:-
(a) Separation of the Service Provider and the Government in the Ministry of Railways–
the Railway Board should be responsible for the provision of Railway Transport in the
country and should work under the overall control and superintendence of the
Government, i.e. , Ministry of Railways. For this to be achieved, a separate
administrative set up would have to be created at the Government level in the Ministry
of Railways.
(b) Creation of an independent Safety Regulator, namely RSA, ideally through separate
Legislation, to be housed in the Ministry of Railways. The RSA should be completely
independent of the service provider, i.e. the Railway Board.
(i) The RSA should be free to devise its regulations for safety oversight after
thorough stakeholder consultation in a laid down manner. The safety regulations
should be continuously updated keeping pace with the emerging issues and
changing technology.
(ii) The RSA should be adequately staffed with trained and skilled manpower up to
the field level, so as to allow the RSA to fulfil its mandate of effective safety
oversight.
(iii) The funding of RSA should ideally be through a safety cess on the passengers,
so as to ensure independent and build passengers’ stake in the safety oversight
mechanism.
93. The Ministry of Civil Aviation further informed the Committee that with the creation of the
proposed RSA, the role of the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety and Commissioners of
Railway Safety would be limited to the investigation into serious railway accidents. It would
therefore become necessary to bring about necessary legislative amendments in the Railways Act,
to redefine the role of the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety and Commissioners of Railway
Safety. Ideally this role of accident investigation should be vested into an independent accident
investigation commission, to be housed in another Ministry, say the Ministry of Civil Aviation as
per the existing arrangement, so as to ensure the independence of accident investigation.
94. The Committee notes that the High Level Safety Review Committee headed by
Dr. Anil Kakodkar has made important recommendations for setting up of Railway Safety
Authority and also for strengthening and empowering CRS. These recommendations came
when this Committee was half way through its considerations of working of CRS. Ministry of
Railways was requested to furnish its response to relevant recommendations of the Kakodkar

17
Committee, which it said were under consideration. Whereas, Ministry of Civil Aviation did
furnished detailed comments to those recommendations that have been given in the
paragraphs above. Although, most of recommendations of Kakodkar Committee appear to be
of far reaching significance for strengthening safety regulations in Indian Railways, this
Committee could not apply its mind in the absence of Ministry of railways’ response. It would,
therefore, like to call upon the Ministry of Railways to finalise its responses at the earliest
as it has already taken a long time. While, doing so it should discuss the issues with the
Ministry of Civil Aviation and CRS. The Committee was informed that the Kakodkar
Committee had not consulted the Ministry of Civil Aviation while finalising its
recommendations. At this stage, the Committee can only say that recommendations of the
Kakodkar Committee and comments/suggestions given by the Ministry of Civil Aviation
appear to be very significant to be considered seriously. The Ministry of Railways should
furnish its response in this regard to this Committee as soon as these are finalised. The
Committee recommends that while implementing the recommendations the views of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation may be taken into account and due weightage should be given. The
role of Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety and Commissioners of Railway Safety should
be clearly defined in the new dispension and any legislative amendments, if necessary, must
be brought forward accordingly. At any cost the role of operator, regulator and investigator
must be clearly delineated and put under different administrative control.
95. Due to increase in the Metro Rail network in Delhi and its expansion to other cities
as well, the Committee feels that the number of existing circles Safety Commission may
need to be increased to cope up with future Metro Rail safety requirements. Accordingly,
the existing Railways, CRS needs to be expanded and empowered.
GENERAL OBSERV ATION
96. The Committee on the basis of the deliberations with the Ministry of Civil Aviation
and that of Railways and information made available to it finds that the existing system in
which CRS has to function, leaves much to be desired. The CRS has to work under lot of
limitations and has to depend for so many things on the Ministry of Railways that it is not
able to exercise, in actual practice, even those powers, that are available to it in Railways
Act and the Rules made thereunder. Its autonomy, thus, is greatly impaired.
97. The CRS is not having much say in the monitoring of railway safety presently in the
country except accident investigation and inspection of new lines before they are commissioned.
The CRS is not having any power to carry out annual audit of safety parameters of Indian
Railways. The Committee emphasizes that the CRS should be strengthened with required
powers and autonomy for the betterment of railway safety in the country.
98. The Committee found that apart from Parliamentary Committees, many high-powered
Committees/Commissions, constituted by the Government from time to time, have made
important recommendations for empowering Commission of Railway Safety. But most of these
have largely remained unimplemented. The Committee fails to understand if it is due to lack
of will or resistance from the Railways to change the status quo. The Committee is concerned
about this. Recommendations/suggestions made in this Report, in fact, fall in two categories -
those which can be implemented by executive/administrative orders and those that are long
term needing legislative intervention. Those belonging to former may be implemented urgently,
not to be delayed for those in the latter categories. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
the Action Taken Replies should be submitted to it separately for the two categories furnishing
status of their implementation in clear terms. The Committee feels that most of the problems
with the CRS mentioned in this Report can be taken care of even in the existing system if the
recommendations/suggestions of the Committee are implemented urgently.

18
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE — AT A GLANCE
However, after the first round of discussions with the both the Ministries separately
and also with the CCRS, the Committee found that the two Ministries had quite different,
sometimes opposite views on certain crucial issues relating to effectiveness, autonomy and
need to empower and restructure the CRS. The Ministry of Railways maintained that the
CRS was fulfilling its mandate effectively and had enjoyed complete autonomy and that its
views are taken quite seriously and most of its recommendations are implemented and that
there was no need to disturb the existing arrangement to further restructure/empower CRS.
The Ministry of Civil Aviation which is also central government for the CRS had expressed
contrary views on many such issues. (Para 8)
Duality of Command
Thus, CRS functions under Rules framed by both the Ministries under the Railways
Act. While accident investigation related rules are issued by the Ministry of Civil Aviation,
accidents inquiry related rules were issued by the Ministry of Railways. Though the CRS is
under the administrative control of Ministry of Civil Aviation, it takes its origin and
discharges its duties as per the Rules and Regulations framed under the Railways Act. The
Committee feels that involvement of two Ministries – Ministry of Railways and Ministry of
Civil Aviation, leads to avoidable confusion and also makes it difficult to apportion the
responsibilities due to duality of control and command in the functioning of CRS. It also
leaves scope for conflict of interest for Ministry of Railways. (Para 16)
Besides, under the Railways Act the term Central Government means the Ministry
of Railways. There being some overlapping in safety related issues between the Railway
Board and CRS as it is, this confusion gets further confounded. Although Ministry of
Railways denied the existence of such a confusion, instances of unilateral action by the
Railway Board for deciding standards and codes and informing the Commission of Railway
Safety without any involvement/consultation with the latter were brought to the notice of
the Committee. The Committee is constrained to conclude that such an arrangement is
suitable to Ministry of Railways which is why, it does not want to disturb the existing
arrangement. (Para 17)
The Government of India (Transaction of Business) Rules clearly delineate the
functions of various Ministries/Departments of Government of India. The Committee
recommends that the term Central Government occurring in the Railway Act should
adequately be defined to demarcate the functions of Ministry of Railways and Ministry of
Civil Aviation to avoid any confusion in respect of powers, mandate and autonomous
working of CRS between the two Ministries. (Para 18)
The Committee raised the issue of adequacy of existing rules, legislations relating to
Railway Safety and a need, if any, to amend these to meet the present day requirements,
the Ministry of Railways informed that the existing rules, legislations relating to Railway
Safety were adequate and that there was no need to amend them. However, review of safety
standards is a continuous process and amendments in the manuals, codes, general rules, etc
are made as and when required. (Para 19)
18

19
It was brought before the Committee that whenever the Ministry of Railways propose
to change any rules relating to railway safety, the same is referred to CRS, but
modifications or changes in standards or codes pertaining to railway safety were not
referred. Thus the changes/modifications in safety codes are implemented without
consultation with CRS. As per the Government of India (Transaction of Business) Rules
when the subject of a case concerns more than one Department, no decision can be taken
or order issued until all such departments have concurred, or failing such concurrence, a
decision thereon has been taken by or under the authority of the Cabinet. As such any
modification/change of rules or standards by the Ministry of Railways needs the concurrence
of Ministry of Civil Aviation also. (Para 20)
The Annual Report of CRS for 2010-11, gives specific examples of amendment/
modification of rules/policy in respect of safety train operations without the information/
involvement of the office of CRS. One such examples was revised Policy Circular dated the
12
th July, 2010 on the ‘sanction of speed of nominated trains on specific routes’ and the
increase of speed of trains without the approval of Commissioner of Railway Safety of the
concerned Zone, resulting in danger to travelling public. (Para 21)
The Committee is of the view that any decision taken by the Ministry of Railways
in respect of matters relating to railway safety should have the concurrence (not merely
consultation) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation as per the Government of India (Transaction
of Business) Rules. (Para 22)
In view of the scope for confusion due to dual control in respect of CRS on many
respects, this Committee had recommended in its 83
rd Report to go for a stand-alone
legislation for Commission of Railway Safety in the year 2005. As such, the Ministry of
Civil Aviation had prepared a draft ‘Commission of Railway Safety Bill’ which, the
Committee was informed, did not find favour with the Ministry of Railways and eventually
the proposal was dropped in the year 2010. The Committee does not know the exact reason
for Railway’s reservation in this regard but is still convinced that in the present rail safety
scenario, having a separate legislation needs serious consideration for clearly defining the
role, powers and jurisdiction of CRS for ensuring its autonomy and effective functioning.
(Para 23)
CHIEF COMMISSIONER OF RAILWAY SAFETY
FIXING OF STANDARDS
The Committee feels that minimum standards for railway tracks and rolling stock
should be codified in consultation with the Commission of Railways Safety, Ministry of Civil
Aviation with a view to rule out any possibility of lowering the required standards as per
its convenience by the Ministry of Railways. The Committee also feels that the standards
fixed should not be lowered on the plea of scarcity of resources to maintain them. The CRS
should be empowered to carry out periodic safety audit of Railways to ensure the proper
functioning of the railway safety apparatus of the huge railway network in the country.
(Para 42)
INSPECTION
The argument extended by the Ministry of Railways in respect of its order issued in
the year 1953 relieving CsRS of their duty of ‘annual periodical inspection’ is not legally
tenable. The said circular says very clearly that Government Inspectors (then) are being
“relieved of their responsibility under Section 4(2)(b) of the Indian Railways Act 1890”. It

20
took away, in fact, the duty of inspection provided to the Commissioners by the Act of 1890.
This amounts to by-passing the law making power of Parliament. Besides, the Committee
does not agree with the Ministry’s argument that this was done under the power to issue
direction by the Central Government, as provided in Section 6(b) of the Railways Act. The
Committee is of the view that the power to issue directions given to the Ministry by the
Act, cannot be used to take away something given by the same Act. This is against the basic
tenets  of subordinate legislation. This ‘power to issue direction’ should relate to such
details, procedures, manner, formalities, timings, etc. of the inspection and certainly not for
withdrawing these powers. And the Ministry is supposed to have laid down rules, etc. for
carrying out these functions. The Committee does not know if any rule, regulations etc.
have been framed under this. (Para 48)
Although the Ministry of Railways contended that the said circular of 1953 became
ineffective with the Railways Act 1989 coming into operation, the Committee was informed
that the said circular has continued to remain in operation till date. The Committee feels
that this circular should have been objected to by the then Ministry of Communication when
it was issued and later by the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the matter could have been
settled in consultation with the Ministry of Law, if needed. And if the 1953 Order became
inoperative with the new Railway Act coming into being in 1989, the Ministry of Railways
should have issued a fresh circular clarifying the position, which unfortunately was not
done. In the absence of such a clarification, the said Order continued to remain in
operation till date. The Committee fails to understand the silence of both the Ministries and
desires this issue to be settled on priority in consultation with the Ministry of Law &
Justice under intimation to this Committee. (Para 49)
The Committee is of the opinion that powers for annual inspections of open lines and
asset of the Railway by CRS should be strengthened. The Commissioner of Railway Safety
is “invited” by General Manager to the annual inspection conducted by them, as per the
existing practice. The Committee feels that such a practice makes CsRS dependent on the
GMs who may carry out inspection as per their desire and convenience. The Committee
feels that the CsRS should be given independence to carry out periodic or other inspection
of railway lines as provided in Section 6 (b) of Indian Railways Act 1989. (Para 50)
INVESTIGATION OF RAILWAY ACCIDENTS
The Committee notes that the accident enquiry is done as per the provisions of
Railway Accident Rules, 1998 (Ministry of Civil Aviation) and Notice of and Inquiries into
Accidents Rules, 1998 (Ministry of Railways). As such, the investigator - the CRS, carries
out the accident inquiry on the basis of laid down procedure by the service provider – the
Ministry of Railways. Since CRS does not have any independent investigating mechanism
for accidents, it has to depend mainly on the Ministry of Railways for technical manpower,
infrastructure and other logistical support required for investigations as well as inspections.
(Para 55)
The Committee notes that CRS has powers to investigate a railway accident but
normally it does so only after receiving a notice from the concerned GM. The accidents for
which no notice has been issued and those which the CRS is unable to investigate for some
reasons, are investigated by the Ministry of Railways themselves. It has also been provided
that the CRS investigates those accidents resulting in loss of passengers’ life, grievous hurt
or damage to property worth more than Rs. 25 lakhs. Besides, sometimes accidents are
investigated under Commissions of Inquiry Act also. Thus, in actual practice, CRS is able
to investigate only some accidents notified by the concerned GMs and a large number of

21
accidents are left to be investigated by the Ministry of Railways, the service provider
themselves. Although the Railways Act provides that the CRS can investigate any accident,
notified or not, CRS, in actual practice, is not able to do so in view of the limitations -
legal, infrastructural, technical, manpower, etc. under which it has to function. This
presents a highly disappointing picture, where the CRS’s powers relating to accident
investigation, the basic mandate of CRS, is greatly restricted. Therefore, the Committee
emphasizes the need for empowering CRS for increasing its autonomy and effectiveness as
an accident investigator. (Para 56)
The Committee also feels that delayed reporting of such accidents/incidents in
violation of Section 113(2) of Railways Act 1989 should be considered as serious and the
concerned zone of the railways should be penalized for such violations accordingly.
(Para 57)
It has come to the notice of the Committee that the Ministry of Railways had
enhanced the financial threshold for investigating an accident to Rs. 2.5 crores from to
Rs. 25 lakhs as provided in the Rules, without making necessary changes in the concerned
rules. The Committee feels that through this enhancement, a large number of accidents
have been excluded from the purview of the CRS. The Committee feels that this is another
example of circumventing the Act of Parliament and Rules made thereunder, by an
executive order i.e. through internal manual of the Ministry of Railways. If it was felt
necessary to enhance the financial limits, it should have been done by amending both the
Rules and notifying them in the Gazette and placing them before the Parliament. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should amend the concerned Rules at
the earliest and place them before the Parliament instead of adopting the executive orders.
(Para 58)
The Committee notes that there are large numbers of incidents which may be
serious enough but do not lead to human deaths etc. are not covered under Section 113.
There may be ‘accident’ under Section 120 and, therefore, may not be investigated by any
agency. The Committee is of the opinion that such serious incidents should also be
investigated with a view to take preventive measures so that minor incidents do not lead
to major accidents. The Committee feels that for this purpose ‘incidents’ need to be defined
appropriately in Section 120 and inquiry be made necessary for them as well. (Para 59)
IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS OF CRS
The Committee notes that the recommendations of the CRS are not mandatory and
the Ministry of Railways takes its own decision on a recommendation of CRS on the basis
of executive and operational and other requirements. The Committee also notes that
majority of the recommendations made by the CRS are accepted by the Ministry of
Railways. However, there does not exist a formal mechanism to inform the CRS whether
the accepted recommendations have actually been implemented. The Committee
emphasises the need for putting a system for this purpose in place so that periodic status
reports are sent to CRS about the compliance of accepted recommendations. It would
greatly help him in shaping his opinion on different issues in his subsequent Reports.
(Para 71)
The Committee is concerned to note that majority of the recommendations made by
the CRS related to “ensuring compliance of extant instructions/standards” concerning
railway safety. It means that non-observance of safety instructions/standards is the main
cause of railway accidents. The Committee is constrained to conclude that the safety
standards and instructions are not being followed by Ministry of Railways resulting into

22
accident. This puts the entire safety mechanism including the effectiveness of CRS in
question. (Para 72)
The Committee finds that some of the advanced safety systems such as Complete
Track Circuiting in station yards, Auxiliary Warning System in suburban section, Audio
Visual Device in Locomotives, Data Loggers, Anti-Collision Device, etc. were recommended
by CRS for consideration by the Ministry of Railways. All of which remain unimplemented
so far on one pretext or the other. The Committee fails to understand why none of these
modern safety devices could be adopted in Indian Railways, wholly or partially. The
Committee notes that Anti Collision Device which was introduced in select rail routes on
trial basis could not be expanded to other routes due to some deficiencies noticed during
the trial period. The Committee hopes that further trials will be conducted after removal
of deficiencies and the device will be installed on the rail routes in the coming years.
(Para 73)
SEPARATION OF ROLES OF OPERATOR, REGULATOR AND INVESTIGATOR
The Committee notes that currently Ministry of Railways, in actual practice, plays
the roles of regulator, the operator and the investigator, as the CRS is largely dependent
upon the Ministry of Railways in many ways for carrying out its mandate. Currently,
separation of these roles is being resorted to in other areas for better management. This
argument of the Ministry of Civil Aviation was not favoured by the Ministry of Railways.
(Para 76)
The Committee, however, agrees in principle, with the idea of having a regulator
fully independent of the service provider. This has been recommended by the Kakodkar
Committee as well. The Committee recommends that this should be considered for
implementation at the earliest as the existing system does not demarcate clearly between
the roles of regulator and the service provider leaving thereby enough scope for conflict of
interest. That may be the reason why the Ministry of Railways is not in favour of disturbing
the existing structure in any manner. (Para 77)
HUMAN RESOURCES IN CRS
The Committee feels that the autonomy and effectiveness of CRS is greatly
constrained due to the fact that it has to depend mainly on the Ministry of Railways for
technical manpower and other support. It also has to adjust to the convenience of the
concerned railway administration for inspections etc. The Committee finds that
Commissioners are working without any technical support. The CRS is currently managing
with 111 staff as against the sanctioned strength of 145. Even the sanctioned staff is
inadequate and CRS needs more technical staff and adequate infrastructure mainly at field
level, to deal with its increased work due to ever expanding rail network. The Committee
recommends that the man- power in CRS at various levels should be increased and
vacancies filled on priority. The Committee emphasizes the need for strengthening and
expansion of office of Commissioner of Railway Safety at Zonal level with adequate officers
preferably from different technical background relevant for railways. (Para 84)
The Committee notes that Deputy Commissioners of Railway Safety are appointed on
deputation basis from amongst the officers of railways from signalling, electrical,
mechanical, operating and civil engineering departments. The Committee recommends that
possibility be explored to ensure that Railway Officers join the CRS at some junior level,
say below the Deputy CsRS rank so that such officer should be in a position to reach the
level of Commissioner of Railway Safety in the course of time. The Committee hopes that

23
this would widen the promotional avenues in CRS and the availability of more promotional
avenues will definitely attract talents to CRS. (Para 85)
The Committee recommends to upgrade the status of Chief Commissioner of Railway
Safety and Commissioners of Railway Safety to the level of Secretary and Special Secretary
to Government of India respectively, which would greatly help CRS to improve it efficiency
and effectiveness, while dealing with the Railways Board and Ministry of Railways. It would
also result in attracting the best talent to the Commission. The financial implication of this
recommendation will be insignificant as the CCRS normally draws the pay at the maximum
of the grade (Rs 80,000 which is also the grade of Secretary)) and the grade of CRS will
go up by only Rs.1000 (from 79,000 max. to 80,000 max.) This issue is hanging fire since
a long time and had been recommended earlier also by this Committee in its 83
rd Report
and also by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Railways in its
19
th Report. Railway Safety Review Committee headed by Justice Khanna in 1998 had also
made recommendations in this regard. The Committee would like to know the reasons for
non-implementation of these recommendations. (Para 86)
TRAINING AND SKILL UPGRADATION
The Committee was surprised to know that a major handicap in the current set up
is that there is no system of skill upgradation for the officers working in the Commission.
While the railway technology is constantly changing, the training needs of the CRS officials
in the new technology developing fast are not looked after. The Committee feels that
frequent exposure to specialized training courses are required for keeping the Commission
officials abreast of the developments in technology and best practices being followed in the
more developed railway systems. There is no budget for this purpose nor does the
Commission have any powers for arranging such trainings. The Committee notes that
Section 9 of Railway Act which deals with the facilities to be afforded to the Commissioners,
lays down that all reasonable facilities shall be afforded by railway administration for
discharge of the duties and exercise of power by the Commissioners but the railway
administration does not include the Commissioners in the study tours or technology
trainings arranged by them for railway officers. The Committee recommends that Railways
Board must reserve slots in relevant training course meant for its senior officers for
officers of the Commission for which budget may be shared with the Ministry of Civil
Aviation. The Committee feels that it should be taken up on urgent basis. (Para 87)
RECOMMENDATIONS OF HIGH LEVEL SAFETY REVIEW COMMITTEE ON SAFETY ARCHI-
TECTURE ON INDIAN RAILWAYS (DR. ANIL KAKODKAR COMMITTEE)
The Committee notes that the High Level Safety Review Committee headed by
Dr. Anil Kakodkar has made important recommendations for setting up of Railway Safety
Authority and also for strengthening and empowering CRS. These recommendations came
when this Committee was half way through its considerations of working of CRS. Ministry
of Railways was requested to furnish its response to relevant recommendations of the
Kakodkar Committee, which it said were under consideration. Whereas, Ministry of Civil
Aviation did furnished detailed comments to those recommendations that have been given
in the paragraphs above. Although, most of recommendations of Kakodkar Committee
appear to be of far reaching significance for strengthening safety regulations in Indian
Railways, this Committee could not apply its mind in the absence of Ministry of railways’
response. It would, therefore, like to call upon the Ministry of Railways to finalise its
responses at the earliest as it has already taken a long time. While, doing so it should
discuss the issues with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and CRS. The Committee was

24
informed that the Kakodkar Committee had not consulted the Ministry of Civil Aviation
while finalising its recommendations. At this stage, the Committee can only say that
recommendations of the Kakodkar Committee and comments/suggestions given by the
Ministry of Civil Aviation appear to be very significant to be considered seriously. The
Ministry of Railways should furnish its response in this regard to this Committee as soon
as these are finalised. The Committee recommends that while implementing the
recommendations the views of the Ministry of Civil Aviation may be taken into account and
due weightage should be given. The role of Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety and
Commissioners of Railway Safety should be clearly defined in the new dispension and any
legislative amendments, if necessary, must be brought forward accordingly. At any cost the
role of operator, regulator and investigator must be clearly delineated and put under
different administrative control. (Para 94)
Due to increase in the Metro Rail network in Delhi and its expansion to other cities
as well, the Committee feels that the number of existing circles Safety Commission may
need to be increased to cope up with future Metro Rail safety requirements. Accordingly,
the existing Railways, CRS needs to be expanded and empowered. (Para 95)
General Observation
The Committee on the basis of the deliberations with the Ministry of Civil Aviation
and that of Railways and information made available to it finds that the existing system in
which CRS has to function, leaves much to be desired. The CRS has to work under lot of
limitations and has to depend for so many things on the Ministry of Railways that it is not
able to exercise, in actual practice, even those powers, that are available to it in Railways
Act and the Rules made thereunder. Its autonomy, thus, is greatly impaired. (Para 96)
The CRS is not having much say in the monitoring of railway safety presently in the
country except accident investigation and inspection of new lines before they are
commissioned. The CRS is not having any power to carry out annual audit of safety
parameters of Indian Railways. The Committee emphasizes that the CRS should be
strengthened with required powers and autonomy for the betterment of railway safety in the
country. (Para 97)
The Committee found that apart from Parliamentary Committees, many high-
powered Committees/Commissions, constituted by the Government from time to time, have
made important recommendations for empowering Commission of Railway Safety. But most
of these have largely remained unimplemented. The Committee fails to understand if it is
due to lack of will or resistance from the Railways to change the status quo. The Committee
is concerned about this. Recommendations/suggestions made in this Report, in fact, fall in
two categories - those which can be implemented by executive/administrative orders and
those that are long term needing legislative intervention. Those belonging to former may
be implemented urgently, not to be delayed for those in the latter categories. The
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Action Taken Replies should be submitted to
it separately for the two categories furnishing status of their implementation in clear terms.
The Committee feels that most of the problems with the CRS mentioned in this Report can
be taken care of even in the existing system if the recommendations/suggestions of the
Committee are implemented urgently. (Para 98)

25
ANNEXURE

26

27
ANNEXURE-I
(vide Para-3)
Sl. No. Circle & HQ. Jurisdiction Route KM
1. Central Circle, Mumbai (i) Central Railway, Mumbai 7,610.590
(ii) W est Central Railway Jabalpur
(iii) Konkan Railway, Navi Mumbai
2. Eastern Circle, Kolkata (i) Eastern Railway, Kolkata 6,041.630
(ii) East Central Railway, Hajipur
3. Northern Circle, Northern Railway, New Delhi 6,968.400
New Delhi
4. North Eastern Circle, (i) N.E. Railway, Gorakhpur 6,817.300
Lucknow
(ii) North Central Railway, Allahabad
5. North Frontier Circle, (i) N.F. Railway, Guwahati 3,931.306
Kolkata
(ii) Metro Railway, Kolkata
6. Southern Circle, (i) Southern Railway, Chennai 8,274.530
Bangalore
(ii) South Western Railway, Hubli
7. South Central Circle, South Central Railway, Secunderabad 5,803.360
Secunderabad
8. South Eastern Circle, (i) S.E. Railway, Kolkata 7,650.680
Kolkata
(ii) East Coast Railway, Bhubneshwar
(iii) South East Central Railway, Bilaspur
9. Western Circle, Mumbai (i) W estern Railway, Mumbai 1 1,640.800
(ii) North Western Railway, Jaipur
27

28
ANNEXURE-II
(vide Para-81)
Sl. Name of Post Total Total No. of existing post
No. sanctioned as per return No. 7 of
post 30.9.2011. Received from
Circle office/Technical Wing
1. Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety 1 1
(Scale Rs.75500-80000)
2. Commissioner of Railway Safety 9 9
(Scale Rs.67000-79000)
3. Dy. Commissioner of Railway Safety 1 1
(General)
[Scale Rs.37400-67000+8700(GP)]
4. Dy. Commissioner of Railway Safety 13 3
(Technical)
[Scale Rs.37400-67000+8700(GP)]
5. Assistant Director (Official Language) 1 1
[Scale Rs.15600-39100-5400 (GP)]
6. Office Superintendent 9 7
[Scale Rs.15600-39100-4200 (GP)]
7. Stenographer 11 8
[Scale Rs.15600-39100-4200 (GP)]
8. Safety Assistant 9 7
[Scale Rs.15600-39100-4200 (GP)]
9. Technical Assistant 2 2
[Scale Rs.5200-20200-2800 (GP)]
10. Junior Hindi Translator 1 1
[Scale Rs.15600-39100-4200 (GP)]
11 Upper Division clerk 11 9
[Scale Rs.5200-20200-2400 (GP)]
12 Lower Division Clerk 27 19
[Scale Rs.5200-20200-1900 (GP)]
13 Staff Car Driver-II 1 1
[Scale Rs.5200-20200-2400 (GP)]
14 Staff Car Driver 2 2
[Scale Rs.5200-20200-1900 (GP)]
MTS 47 40
T
OTAL : 145 111
28

29
MINUTES

I
FIRST MEETING
The Committee met at 12.00 N OON on Wednesday the 19 th October, 2011 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
4. Shri Ramdas Agarwal
5. Shri Vikram Verma
6. Shri Thomas Sangma
7. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
LOK SABHA
8. Shri. Mahesh Joshi
9. Shri Hassan Khan
10. Dr. Kruparani Killi
11. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
12. Shrimati Ranee Narah
13. Shri Rajaram Pal
14. Shri Rudramadhab Ray
15. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
16. Shrimati Meena Singh
17. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
18. Shri Rakesh Singh
19. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
31

32
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. In view of the deteriorating safety scenario, the Chairman proposed that during the current
year (2011-12) the safety aspects relating to Railways, Civil Aviation. Road Transport and Shipping
may be taken up for examination and report. The Committee agreed and felt that other subjects
also may be taken up depending on the availability of time.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9* * *
10. * * *
11. The Committee decided to meet again on the 15
th November, 2011 to hear presentation on
the ‘Functioning of Commission of Railway Safety’ and also on ‘Aviation safety and related issues’
by the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation.
12. The Committee adjourned at 1.10 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

33
II
SECOND MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday the 15 th November, 2011 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
4. Shri Vikram Verma
5. Shri Thomas Sangma
6. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
7. Shri Syed Azeez Pasha
LOK SABHA
8. Shri. Mahesh Joshi
9. Shri Hassan Khan
10. Dr. Kruparani Killi
11. Shri Jose K. Mani
12. Shrimati Ranee Narah
13. Shri Rajaram Pal
14. Shri Rudramadhab Ray
15. Shrimati Meena Singh
16. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
17. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
18. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
33

34
MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
1. Dr. S.N.A. Zaidi, Secretary
2. Shri Alok Sinha, Joint Secretary
3. Shri Alok Shekhar, Director
4. Shri Syed Nasir Ali Director
** *
COMMISSION ON RAILWAY SAFETY
1. Shri Prashant Kumar, Chief Commissioner
2. Shri R.K. Kardam, Commissioner, Northern Circle
3. Shri Prabhat Kumar Bajpai, Commissioner, North-East Circle
4. Shri L.B. Singh, Deputy Commissioner
** *
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and briefed them
about the agenda of the meeting i.e. taking oral evidence on the (i) functioning of Commission of
Railway Safety which functions under the Ministry of Civil Aviation and (ii) Civil Aviation Safety.
He also informed that the representatives of Pilots Association has also been called for evidence
as the pilots were crucial element in air safety.
3. * * *
4. Thereafter, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary and other officials of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation on the ‘Functioning of Commission of Railway Safety’. The Committee
noted that to ensure its autonomy and independence, the Commission on Railway Safety had been
placed under a different Ministry, i.e., the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Chairman asked whether
in the existing arrangement, the intended autonomy of the Commission was ensured both in theory
and practice? Since, the Commission of Railway Safety was working under Ministry of Civil
Aviation and it has been created under the Railways Act, that is administered/implemented by the
Ministry of Railways, what was the mechanism for framing rules and regulations and how was it
being taken care of by two Ministries without any confusion being created. Further, the Chairman
also enquired about the supply of manpower at different levels, arrangement regarding their
training, their transfer and posting, filling of vacancies, etc. in the Commission of Railway Safety.
The Committee also wanted to know about the justification for the Commissioners submitting their
reports to the Railway Board also and to the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety simultaneously.
Was it not against the spirit of autonomy of Commission of Railway Safety, the Committee queried.
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation thereafter, made a presentation on the Functioning
of Commission of Railway Safety and informed that at present, under the Railway Safety Act, the
role of the Commission was in a kind of conflicting situation in as much as the Commission not
only investigated into accidents but also certified the railway tracks and railway works based on
the standards laid down by the Railway Board i.e. RDSO. Under a modern safety paradigm, there
should be a Regulator to lay down specifications and standards to be followed by the Operator and
to see if the operator complied with the standards laid down by the Regulator. If there is any
accident on account of, non-compliance of those standards, there should be an independent
accident investigative body. He submitted that there should be clarity of rules amongst regulator,
operator and the investigating agency. All three distinctions were missing in the present
*** Relate tos other matters.

35
arrangement, he said. He was also of the view that if the large numbers of incidents which lead
to serious accidents were properly investigated and recommendation implemented, the frequency of
accidents could be minimized to a great extent.
6. The Secretary claimed that reduction in train accidents can be partly attributed to the
implementation of some of the major recommendations made by the Railway Safety Commission
from time to time. For example, he informed that it had recommended to the Railway Board for
providing data loggers at panel interlocked stations for diagnosis of faults and analysis so that
whenever there was an accident on those stations, the investigative body will have complete access
to important data regarding the moment when the accident occurs.
7. Thereafter, the Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety also made a power point presentation
on various issues related to the functioning of Commission of Railway Safety. On a query he
informed that Ministry of Railways was engaged in the technical planning for metro railways.
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. * * *
11. * * *
12. The Committee also directed the Secretariat to prepare a questionnaire based on today’s
presentation/discussions on Commission of Railway Safety for having comments of the Ministries
of Civil Aviation and that of Railways.
12. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
13. The meeting adjourned at 1.30 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

36
V
FIFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Monday the 21 st February, 2012 in Committee Room
‘D’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
4. Shri Ramdas Agarwal
5. Shri Vikram Verma
LOK SABHA
6. Shri. Mahesh Joshi
7. Shri Hassan Khan
8. Shri Jose K. Mani
9. Shrimati Meena Singh
10. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
1. Shri Sunil Kumar, Advisor (Safety)
2. Ms. Vijaya Laxmi Kaushik, Executive Director (Safety)
3. Shri J.S. Bindra, Director/Safety-II
4. Shri Alok Kumar, Joint Director/Safety-IV
** *
36
*** Relate to other matters.

37
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and briefed them
about the agenda of the meeting i.e taking oral evidence on the (i) Functioning of Commission of
Railway Safety and (ii) * * * *.
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for examination the ‘Functioning of Commission of
Railway Safety’. The Chairman in his opening remarks recalled the meeting with Officials of the
Ministry of Civil Aviation on the same subject earlier. He further stated that issues and problems
relating to CRS raised on that day need clarification from the Ministry of Railways since the CRS
is governed by the Railways Act which is administered by Ministry of Railways. The Committee
felt that the existing arrangement was not conducive to the independence and autonomy of the CRS
- the agency to investigate railway accidents, inspect and certify the rail lines and rolling stock.
The CRS had to depend on Ministry of Railways in many ways. The need for a truly independent
regulatory system was emphasized. The Committee also raised the issue of efficacy of existing
legislations and rules for giving proper autonomy in the functioning of CRS. The Committee wanted
to know the status of action taken on various recommendations made by CRS from time to time
relating to rail safety like complete track circuiting, installation of auxiliary warning system,
provision of data loggers and voice recorders and anti-collision device. The Committee requested
the representatives of Ministry to clarify process of conduct of enquiry into accidents relating good
trains by CRS.
4. The Adviser (Safety), Railway Board stated that Indian Railway system did not need any
regulator at present and clarified that the CRS did not function under the administrative control of
Ministry of Railways. It enjoyed required independence and was more neutral while investigating
accidents and discharging its assigned duties under Railways Act. He expressed his satisfaction over
the present set-up as it was a result of well thought out plan of the legislature. He further stated
that due to shortage of funds, major recommendations by CRS could not be implemented. He
informed the Committee that observations/recommendations made by Kakodkar Committee on
railway safety were being deliberated in the Ministry at higher level. The existing legislations, rules
and regulations were adequate for the CRS to discharge its duties independently and there was no
interference by the Ministry of Railways in the day-to-day affairs of CRS. He explained to the
Committee various stages in analyzing and taking follow-up action on accident reports submitted
by CRS to Ministry of Railways.
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 5.54 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

38
I
FIRST MEETING
The newly constituted Committee met at 3.30 P.M. on Thursday, the 11 th October, 2012
in Room No.53, Ground Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
3. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
4. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
5. Shri Kunal Kumar Ghosh
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
7. Dr. Kruparani Killi
8. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
9. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
10. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
11. Shri Modugula Venugopala Reddy
12. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
13. Shri K. Sudhakaran
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVES OF MINISTRY OF RAILW AYS
1. Shri Vinay Mittal, Chairman, Railway Board.
2. Ms. Vijaya Kanth, Financial Commissioner, Railways.
38

39
3. Shri A.P. Mishra, Member Engineering, Railway Board
4. Shri Keshav Chandra, Member Mechanical, Railway Board
5. Shri Kul Bhushan, Member Electrical, Railway Board
6. Shri A.K. V ohra, Member Staff, Railway Board
7. Shri K.K. Srivastava, Member Traffic, Railway Board
8. Shri H.V. Sharma, OSD (PRI)
9. Shri Sunil Kumar, Adviser (Safety)
10. Ms. Saroj Rajware, Adviser (finance)
11. Mrs. Vijaya Laxmi Kaushik, ED (Safety)
12. Ms. V . Vaidehi, EDF (BC)
13. Shri J.S. Bindra, Director (Safety)
14. Shri Ashish Mehrotra, Director (Safety-I)
2. * * *
3. * * *
4. The Chairman informed the Members that in view of the deteriorating safety scenario, the
Committee had decided to take up the safety aspects relating to Railways, Civil Aviation, Road
Transport and Shipping. The Committee had heard the experts and officials of the Ministry of Road
Transport and Highways on road safety and Ministries of Civil Aviation and Railways in respect
of ‘Commission of Railway Safety’ (CRS), which is under the administrative control of Ministry
of Civil Aviation.
5. The Chairman, thereafter, briefed the Members about the day’s agenda and informed that
the officials of the Ministry of Railways had been invited to further discuss the ‘Functioning of
Commission of Railway Safety.
6. Initiating the discussion, the Chairman recalled the points/issues raised by the officials of
the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Chief Commissioner of Railways Safety and the Adviser (Safety),
Railway Board in the earlier meetings. He stated that the Committee wanted to know the response
of the Ministry of Railways on the recommendations of the Safety Review Committee under the
Chairmanship of Dr. Kakodkar concerning the CRS.
7.  The Committee raised the issues such as non-availability of parameters and technical
specifications for quantifying railway safety; withdrawal of the periodical routine inspections of
railways to be done by CRS as prescribed under Section 6(b) of Railway Act; dependence of CRS
on Railway Board for infrastructure and technical staff to carry out its inspectorial and
investigatory activities; CRS’s recommendations not being binding on the Ministry of Railways;
arguments of Ministry of Railways against granting more autonomy to CRS; separation of
regulatory, operational and investigative roles as is the case in other areas; necessity for a separate
legislation for reducing confusion and duality on the implementation of Railways Act and
Regulations issued by Ministry of Railways and Civil Aviation. The Committee wanted to know the
status of creation of independent Railway Safety Authority as recommended by Dr. Kakodkar
Committee and the steps taken to address the flaws in the existing railway safety system as pointed
by the above Committee.
*** Relate to other matters.

40
8. The Chairman, Railway Board stated that Dr. Kakodkar Committee had recommended far-
reaching changes in the safety structure of Indian Railways which were under consideration of the
Ministry. The proposed Railway Safety Authority would function under the Minister for Railways
and would be segregated from the Railway Board in terms of operational, functional and policy-
making arm of Indian Railways. The existing CRS will be part of the proposed authority. He
informed the Committee that every aspect of railway’s working has parameters and technical
specifications and the system worked within defined parameters only. The Chairman, Railway Board
could not provide the Committee reasons for the withdrawal of the power of periodical routine
inspection of railways by Commissioner of Railway Safety under Section 4(b) of the Indian
Railway Act, 1890 by an Executive Order and assured the Committee that he will look into it and
get back. He also informed the Committee that suggestions of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
received on the recommendations of Dr. Kakodkar Committee are under examination.
9. Members of the Committee raised queries on specific issues to which the concerned
officials of the Railway Board replied. For the questions that remained unanswered and other
information sought, the Chairman directed the officials to submit written replies to the Committee.
The Chairman, Railway Board sought a month’s time for this, which was accepted.
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
11. The meeting adjourned at 5.15 
P.M.

41
III
THIRD MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Monday the 5 th November, 2012 in Committee Room
‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
3. Shri V . Hanumantha Rao
4. Shrimati Bimla Kashyap Sood
5. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
6. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
7. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
8. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
9. Shri Ghanshyam Anuragi
10. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
11. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
12. Shri G.V . Harsha Kumar
13. Shri Prabodh Panda
14. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
15. Shri Rakesh Singh
16. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
17. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
REPRESENTATIVE OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
1. Shri K.N. Shrivastava, Secretary
2. Shri S. Machendranathan, Addl Secretary & F A
3. Shri Anil Srivastava, Joint Secretary
4. Shri G. Ashok Kumar, Joint Secretary
5. Shri L. Rajasekhar Reddy, Director
41

42
6. Shri Balmiki Prasad, Director
7. Shri Prashant Kumar, Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety
8. Shri R.K. Kardam, Commissioner of Railway Safety
9. Shri Prabhat Kumar Bajpai, Commissioner of Railway Safety
10. Shri L.B. Singh, Dy. Commissioner of Railway Safety
2. * * *
3. Then, the Committee took up the ‘Functioning of Commission of Railway Safety’ for
discussion. The Chairman, initiating the proceedings, recalled the earlier deliberations on the subject
with the officials of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Chief Commissioner of Railways Safety and
Railway Board. He stated that on a number of issues impinging upon the autonomy as well as
effectiveness of the CRS on which the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Ministry of Railways had
taken conflicting positions. These, he said, needed clarification from the Ministry of Civil Aviation
for which that meeting had been called.
4. The Committee sought clarifications regarding the reservations expressed by the Ministry of
Civil Aviation on the Railway Safety Authority proposed by Kakodkar Committee and the role of
Commission of Railway Safety under the new Authority. The need to review the functioning of
CRS; delegation of more powers and autonomy to CRS; restoration of power of CRS for annual
inspection that was withdrawn in 1953; expansion of CRS to cope with the increased railway
operations and its role in strengthening railway safety in the country; and dependence of CRS on
Railway Board for infrastructure and technical staff were also discussed. The Committee also
discussed the possible confusion and lack of coordination in implementation of Acts and Rules
between the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of Railways as the CRS functions under the
Railway Act for which Ministry of Railways is the administrative Ministry.
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation briefed the Committee on the genesis, powers and
the functioning of CRS; procedures for providing infrastructural support and technical staff and other
facilities for CRS from the Ministry of Railways and Ministry of Civil Aviation; and definition of
scope of investigation on major accidents. He reiterated the need for separation of service provider,
regulator and investigator for railway operations in the country to ensure fair investigation of rail
accidents. When enquired, he assured the Committee to take up the issue of restoration of powers
of CRS for annual inspection with the Ministry of Railways. The Secretary briefed the Committee
on the proposed Railway Safety Authority and expressed views of Ministry of Civil Aviation for such
arrangement. He further informed the Committee that detailed discussions will be initiated with the
Ministry of Railways on granting more financial and administrative powers to CRS.
6. Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety while supplementing the views of the Secretary, Ministry
of Civil Aviation informed the Committee on the first-stage conflict of interest within Railways where
it performed safety as well as executive roles. He further emphasized the need for strengthening of
support and technical staff of Commissioner of Railway Safety to carry out his routine works. He
informed the Committee that rules relating to railway safety were not referred to them before making
any change. Opinion of CRS on changing of standards are also not taken generally.
7. Members of the Committee raised queries on specific issues to which the concerned
officials replied. For the unanswered questions and other information sought, the Chairman directed
the officials to submit written replies to the Committee.
8. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
9. The meeting adjourned at 12.00 N
OON.
*** Relate to other matters.

43
IV
FOURTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.30 A.M. on Thursday, the 3 rd January, 2013 in Committee Room
‘63’, First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Aayanur Manjunatha
3. Shri Narendra Kumar Kashyap
4. Shrimati Vasanthi Stanley
5. Shri Thomas Sangma
LOK SABHA
6. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
7. Shri M. Krishnaswamy
8. Shri Prabodh Panda
9. Shri Deoraj Singh Patel
10. Shri Adhalrao Shivaji Patil
11. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
12. Shri K. Sudhakaran
13. Shri Dinesh Trivedi
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B, Joint Director
Shri A.S. Chakravani, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
** *
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and extended them good wishes
for the new year 2013. Thereafter, the Committee considered  the draft reports on the
43
*** Relate to other matters.

44
(i) Functioning of Commission of Railway Safety; (ii) Development of National Waterways –
Potential and Challenges; and (iii) Development of Tourism in Darjeeling and Sikkim. After some
discussion the Committee adopted these reports without any modification.
3. * * *
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. * * *
9. * * *
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept.
11. The meeting adjourned at 1.20 
P.M. to meet again on 16 th January, 2013.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.