 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
July, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
  
REPORT NO. 
350
_ 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTIETH REPORT  
‘Development of Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and Issues 
pertaining to Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24th July, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24th July, 2023) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 


 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
THREE HUNDRED FIFTIETH REPORT  
‘Development of Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and Issues 
pertaining to Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports’ 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 24th July, 2023) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 24th July, 2023) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii-vi 
 4. REPORT                                1-52 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   53-71 
6. ANNEXURES          
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended
72-111
112-157

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE  
 (2022-23) 
 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2022) 
 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A. Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11.  Shri Anto Antony 
12.  Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
13.  Shri Tapir Gao  
14.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
19.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
20.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
21.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22.  Shri Prince Raj 
23.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
25.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
27.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
30.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
Shri Gaurav Singh Gahlain, Assistant Committee Officer 

ii 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Fiftieth Report on 'Development of Greenfield and 
Brownfield Airports and Issues pertaining to Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports’.  
2. The Committee heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, on the 
subject, in its meetings held  on 16th November and 25th November, 2022. The Committee 
also heard the views of the representatives of Association of Private Airport Operators 
(APAO) and Delhi International Airport Limited (DIAL) , on the subject on 15th December, 
2022. The Committee in its fourth meeting on the subject, held on 5th January, 2023, heard 
the views of the Senior Officers of Department of Legal Affairs. The Committee also heard 
the representatives of Ministry of Defence and Ministry of Home Affairs alongwith Central 
Industrial Security Force (CISF) on 6 th January, 2023. The Committee once again heard the 
views of the representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation and Department of Legal Affairs , 
on the subject, on 30 th January, 2023. The Committee further heard the views of the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation; Department of Revenue; Department of Expenditure; Department of 
Economic Affairs; and Niti Aayog, in its meeting held on 23 rd March, 2023. The Committee 
also took up the issue during its Study Visit to Goa on 8 th July, 2023 and held discussions 
with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and representatives of GMR Goa International Airport, 
Mopa.    
3.  The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Civil 
Aviation; Ministry of Defence; Ministry of Home Affairs; Central Industrial Security Force; 
Department of Legal Affairs; Department of Revenue; Department of Expenditure; 
Department of Economic Affairs; Niti Aayog; Association of Private Airport Oper ators 
(APAO); Delhi International Airport Limited (DIAL); and GMR Goa International Airport, 
Mopa, for placing before the Committee , the material and information desired in connection 
with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  20th 
July, 2023.   
 
 
(V. Vijayasai Reddy) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
July 20, 2023                                                            Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Asadha 29, 1945 (Saka)                                    Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
3D Three Dimensional 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
AAI Airports Authority of India 
AAICLAS AAI Cargo Logistics and Allied Services Company Limited 
ADRM Airport Development Reference Manual 
AERA Airports Economic Regulatory Authority 
AI Artificial Intelligence 
AMC Airspace Management Cell 
AMO Approved Maintenance Organization 
ANS Air Navigation Services 
APADCL Andhra Pradesh Airports Development Corporation Limited 
APAO Association of Private Airport Operators 
ASA Air Service Agreement 
ASG Aviation Security Group 
ASQ Airport Service Quality 
ATC/ATCO Air Traffic Controller 
ATF Aviation Turbine Fuel 
ATM Automated Teller Machine 
ATO Approved Training Organisations 
BCAS Bureau of Civil Aviation Safety 
BEST Biometric Enabled Seamless Travel 
BISAG-N Bhaskaracharya National Institute for Space Applications and Geo-
informatics 
CA Civil Aviation 
CAE Canadian Aviation Electronics 
CAG Comptroller and Auditor General of India 
CAPEX Capital expenditures 
CAR Civil Aviation Requirement 
CCEA Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
CCIL Container Corporation of India Limited 
CDR Conditional Route 
CE Civil Enclave 
CGST Central Goods and Services Tax 
CII Confederation of Indian Industry 
CISF Central Industrial Security Force 
CMD Chairman and Managing Director 
CNS/ATM Communications, Navigation and Surveillance Systems/Air Traffic 
Management 
COD Cost of Deployment 
COVID Coronavirus Disease 
CPSU Central Public Sector Undertakings 
CSHA Common Security Hold Area 
CSIR Council of Scientific and Industrial Research 

iv 
 
CSTPL CAE Simulation Training Private Limited 
DAMEL Delhi Airport Metro Express Private Limited's 
DBOM Design, Build, Operate and Maintain 
DEA Department of Economic Affairs 
DFI Development Financial Institutions 
DIACL Dholera International Airport Company Ltd. 
DG Director General 
DIAL Delhi International Airport Limited 
DGCA Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
DM District Magistrate 
DME Distance Measuring Equipment 
DMEO Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office 
DMICDC Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor Development Corporation Limited 
DMRC Delhi Metro Rail Corporation 
DO Demi-Official 
DoLA Department of Legal Affairs 
DPIIT Department for Promotion of Industry 
DPR Detailed Project Report 
DVOR Doppler Very High Frequency Omni Range 
ECLGS Emergency Credit Line Guarantee Scheme 
EHVT Extra High Voltage Transmission 
EPC Engineering, Procurement and Construction 
FBP Farakka Barrage Project 
FDI Foreign Direct Investment 
FSI Floor Space Index 
FSTC Flight Simulation Technique Centre 
FTO Flying Training Organisation 
FUA Flexible Use of Airspace 
GBS Government Building Security 
GDP Gross Domestic Product 
GFA Greenfield Airports 
GFAP Greenfield Airports Policy 
GMR Grandhi Mallikarjuna Rao 
GoAP Government of Andhra Pradesh 
GoB Government of Bihar 
GoI Government of India 
GoMP Government of Madhya Pradesh 
GoK Government of Karnataka 
GoUP Government of Uttar Pradesh 
GoTN Government of Tamil Nadu 
GP Glide Path 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
GW Gigawatts 
HT High Tension 
IAF Indian Air Force 

v 
 
IATA International Air Transport Association 
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization 
IGBC Indian Green Building Council 
ILS Instrument Landing System 
IMD India Meteorological Department 
INR Indian Rupee 
INS Indian Naval Station 
ITC Input Tax Credit 
IRR Internal Rate of Return 
ISP Independent Service Provider 
ITC Input Tax Credit 
J&K Jammu & Kashmir 
JV Joint Venture 
JVC Joint Venture Cell 
KSIDC Kerala State Industrial Development Corporation 
LA Land Acquisition 
LNJPNNICFS Lok Nayak Jayaprakash Narayan National Institute of Criminology & 
Forensic Science 
LP Low Power 
LLZ Localizer 
MAFI Modernization of Airport Facilities and Infrastructure 
MHA Ministry of Home Affairs 
MI Medical Inspection 
MIA Manohar International Airport 
MIAL Mumbai Airport Limited 
ML Machine Learning 
MMT Million Metric Tonnes 
MoA Memorandum of Agreement 
MoCA Ministry of Civil Aviation 
MoD Ministry of Defence 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MPPA Million Passengers Per Annum 
MRO Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul 
NASFT National Aviation Security Fee Trust 
NCAP National Civil Aviation Policy 
NDB Non-Directional Beacon 
NITI National Institution for Transforming India 
NMP National Monetization Pipeline 
NOC No Objection Certificate 
NPG Network Planning Group 
NSG National Security Guard 
NRI Non-Residential Indians 
NSOP Non-scheduled Operator's Permit 
OEM Original Equipment Manufacturer 
OM Operations Manual 
OLS Obstacle Limitation Survey 

vi 
 
PAO Private Airport Operator 
PDA Project Development Agreement 
PDC Probable Date of Completion 
PESC Pre-embarkation Security Checks 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PSU Public Sector Undertaking 
PTB Passenger Terminal Building 
R&R Resettlement & Rehabilitation 
RA3 Third Country EU Aviation Security validated Regulated Agent 
RCS Regional Connectivity Scheme 
RFP Request For Proposal 
RITES Rail India Technical and Economic Service 
RNA Radio Navigational Aid 
RoFR Right of First Refusal 
RoW Right of Way 
SBD Self Baggage Drop 
SEP Safety and Emergency Procedures 
SEZ Special Economic Zone 
SG State Government 
SHA Security Hold Area 
SOP Standard Operating Procedure 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
STP Sewage Treatment Plant 
TAT Turnaround Time 
TDSAT Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal 
TEFR Techno-Economic Feasibilty Report 
TEFS Techno-Economic Feasibilty Study 
TIDCO Tamil Nadu Industrial Development Corporation Limited 
TPC Total Plant Cost 
TRA Temporary Reserved Area 
TSA Temporary Segregated Area 
UAE United Arab Emirates 
UDAN Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik 
UK United Kingdom 
ULB Urban Local Body 
USA United States of America 
UT Union Territory 
VAT Value Added Tax 
VCF Value Capture Financing 
VDGS Visual Docking Guidance System 
VGF Vitality Gap Funding 
VIP Very Important Person 
WACC Weighted Average Cost of Capital 
YIAPL Yamuna International Airport Private Limited 
 

Page 1 of 111 
 
 
REPORT 
 
Chapter-I 
Background  
The development of airports is crucial for a growing economy like India, which has seen 
a significant increase in air traffic in recent years. India's rapidly expanding middle class, rising 
disposable income, and increasing i nternational trade have contributed to the growth of the 
aviation industry. The development of airports not only improves connectivity but also 
contributes to the growth of various industries, including tourism, manufacturing, and 
agriculture. Indian Government has recognised the importance of airport development and has 
embarked on an ambitious plan to modernize and expand the country's airports. This plan 
includes the construction of new Greenfield airports, as well as the expansion of existing 
Brownfield airports, with the aim of improving access to remote areas and boosting economic 
growth. Additionally, the development of airports has a positive impact on employment 
generation and infrastructure development, making it a crucial aspect of India's overall  economic 
development strategy. 
2. Several issues also persist pertaining to civil enclaves, i.e., aerodromes used for both 
military aviation and civil aviation. At present, there are thirty -one Civil Enclaves in the country, 
out of which twenty-eight are being maintained by the Airports Authority of India (AAI), one is 
to be developed by AAI and the remaining two by the State Government and private Airport 
Operator. 
3. The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and 
Culture took cognisance of the crucial role played by the development of greenfield and 
brownfield airports and civil enclaves in facilitating the growth of the aviation sector in India. In 
light of this, the Committee decided to take up the subject „Development  of Greenfield and 
Brownfield Airports and Issues Pertaining to Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports‟ for detailed 
examination and report. 
4. The Committee heard the views of the representatives of various Ministries and 
Departments in its meetings as per details given below:- 
● Ministry of Civil Aviation on 16th November, 2022; 
● Ministry of Civil Aviation on 25th November, 2022; 
● Association of Private Airport Operators (APAO) and Delhi International Airport 
Limited (DIAL) on 15th December, 2022; 
● Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law and Justice) on 5th January, 2023; 
● Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Home Affairs along with Central Industrial 
Security Force (CISF) on 6th January, 2023; 
● Ministry of Civil Aviation and Department of Legal Affairs on 30 th January, 
2023;  
● Ministry of Civil Aviation, Department of Revenue (Ministry of Finance), 
Department of Expenditure (Ministry of Finance), Department of Economic 
Affairs (Ministry of Finance); and NITI Aayog on 23rd March, 2023. 

Page 2 of 111 
 
● The Committee also took up the i ssue during its Study Visit to Goa on 8 th July, 
2023 and held discussions with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and representatives 
of GMR Goa International Airport, Mopa.  
5. The views of the various stakeholders consulted by the Committee on the various is sues 
pertaining to the subject, along with the Committee‟s recommendations thereon, are presented in 
the following chapters. 
  

Page 3 of 111 
 
Chapter-II 
Development of Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and the 
Challenges thereof 
6. In its background note on the subject,  the Ministry of Civil Aviation furnished the 
following information with respect to greenfield and brownfield airports:- 
I. Greenfield Airport: - 
A Greenfield airport is conventionally referred as an aviation facility being developed on 
empty land or previ ously undeveloped land and an airport whose commissioning, 
planning & construction process is carried out from the scratch / grass route level. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, in this regard has formulated a Greenfield Airport Policy and 
guidelines for setting  up of Greenfield Airport. The airports, Greenfield in nature are 
given „In -Principle‟ approval as per criteria, guidelines and procedures formulated in 
Greenfield Airport Policy. 
The Ministry informed that before the introduction of the Greenfield Policy,  3 Greenfield 
Airports (GFA) were operationalized namely, Cochin (in 1999), Hyderabad (in 2008) and 
Bangalore International Airports (in 2008). Post 2008, the Government has granted in -
principle approval for 21 GFA projects out of which 11 GFAs have been o perationalised 
since 2008 and In-Principle Approval has been accorded to 10 Greenfield Airports . 
Details are enclosed as Annexure -I. The list of Greenfield Airports for which first stage 
Site Clearance is granted is enclosed as Annexure -II. The list of Gre enfield Airports 
which are under consideration is enclosed as Annexure-III. 
7. The Ministry further informed that the Government of India has formulated Greenfield 
Airports (GFA) Policy, 2008. As per the Policy, a State Government or an Airport Developer, 
willing to establish an airport, is required to send a proposal to the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(MoCA) for 2 -stages approval i.e. 'Site -Clearance' followed by 'In -Principle' approval. Such 
proposals are considered by MoCA as per the procedure stipulated in the GFA Policy.  
II. Brownfield Airport:- 
A Brownfield airport is conventionally referred to as an airport which has an existing 
infrastructure for the development of an airport such as runway, Terminal Building etc. 
Development works are carried out fu rther on these facilities and additional facilities 
required for safe aircraft operation are created in a phased manner. 
AAI has embarked upon a CAPEX plan of 25000 Crores during year 2019 -2024 
for development/upgradation/modernization of various airports in the country to meet the 
requirement of Air traffic which includes Greenfield airports, expansion/ modification of 
existing terminal, new terminals, expansion/ strengthening of existing runways, aprons, 
ANS works like control tower, technical block etc.  List of New Terminal Buildings/ 
Expansion of existing terminal buildings in progress/ planning stage and New Civil 
Enclaves - work in progress/ planning stage (airports operated by MoD) is at Annexure -
IV.  
8. Given the inherent difference between the approach taken for the development of airports 
in the case of greenfield and brownfield projects, each type has its own set of advantages and 

Page 4 of 111 
 
disadvantages. The Ministry listed the following advantages and disadvantages of greenfield and 
brownfield airports: 
Advantages of Greenfield Airports 
● Airport at Greenfield sites can be planned as per the governing guidelines for 
unrestricted development of Airport and aircraft movement up to full potential. 
● Availability of Land for future expansion of Airport. 
Disadvantages of Greenfield Airports 
● Requirement of more time and money for creation of complete new infrastructure 
at airport as well as Airport connectivity. 
Advantages of Brownfield Airports  
● Brownfield airport already has airport infrastructure. 
● As airport infrastructure is already existing at Brownfield airport and it only needs 
to be upgraded as per requirement, this will lead to cost-effectiveness of airport. 
● Connectivity is already available to places of importance in a city like offices, 
hospitals, institutions etc. 
Disadvantages of Brownfield Airports 
● Limited scope for expansion due to landlocked situation. 
● High cost for acquisition of land for expansion and rehabilitation. 
9. The Committee noted that the Ministry of Civil Aviation has cited „time and money‟ 
parameters for the delay in construction of Greenfield airports. The Committee sought to know 
whether the Ministry has undertaken any study to foresee the future benefits, which will 
outweigh the aforesaid parameters.  
10. In response, the Ministry informe d that the construction of Greenfield airport project 
depends upon many factors such as land acquisition, availability of mandatory clearances, 
financial closure, etc. Moreover, these factors are unique for each airport project considering the 
geographical limitations, local laws, nature of project funding, quantum of rehabilitation and 
resettlement, legal issues etc. Therefore, during the conceptualization of Greenfield airport 
projects, Pre-feasibility Study is carried out followed by Impact Assessment Re port, on case to 
case basis. Further, Detailed Project Report (DPR) and other requisite studies are also carried out 
for examining the viability of the project. 
11. The Committee observes that the Government has granted in-principle approval for 
21 Greenfi eld Airport projects since 2008, which is a crucial step towards meeting the 
growing air traffic demand in the country. However, more Greenfield airports need to be 
developed to cater to the increasing demand and to achieve the vision laid out in the 
National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 to enable 30 crore domestic ticketing by 2022 and 50 
crore by 2027. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should encourage 
more State Governments and private airport developers to propose Greenfield airport 
projects and to streamline its approval process to expedite the development of airports. 
12. The Committee notes that the Airports Authority of India (AAI) has embarked 
upon a capital expenditure plan of Rs. 25,000 crores during the period 2019 -2024 for th e 
development/upgradation/modernization of various airports in the country. This is a 
welcome move to improve the existing airport infrastructure in order to cater to the ever -

Page 5 of 111 
 
growing air traffic demand. The Committee recommends that the Ministry/AAI may 
ensure that traffic projections of the long -term future are factored in the planning and 
execution of these projects. 
13. The list of airports for which new terminal buildings are under planning or in 
progress includes several airports in Tier II and III ci ties. This is a positive move towards 
improving regional connectivity and providing access to air travel to a wider population. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that these airports are well -
connected to major nearby cities and have adequate transportation infrastructure to 
facilitate passenger traffic. 
14. The Committee observes that the list of airports under planning or expansion 
includes several airports that are being developed under PPP mode. PPPs can bring in 
private sector exp ertise and investment, which can help in accelerating the airport 
development process and improving operational efficiency. Therefore, the government 
should encourage more PPPs for airport development, especially for Greenfield airports. 
15. National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 mandates AAI to continue to modernize the existing 
airports and upgrade quality of services. AAI will maintain an  Airport Service Quality  (ASQ) 
rating of 4.5 or more across all airports which have a throughput above 1.5 mppa and ASQ rating 
of 4.0 or more for the rest. AAI will also explore the possibility of giving out O&M contracts for 
a cluster of existing and/or new airports. AAI airports with throughput above 0.5 mppa will 
strive to generate non-aeronautical revenue in excess of 35% of the airport‟s total revenue. 
16. Airports have planned Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) of more than Rs. 90,000 crore, out 
of which CAPEX for existing airports (including AAI and PPP) is approx. Rs. 55,000 crore and 
Greenfield airports is more than Rs. 35000 crore. 
17. The Committee desires to know the number of airports with throughput above 1.5 
mppa which have an ASQ rating of less than 4.5 and number of airports with throughput 
less than 1.5 mppa which have an ASQ rating of less than 4.0 as on date. The  Committee 
may be apprised of the steps being taken by AAI to upgrade the quality of services 
provided at each such airport with low ASQ ratings. 
 
Observations of the Committee 
18. The Committee notes that the following issues need wider consultations and deeper 
analysis:- 
i) Various issues relating to Greenfield Airports Policy, 2008 and National Civil 
Aviation Policy, 2016 such as review of the said Policies, grant of „In -Principle 
Approval‟ and „Site Clearance‟ for new Greenfield projects; and 
ii) Development of Greenfield Airports under the Greenfield Airports Policy, 2008, 
across the country especially in the States where there are no Greenfield Airports, 
presently.  
 
 
 

Page 6 of 111 
 
Need for a comprehensive policy on brownfield airports 
19. The Committee observed that brow nfield airport projects are complex development 
projects facing many constraints in terms of site expansion, design limitations, and execution 
risks. At the same time, brownfield airport projects are necessary to revamp, expand and 
modernise existing airports. With more tier 2 city airports expected to become major airports, the 
number of brownfield airport projects is likely to grow. While there exists a Greenfield Airports 
Policy, no such policy has been devised for brownfield airports. In this context, t he Committee 
sought to know from the Ministry regarding the reasons for not having a Brownfield Airports 
Policy in place. 
20. The Ministry, in its written reply, apprised that the Government of India has not framed a 
specific policy for Brownfield airports  as upgradation and modernization of airports is an 
ongoing process depending upon the traffic potential, demands from airline operators, 
commercial viability, availability of land etc. Hence, AAI & respective airports operators take 
initiatives to upgrade  the airports at regular intervals depending on traffic demand and other 
factors. However, Airports Authority of India (AAI) Act, 1994 and National Civil Aviation 
Policy (NCAP), 2016 contain provisions for the development of airports which serve as the 
guiding principles for the brownfield airport projects.  
21. The Ministry further added that NCAP, 2016 mandates AAI to continue to modernize the 
existing airports and upgrade quality of services. AAI has to maintain an Airport Service Quality 
(ASQ) rating of  4.5 or more across all airports which have a throughput above 1.5 mppa and 
ASQ rating of 4.0 or more for the rest. Further, as per AAI Act, 1994, AAI, being a Category - I 
Miniratna PSU, has financial autonomy to execute projects up to Rs.500 crore with t he approval 
of the Board of AAI. For the projects of value more than Rs.500 crore, guidelines of Department 
of Expenditure are followed for appraisal and approval of such projects. 
22. The Ministry stated that AAI will also explore the possibility of givin g out O&M 
contracts for a cluster of existing and/or new airports. AAI airports with throughput above 0.5 
mppa will strive to generate non -aeronautical revenue in excess of 35% of the airport‟s total 
revenue. Thus, the NCAP, 2016 gives the guiding principl es for upgradation and expansion of 
existing airports.  
23. The Committee notes that the NCAP, 2016 gives the guiding principles for the 
upgradation and expansion of existing airports. The Committee feels that the Ministry may 
come up with a clear policy as regards the criteria to be followed in terms of the decision to 
be made regarding the type of airport project to be taken up i.e., the parameters that 
should decide whether the Ministry/ AAI should opt for a greenfield project instead of a 
brownfield or civil enclave project. The Committee feels that this clarity would permit AAI 
to work towards improving air connectivity and result in economic growth. 
 
Challenges Faced in Co-ordination between different Agencies and Departments  
24. The Committee enquire d from the Ministry regarding the challenges faced in 
coordinating with the State Governments to set up Greenfield or Brownfield airports. The 
Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee regarding the following challenges:- 

Page 7 of 111 
 
i)  Delay in acquisit ion of land by State Government and allotting the same to the 
developer/AAI for the development and operation of an airport 
ii)  Delay in compliance/response by State Governments during the examination of the 
applications of Greenfield airport projects 
iii) Delay in submission of application for „in -principle‟ approval in respect of the projects 
where Central Government has granted „site clearance‟ 
iv)    Provisioning of road and metro connectivity to the airport 
v)      Provisioning of the utilities like electricity, water supply etc. 
vi)    Delay in removal of obstacles 
25. On the issue of involvement of multiple agencies viz. AAI, Airport operators etc. as 
regards setting up and operationalization of Greenfield/Brownfield airports/Civil Enclaves, the 
Ministry furnished the following information:- 
Greenfield Airports: Under the Greenfield Airports Policy, 2008, a Steering Committee 
under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Civil Aviation) has been constituted to coordinate 
and monitor various clearances required  for setting up of an airport. The Committee 
comprises representatives from the Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Defence, 
Department of Economic Affairs, Department of Revenue, NITI Aayog, India 
Meteorological Department,  Airports Authority of India,  and Directorate General of 
Civil Aviation.  
Besides, MoCA provides all the necessary support and facilitation to airport developers 
in resolving the issues including those which require coordination with State 
Governments and Ministries/Departments of GoI. 
Brownfield Airports/ Civil Enclaves:  MoCA provides all the necessary support and 
facilitation to airport operators in resolving the issues including those which require 
coordination with State Governments and Ministries/Departments of GoI.  
26. The Committee notes the issues being faced by the Ministry in coordinating with the 
State Governments/ Airport Operators and other stakeholders for setting up and 
operationalisation of airports in the country. The Committee feels that having a robust 
mechanism for coordination between the multitude of stakeholders involved in this process 
is crucial in order to avoid cost and time overruns in airport projects. The Ministry should 
evolve a mechanism to coordinate with the stakeholders at the highest level to tackle 
bottlenecks and enable the timely completion of projects. 
27. The Committee feels that land acquisition is a prominent issue that needs consistent 
oversight of the Ministry/ AAI a s well as the State Government. Hence, a mechanism 
should be evolved to track the progress and delays in the process of land acquisition of 
airports. 
28. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may work with all the 
stakeholders to prescribe target deadlines, where possible, which may be scrupulously 
followed to ensure smooth progress of airport projects. 
29. The Committee opines that strong road, rail and metro connectivity to various 
airports is essential for the efficient operation of any airport, both for passenger as well as 
cargo operations. The Committee, therefore,  recommends that the Ministry may 

Page 8 of 111 
 
coordinate with the Ministries/ Departments/ State Governments concerned to work 
towards improving connectivity to the airports. 
  
Delayed Greenfield and Brownfield Projects 
30. The Committee noted that in -principle approv al has been accorded to 13 greenfield 
airports. Out of these, there are 4 airports where the time gap between the in -principle approval 
and projected operationalisation is more than 10 years and 1 airport where this time gap is more 
than 20 years. There ar e 2 airports which were granted in -principle approval more than 10 years 
ago but no operationalisation date has been provided for the same. The Committee enquired from 
the Ministry regarding the reasons for such time gap and steps taken to minimise pendency. 
31. The Ministry informed that necessary action for airport project development including 
acquisition of land, financing of the project, etc. has to be taken by the respective airport 
promoter or the State Government concerned. Construction of airport p roject depends upon 
many factors such as land acquisition, availability of mandatory clearances, financial closure, 
etc. Further, acquisition of requisite land for development of the projects, getting environmental 
clearances, re-settlement and rehabilitation of the affected population, court cases etc. have been 
found to be main hurdles for completion of many airport projects. 
32. Status of the Greenfield Airports where „In principle‟ approval has been accorded by 
Government of India and the reasons for ti me gap in „In -Principle‟ approval and 
operationalization is placed at Annexure-V. 
33. The Ministry added that it has done continuous monitoring of Airport Projects, due to 
which projects like Mopa are ready for operationalization and others projects like Navi Mumbai, 
Noida (Jewar), Hirasar, Shivamogga are progressing well.  
34. In response to a query raised by the Committee, the Ministry informed that the progress 
some of the projects such as development/ expansion works at Port Blair, Darbhanga, Leh, 
Adampur, Gorakhpur, Kanpur, Goa and Pune airports have not been able to meet the planned 
physical and/ or financial goals and the deadlines had to be revised due to multiple reasons such 
as impact of COVID -19 pandemic, adverse weather conditions, delay in hand ing over of land, 
delay in seeking working permission from Ministry of Defence, poor performance of the 
execution agencies etc. 
35. The Ministry stated that while some of the factors such as weather conditions and 
pandemic impacts are inevitable, the airpo rt developers and concerned agencies have taken 
various steps to mitigate the delays such as constant monitoring of projects under Project 
Monitoring Group, expeditious resolution of issues related to land or other approvals with the 
State Government and M oD by ways of continual dialogue and meetings, intervention of 
Competent Authority to address the issues related to execution agencies etc. 
36. The Committee notes the various factors such as land acquisitions, availability of 
clearances, financial closure  and so on, on which the progress of an airport project 
depends. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry which enabled the 
operationalisation of the Mopa airport and good progress in other projects like Navi 
Mumbai and Jewar. On -time completion of airport projects has a multiplier effect on the 
regional economy and directly contributes to the fast -paced growth of the nation, besides 

Page 9 of 111 
 
helping avoid huge cost overruns. The Committee , therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may try to emulate  its achievements at the Mopa, Navi Mumbai and Jewar 
airports, in case of airport projects for which in-principle approval had been granted many 
years ago.  
37. The Ministry informed the Committee that airport projects are infrastructure projects 
which require large expanse of land. The acquisition of land is one of the key challenges being 
faced by the airport developers for these projects. Rehabilitation and Resettlement issues 
associated with land acquisition usually lead to various litigations. While, A AI and other airport 
developers take all the measures to resolve these issues amicably, due to involvement of large 
public, legal issues become inevitable. 
38. The Committee observed that it is not uncommon for greenfield airport projects to get 
stalled du e to stakeholder conflicts. As per the background note furnished by the Ministry, at 
least 2 greenfield airport projects have been pending due to legal disputes regarding land 
acquisition. Many other airport projects in the past have also been stalled due to protests by 
residents objecting to land acquisition. 
39. In this regard, the Ministry informed the Committee that the responsibility of 
implementation of airport projects including land acquisition, rehabilitation and resettlement, 
compensation to the l and owners etc. rests with the concerned airport developer / State 
Government as in accordance with the Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 
2013. 
40. However, MoCA continuously monitors the proposals where „In -Principle‟ approval and 
„Site Clearance‟ have been granted. If projects are facing challenges on any of the aspects such 
as legal, land issues, other approvals, project implementation or any issue etc., MoCA provides 
all the necessary support and facilitation to airport developers i n resolving the issue including 
those which require coordination from the State Government and Ministries/Departments of GoI. 
41. The Committee agrees with the observation of the Ministry that legal issues become 
inevitable as it may involve stakeholder co nflicts. The Committee, however, notes that the 
timely completion of airport projects is of acute importance to the region in question, as 
well as the nation as a whole. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
should evolve a suitable mechan ism in co -ordination with all stakeholders to remove such 
bottlenecks.  
42. The Committee observes that stakeholder conflicts and legal disputes can cause 
significant delays in the completion of greenfield airport projects. Therefore, it is important 
for the Ministry to take proactive steps to address stakeholder grievances in a timely and 
adequate manner to prevent disputes from escalating to legal disputes.  
43. The Committee may be apprised of the status of Greenfield/Brownfield/Civil 
Enclave Airports at  Bihta, Darbhanga, Thanjavur, Sabarimala, Calicut, Nagpur, Kannur, 
Parandur, Kotkasim, Navi Mumbai, Jhalawar, Neemuch, Gaucher, Dehradun, Pantnagar, 
Dimapur, Mopa, Kadapa, Thanjavur and Begumpet. 

Page 10 of 111 
 
 
Improving connectivity to airports 
44. In most cases, green field airports are located far from the main city. In such areas, the 
connectivity to the airports in the form of roads, highways, railways, etc. is low. To ensure public 
access to the airport, there is a need to foster significant infrastructural growth n ear and around 
the proposed airport site. This need for multi -modal hinterland connectivity has also been 
reiterated in the National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016. 
45. In light of this, the Committee sought to know from the Ministry regarding the steps 
taken to provide for holistic infrastructural growth near and around the proposed greenfield 
airport site. The Committee also enquired about whether any provisions have been made under 
the Greenfield Airports Policy to identify and address these infrastructural  needs at the proposal 
stage itself. 
46. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that Multi -modal connectivity 
inter-alia includes road/rail/metro and high speed rail corridors is of paramount importance for 
the economic viability of the projects and also helps the airport be sustainable in long run. This is 
also reflected in the Greenfield Airports Policy, 2008 which inter -alia encourages State 
Governments to incentivize the developer for incorporating multi -modal connectivity to the 
airport. Creation of a robust connectivity around the airport leads to an ecosystem which 
supports the development and growth of the project as well as the surrounding area which in turn 
has a multiplier effect on the economy as a whole. Therefore, provisioning for connectivity to the 
airports is made at the initial stage of finalization of Detailed Project Report/ Master Plan for 
Greenfield airport project in consultation with the airport developer and State Government. 
Greenfield Airport projects like Jewar,  Mopa, Navi Mumbai, Hirasar, Dholera  etc and 
Brownfield Airports projects like Delhi, Mumbai, Bengaluru,  Hyderabad, Kolkata, Chennai,  
Lucknow, Kochi etc. are prime examples which have a robust road/rail/metro network which is 
targeted to facilitate the a irport passengers on one hand and to promote higher economic 
activities on other hand. Moreover, NCAP, 2016 provides for multi -modal hinterland 
connectivity (road, rail, metro, waterways, etc.). 
47. The Committee is of the view that provision for multi -modal connectivity should be 
made at the proposal stage itself for greenfield airports, in consultation with the airport 
developer and State Government. This will ensure that the necessary infrastructure is in 
place before the airport becomes operational. The  Ministry should coordinate with the 
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, Ministry of Railways and State Government 
Departments concerned to request them to come up with robust connectivity to the airports 
under development, to enable good access from the date of their operationalisation.  
 
Financing of Airport Projects and Foreign Direct Investment in Civil Aviation 
Sector 
48. The Committee observed that Greenfield and brownfield airports require huge 
investment. At present, most of the investment in a irport projects and related segments comes 
either from the government or from private players within the country. There is potential for 

Page 11 of 111 
 
diversifying the sources of funding for airport projects and related segments, especially in the 
form of foreign investment. In view of this, the Committee enquired from the Ministry regarding 
the current FDI policy for airport development projects and related segments, and the steps taken 
to make investments in aviation sector more attractive to foreign players.. 
49. The Ministry, in its reply, stated that the Government of India has permitted Foreign 
Direct Investment (FDI) as a major source of non -debt financial resource for economic 
development to infuse long -term sustainable capital in the civil aviation sector. 100% F DI has 
been permitted in Greenfield and existing Brownfield airport projects, and also specified sectors 
under Air Transport Services, Ground Handling Services, Maintenance and Repair organizations, 
flying training institutes and technical training institu tions subject to sectoral regulations and 
conditions specified in FDI Policy. The Government has set up an independent regulatory 
authority namely Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India (AERA) which determines 
aeronautical tariffs of major airport  in accordance with AERA Act and AERA guidelines issued 
from time to time. The tariffs determined through cost plus principle assure reasonable return on 
investment and thus private airport operators hardly find any difficulty in raising funds for 
airport development and this also reflects in the fact that the major airports managed by private 
operators like Delhi, Bengaluru, Hyderabad have undertaken development works of thousands of 
crore of rupees at their respective airports and have also got funding fr om financial institutions 
for the same. Incidentally, responsibility of financing of airport projects running under PPP mode 
lies with concerned airport operator/developer and the airport operators/developers generally, 
manage funds for airports as a mix o f debt and equity. Further, the big PPP Greenfield projects 
being developed by private concessionaires at Mopa, Navi Mumbai and Jewar have made 
financing arrangements with Banks and these projects are being developed satisfactorily. 
50. The Ministry added that currently, various foreign companies are holding stakes in Delhi, 
Bangalore, Hyderabad and Durgapur Airports. Jewar Airport Project has been awarded to a 
foreign company namely M/s Zurich Airport International AG which has formed a Special 
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) - Yamuna International Airport Private Limited (YIAPL) for the airport 
development. 
51. The Committee is aware that as per the Consolidated F oreign Direct Investment 
(FDI) Policy, 2020 issued by Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 
(DPIIT), Ministry of Commerce , the Government has permitted FDI in the Civil Aviation 
Sector as follows:-  
A. Airports 
Sector/Activity % of Equity/FDI Cap Entry Route 
(a) Greenfield Projects 100 % Automatic 
(b) Existing Projects 100 % Automatic 
 
B. Air Transport Services 
Sector/Activity % of Equity/FDI Cap Entry Route 
(1) (a) Scheduled Air Transport 
Service/ Domestic Scheduled 
Passenger Airline 
(b) Regional Air Transport 
100 % 
Automatic up to 49% 
(Automatic up to 100% for 
NRIs) 
Government route beyond 

Page 12 of 111 
 
Service 49% 
(2) Non-Scheduled Air Transport 
Services 100 % Automatic 
(3) Helicopter services/seaplane 
services requiring DGCA 
approval 
100 % Automatic 
 
C. Other Services under Civil Aviation Sector 
Sector/Activity % of Equity/FDI Cap Entry Route 
(1) Ground Handling Services 
subject to sectoral regulations 
and security clearance 
100 % Automatic 
(2) Maintenance and Repair 
organizations; flying training 
institutes; and technical training 
institutions. 
100 % Automatic 
 
52. The Committee notes the cha nges in FDI Policy, 2020 and would like to know the 
improvements that had happened as a result of the changes in the FDI Policy since 2020. It 
also feels that the changes in the FDI Policy would help drive the level of investment needed 
in order to achieve  the desired growth rate in the aviation sector in the country . The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should make efforts to attract more 
foreign investment  in the Indian aviation sector , which can lead to the development of 
better infrastructure, more job opportunities, and improved economic growth.  
Land Value Capture Mechanism 
53. In its Value Capture Finance Policy Framework, the erstwhile Ministry of Urban 
Development described Value Capture to be based on the principle that private la nd and 
buildings benefit from public investments in infrastructure and policy decisions of Governments 
(e.g. change of land use or FSI). Appropriate VCF tools can be deployed to capture a part of the 
increment in value of land and buildings. In turn, these  can be used to fund projects being set up 
for the public by the Central/ State Governments and Urban Local Bodies ( ULBs). This 
generates a virtuous cycle in which value is created, realized and captured, and used again for 
project investment. As the addit ional value is generated by actions other than landowner‟s direct 
investment, Value Capture is distinct from the user charges or fees that agencies collect for 
providing services. 
54. The Secretary, Department of Expenditure (Ministry of Finance) informed the Committee 
that the Value Capture mechanism is currently operating in the metro rail sector and the National 
Highways. He stated that the Ministry of Housing & Urban Affairs has made it a part of their 
policy that there must be a mechanism by which a pa rt of that increase in the property values 
which arises because of the construction of a metro station, will be given back to the metro rail 
undertaking through either imposition of a betterment levy or some other mechanism to assist in 
financing further g rowth of the metro rail system. He opined that one difference is that both 
metro rail and National Highways are linear projects where there is a ribbon development that is 
possible on either side of the metro or the highway. In the case of an airport, it i s located in one 

Page 13 of 111 
 
place. It may or may not lead to development along the line or the road that leads to the airport 
depending on whether it is completely greenfield or whether it is already in a well -populated 
area. He, however, concluded that theoretically , value capture can be thought of if there is an 
appreciation in value by the creation of an airport that could provide a source of some funding 
for an airport project. 
55. The Committee notes that land acquisition is one of the biggest expenditures 
incurred on the development of an airport. Given the consistently rising land acquisition 
costs for public infrastructure projects, the present sources for financing of the same i.e., 
budgetary allocation of the Ministry, Public -Private-Partnership and AAI reven ue, might 
not be sufficient. The Committee feels that the Value Capture Mechanism can augment the 
financial requirements of the airport sector in the country. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may conduct a detailed analysis of the possible implem entation of the 
Value Capture Mechanism to generate revenue for investment in further development, 
maintenance and expansion of airports across the country.  
 
Implementation of PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan for Multi -modal 
Connectivity 
56. The PM Gat i Shakti National Master Plan was launched on 21 st October, 2021 to boost 
multi-modal connectivity in the country. The overarching objective of 'Gati Shakti' scheme is to 
create a digital platform for integrated planning and coordinated execution by sixtee n ministries. 
Each ministry and department will be able to access information about the ongoing and 
upcoming projects for a balanced and synchronized approach. PM Gati Shakti is supposed to 
break Departmental silos and institutionalize holistic planning fo r stakeholders across major 
infrastructure projects. It will incorporate the infrastructure schemes of various Ministries and 
State Governments like Bharatmala, Sagarmala, inland waterways, dry/land ports, UDAN etc.  
Plans and programmes made by the Ministr y of Civil Aviation and Airports Authority of India 
for implementation of PM Gati Shakti Master Plan are attached at Annexure-VI. 
57. The Committee takes note of the plans and programmes made by the Ministry for 
implementation of the PM Gati Shakti National  Master Plan. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may utilise the PM Gati Shakti platform to coordinate with other 
infrastructure Ministries/ Departments and to ensure excellent connectivity to all airports 
across the country. The Ministry may work with the relevant Ministries/ Departments 
towards rapid development of the necessary supporting infrastructure in the vicinity of 
airports, especially greenfield airport projects. 
58. On a query of the Committee regarding any digital initiatives/ Artificia l Intelligence (AI) 
proposals designed to augment the infrastructure around airports. The Ministry informed the 
Committee that AAI has initiated a process of creating a Data Analytics Platform by integrating 
various data sources where data analytics can wo rk to identify requirement of infrastructure 
around airport using correlation, AI/ML (Machine Learning). 
59. The Committee appreciates the initiation of creation of a Data Analytics Platform 
by AAI to identify infrastructure requirements around airports. T he Committee 
recommends that AAI may explore the possibility of feeding the data pertaining to other 

Page 14 of 111 
 
infrastructure Ministries/ Departments available through the Gati Shakti National Master 
Plan, to its upcoming Data Analytics Platform for better outputs. 
 
Manohar International Airport (MIA), Mopa, Goa  
60. The Committee during its recent Study Visit to Goa , held discussions with the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation and representatives of GMR Goa International Airport  (Manohar International 
Airport), Mopa, on the issue.  The Ministry informed that MIA is built on 2,132 acres, of which 
232 acres are earmarked for the City Side Development for commercial purposes. The 
configuration of the airside facilities and terminal facilities is done based on the traffic 
projections. Further, the Ministry also highlighted the key infrastructures of the Airport which 
are as follows:- 
 Runway bearing Code 4E/ F is equipped to handle extra -large wide-bodied jets like an 
Airbus A380; 
 Two Rapid Exit Taxiways & 6 Cross Taxiways for air craft circulation and to avoid 
congestion; 
 Optimum number of Apron and Passenger Boarding Bridges, wherein all these facilities 
are expandable to meet the future market demand; 
 Passenger Terminal Building (PTB) comprising of 18 check-in counters along with 4 Self 
Baggage Drop (SBD) points, advanced baggage handling system, and other amenities 
and utilities, which could cater to 3,300 passengers at its peak hours. The repeatable 
module allows for ready future expansion of the Processor and Pier buildings 
independently in either the east or west direction; 
 Air Traffic Control Tower with state-of-the art communication & navigation facilities; 
and 
 Airport is planned with a multi -modal connectivity to National Highway and Railway 
Stations.  
Sustainability Initiatives at MIA: 
 Manohar International Airport will be a Zero carbon Footprint Airport soon. 
 Soil Conservation to ensure preservation of soil/no dumping outside site. 
 5 MW Solar PV Power Generation Plant within premises, expandable at later date. 
 State-of-the-Art Sewage Treatment Plant (STP) facilities with Fluidized Media Reactor, 
ensuring zero discharge. 
 Storm Water Drains and Inline Rainwater Harvesting pits. 
 Recharges ground water up to 30% using rainwater harvested during monsoon seasons. 
 More than 5 Lac native species tree saplings have been planted in and around the project 
site. 
Design and Technology Consideration for the Mopa Airport: 
 Designed keeping in mind the nature, culture and spirit of Goa, 
 5G infrastructure provided with smart city elements/enablers, 

Page 15 of 111 
 
 Vernacular Architecture  which provides ample natural light to the interiors of the 
Terminal building. Its architecture forms the shape of “Shankha” which conveys positive 
vibrations, 
 The Interior of the Building is a blend of Contemporary and Goan Architecture to portray 
the exuberant culture, colourful & eventful lifestyle of Goa also contributing towards a 
greater passenger experience and memorable moments, 
 Mushroom design Air -Conditioning provided ensuring optimum utilization of space 
while providing efficient cooling, 
 A Best in Class design certified to platinum standard by Indian Green Building Council 
of CII (IGBC), 
 The airport has adopted best -in-class technologies like 3 -D Monolithic Pre -Cast 
buildings, Stabil Road, Robomatic Hollow pre cast walls, 5G compatible IT infrastructure 
and 
 World-class cargo facilities comprising of 25,000 metric tonnes of temperature-controlled 
Cargo handling capacity, has the potential to become an ideal hub for exports from Goa, 
Southern Maharashtra and Karnataka. T he new RA3 -compliant cargo terminal will not 
only help airlines tap into lucrative revenue opportunities but will also open up new 
avenues for employment generation and contributing to the states‟ GDP.  
Promoting Local Arts and Culture at MIA: 
 The airport promotes local artisans by creating a designated area for a flea market under 
Prakalp Initiative by the airport operator.  
 Extensively used locally-sourced Azulos tiles. The use of bright hues of red, blue, green 
and yellow with white borders on the walls replicates the look and feel of old Goa. The 
food court at the PTB recreates the charm of a typical Goan café, with its walls painted in 
bright colours and the counters made of tin-glazed blue-and-white Azulo tiles. 
 
61. The Committee notes the various ste ps taken by the Ministry to develop the 
Manohar International Airport at Mopa, Goa as one of the 11 Greenfield airports which 
have been operationalized since 2008. The Committee appreciates that the airport has been 
planned and constructed after diligent p lanning and taking various aspects into 
consideration. The configuration of the airport as regards the Passenger Terminal 
Building; Runways; Taxiway; Passenger Boarding Bridges; Air Traffic Control Tower; 
and Multi-Modal Connectivity has been developed kee ping in mind the present and future 
requirements. Further, the Committee notes that sustainability initiatives and technological 
advancements implemented in the development of Mopa International ai rport can be 
applied to future G reenfield projects. Accordi ngly, the Committee recommends the 
Ministry to adopt the best practices which have been followed at Mopa and if found 
feasible, it may be implemented at othe r ongoing/future Greenfield projects after due 
consideration, to ensure that both environmental and  commercial aspects of development 
are catered to.   
  

Page 16 of 111 
 
Chapter-III 
Issues pertaining to Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports 
62. A Civil Enclave is an airport that is used for both military aviation and civil aviation 
purposes. Civil Enclaves  typically conta in facilities for both a civil airport and a military air 
base.  At present, there are 31Civil Enclaves in the country, out of which 28 are being maintained 
by the Airports Authority of India (AAI), one is to be developed by AAI and remaining 2 by the 
State Government and private Airport Operator. The list of Civil Enclaves is enclosed as 
Annexure-VII. 
63. The advantages and disadvantages of Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports as informed by 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation, are attached at Annexure-VIII. 
 
Modernisation of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI) scheme 
64. The Committee was also informed that Civil Enclaves have played vital role in 
supporting operation of civil flights from defence airfields. These airports are owned by Defence 
but Terminals are maintain ed by AAI/State Government/Private Enterprises. Development of 
basic infrastructure is undertaken by Indian Air Force (IAF) under Modernisation of Airfield 
Infrastructure (MAFI) scheme. Expansion and development of airports, including provision of 
night la nding facility at an airport, is a continuous process and is undertaken by AAI or the 
concerned airport operator from time to time depending upon commercial viability, traffic 
demand and availability of land etc. However, development of basic infrastructur e like extension 
of runway is undertaken by the IAF under the Modernization of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI) 
scheme. AAI, from time to time, keeps coordinating with the IAF regarding the issue of 
upgradation of infrastructure under MAFI scheme by IAF. Due  to various operational/ 
administrative reasons, the Probable Date of Completion (PDC) given earlier may not be adhered 
to and wherever PDCs have elapsed, IAF has been approached to get revised PDC.  
65. The Committee also enquired as regards the planned o r proposed projects, under the 
MAFI project of the IAF, and the time frame for them. In this regard, the Ministry gave the 
details of Radio Navigational aids which have been replaced or planned to be replaced under 
project MAFI at joint user airfields as o n 1st  October, 2022 as provided by MAFI Cell, Ministry 
of Defence are attached as Annexure-IX. 
66. The Committee notes the details of the planned or proposed projects under the 
MAFI project of the IAF at 20 Civil Enclaves in the country. It notes that as per the details 
of Radio Navigational Aids (RNAs) which have been replaced or planned to be replaced 
under project MAFI at the Civil Enclaves as on 1st October, 2022, are as follows:- 
 RNAs replaced: 26 
 RNAs planned to be replaced: 23 
 RNAs for which no replacement plan has been received: 22  
67. The Committee appreciates the timely replacement of RNAs at various Civil 
Enclaves. However, it also observes that due to various operational and administrative 
reasons, PDCs given earlier could not be adhered to and wherever PDCs have elapsed, IAF 

Page 17 of 111 
 
has been approached to get revised PDC . The Committee notes that unlike Greenfield/ 
Brownfield airports which are managed by a single operator, the Civil Enclave Airports 
are managed by two operators, i.e., the AAI/ State  Government/ Private enterprises and 
the IAF. Hence, the Committee feels that there has to be perfect coordination between both 
the aforesaid agencies for smooth functioning of Civil Enclaves. It hopes that the 
operational/ administrative reasons for lapse  of PDCs, if any, may be examined and sorted 
out with IAF in future, so as to avoid delays. The Committee recommends that the 
proposed installation of navigational aids at various Civil Enclaves may be expedited to 
facilitate air operations of civilian air crafts, even in poor visibility and adverse weather 
conditions, enhancing safety of air travel.  
68.     Land Barter Matrix Formula: 
The Ministry informed that the „Land Barter Matrix‟ was finalized between MoD and 
MoCA to swap lands between AAI and IAF to  ensure expansion/upgradation of infrastructure. 
The Land Barter Matrix is based on the concept of transfer of equal value of land between MoD 
and AAI. A list of airports where IAF wants land from AAI and a list of airports where AAI 
wants land from IAF is  formulated along with the area and value of land. The Balance of the 
difference of value of land is forwarded to the next Barter Matrix. 
69. The Committee notes the advantages, the disadvantages and the challenges faced for 
the Civil Enclaves at Defence a irports. While the Committee fully understands the 
requirement of these Enclaves for Defence needs, it is however of the opinion that the 
requirements of the commercial aircraft operations has to be addressed as well. Keeping in 
view the development of the  region and increased business and employment potential, 
feasibility of development of full -fledged airport may be considered on a case -to-case basis 
to avoid the tough balance between defence and commercial operations at Civil Enclaves. 
The Committee ther efore recommends that issues such as expediting swapping of land 
under land Barter Matrix formula, delinking of working permissions for lease rentals, 
extension of watch hours for civilian/ commercial flights, restrictions/ constraints for round 
the clock operations, expansion of existing airport, and duality of security agencies for 
providing security, are areas which can be jointly addressed by the Ministries of Civil 
Aviation and Defence. A mechanism beneficial for both commercial and defence operations 
should be evolved therefor. 
70. The Committee is aware that „Land Barter Matrix‟ formula was used to solve the 
issues between the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Defence at the Bagdogra Airport, which 
is a C ivil Enclave in Defence Airport. The Committee d esires to know from the Ministry, 
whether it is being used to sort out issues at other Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports also. 
71. The Committee notes the challenges faced by the MoCA during construction and 
operations of Civil Enclaves at Defence Airport s. Besides, the  main challenges relate to  
airports catering to fast growing civilian traffic hubs. The Committee appreciates that both 
the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Defence have developed mechanism such as the „Land 
Barter Matrix‟ formula to resolve issues. The Committee also appreciates that meetings are 
held at the highest levels involving concerned Cabinet Ministries and Secretaries, to 
remove the stumbling blocks in operations of Civil Enclaves.  
72.     Time Frame for seeking permissions from Defence Authorities: 

Page 18 of 111 
 
The Committee enquired about the usual average time frame of seeking permission from 
the defence or the Air Force to construct a Civil Enclave and the constraints faced in the process 
therein. In reply the Ministry stated that  once it is  decided to develop a Civil Enclave, the State 
Government or IAF is approached for suitable and adequate land (approximately 50 acre) for 
providing Terminal Building along with Apron and IAF is requested to provide land for Link 
Taxiway also.  The entire p rocess including construction, depending on the complexity of land 
takes around two years. Constraints are faced in the process are to get adequate land along with 
external connectivity, space for Aprons and Link Taxiway and extension of watch hours and 
number of operations permitted per hour.  
73. The Committee notes that it takes around two years for the construction of Civil 
Enclave after permission is granted by Defence Authority. The committee recommends 
that the feasibility of reducing the time frame may be considered, keeping in view the cost 
escalation of construction of airports. 
74. The Committee was also informed that meetings are held both at the levels of the 
Hon‟ble Cabinet Ministers and Secretaries of respective Ministries, where issues are ir oned out 
to resolve the bottlenecks for smooth running of the civilian operations in these defence airports. 
75.    The Committee was informed that the expansion of operations at civil enclaves has raised 
many challenges. For instance, instead of 6,000 -foot-long runways at many IAF bases, today's 
wide-bodied commercial aircrafts need 7,500 feet. Also, the parking areas in front of terminal 
buildings that accommodated 2 earlier-generation aircrafts must now be expanded to cater to 3 -4 
larger modern aircraft. Air traffic controllers (ATCs) are also overworked, handling both fighter 
aircraft training and civil traffic. These issues are more prominent in airports that are emerging as 
fast-growing civilian traffic hubs such as Pune and Goa. 
76.    The Committee also notes that the Air Traffic Controllers are overworked, handling 
both fighter and civilian aircrafts at Civil Enclaves which are emerging hubs. The 
Committee is of the opinion that the smooth and efficient working of the ATCs is a must to 
ensure safety of Defence and Civilian aircrafts. The Committee therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry may devise a mechanism to ensure proper workload for ATCs and also 
increase the number of ATCs at such Civil Enclaves. 
77.    Flexi Airspace Management: 
The Committee also noted that flexi airspace management has been worked ambitiously 
between ATS and IAF and enquired about the outcome in the last two decades and the pending 
issues and proposals. The Ministry replied that under Flexible Use of Airspace (FUA), as on 
date, 89 Temporary Reserved Areas (TRAs) and 16 Temporary Segregated Areas (TSA) have 
been established following ICAO norms. Out of total 105 TRAs/TSAs, 98 are managed in a 
flexible manner through Airspace Management Cells (AMCs). 40 Danger Areas and one 
Restricted Area of Army have been de -notified and upper limit of two Danger Areas has been 
brought down to 10,000 feet from 37,000 feet. A total of 128 Conditional Routes (CDRs) have 
been implemented. 
78.    FUA has enabled a reported fuel savings of around Rs. 300 crore for different airlines and 
a reported reduction of carbon foot print of the order of 75000 tons. Ministry of Defence, vide 
letter dated 26 th December, 2022 has issued policy for requirement of Air Operation Routine 

Page 19 of 111 
 
number and flight clearance i n respect of Non -Scheduled Civil Aircraft operating from Defence 
airfields. 
79.    The Committee observes that the adoption of the FUA policy has led to substantial 
fuel savings for the airlines and also a consequent reduction of carbon footprint. The 
Committee is of the opinion that this environment friendly initiative should be fully 
encouraged as it would decrease the impact on the environment and also ensure savings for 
the Airlines on account of fuel. The Committee , therefore, recommends that the Minis tries 
of Civil Aviation and Defence should proactively co -ordinate among themselves, to ensure 
success of the FUA policy.  
 
  

Page 20 of 111 
 
Chapter-IV 
Other Issues common to Greenfield Airports, Brownfield 
Airports and Civil Enclaves 
Security at airports 
80. The Committee was informed of the following deployment of CISF at Airports: 
Ø  CISF is securing 66 Airports 
Ø  Categorization of 66 airports:- 
·         Hypersensitive         :        23 Airports 
·         Sensitive                   :        38 Airports 
·         Normal                     :        05 Airports        
          (International airports- 30) 
81. The Committee was apprised that CISF is providing security cover to 353 establishments 
constituting the critical infrastructure of the country which includes 6 6 international and major 
airports of the country, atomic energy & space installations, sea -ports, steel plants, coal fields, 
hydro-electric and thermal power plants, defence production units, fertilizer and chemical 
industries, note printing press/mints, heritage monuments/museums (Taj Mahal, Red -Fort, 
Victoria Memorial & Statue of Unity), important government buildings, Delhi Metro Rail, VIP 
security and private sector establishments. The CISF is deployed in almost all parts of the 
country including sever al sensitive areas in J&K and North Eastern States. A large number of 
units are also located in areas affected by left wing extremism. The induction of CISF in the field 
of VIP security is also yet another landmark achievement. Details regarding major deployment of 
CISF are at Annexure-X. 
82. The Committee notes that the CISF plays a pivotal role in providing security at 
airports, which is brought out by the fact that out of a total of 353 units deployed by CISF, 
66 units or 18.7 % is deployed at the airp orts only. The Committee also notes that the 
responsibility of the CISF to provide security is spread across a wide spectrum of 
establishments, as it provides security to 353 installations across the country including 
airports. It is also aware that the Ci vil Aviation Sector has seen an exponential growth and 
is expected to grow at a faster space in near future, which will enhance the need for 
manpower engaged in providing security for airports. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Civi l Aviation may examine the feasibility of setting up a 
specialized security agency for airports only, in consultation with the Ministry of Home 
Affairs. 
83.   The Committee was informed that earlier Cost of Deployment (CoD) of CISF deployment 
were paid by the concerned airport management/AAI. The Ministry of Civil Aviation created a 
Trust namely “National Aviation Security Fee Trust (NASFT)” in the year 2019. One of the 
mandates of NASFT is remittance to CISF (Aviation Security Group - ASG) from the Trust 
(NASFT) towards the cost of deployment to the CISF. Since 1st July 2019 CISF COD is 
centrally paid by NASFT for all airports. The Committee was also apprised that as on date, the 
total outstanding dues of Cost of Deployment (COD) in respect of 66 airports u nder CISF is Rs. 

Page 21 of 111 
 
4707,76,67,589/-. The details of Outstanding Dues of COD against JV and AAI airports under 
CISF as on 30.11.2022 are as under:- 
Airports Total outstanding dues (in Rs.) to be paid to CISF 
50 AAI airports 1667,07,74,604 
16 JV airports 3040,68,92,985 
Total 4707,76,67,589 
 
84.  The Committee notes that the total outstanding dues of COD for CISF from the 
NASFT is more than Rs. 4707 crores. Further, the 16 JV airports account for more than 
64% of the total outstanding COD dues. The Committee  notes the huge amount of 
outstanding dues which are payable to CISF by the NASFT, especially the dues of the 16 
JV airports and desires to know the reasons for the same. The Committee hopes that the 
dues will be cleared at the earliest by NASFT to enable the CISF to provide foolproof 
security at airports through deployment of enough manpower and the latest security 
gadgets at airports. 
85. APAO informed the Committee that the security agencies need to adopt modern 
technologies and use AI to upgrade their s kills to meet future challenges and meet international 
standards. Not only Immigration and Security processes need to be reviewed, technology should be 
used to improve, processing time and throughput e.g. 3D X -ray machines to be inducted, Full 
Body Scanners etc. 
86. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the suggestions made by 
APAO and ensure that latest technologies are employed at all airports for security as well as 
convenience of air passengers. 
 
Increasing the number of domestic and international airports 
● Increasing airport density and availability in the country 
87. India has a low per square kilometer availability of airports, compared to many countries 
of comparable size and/or population. There are many countries with more airport s than India 
despite having lower geographical area. Examples include Mexico, Indonesia, South Africa, 
Germany, France and UK, among others. As per International Air Transport Association (IATA) 
2020 Report on 'Air Connectivity' 1, India ranks 120 in terms of „Air Connectivity per 1000 
people‟ in 2019 a moderate improvement from its 131 st rank in 2009. In terms of 'Air 
Connectivity / GDP score', India ranks 121 in 2019, lower than its 118th rank in 2009. 
88. In this light, the Committee desired to know the r easons for having such low 
geographical density and per capita availability of airports in India and the proposed course of 
                                                 
1 IATA: “Air Connectivity: Measuring the connections that drive economic growth”  
https://www.iata.org/en/iata-repository/publications/economic-reports/air-connectivity-measuring-the-
connections-that-drive-economic-growth/ 

Page 22 of 111 
 
action to increase geographical density and per capita availability of airports in a planned 
manner. 
89. The Ministry, in its writte n reply, informed the Committee that development of new/ 
existing airports is a continuous process and is undertaken by the Government depending upon 
commercial viability, traffic demand, demand from State Governments, availability of land etc.  
Government of India (GoI) has formulated a Greenfield Airports (GFA) Policy, 2008 which 
provides detailed guidelines, procedures and steps related to construction of Greenfield airports 
across the country. The Government of India has accorded 'In -Principle' approval for setting up 
of 21 Greenfield Airports across the country.  
90. The Ministry further informed that to augment aviation infrastructure, it has launched 
Regional Connectivity Scheme - UDAN (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik) on 21.10.2016 to stimulate 
regional air connectivity and make air travel affordable to the masses. UDAN is a market -driven 
scheme. An airport which is included in the awarded routes of UDAN and requires 
upgradation/development for commencement of UDAN operations, is developed under 'Revival 
of unserved and underserved airports' scheme. 
91. The Ministry added that the number of operational airports/ Aerodromes in the country 
has increased from 74 in the year 2014 to 146 (including 2 Waterdromes and 9 Heliports) as on 
date. 
92. The Ministry stated that Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs (CCEA), Govt. of India 
has approved the scheme for „Revival and Development of un -served and under-served airports‟ 
of State Govt., AAI, Civil Enclaves, CPSUs, Helipads and Water Aerodromes in 2017 at the total 
cost of Rs. 4,500 Crores and the airports/ heliports/ water aerodromes are to be developed/ 
revived till 31.03.2024.  Further, details of Airports Operationalized/To Be Operationalised are 
attached at Annexure-XI. 
93. The Committee appreciates the various measu res being undertaken by the Ministry 
to improve air connectivity across the country. The Committee notes that to make air 
travel accessible to more people across the country, it is necessary to have operational 
airports in more cities. Providing air connec tivity to more cities in an aspirational 
developing country like India stimulates economic growth by creation of new opportunities 
in terms of trade & tourism. It also facilitates access to better healthcare, education and 
other services for people across the country. The Committee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry may ensure that a robust mechanism is in place to achi eve the 
operationalization of the airports/ heliports/ water aerodromes targeted during the years 
2022-23 and 2023-24. 
94. The Committee notes that India's ranking has decreased from 118 in 2009 to 121 in 
2019, in 'Air Connectivity / GDP score' as per IATA's 2020 'Air Connectivity' Report. This 
could indicate that India's air connectivity gains have not been able to keep up with its 
GDP growth. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that effective 
measures are taken to strengthen air connectivity at a rapid pace to further push India on 
its path of economic growth. 
95. The details of 37 airports/ Heliports (H)/ Water Aerodr omes (W) which have no 
scheduled commercial operations are at Annexure-XII. 

Page 23 of 111 
 
96. The Committee opines that the development of airports/ heliports is a capital -
intensive process involving funds to the tune of hundreds of crore rupees. It is essential to 
ensure that the capacities of already developed airports are optimally utilised to enable a 
good return on the invested capital as well as to stimulate regional economic growth. The 
Committee feels that the Ministry should devise an effective strategy to start  scheduled 
operations at these airports to ensure that their capacities are optimally utilised. The 
Ministry may explore the feasibility of viability gap funding to help fuel the demand 
needed to support scheduled operations at these airports. The Ministry  may also consider 
incentivising the airlines for a limited period of time to help sustain scheduled commercial 
operations. 
● Increasing the number of international airports 
97. The Ministry informed the Committee that during the last seven years, six airpor ts have 
been constructed/ declared as international airports making a total of 30 international airports in 
the country at present.  Out of these, two existing airports namely, Vijayawada and Tirupati in 
Andhra Pradesh were declared as international airport s in the year 2017. In addition, four 
Greenfield airports namely, Kannur in Kerala, Shirdi in Maharashtra, Kushinagar in Uttar 
Pradesh and Mopa in Goa have been constructed as international airports. 
98. The Committee enquired from the Ministry regarding t he key challenges involved in 
converting domestic airports into international airports. The Ministry, in its written reply, stated 
that declaration of an airport as an International Airport depends upon various factors such as 
traffic potential, infrastruc tural requirements and the demand from airlines for operation of 
international flights from the airport. Converting an airport as an international airport requires 
creation of infrastructure like provision of Ground Lighting facilities, Instrument Landing 
System, adequate runway length, space for Immigration, Customs, Health and Animal & Plant 
Quarantine services etc. 
99. The Ministry highlighted that traffic potential is a key factor which could not be 
undermined while considering the international status for an airport. An airport may have the 
„International‟ status and requisite infrastructure, but if it does not have traffic potential, the 
infrastructure would not be utilized to its full extent.  Indian designated carriers are free to mount 
scheduled operations to/from any airport to foreign destinations under the ambit of bilateral Air 
Service Agreements (ASAs) concluded by India with foreign countries. The Government only 
provides an enabling environment for operation of international flights and commenc ement of 
international flights is purely a commercial decision of scheduled airlines on the basis of traffic 
demand, airports flight handling capacity, safety infrastructure and economic viability of the 
route.   
100. The Committee informed that the propos al to declare Bhopal and Indore airports as 
International airports is under consideration in the Ministry. 
101. The Committee observes that international air connectivity in tier 2 cities can help 
improve trade, increase tourism and attract foreign investm ent in the region. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may actively analyse the potential for 
international traffic at the presently operational non -international airports as well as 
upcoming greenfield airports.  

Page 24 of 111 
 
● Public Private Partnership in construction and expansion of airports 
102. The Committee sought to know whether the Ministry has any plans to introduce Public 
Private Partnership (PPP) mode in construction and expansion of Greenfield/Brownfield airports 
and Civil Enclaves in Defe nce Airports. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the 
Committee that so far, Airports Authority of India (AAI) has leased out eight of its brownfield 
airports namely, Delhi, Mumbai, Ahmedabad, Jaipur, Lucknow, Guwahati, Thiruvananthapuram 
and Mangaluru for Operations, Management and Development under Public Private Partnership 
(PPP). 
103. Further, as per National Monetization Pipeline (NMP), 25 more AAI airports namely 
Bhubaneshwar, Varanasi, Amritsar, Trichy, Indore, Raipur, Calicut, Coimbatore, N agpur, Patna, 
Madurai, Surat, Ranchi, Jodhpur, Chennai, Vijayawada, Vadodara, Bhopal, Tirupati, Hubli, 
Imphal, Agartala, Udaipur, Dehradun and Rajahmundry have been earmarked for asset 
monetization over the years 2022 to 2025.  
104. As on date, Mopa, Navi Mumbai and Jewar (Noida) Greenfield airport projects are being 
developed under PPP. 
105. The Committee acknowledges the Ministry's efforts to privatize 25 airports between 
2022 and 2025, in line with the global trend of privatization in the aviation sector . The 
revenue generated through T ier-I PPP airports will permit the Ministry to make 
investments for the development of airports in Tier -II and Tier -III cities, where capital 
investment is the need of the hour. The Committee believes that such a plan will ultimately 
lead to much -improved air connectivity across the country and contribute to more evenly 
distributed regional economic growth.  
106. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may continue to seek 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) to achieve the goal of rapid development of the Indian 
civil aviation sector and to make air travel accessible for all.  
● Accommodating future growth 
107. The Committee noted that the last in -principle approval granted for a greenfield airport 
was for Hollongi Airport in January, 2019. The Committee queried the Ministry regarding the 
reasons for not granting in-principle approval for any greenfield projects in the past 4 years.  
108. In its reply, the Ministry stated that the development of a Greenfield airport is governed 
under the Greenfield Airports (GFA) Policy, 2008. As per the Policy, a State Government or an 
Airport Developer, willing to establish an airport, is required to submit a proposal to the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation (MoCA) for 2 -stages approval i.e. 'Site-Clearance' followed by 'In -Principle' 
approval. Such proposals are considered by MoCA as per the procedure stipulated in the GFA  
Policy. Ministry of Civil Aviation has been proactively engaged with the various State 
Government/UT such as Karnataka , Kerala, Maharashtra, Odisha, Assam, Nagaland, Gujarat, 
Rajasthan, Port Blair, Lakshadeep etc. for the construction of new Greenfield airports in their 
respective States/UTs. However, submission of a duly filled application by the State 
Government/Airport Company is a prerequisite for granting of approvals by the Central 
Government. Recently, this Ministry has received „Site Clearance‟ application in respect of 
proposed airports, viz. Kottayam in Kerala, Parandur in Tamil Nadu, Raichur in Karnataka and 
Puri in Odisha and they are being considered in consultation with Stakeholders. Further, Site 

Page 25 of 111 
 
Clearance for the following Greenfield Airports, namely, Mandi (Himachal Pradesh) in July, 
2022, Singrauli (Madhya Pradesh) in September, 2017 and Kotkasim (Alwar, R ajasthan) in 
November, 2015, has been granted by GoI. 
109. The Committee notes that Site Clearance has been granted for Singrauli and 
Kotkasim Greenfield airports in 2017 and 2022 respectively. The Committee may be 
apprised of the present status of these airports, along with reasons for delays, if any.  
110. The Ministry, in its written reply to a query of the Committee, informed that the 
efficiency and effectiveness of Greenfield, Brownfield or Civil Enclaves depend upon the 
demand of aviation sector in a particular area. Though Greenfield airport is one built from the 
scratch and is generally planned in a way to meet the civil aviation requirement of the 
surrounding area over a long period of time, the expansion of the existing (Brownfield) airports 
may also fulfil the demand for a long period at a lesser cost. Similarly, Civil Enclaves also have 
their own peculiar advantages as the assets at a Civil Enclave are jointly owned by AAI and 
Defence Authorities. 
111. The Committee observes that brownfield airpor ts have a limited scope for 
expansion which results in high costs of land acquisition for expansion and rehabilitation. 
Civil enclaves, on the other hand, face constraints in terms of accessibility of air space, land 
and operational watch hours. The Commit tee feels that greenfield airports, despite the 
initial requirement of huge capital, are best suited to meet the demands of air traffic 
growth in the nearby region for several coming decades. It is often noted that airport 
infrastructure projects run into delays, sometimes for several years. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry/ AAI may consider alternate greenfield options in 
the vicinity of a brownfield/ civil enclave project before granting permission for the 
development/ expansion of the same. Extensive cost-benefit analysis may be done on a case-
to-case basis in terms of long -term costs to the Government and benefits accrued to the 
public at large over several coming decades. 
112. The Committee enquired from the Association of Private Airport Operators regarding the 
potential challenges that the aviation industry will face i n the next 20 years and the steps that the 
Government should take to ensure that future growth in the aviation sector can be accommodated 
at airports without hindran ces. Written submission of APAO in this regard is placed at 
Annexure-XIII. 
113. The Committee takes note of the extensive list of challenges to be faced by the 
aviation sector in the next 20 years, as per APAO. The Committee agrees with the 
observation tha t land acquisition delays often cause time and cost overruns. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into such issues before awarding a 
project.  
114. The Committee desires that the Ministry may work towards creation of a single 
window clearance system for all statutory compliances to minimise delays in the execution 
of airport projects. 
115. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the various other 
suggestions made by APAO such as creation of skill development centres for aviati on, 
periodic audits, strengthening AERA and so on. The Ministry may ensure that the 

Page 26 of 111 
 
feedback received from APAO and other stakeholders, both public and private, are duly 
heard and acted upon to ensure fast-paced growth of the Indian aviation sector. 
● Establishing global transit hubs for international flights 
116. The Hon‟ble Minister of Civil Aviation recently said that India needs to develop an 
airport which would serve as a global transit hub for international flights. Many such 
international transit hubs have emerged within Asia itself, such as Dubai, Abu Dhabi, Doha, 
Singapore and Hong Kong. At present, India does not have any airport that can compete with 
these giant international transit hubs.  In this context, the Committee desired to know the reasons 
for India lagging in this regard in comparison to its Asian counterparts. 
117. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that the erstwhile bilateral 
policy was very liberal in granting passenger traffic rights, and points of call in India for the 
airlines of nearby countries. This has resulted in a serious imbalance in the number of points of 
call in favour of foreign carriers. This encouraged development of hubs in nearby countries like 
Singapore, Malaysia, UAE, Qatar etc. The Ministry sta ted that the key challenges in establishing 
a global transit hub for international flights are as under: 
a)   Existence of strong hubs in and around India in nearby countries like Singapore, 
Malaysia, UAE, Qatar etc. 
b)    Lack of wide-body aircraft with Indian carriers. 
c)    Slot constraints at major airports like Delhi and Mumbai 
118. APAO added that the Ministry of Civil Aviation is working in association with the 
concerned stakeholders for preparing a roadmap for establishing global hubs for internatio nal 
flights in India. 
119. The Committee notes that the erstwhile bilateral policy resulted in a serious 
imbalance in the number of points of call in favour of foreign carriers. The Committee may 
be apprised of the steps being taken by the Ministry in orde r to correct this imbalance and 
to develop its major airports as a global transit hub for international flights. 
120. The Committee acknowledges the various challenges being faced in establishing a 
global transit hub for international flights. The Committe e feels that the Ministry should 
work on obtaining points of call for Indian carriers in more countries. Effective steps may 
be taken to address the slot constraints at major airports like Delhi and Mumbai. Potential 
of airports close to Delhi and Mumbai i .e., Jewar Airport and Navi Mumbai Airport, may 
be explored for their development as a global transit hub. 
 
Profitability of airports 
121. As regards profitability of airports, the Ministry highlighted that there are 133 airports 
with AAI including JVC and  PPP Airports. Out of 130 AAI airports (excluding 3 JVC airports), 
the 9 airports operated by AAI are profit-making airports, are as per Annexure-XIV. 
122. The Committee enquired about the reasons for such a low number of airports making 
operational profits and the plans to increase the profitability of remaining airports. The Ministry 
informed that Airports Authority of India has taken up steps to increase the revenue through the 
development of non -aeronautical activities at AAI airports such as AAI has introduced the 
concept of Master Concessionaire for Food and Beverages, Retail, Advertising Rights, Duty-Free 

Page 27 of 111 
 
shops, Duty Paid shops, Executive lounges, Money exchange counter, etc. This endeavour shall 
not only create world -class experience for the travel ling public in terms of international brands 
etc., but also upgrade the level of the facilities as a whole. Further, an airport in general becomes 
profitable when adequate traffic flows from the airport. The Government has taken various steps 
to facilitate the airlines, thus encouraging participation to improve the profitability of aviation 
sector. Some of the measures taken are: 
● The reduction in Value Added Tax (VAT) on Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) was taken up 
with the State Government / Union Territories levying high VAT on ATF. As a result, 16 
States have reduced VAT on ATF. 
● Goods and Services Tax on (GST) rate has been reduced from 18% to 5 % for domestic 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) services. 
● Government has approved Emergency Credit Line Guara ntee Scheme (ECLGS) to 
aviation sector. Based on the industry demand, the scope of ECLGS has been enhanced to 
provide credit support to these companies up to 100% of their total credit outstanding 
(both fund based and non -fund based outstanding) as on refe rence dates, subject to a cap 
of Rs. 1500 crore per borrower, whichever is lower. 
123. The Committee agrees with the fact that an airport in general becomes profitable 
when adequate traffic flows from the airport. The Committee feels that the Ministry should 
work towards increasing the share of air transport for cargo movement as the same would 
help generate revenue for the airports. AAI should also work with airlines to attract new 
routes and increase frequency on existing routes to attract maximum passeng ers. More 
stress should be laid on non -aeronautical revenue sources such as lounges, shopping areas 
etc. within the airports which would also provide a rich experience to the passengers. 
124. The Committee further recommends that the Airports Authority of India may focus 
on improving the operational efficiency of all its airports. This can be done by streamlining 
the processes involved in airport operations, such as passenger check -in, baggage handling, 
security and ground handling services. Efforts may als o be made to implement cost -cutting 
measures such as optimizing energy consumption and outsourcing non -core functions of 
the airport. 
 
Challenges faced by Private Airports Operators in the operation of airports 
across the country and possible solutions thereto 
125. The Committee was informed of the GMR Group's presence across five National 
Airports which are Delhi International Airport ; Bhogapuram Airport, Visakhapatnam; 
Hyderabad Int ernational Airport; and Mopa International Airport, Goa. It was also infor med 
about their presence across three International Airports. 
126. The Committee was informed of the difficulty faced in timely resolution of tariff (airport 
charges) issue by the appellate tribunal (TDSAT). It was also informed that tariff determination 
for Major Airports was done by AERA and while determining tariff, there are always areas of 
difference in the interpretation of concession agreements. The Committee was apprised that 
while AERA Act, 2008 stipulates that disputes arising should be resolved i n 90 days, however, it 
is taking 3 to 6 years for resolution; and currently, more than 20 cases pertaining to AERA 

Page 28 of 111 
 
matters are still pending with TDSAT. The GMR representative suggested the formation of a 
separate tribunal to handle disputes of airport sec tor or alternatively, a dedicated bench under a 
tribunal, which is entrusted to handle disputes of airport sector to expedite dispute resolution 
process. 
127. The Committee takes note of the unduly long time of 3 to 6 years taken in the 
dispute resolution process for the airport sector matters, whereas AERA Act, 2008 
stipulates a time period of 90 days only. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may seek the comments of the Ministry of Law & Justice, as regards formation of airport 
sector specific appe llate tribunal or a dedicated bench under TDSAT, to expedite dispute 
resolution process. 
128. The Committee was also informed of the challenges faced in availability of long term 
funding at low interest rates for airport projects. It was also informed that  airport projects require 
significant capital expenditure under PPP arrangement, besides concessionaire needs to arrange 
for funding for the development of infrastructure. The GMR representative suggested that 
Insurance companies, Pension Funds, Developmen t Financial Institutions (DFI) may be allowed 
to provide funding for infrastructure development. 
129. The Committee is aware that construction of airport projects are highly capital 
intensive and therefore recommends that the Ministry may examine the feasi bility of 
funding by Insurance Companies, Development Financial Institutions etc., in consultation 
with the Ministry of Finance.  
130. The representative of GMR also suggested that Airport throughput can be enhanced 
through flexible operational arrangement s. Presently, airports are required to have segregated 
arrival and  departure infrastructure. The GMR representative suggested that a common Security 
Hold Area (SHA), with necessary modification may be allowed for arriving and departing 
passengers and swing operations may be allowed between international and domestic processing 
areas (e.g. security) to ensure flexibility to handle more passenger footfalls, which will also 
reduce capital expenditure for terminal construction, leading to lower passenger charg es and 
availability of more space to passengers. The Committee was also informed that to support the 
airport infrastructure, there is a requirement of enhancement / upgradation of support 
infrastructure such as connecting roads, storm water drainage, water  supply, sewerage or any 
other government activities outside the airport. The GMR representative suggested that a 
mechanism may be institutionalized to review the support infrastructure requirement periodically 
and advance planning should be undertaken on the basis of airport master development for 
infrastructure development to ensure smooth operation. 
131. The Committee notes the suggestions of the GMR representative regarding a 
Common Security Hold Area (SHA) and recommends that the suggestion may be disc ussed 
with the Ministry of Home Affairs and other security agencies involved, and if feasible, a 
plan may be worked out to benefit the passengers. It also recommends that the support 
infrastructure constructed and maintained by Government agencies should b e planned 
well in advance at the planning stage and periodically reviewed to ensure smooth operation 
at the airports. 

Page 29 of 111 
 
132. The Committee was informed that though India is acting as a transfer point for cargo, 
however, trans-shipment cargo is being re-screened in India, leading to higher  timelines in trans-
shipment. The GMR representative suggested that since transfer cargo is screened in the 
originating country/station and as the cargo is in sterile area, re -screening is not required. In 
specific cases, where cargo is coming from select countries, such re-screening can be mandated. 
133. The Committee is of the opinion that to develop India, as a trans -shipment hub for 
cargo, seamless trans-shipment, which will reduce time and costs is imperative. It therefo re 
recommends that the need for re -screening of cargo may be examined in consultation with 
the Ministry of Home Affairs, to reduce the timelines for trans-shipment. 
134. The Committee was also informed of the difficulties faced by the GMR in Input Tax 
Credit (ITC) on GST paid on works contract services used for setting up / expansion  activity at 
airport. It was also informed that currently, no ITC is available on GST paid on contract services; 
and allowing such credit can result in benefit being passed on to passengers indirectly. The GMR 
representative suggested to allow ITC on GST paid on works contract services used for setting 
up / expansion  activity at airport. The Committee was also informed that Government is 
providing Emergency Credit Line Guarante e Scheme (ECLGS) support to various industries, 
through provision of ECLGS and the objective of this scheme is to provide funding support to 
industries impacted due to COVID-19. However, ancillary airport services are not covered under 
the scheme; and as p er latest modification issued on 5 th October 2022, only airlines are eligible 
for enhanced amounts under the scheme. The GMR representative suggested that all the 
adjacencies business of airport may be included, viz., MRO, Duty Free, Multi -Level Car Park, 
Duty Free, Cargo, Advertising, Food & Beverages (F&B); and modification enhancing the limit 
for airlines should be extended to entire Civil Aviation sector. 
135. The Committee suggests that the issue of ITC on GST paid on works contract 
services for settin g up / expansion activity at airport and inclusion of all ancillary airport 
services for enhanced amounts under the ECLGS may be examined in consultation with 
the Ministry of Finance, and a mechanism may be worked out so as to benefit the 
passengers in the long term. 
136. In its meeting held on the 15 th December, 2022 the representative of GMR apprised the 
Committee of the Regulatory & Policy issues to attract Private Investments in Airports. The 
representative suggested that for PPP projects, a separate ov erriding PPP law should be 
promulgated, similar to Special Economic Zone (SEZ) Act, 2005 promulgated to implement 
SEZs in the country. This will enable confidence among investors and boost the investment in 
PPPs project. It was also suggested that to avoid  delays in decision making/approvals, a self -
certification mechanism with checks and balances and concept of deemed approval maybe 
considered after expiry of pre-determined time. 
137. The Committee is of the opinion that all out efforts are required to for mulate 
policies and legislations, which encourage and attract private investments in Airport 
projects. In this regard the Committee notes that SEZ Act, 2005, has been successful in 
setting up SEZs across the country, which have business -friendly trade laws  and have 
increased investments, trade and generated employment. The Committee notes the 
suggestion of the Private Airport Operator (PAO) and recommends that the feasibility of 

Page 30 of 111 
 
having a separate law PPP law to attract PPP investments in airports may be exa mined in 
consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice. 
138. The Committee was informed that Land Acquisition and Environment related challenges 
result in delays most of the airport projects in the country; and for Greenfield airports, as per 
existing pr ovisions 90% of the land should be in possession of the Authority at the time of 
bidding. However, inordinate delays have been seen in completion of Land Acquisition (LA) and 
Resettlement & Rehabilitation (R&R) after completion of bid process, leading to p roject 
timelines and costs going haywire. It was therefore suggested that the financial bids should be 
called upon completion of LA and R&R processes. 
139. The representative also suggested that with deep depreciation in Rupee, Baggage 
allowance needs to be enhanced from Rs 50,000 to Rs 100,000. 
140. The Committee was informed that currently stray dogs roam free at all the airports 
premises posing a risk to passengers at terminals. However, current legal provision prohibit 
airport operators to take any acti ons and hence necessary legal provision such as sterilizing and 
relocating to be made. 
141. The Committee notes the suggestions of the Private Airport Operators (PAO) 
regarding amendments/enactments of legal provisions for calling upon financial bids for 
airport projects only upon completion of LA and R&R processes, enhancement of baggage 
allowance and legal provisions for handling of stray dogs. The Committee recommends 
that the suggestions may be examined by the Ministry of Civil Aviation in consultation with 
the concerned Ministries, so as to expedite the process of development of airports and also 
to benefit the nation at large. 
 
Feasibility of creating multiple entry routes to tackle congestion in major 
airports 
142. Recent issues of congestion in major  airports across the country have raised the question 
whether multiple entry routes on the airports will help ease such congestion and ensure easier 
accessibility to boarding gates. 
143. For instance, at the Delhi Airport Terminal 3, all passengers, whethe r travelling 
domestically or internationally routed through a single entry route of the terminal building, 
which creates a bottleneck at the entry passageway.  
144. In light of this, the Committee enquired as whether the Minsitry has assessed the 
feasibility of redesigning terminal building by creating multiple entry routes so that passengers 
can have easy accessibility to their gates. 
145. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that Airport Terminals are 
designed and built to handle com bined peak hour capacities of domestic & international 
passengers. Various common facilities like check -in hall/ counters, arrival hall, baggage drop 
facilities etc., are designed for optimal utilization by both domestic and international passengers. 
The t erminal buildings are generally designed with multiple entry gates (vestibules) to ensure 
optimal throughput is achieved based on the planned design capacity of the terminal. 
146. The Committee pointed out the lack of future planning at major airports to d eal with 
increased passenger traffic. A Member of the Committee, in its meeting held on 15 th December 

Page 31 of 111 
 
2022, pointed out that DIAL has a capacity of around 70 million passengers at present and plans 
to increase its capacity to 110 million passengers in near  future by enhancing the peak capacity 
of slots by virtue of bays and remote bays and parking but enhancing the capacity for passengers 
was not part of the plan.  He demonstrated that when passenger traffic increases, the entry points 
for terminals have to be increased. He contended that if there is congestion in T -3, it would have 
to be split into three entries. He recommended creating an arm on the right side of Terminal -3 as 
T-3A,T-3B and T -3C which would increase the number of terminals.  A representati ve of the 
GMR Group admitted that the concept of the arm was a novel concept that would be definitely 
studied by the organisation. 
147. The Committee recommends that AAI should conduct feasibility studies to assess 
whether creating an arm on the right side of Terminal-3 of the Indira Gandhi International 
Airport, Delhi would help tackle the congestion issues being faced by passengers. If found 
feasible, the same principle may be followed at other airports across the country to ensure 
minimal waiting time fo r passengers. Airport terminals should prioritise  passenger 
accessibility to boarding gates. Multiple entry gates should be designed and built to ensure 
optimal throughput at airports. 
148. The Committee recommends that future planning at major airports s hould include 
capacity planning for passengers, in addition to peak hour capacities of domestic as well as 
international passengers. This would ensure that airports are equipped to handle increased 
passenger traffic and avoid congestion. The Ministry shoul d ensure that future projections 
of the number of passengers to be serviced, are duly factored at the planning stage of the 
airport development/ expansion projects in the country. 
 
Night landing facilities at Airports and Civil Enclaves 
149. The Ministry i nformed the Committee that all the operational airports in the country 
having scheduled flight operations have night landing facility, except in 23 airports, details of 
which are at Annexure-XV. 
150. The Ministry further added that night landing facility is purely based on the demand and 
need of the operational requirements of the airlines and the availability of land. The provision of 
night landing facility at the airports is a continuous process and is undertaken by the Airports 
Authority of India (AAI) from time to time depending on the availability of land, commercial 
viability, socio-economic considerations, and traffic demand/ willingness of airlines to operate 
to/from such airports. 
151. The Committee notes that 23 airports in the country have schedu led flight 
operations but do not have night landing facility. The Committee feels that night landing 
facility is a basic prerequisite to permitting an airport to operate at its full capacity. 
Besides, having night landing facilities at airports can also he lp authorities in the speedy 
deployment of emergency response teams and evacuations in case of emergency situations 
in nearby regions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may 
thoroughly consider the benefits of installation/ upgradation of night landing facilities at all 
its airports/ heliports to make sure that the huge capital invested in the development of 
airports is optimally utilised. 

Page 32 of 111 
 
 
Cargo facilities at airports and civil enclaves 
152. Air cargo logistics play a key role in the ec onomic growth of a country. Tapping the 
potential of the air cargo supply chain requires the Government tow ork in synergy with various 
stakeholders such as airlines, air cargo terminal operators, ground handling service providers, 
domestic cargo transport service providers etc.  
153. In view of the importance of air cargo operations to the economic development of the 
nation, the Committee desired to know the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that greenfield 
and brownfield airports are equipped with spe cialised infrastructure to handle time -sensitive, 
perishables, high-value cargoes and regional express facilities. 
154. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that Air Cargo Terminals in 
greenfield and brownfield airports are equipped w ith cold storage facility for handling of time -
sensitive/perishable cargo and strong rooms for handling high -value cargoes. International 
express/courier terminals are also available to handling courier cargo in these airports apart from 
facilities for mov ement of domestic express cargo through domestic cargo terminals. Export air 
cargo is accepted in the “Ready for Carriage” condition at the air cargo terminals. Cut -off time 
for acceptance of Perishable cargo is D(-)4 (4 hrs before departure). High-value cargo are always 
handled in pre -planned manner.  The Ministry also furnished the following information with 
regard to air cargo handling in India: 
a)   Status of Air Cargo handling in India is hereunder: 
 
b)   AAI Cargo Logistics and Allied Services Company  Limited (AAICLAS) 
is in process of developing cargo facilities at Hollongi & Hirasar Greenfield airports.  
c)   Currently, Air cargo facilities are available at 14 Civil Enclave airports. At 
other civil enclave airports, movement of domestic cargo through  domestic passenger 
terminal are facilitated with the approval of BCAS. 


Page 33 of 111 
 
d)     Quantum of Air Cargo Handled, Growth & Projection for Cargo facilities 
at Civil Enclave Airports is placed at Annexure-XVI. 
155. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by th e Ministry to ensure that 
greenfield and brownfield airports are equipped with specialised infrastructure to handle 
time-sensitive, perishables, high -value cargo s and regional express facilities. The 
Committee feels that the aviation sector will play a defining role in increasing India‟s cargo 
capacity to bring it at par with other top performing countries. The Ministry should ensure 
that its rules and guidelines enable a conducive environment for major growth in air cargo 
operations in India. AAI should en sure that all its airports increase their air cargo 
capacities in line with the demands of the air cargo sector.  
156. The Committee notes that it is the vision of the National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 
that cargo volumes should increase to 10 million to nnes by 2027. The Committee notes that 
the Coronavirus -pandemic affected years showed a considerable decline in timers of air 
cargo handled in India. From the data available for the Financial Year 2021 -22, it is 
evident that both domestic and international  air cargo figures are nearing the pre -
pandemic levels.  To meet the target of 10 million tonnes air cargo volume envisaged in 
NCAP, 2016, the cargo volume would have to increase at a compounded annual growth 
rate of well over 20 percent. The Ministry shou ld ensure well -equipped infrastructure 
across crucial greenfield and brownfield airports to capitalise on the expanding global air 
freight market and meet its revised targets. 
 
Global Scenario of Air Transport/ Freight 
157. The Committee examined the World  Bank data on Air Transport and Freight in India, 
Brazil, China and USA.  

Page 34 of 111 
 
 
158. The Committee notes that India grew at a good pace till 2018, in terms of freight 
transported via air. However, air cargo operations in India have been hit very badly by the 
Coronavirus pandemic as compared to many other major economies. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may take suitable remedial measures to ensure that India is 
back on track for a rapid growth trajectory in the air cargo sector in the coming years. 
159. The Committee, in its meeting, held on 23 rd March, 2023 took up the issue of 
discontinuation of cargo operations from Patna, Bhubaneswar, Pune, Jammu, Vizag and 
Coimbatore due to non -compliance with BCAS requirements. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation stated that the volume of cargo at various airports where cargo operations have been 
discontinued is low. He added that there is a viability issue and it is not making commercial 
sense for the cargo terminal operator to invest money to arrange addi tional machines and 
screeners at these airports. 
160. The Committee is of the view that air cargo operations provide an economic boost to 
the regional economy, by permitting quick transport of perishable items such as fruits and 
vegetables. The Committee t herefore recommends that AAI Cargo Logistics and Allied 
Services Company Ltd. (AAICLAS) should consider investing capital in the airports where 
cargo operations have discontinued for lack of compliance with the BCAS requirements so 
as to permit the operati onalisation of air cargo operations thereat. The Committee further 
recommends that BCAS may grant some more time to AAICLAS to meet its requirements 
and enable the airports to immediately resume the air cargo operations thereat. 
161. APAO stated that the k ey challenges faced in operating cargo facilities and expanding 
cargo volume in India, are as follows: 
·      Imbalance between Exports and Imports depending on the Industrial profile around the 
specific airport and its catchment. 


Page 35 of 111 
 
· Restrictions in open sk y policy leading to airlines not getting approvals for multi -port 
landings in India which in turns leads to imbalance between Imports and Exports making in 
unviable for airlines to operate. 
·         GST of 18% on Air Cargo, making Air freight more expensive. 
·         Availability of trained Customs officials 24/7, 365 days 
·    Freighter Operations: Currently, pure non -scheduled freighter charter service flights are 
restricted to 6 airports, namely Bengaluru, Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata, Hyderabad, and Mumbai . In 
order to reduce logistics costs and make products cost viable „open s kies‟ policy for cargo 
charters/ nonscheduled freighters should be allowed for operations across all Indian airports. 
·         Dwell time of Cargo Operations: With 24*7 availability  of customs personnel, reduction of 
free period for import and export to 24 hrs. 
162. APAO further added that the short -term and long -term measures that can be taken to 
increase India‟s air cargo capacity and enhance its competitiveness as compared to othe r leading 
nations are: 
 ·         The process of getting approvals from the ministry should be simple and time bound. 
·         Government should look at Business Centric processes. 
163. Other suggestions made by APAO  regarding Cargo facilities at airports  and civil 
enclaves, are placed at Annexure-XVII. 
164. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may analyse the various challenges 
listed and suggestions made by APAO regarding operating cargo facilities, and take 
suitable action to ensure that the air cargo capacity of our country is boosted. The Ministry 
may ensure proper infrastructure across  crucial greenfield and brownfield airports so that 
India can capitalise on the expansion of the global air freight market. 
 
Green and sustainable initiatives at airports and civil enclaves 
165. India is consistently moving towards a green and sustainable economy, especially in light 
of its target to establish 500 GW of renewable energy capacity by 2030 and reach net zero 
emissions by 2070. In this respect, many air ports across the world are adopting greener elements 
into their designs and operation strategies and undertaking eco -friendly initiatives. In this light, 
the Committee desired to know the taken to incorporate and incentivise green and sustainable 
models for greenfield and brownfield airport projects. Details are at Annexure-XVIII.  
166. The Committee appreciates the multitude of steps being taken by the Ministry/AAI 
to promote the use of green energy in Indian airports. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should continue to incentivize airports to adopt green and sustainable models. 
This can be done by offering tax breaks and other incentives to airports that achieve 
carbon neutrality and net-zero emissions. 
167. The Committee recommends that the Airpo rts A uthority of India may closely 
monitor the progress made by different airports regarding their target for achieving 100% 
use of green energy by 2024. AAI may take necessary measures to help the airports lagging 
behind in the achievement of these targets. 
168. The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should incentivise the use of 
electric vehicles at airports for ground transportation. The Ministry should also work with 

Page 36 of 111 
 
industry associations and other stakeholders to develop infrastructure for charging electric 
vehicles at airports. 
 
Development of Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) Facilities 
169. The Committee took up the issue of development of MRO facilities in India as its MRO 
facilities are lacking and most of India‟s MRO requirements are imported. MRO also accounts 
for the second highest cost item after fuel for aircraft operations. 
 
170. The Committee enquired about the number of MRO facilities in India and whether these 
facilities are able to meet the current MRO requirements in the country. In reply the Ministry 
stated that there are 140 (Operator + Standalone) AMOs/Maintenance, Repair & Overhaul 
MROs approved in India for Line/Base maintenance. Out of which 49 standalone MROs 
approved for base maintenance and 07 are capable of carry ing out the maintenance and overhaul 
of aircraft and components. Due to lack of availability of component and engines overhaul 
facilities in India, operators are constrained to send their aircraft and aircraft engines to the 
facilities where such overhaul, maintenance facilities are available.  
 
171. As regards a query regarding the reasons for the lack of adequate domestic MRO 
facilities in India, the Ministry stated the following reasons: 
i. High rate of GST on MRO in India (which has now been rationalise d with effect 
from 1 April 2020); 
ii. Inadequate availability of approved maintenance facilities in India; 
iii. Airlines are bound under the lease agreement to send their aircraft to a facility 
approved by the lessor during and after the completion of the lease period, and 
iv. High airport charges etc. 
172. The Ministry also stated that Government's aim is to facilitate setting up of aircraft MRO 
services in India through various policy, regulatory and other incentives, rather than establishing 
any facility  on its own.  Government has taken various steps through "Atma Nirbhar Bharat 
Abhiyan" (Make in India), National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 and recently through release of 
revised Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) guidelines w.e.f. 1st September, 2021  for 
making India an MRO Hub. The impact of the tax and regulatory changes will be visible over the 
next 2-3 years as new investments flow in, new contracts are signed and the MRO infrastructure 
and workforce is expanded.  
173. The Committee was also infor med that despite potential savings due to reduced labour, 
shipping, Turnaround Time (TAT) costs and finance cost of replacements & inventory, OEMS 
are not forthcoming as they already have established shops in Singapore, Dubai and other 
countries and setting up capacity in India would imply underutilization of their existing capacity 
at other locations. The Ministry stated that there has been a growth in Indian MRO industry as a 
total of 10 new MROs have been approved in India since GST on MRO was reduced fr om 18% 
to 5%. As regards the steps have been taken to establish more MRO facilities at greenfield/ 
brownfield airports, the Ministry stated that Government had announced a set of policy 

Page 37 of 111 
 
provisions under the National Civil Aviation Policy 2016 for the creat ion of a congenial 
atmosphere for broad -based development of aircraft Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul MRO 
facilities at (MRO) in India. 
174. The initiatives taken under the policy towards developing India into an MRO hub 
include: 
 Exempted Customs Duty on tools and tool kits; 
 Reduced Goods and Services Tax rates on various spare parts, accessories, and 
consumables; 
 Simplified clearance processing of parts; 
 Relaxed restriction on utilization of duty-free parts from one year to three years; 
 Extended stay in I ndia of foreign aircraft for entire duration of MRO work or 6 months, 
whichever is lesser; 
 Revised the Notification to enable export of serviceable parts; 
 100% Foreign Direct Investment permitted via automatic route for MRO; 
 Liberalised policy for borrowin g and lending in Foreign Currency and Rupees on 
competitive terms for MROs; 
 Modalities prescribed for concessional temporary imports of spare parts by foreign 
airlines for repair of their aircraft in transit; 
 Policy prescribed for allotment of land by AAI to promote MROs at AAI airports. 
 Lease period of land increased from 3 years to 30 years. 
 Land allotment done through E-tendering etc. 
  
175. More recently, the GST Council has substantially rationalized the applicable taxes since 
April 2020, while a roadmap has been developed towards making India a global hub for MRO in 
pursuance of the "Atma Nirbhar Bharat Abhiyan" economic packages announced in May, 2020. 
The tax regime has now been substantially rationalized, with GST rates on domestic MRO 
having been r educed from 18% to 5% and zero -rating of MRO services provided by domestic 
MROs to Indian airlines under contract from foreign MROs, both w.e.f. 1 st  April, 2020. This 
would attract MRO business to India which would result in savings for airlines in mainte nance 
and also promote India as an aircraft maintenance hub. 
176. Further, keeping in view India's growing aviation market, technology and skill base, 
Government announced new MRO Guidelines on 1st September, 2021 with a view to create a 
congenial atmosphe re in the country for the development of MRO industry for aircraft/ 
helicopter/ drones and their engines and other parts. The salient features of the guidelines are as 
follows:  
 Concession fee, in any manifestation including royalty, shall not be leviable on new/ 
renewal of existing contracts. 
 Selection of agency and procedures for allotment of land/ space under rationalized land/ 
space rental for new MRO contracts and renewal of existing MRO contracts, shall be 
through e-tender by Airports Authority of India (AAI). 
 The renewal of the existing land leases/ space license of MRO service providers/ Aircraft 
Maintenance Organizations (AMOs) shall be on the basis of bidding wherein Right of 

Page 38 of 111 
 
First Refusal (RoFR) shall be given to the existing lessee/ licensee to m atch the first rank 
bid in terms of the selection criteria provided its bid is within 15% of the most 
competitive bid received. 
 The quoted/ accepted lease fee shall be escalated @15% after every 3rd year. 
 The maximum period of contract, new or renewal, for allotment of land/ space shall be 30 
years from the date of handing over of site.  
177. The new guidelines would further encourage the MRO organizations and OEMs to setup 
workshops in India and create a conducive environment towards making India a global hub of 
MRO. 
178. The Committee was also informed that AAI initiated open tender action under Round -1 
for establishment of MROs at 12 sites of 5 Airports: Bhopal -3 sites, Begumpet -3 sites, 
Chandigarh-2 sites, Chennai-1 site and Juhu -3 sites. Subsequently, M RO Round-2 tender action 
initiated in April 2022 for 13 MRO sites at 5 Airports: Begumpet -3 sites, Chennai-1 site, Juhu-3 
sites, Kolkata-4 sites and Tirupati-2 sites. Consequently, AAI has issued Letter of Intent (LOI) to 
Selected bidders for Bhopal (2 sit es), Chennai (1 site), Juhu (1 site) and Kolkata (1 site). 
Respective bidders have accepted the LOIs for Bhopal, Chennai and Kolkata. Acceptance for 
Juhu is awaited as of now.  
179. Airport authority has identified 11 airports for allotment of land on "Des ign, Build, 
Operate and Maintain" (DBOM) basis (construction-cum-license to operate and maintain) for the 
establishment of MROs. Regional offices -DGCA, will approve MROs on receipt of application 
and on compliance of requirement.   
180. The Committee notes  that MRO demand in India is also anticipated to grow, 
thereby entailing attractive investment opportunities for domestic as well as foreign 
investors, OEMs and leading MROs across the world. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should make all out e fforts through changes in regulations, to create a 
conducive ecosystem for foreign aircraft manufactures like Boeing , Airbus and other 
OEMs to establish their MRO in India.    
181. The Committee commends the policy initiatives such as the MRO Policy 2021, 
National Civil Aviation Policy 2016, and fiscal policies such as rationalisation of GST, 
which reflect the vision of the Government to develop India as a global MRO hub. The 
Committee also notes that presently only repairs of noncore activities other than engine 
repairs etc. are being carried out in India. It hopes that the aforesaid policy would enable 
the India MRO to take up major technical repairs as well. Aircraft manufacturers (OEMs) 
may be encouraged to open MRO facilities in India.  
182. The Committ ee also observes that most of the foreign Aircraft Manufacturers & 
OEMs prefer to utilize their own MROs established abroad despite reduced labour, 
shipping, Turnaround Time and finance cost of replacements & inventory in India. The 
Committee recommends th at the Ministry may focus on highlighting these aspects to 
prospective MROs who want to set up establishments in the country. The Committee is of 
the view that the growth of the MRO sector will also depend on how efficiently it can 
address and remove the k ey challenges faced by MRO players in India. It hopes that the 

Page 39 of 111 
 
Ministry will make all out efforts to implement the various fiscal measures at the ground 
level and also ensure proactive interaction with MRO industry to remove any bottlenecks 
that may arise.  
183. The Committee is of the opinion that since MRO services constitute a significant 
portion of overall expenditure of any airlines operator, setting up MRO services in the 
country would reduce the expenditure on MRO services and subsequently reduce the  
airfares in the domestic routes, which will consequently reduce the cost of air travel and 
benefit the passengers. 
 
Ease of doing business in the aviation sector 
184. The Committee sought to know from the Ministry about the steps taken thus far to 
improve the ease of doing business in the aviation sector. The Ministry, in its written reply, 
informed the Committee that it has undertaken the following measures for improvement in civil  
aviation sector in the country and placed at Annexure-XIX.  
a)  Upgradation/ Modernisation of airports' infrastructure is a continuous process and is 
undertaken by Airports Authority of India (AAI) and other Airport Developers from time to 
time depending on the availability of land, commercial viability, socio -economic 
considerations, traffic demand/willingness of airlines to operate to/from such airports. AAI 
and other Airport Developers have targeted capital outlay of approximately Rs. 98,000 
crore in airport sector in the next five years for expansion and modification of exi sting 
terminals, new terminals and strengthening of runways, among other activities. 
b)    The Digiyatra initiative aims to provide a contactless, seamless and paperless handling of 
passengers at airports from the entry gate of the terminal to the boarding  point. Project 
under Digi Yatra has been launched at three airports viz. Delhi, Bengaluru and Varanasi on 
01.12.2022 under Phase -I. Four other airports viz. Hyderabad, Pune, Kolkata and 
Vijayawada will also be awarded under Phase-I. 
c)    Modernisation of air navigation infrastructure has been taken up. 
d)    Route rationalization in the Indian airspace is being carried out in coordination with Indian 
Air Force, using modern air traffic flow management techniques to develop shorter flight 
routes and lower fuel consumption by airlines. 
e)    Greater use of digital technology is being encouraged at air cargo terminals to enhance 
efficiency and to reduce dwell times. 
f)     eGovernance has been enabled at Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) and 
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) for most of their stakeholder interactions and 
internal processes. 
g)    Ministry of Civil Aviation has launched Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) - UDAN 
(Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik) on 21.10.2016 to stimulate regional air c onnectivity and 
making air travel affordable to the masses. As on 29.11.2022, after four rounds of bidding 
under UDAN, 453 routes have commenced, operationalizing 70 Airports including 2 Water 
Aerodrome & 9 Heliports. More than 2.15 lakh UDAN flights have operated and over 1.1 
crore passengers have availed the benefits in UDAN flights so far. The scheme has been 

Page 40 of 111 
 
able to provide air connectivity to Tier -2 &Tier -3 cities at affordable airfares and has 
transformed the way people travel. 
h)   Further, keeping i n view India's growing aviation market, technology and skill base, 
Government has announced new Maintenance, Repair & Overhaul (MRO) Guidelines on 
01.09.2021 with a view to create a congenial atmosphere in the country for the 
development of the MRO industry. 
i)     The Airports Authority of India (AAI) has brought out a liberalised Flying Training 
Organisation (FTO) policy wherein the concept of airport royalty (revenue share payment 
by FTOs to AAI) has been abolished and land rentals have been significantly rationalised. 
j)      Ministry of Civil Aviation has released a policy for promotion of helicopter operations 
across the country. The policy covers various aspects like concessional ground handling 
charges, parking deposit, landing charges, service charg es, credit facility with ATC and 
training for Air Traffic Control (ATC) with a view to making helicopter operations viable. 
As per the policy, State Governments/UTs are required to set up an Institutional 
mechanism to facilitate helicopter operations by ob taining permissions, approvals, 
clearances, etc. Ministry of Civil Aviation has also requested the State Governments and 
UTs to consider setting up helipads in each district for promoting helicopter operations. 
The Government through this policy, aims to s timulate air traffic and enhance air 
connectivity through helicopters by facilitating helicopter operations across the country. 
k)    Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) has undertaken the National Mission 
on Design & Development of Region al Transport Aircraft. Accordingly, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation has established a Monitoring Committee for implementation of Regional 
Transport Aircraft project under the Co -Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Civil 
Aviation and the Secretary, Department of Scientific and Industrial Research. Last meeting 
of the Committee was held on 07.11.2022, wherein it has been decided/ agreed that by the 
time agreement with the prospective technology partners is finalised, domestic and 
international manufacturing partners shall continue. 
l)     Ministry of Civil Aviation has taken up the issues of reduction in Central Excise Duty on 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) with Ministry of Finance and reduction of Value Added Tax 
(VAT) on ATF with State Governments/ Union Territor ies (UTs) on multiple occasions. 
Based on the request, VAT on ATF has recently been reduced in the range of 1 -4% by 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Arunachal Pradesh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli & Daman and 
Diu, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Ladakh, Madhya 
Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram, Tripura, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh in their respective 
States/ UTs. Besides, Karnataka has also brought down the VAT on ATF to 18%. 
185. Moreover, 8 Advisory Groups under the Chairmanship of the Hon'b le Minister of Civil 
Aviation, comprising industry leaders and representatives of the Government, have been formed 
in various spheres of Aviation Sector, for enhanced coordination with the industry and to find 
solutions of the issues impacting the Sector. 
186. The Committee commends the various steps being taken by the Ministry to improve 
ease of business i n the aviation sector in India and hopes that concerted efforts would be 
made in this direction in future as well. 

Page 41 of 111 
 
187. The Committee recommends that the  Ministry should examine streamlining  the 
regulatory procedures related to aviation, making them more transparent and efficient. 
The Ministry may work on simplifying the process of obtaining financing to boost private 
investment in the aviation sector. 
188. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may hold periodic consultations with 
industry players and investors to understand the regulatory challenges faced by them. The 
eGovernance initiative of DGCA should be expanded to cover more stakeholder 
interactions and internal processes. 
189. The Committee takes note of the National Mission on Design & Development of 
Regional Transport Aircraft being undertaken by CSIR. The Committee feels that the 
design and development of indigenous regional transport aircraf t would be in line with the 
vision of Atmanirbhar Bharat and would contribute towards improving air connectivity 
while creating employment opportunities. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may ensure that sufficient budgetary allocation is provided for this effort. 
190. The Committee observes that the Ministry is responsible for the administration of 
the Aircraft Act, 1934, Aircraft Rules, 1937 and various other legislations pertaining to the 
aviation sector in the country. While the Ministry has ma de amendments to the Aircraft 
Act and Aircraft Rules from time to time, the mother legislation/ rules are about 90 years 
old as on date. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the feasibility 
of undertaking  a thorough review of the existing  legislations/ rules that better reflect the 
modern day realities and requirements of the Indian aviation sector. 
191. Regarding the key regulatory/ compliance challenges in the aviation sector, APAO 
informed the Committee that despite the long -lasting and  vital importance of air transport to 
global development, the expansion of aviation today faces several risks and challenges that 
foreign Investors, developers and operators face across infrastructure projects in India including 
inordinate delays in land a cquisition, counterparty risk, protracted dispute resolution procedures 
and regulatory risks. Indian airports already operate under highly regulated conditions, which 
needs to be relaxed as the sector & the market has reached maturity over the last decade.  While 
often the policy documents are drafted by GoI with the intention of minimum government, 
maximum governance, the actual implementation sometimes is not in the same spirit. Some areas 
where reforms can be undertaken are as follows:  
• AERA (Regulator)  should honour the key provisions of the Concession agreements that 
have been entered into by state governments, prior to enactment of AERA Act.  
• The regulator needs to bring about statutory regulations for tariff determination, as 
mandated in the AERA Act. The absence of which is leading to inconsistency on its stand 
on various issues arising across various airports and also between the various control 
periods.  
• Possibility of bringing light touch approach by AERA should be looked into. 
• Subjective de cisions, like on normative cost, low rate of returns on equity etc. needs to 
eliminated.  

Page 42 of 111 
 
• India lacks a policy for development and operations of a multi -airport city system. There is 
a need for revision of National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 to address issues regarding 
this upcoming development in the country.  
• AERA to be strengthened with the right technical expertise to bring in a wider perspective 
e.g. Members should have economic / finance / Legal background and also Member 
should be inducted having experience of pvt. infrastructure / airport sector.  
• Financial thresholds in current concession agreements are fixed and not linked to inflation. 
Total project cost stipulated in concession agreements is well below actual project costs. 
Corrective amen dments may be considered for making the system more contemporary 
with the problems faced by airport developers / operators. There is a need for revision of 
Guidelines for project proponents/ concessioning authority.  
• Current regulations explicitly provid e for airport operators to adjust tariffs in any one 
control period to account for over- or under-recovery of capital and operating expenses in 
the previous control period. This approach may be extended to ISPs. Flexibility in pricing 
strategy will allow a irport operations and airport service providers more leeway to price 
services to promote airport growth and development. There is a need for revision of 
Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India Act, 2008.  
• Security clearances from BCAS for concessionaires is time consuming.  
• Floor area approvals for the terminal can be a one -time activity instead of approval at each 
concessionaire level. 
192. APAO further added that in order to increase private participation, the cost of doing 
business in the Indian aviation sector can be brought down by:  
• Initial Loans can be given at low interest rates.  
• Government to provide financial support in case of force majeure events like Covid. 
193. Given the important role played by AERA in the Indian aviation sect or, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that AERA is staffed with personnel 
with suitable domain expertise. 
194. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into possible delays in 
security clearance from BCAS for concessionaires in the aviation sector. If possible, fixed 
timelines may be prescribed for such clearances. 
195. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the various regulatory 
challenges listed by APAO and work on resolving the same so as to boost Public Pr ivate 
Partnership in the country.  
 
Facilities for passengers 
196. The Committee sought the details of the facilities provided to passengers at existing 
Greenfield/Brownfield airports/Civil Enclaves in Defence airports.  
197. The Ministry, in its written r esponse, apprised the Committee that at all major Airports, 
passenger facilities viz., Passenger Chairs, Trollies, Drinking Water, Toilets, ATMs, Baggage 
Information Display System, Flight Information Display System, Ceremonial Lounge/Reserved 
Lounge, Child Care Room, Smoking Room, Elevators, Escalators, Entertainment TV, MI Room, 
Money Exchange, Retail outlets /Eating Facility, Car Parking, Carousel belts, Pre -paid taxis and 

Page 43 of 111 
 
car rental, Lost & Found Facility, Airlines ticketing counter, Check -in counters, Mobile 
Charging points, Tourist Information centre etc. are being provided. 
198. Further, common passenger processing facility is available at 39 AAI airports. Also, 
passenger processing system facility is being introduced at four new AAI airports, which i s 
likely to be operational by March 2023. 
199. „May I Help You‟ Counters are operational at 43 AAI Airports. The remaining airports 
have also been advised to take necessary action for the provision of „May I Help You‟ Counters 
on Priority. 
200. The Committ ee notes that sufficient passenger facilities have been provided at 
major airports across the country. The Committee, however, notes that no mention has 
been made regarding the facilities provided at non -major airports. The Committee 
recommends that AAI ma y come up with guidelines to prescribe a certain minimum set of 
passenger facilities to be provided at all airports across the country. This may include 
facilities for drinking water, toilets, „May I Help You‟ counters, and so on.  
201. The Ministry highlighted that it has finalized the „Accessibility Standards and Guidelines 
for Civil Aviation' to assist people to comprehend and understand the Universal Accessibility 
Standards. It would help people providing the services at airports in understanding the ne eds of 
persons with reduced mobility, old people, children, expecting mothers, and various other users 
to make air travel convenient for everyone by incorporating the accessibility features. Only by 
incorporating the requirements of various user groups can  we make a truly universal design and 
ensure that everyone has a hassle -free travel experience. Through a series of four parts, each of 
which is separated into chapters, these guidelines establish a framework for educating and 
guiding various airport operators, airlines, security agencies and other professionals involved for 
the design, planning, and implementation of accessibility in built environment. It provides a 
comprehensive approach in understanding the accessibility in an Indian context, by transiti oning 
from barrier-free approach to a universal design philosophy. The guidelines should be read in 
conjunction with the existing standards of Civil Aviation and built environment. This document 
is a foundation stone in achieving accessible airports. Its t rue success shall be seen in the 
implementation at various airports resulting in a safer, inclusive and convenient customer 
experience and we believe that it will happen over time. 
202. Moreover, DGCA vide Civil Aviation Requirements - Section 3 – Air Trans port Series 
„M‟ Part I -Issue III dated 28 th February, 2014 have published the guidelines for Carriage of 
Persons with Disability (Divyangjan) and/or Persons with Reduced Mobility. 
203. The Committee appreciates the finalisation of the „Accessibility Standa rds and 
Guidelines for Civil Aviation‟ and believes that the implementation of these standards and 
guidelines would help all passengers have a safe and convenient air travel experience. The 
Committee hopes that these accessibility standards and guidelines are up to international 
standards to ensure a world -class experience for domestic and international passengers 
alike. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may put a mechanism in place to 
ensure that these standards and guidelines are strictly followe d across all airports in the 
country. 
  

Page 44 of 111 
 
Chapter-V 
Airport-specific Issues 
Greenfield Airport in Bihar 
204. The Committee sought to know whether negotiations for creation of a new greenfield 
international airport in Bihar have been on since 2009 and no prog ress has been made so far on 
the same. 
205. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that Government of India has 
formulated Greenfield Airports (GFA) Policy, 2008. As per the Policy, a State Government or an 
Airport Developer, willing to  establish an airport, is required to send a proposal to the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation (MoCA) for 2 -stages approval i.e. 'Site -Clearance' followed by 'In -Principle' 
approval. Such proposals are considered by MoCA as per the procedure stipulated in the GFA  
Policy. However, no proposal under GFA Policy has been received in this Ministry from State 
Government or an Airport Developer for development of a Greenfield airport in Bihar. As and 
when proposals for establishment of Greenfield airports in Bihar are re ceived in this Ministry, 
the same will be considered as per the provisions of the GFA Policy. 
206. The Ministry added that on request of the State Government, a pre -feasibility study of 
site identified by the State Government at Nalanda was conducted by AA I in 2009. 
Subsequently, another site was identified by the State Goverment near Punpun River. Both the 
sites were not found suitable for development of Greenfield Airport due to technical reasons.  
207. The Ministry further informed that AAI has conducted  a pre-feasibility study on request 
of Hon‟ble MP, Saran for the site identified by District Administration, Saran. The site was 
found technically suitable. Report was forwarded to the State Government. However, no formal 
request as per the Greenfield Airp ort Policy has been made by the State Government for 
development of a Greenfield Airport. 
208. The Committee recommends that all efforts should be made to iron out the 
difficulties faced in the development of a Greenfield airport in Bihar with close cooperation 
of the State Government, which will help create optimum results for the public . Further, 
the Committee recommends that in the meanwhile, various options may be explored for 
modernisation of the existing Patna Airport to cater to the growing demand fo r aviation in 
the State. 
 
Bihta, Darbhanga and Sitamarhi Airports 
209. The Committee enquired the Ministry regarding the status of 
construction/operationalization of Darbhanga, Bihta, Sitamarhi airports. The Ministry furnished 
the following details of deve lopment of a Civil Enclave at Bihta and Darbhanga Airports are as 
under: 
Bihta Airport 
210. AAI has projected a land requirement of 191.5 acre for runway extension and 8 acre for 
apron extension/city-side development to make the Civil Enclave at Bihta suit able for operation 
of wide-bodied aircraft. However, the land is yet to be handed over by the State Government. 

Page 45 of 111 
 
Further development of the Civil Enclave is subject to handing over of requisite land by State 
Government of Bihar. 
Darbhanga Airport 
211. Darbhanga Airport was operationalised on 8th Nov, 2020 with Interim Terminal Building. 
In order to cater the growing passenger traffic, AAI has undertaken expansion of Interim 
terminal building along with associated facilities, for which working permission has already been 
granted by MoD. The probable date of completion of the project is June, 2023. 
212. Further, AAI has also planned development of a permanent Civil Enclave along with 
CAT-I lighting. Accordingly, AAI has projected a land requirement of 78 acre ( 54 acre for Civil 
Enclave + 24 acre for CAT -I lighting). The land is yet to be handed over by the State 
Government. 
Sitamarhi Airport:  
213. Sitamarhi Airstrip is owned by the State Government of Bihar and presently is not 
included in the UDAN scheme. For the forthcoming round of bidding under UDAN, if the State 
Government of Bihar mentions the existence of Sitamarhi airstrip and asks for it to be included 
under UDAN, airstrip can be included in RCS Document for next round of bidding. In case, any 
airline applies for routes connecting Sitamarhi airstrip in Bihar in future rounds of RCS bidding, 
the same will be considered as per provisions in RCS. 
214. The Committee may be apprised of the present status of land acquisition by the 
State Government for the Bih ta Airport along with reasons for delay, if any. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the investment envisaged for 
the Bihta Civil Enclave is utilised in an optimum manner to ensure decongestion of the 
Patna airport. The Ministry may examine the avenues for future expansion of the Bihta 
airport and to ensure that the best possible site is chosen to share the load of the Patna 
airport in the future. 
215. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may request the State Government 
to take up the land acquisition for the Darbhanga Airport on priority so as to enable AAI 
to develop a permanent Civil Enclave there  at. The Committee further recommends that 
the Ministry may ensure necessary infrastructure for comfortable seating of passengers a t 
the Darbhanga airport.  
216. Proactive efforts should be made by AAI to ensure that all States reap benefits of 
enhanced regional air connectivity under the RCS UDAN Scheme. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may seek the willingness of the State  Government of Bihar 
for inclusion of the Sitamarhi airstrip under the UDAN scheme.  
 
Purnea Civil Enclave 
217. The Ministry informed the Committee that on request of State Government, a feasibility 
study for development of Civil Enclave at Purnea was cond ucted by AAI in July, 2015. Request 
for civil operations from Purnea Airport was sent to MoD in February, 2016 and approval for the 
same was received in April 2016. AAI had requested State Government for 50 acre of land for 
development of a New Civil Enclave. The State Government in June, 2022 informed that 52 acre 
of land has been acquired. However, AAI observed that the acquired land is not as per AAI‟s 

Page 46 of 111 
 
proposal in terms of location and shape as required. Consequently, in pursuance to the meeting 
held between Secretary, Civil Aviation and the Chief Secretary, GoB on 26.07.2022, AAI has 
requested State Government for additional land of 15 acres and assurance for 4 lane road 
connectivity to the Airport Site. The confirmation of the State Government is awaite d in the 
matter. 
218. The Committee notes that the 52 acre land acquired by the State Government for 
development of a new Civil Enclave at Purnea, is not as per AAI's proposal in terms of 
location and shape as required. It also notes that this lan d which w as not as per proposal  
was handed over by the State after more than 6 years of approval from the Ministry of 
Defence. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the reasons behind 
this lapse and ensure that incidents like these do not recur t o avoid huge delays in the 
project. 
 
Gaya Airport 
219. As regards expansion of Gaya Airport, the Ministry informed that  initially, 200 acre of 
land requirement for expansion of Gaya Airport was forwarded to State Government of Bihar in 
August 2009 which in cluded 70 acre for runway extension, 30 acre for approach lights and 100 
acre for future Airport expansion. Subsequently, based on the site conditions, land requirement 
was revised to 212.76 acre which included 70 acre for runway extension, 42.76 acre for approach 
lights and 100 acre for future Airport expansion. This was forwarded to State Government in 
July, 2017. Out of this, 23.84 acre has been handed over to AAI for approach lights. Balance 
land for approach lights, runway extension and for future Airp ort expansion remains to be 
handed over by the State Government. 
220. The Committee notes that AAI has been handed over only 23.84 acre of land out of 
its requirement of more than 200 acres of land for expansion of the Gaya Airport. The 
Committee feels tha t Gaya airport is one of the most important airports in Bihar. The 
Committee recommends that the matter may be taken up with the State Government of 
Bihar at the highest level to facilitate handing over of the remaining part of the required 
land.  
221. The Committee further recommends that AAI may undertake a fresh assessment of 
the requirement of land for expansion of the Gaya Airport keeping future air traffic 
estimates of several decades in mind, given the original assessment was made in 2009. 
 
Sabarimala airport 
222. As regards the status of construction and operationalisation of Sabarimala Greenfield 
airport, the Ministry informed that the proposal submitted by the State Government of Kerala on 
05.10.2021 was examined in consultation with AAI & DGCA and  State Government was 
advised on 01.11.2021 to furnish Techno-Economic Feasibilty Study (TEFS). 
223. After several reminders and follow ups, the TEFS report was submitted by State 
Government on 30.06.2022 and the same was forwarded to AAI & DGCA for furnis hing their 
comments on the TEFS Report. Thereafter, on 16.09.2022, comments/observations of DGCA & 

Page 47 of 111 
 
AAI were forwarded to Kerala State Industrial Development Corporation (KSIDC) for 
comments/compliance along with inputs on specific observations of MoCA regarding: 
i)  Impact of the new airport on existing airports within 150 Km radius and the 
viability of the proposed airport. 
ii) Point of Call status for International airports. 
224. KSIDC has given their compliance in October, 2022, based on which, the propo sal was 
placed before the Steering Committee on 22.11.2022 for its consideration. The committee has 
advised KSIDC to give clarity on the availability of land, free from all encumbrances within two 
weeks time. In addition, KSIDC has also been advised to eng age an independent agency to carry 
out an Impact Assessment of the newly proposed airport on existing nearby airports as per GFA 
Policy and furnish IRR of the project. 
225. The Committee is of the view that the Sabarimala airport will be a major boon to 
the visitors of the Sabarimala Temple and give a boost to the regional economy.  The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the Sabarimala airport project 
stays on track and any bottlenecks causing delays in its completion are proactively tackled. 
 
Calicut Airport 
226. The Committee enquired about the status of levelling and further development of Calicut 
Airport. The Ministry informed that as per recommendation of Fali Major Committee, 14.50 
acres of land was required to develop Runway End Sa fety Area (RESA) at the end of runway to 
ensure safe operations. AAI has mentioned that the land was required to be given to AAI by the 
State Govt. of Kerala free of cost after levelling and developing the land. The State Govt. of 
Kerala has requested AAI to bear the cost of levelling and stabilizing the land under the direction 
of MoCA. AAI has agreed to share the cost of levelling and stabilizing the land up to Rs. 100 
crore with a condition that any cost beyond Rs. 100 crore should be borne by the State Govt. of 
Kerala, which will execute levelling and stabilizing work. The Government of Kerala has not 
agreed to meet the cost of levelling of land over Rs. 100 crore. 
227. The Committee notes that AAI has agreed to share the cost of levelling and 
stabilizing the land up to Rs. 100 crores with a condition that any cost beyond Rs. 100 
crores should be borne by the State Government of Kerala. The Committee recommends 
that AAI may consider meeting the entire cost of land acquisition for the expansion of the 
Calicut airport. 
 
Bhiwadi Airport 
228. The Ministry informed the Committee that as per Greenfield Airports Policy, 
Government of India has granted the site clearance to M/s. Delhi Mumbai Industrial Corridor 
Development Corporation Limited (DMICDC) for setting up a Greenfield Airport for public use 
near Bhiwadi, District Alwar, Rajasthan subject to some conditions on 18.11.2015. However, 
application for second stage approval i.e. “In-Principle” approval has not been received from the 
project proponent till date. 
229. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may take up the matter with 
DMICDC to know the reasons behind not seeking “In -Principle” approval for the 

Page 48 of 111 
 
Greenfield Airport near Bhiwadi, Alwar, Rajasthan despite receiving site clearance for the 
same. 
 
Bhogapuram Airport 
230. With regard to the Bhogapuram Airport, the Committee sought to know whether AAI has 
agreed to disinvest the Vizag Airport for the construction of the Bhogapuram Airport. 
231. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee t hat in March, 2015, State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) submitted a proposal for grant of „Site Clearance‟ for a 
Greenfield Airport at Bhogapuram. The State Government stated that there is need for a 
Greenfield International Airport to meet future gr owth as the existing airport at Vishakhapatnam 
is Civil Enclave in INS Dega, which is primarily for Naval Operations. Further, the existing 
airport being surrounded by hills, has limited scope for expansion. GoAP has identified the land 
for this project to be developed in PPP Mode. 
232. The Ministry stated that the proposal of State Government was examined and GoI 
granted „Site Clearance‟ to GoAP in January, 2016,  for development of Bhogapuram Greenfield 
airport with a provision that scheduled commercial operations at the Civil Enclave at the existing 
Vizag Naval airfield will be stopped for a period of 30 years, once the operations of Greenfield 
Airport at Bhogapuram starts.  GoI granted „In -Principle‟ approval to the project on 07.10.2016. 
A Concession Ag reement for development of Bhogapuram was executed between GoAP 
(APADCL) and the Concessionaire on 12.06.2020.  Thereafter, an MoU was signed between AAI 
and GoAP in September, 2022 for mutation of land in possession of AAI in Vizag Civil Enclave 
in the name of AAI.  
233. MoCA has granted NOC to GoAP for closure of scheduled commercial operations at the 
Civil Enclave at existing Vizag Naval Airfield (lNS Dega) for 30 years, once the operation of 
Greenfield airport at Bhogapuram starts, subject to compliance of the provisions of MoU entered 
between AAI and GoAP in September, 2022. 
234. The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons for the long delay in signing the 
MoU between AAI and Government of Andhra Pradesh, after grant of in -principle 
approval to t he project by the Government of India in 2016. The Committee may also be 
briefed about how the existing infrastructure for civil flight operations at the 
Visakhapatnam airport will be utilised and maintained during the closure of scheduled 
commercial operations for 30 years thereat. 
 
Chandigarh Airport 
235. A Member of the Committee, in its meeting held on 16 th November, 2022, raised an issue 
regarding the Chandigarh Airport that the parking of aircraft is done through visual indication by 
marshals on the A irport grounds and in absence of communications the pilots have to steer with 
physical indications.  
236. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that  the New Civil Enclave at 
Chandigarh Airport was operationalized on 19 th October, 2015.  ATC services at Chandigarh 
Civil Enclave are provided by IAF, Chandigarh. Parking bays are pre -allotted for the whole day 

Page 49 of 111 
 
and the schedule is circulated to all airlines. “Follow -Me” vehicle is provided on pilot‟s request 
which is communicated to Apron Control by IAF ATC. 
237. The Ministry further stated that there are 23 parking stands for Code C & E type of 
Aircraft. Automatic-Visual Docking Guidance System (VDGS) is installed at 5 parking stands to 
park the aircraft efficiently on the parking stand. Mars halls are used by ground handling staff for 
rest of the parking stands to park the aircraft. This practice is being followed since the 
operationalization of Airport. Further, provision of VDGS for 10 more parking stands is planned. 
238. The Committee notes  that the Automatic -Visual Docking Guidance System is 
presently installed at 5 parking stands of the New Civil Enclave at Chandigarh airport and 
provision for VDGS is planned for 10 more parking stands. As of now, Marshalls are being 
used for other parking stands. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may plan the 
installation of VDGS on the remaining parking stands in a time -bound manner to permit 
efficient parking of aircrafts on the parking stands. 
  

Page 50 of 111 
 
Chapter-VI 
Miscellaneous Civil Aviation Sector Issues 
Shortage of ATCOs 
239. There is a staff shortage of air traffic controllers (ATCOs), which severely impacts the 
functioning of airports in the country. Estimates suggest that for complying with the DGCA‟s 
regulations, India needs 40% more ATCOs person nel in 2022 than its present strength of 3,163.  
Next year, it is projected to further increase to 5,131, 60% more than what India has today. The 
present workforce already falls short by 22% of the sanctioned number of 3,871.  In light of this, 
the Committee sought to know the current backlog of vacancies for the post of ATCO and the 
steps taken to ensure expeditious filling of these vacancies. 
240. The Ministry, in its written reply, informed the Committee that the recruitment of ATCOs 
against the existing v acancies is a regular process undertaken by the Airports Authority of India 
(AAI). The details of the steps taken by AAI to fill up the vacancies of ATCOs are placed at 
Annexure-XX.  
241. The Committee notes that the Government has approved creation of a ddition 340 
posts of ATCOs in AAI in May, 2022. The Committee recommends that AAI may ensure 
that sufficient ATCOs are posted at all times to ensure smooth functioning of airports 
across the country. AAI may analyse the demand for ATCOs keeping in mind the  
projected growth of the Indian aviation sector and take proactive action for timely 
recruitment of ATCOs based on the same. 
 
Training of pilots 
242. The Ministry informed the Committee that the Government has allowed for the opening 
of Approved Training Organisations (ATO) for simulator training within the country. At present, 
there are three big ATOs functioning which are:- (i) CSTPL (ii) FSTC (iii) CAE. All the pilots at 
present are undergoing the required regular simulator training at these organisations. 
243. The Committee notes that the Government has allowed for the opening of ATOs to 
provide simulator training within the country. The Committee may be apprised as to 
whether the capacity of the ATOs presently functioning in the country suffice the 
requirements for pilots in the Indian aviation sector. 
 
Increasing incidents of in-flight altercations 
244. In the past few months, there have been numerous untoward incidents involving 
verbal/physical altercations either among passengers or between passengers  and the flight crew. 
These incidents have brought to light the importance of ensuring a mechanism to prevent and 
deter such fights, especially mid -flight, which impact the overall safety of passengers and flight 
crew. 
245. In view of this, the Committee e nquired about the standard operating procedure followed 
by the concerned authorities in case of occurrence of such incidents. 
246. The Ministry informed that DGCA has issued CAR, Section 3 - Air Transport, Series M, 
and Part VI titled “Handling of unruly / disruptive passengers”, specifying detailed procedures 

Page 51 of 111 
 
for the airlines to follow. Further, Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) followed by the airlines 
are defined in the airlines Safety and Emergency Procedures Manual. The airlines formulate the 
policy and the procedure to be followed by the crew to be implemented for action and handling 
of unruly passenger in case a situation arises in the aircraft. These guidelines pertain to 
requirements for dealing with unruly passengers, training of crew, reporting of unruly 
passengers, list of passengers affecting safety and security of airlines in national interest and 
provision of appeal by aggrieved persons. A No -Fly List is maintained by the DGCA as per the 
recommendations of the respective Internal Committee co nstituted by the airlines. The airlines 
maintain a database of all unruly passengers and inform the same to DGCA/other airlines which 
forms a No-Fly List maintained by DGCA. 
247. The Committee desired to know as to whether  the concerned authorities provide  any 
training to the flight crew to tackle such sensitive situations. The Ministry, in its written reply, 
informed the Committee that as per provisions of CAR, titled “Handling of unruly / disruptive 
passengers" to deal with the issue related to handling o f unruly/disruptive passengers also 
provides measures to pre -empt incidents by way of training of flight crew, cabin crew and 
ground staff in soft skills to deal with unruly passengers besides how to detect, diffuse and 
prevent critical situation. It also provides for training of such operative personnel for dealing 
with conflict and its aftermath, ways/means to mitigate situation arising due to long waiting 
lines, flight being overbooked, delays and diversion/cancellation as well as lack of information, 
etc. 
248. The Ministry highlighted that guidance for handling of unruly/disruptive passenger is part 
of approved Operations Manual (OM) of airlines for pilots and Safety Equipment & Procedures 
(SEP) manual of the airlines (Accepted by DGCA) for Cabin Crew. I nitial and recurrent training 
for pilot and cabin crew are provided by the airlines based upon OM and SEP manual 
respectively. Training programme for pilot and cabin crew is monitored for compliance through 
regular surveillances. 
249. The Ministry added that in view of recent incidents of unruly behaviour and inappropriate 
conduct by the passengers on board the aircraft during flight, DGCA has issued advisory on 
06.01.2023 to all scheduled airlines to sensitize pilots, cabin crew and Director -in-flight Services 
of their respective airlines regarding handling of passengers with unruly behaviour. 
250. The Committee appreciates that DGCA has issued CAR, Section 3 - Air Transport, 
Series M, and Part VI titled “Handling of un ruly / disruptive passengers”, specifying  
detailed procedures for the airlines to follow in case of incidents of unruly behavior by 
passengers during flights. The Committee recommends that DGCA may enforce a zero 
tolerance policy for incidents of unruly behaviour by passengers and strict imple mentation 
of the No -Fly List may be ensured. DGCA may periodically review the SOPs and 
Emergency Procedures Manuals framed by the airline companies in this regard, to ensure 
the compliance of DGCA norms. 
251. Members of the Committee, in its meeting held o n 30 th January, 2023, highlighted the 
issue of victim passenger and cabin crew having to make several visits to a non -local police 
station. 

Page 52 of 111 
 
252. The Committee recommends that a special Airline Wing should be formed for 
dealing with police and courts in cas es of unruly passengers since at present, the pilot and 
crew members have to attend the court and visit police stations for prosecuting the unruly 
passenger. The Ministry may also coordinate with the concerned Departments to ensure 
that any victims of unru ly passengers are not required to physically visit distant police 
stations and courts in pursuance of legal remedy in such cases. 
Capacity Constraints at Airports 
253. The Committee is aware that there are various capacity constraints at the existing 
airports/ terminals. For instance, a fourth runway (29 „right‟) at Terminal -1 of the Indira 
Gandhi International Airport, Delhi has not been operationalised due to some 
administrative reasons and also due to some obstacles such as buildings in the flight path. 
The delay in operationalization of this runway is hampering the capacity of a critical 
airport as flights are being delayed affecting the operational cost of airlines. The 
Committee had taken up this issue during the examination of the Demands for Grants 
(2023-24) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) and the Secretary, MoCA had assured 
that a ction has been initiated for demolishing a particular building which was creating 
hindrance and this will pave the way for operationalization of the said runway. The 
Committee would like to know the present status of the action taken in this regard.  
CAG Observations 
254. The comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG) of India on Greenfield/ 
Brownfield/ Civil Enclaves for which reply is  pending from MoCA a re attached as Annexure -
XXI. 
255. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that replies in respect of 
observations made in CAG Reports are furnished in a time -bound manner without fail. 
The Committee may be apprised of the reasons for not furn ishing reply to the Para No. 3.1 
of CAG'S Report No. 13 of 2013 (Commercial) even after a decade has passed since the 
Report came out. 
Issues pertaining to Digi Yatra 
256. The Ministry has rolled out the DigiYatra initiative, which is a Biometric Enabled 
Seamless Travel (BEST) experience based on Facial Recognition System. It provides contactless 
identification of passengers at key check points like Airport Entry, Security Check and Boarding 
Gate. However, many users have reported issues pertaining to the f unctionality of the Digi Yatra 
app. The Committee enquired the Ministry whether any feedback mechanism has been 
implemented to identify and address the issues faced by users. The Ministry informed the 
Committee that a dedicated feedback form within the app  is available for DY users to send their 
feedback. Apart from this, manual help desks are present at all airports for helping the 
passengers. 
257. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the technical issues 
faced by the users of the Dig i Yatra app are ironed out at the earliest. The reviews of the 
users may be duly looked into and issues highlighted thereat may also be resolved.  
 
*****  

Page 53 of 111 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS - AT A GLANCE 
 
Development of Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and the Challenges thereof 
The Committee observes that the Government has granted in -principle approval for 
21 Greenfield Airport projects since 2008, which is a crucial step towards meeting the 
growing air traffic demand in the country. However, more Greenfiel d airports need to be 
developed to cater to the increasing demand and to achieve the vision laid out in the 
National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 to enable 30 crore domestic ticketing by 2022 and 50 
crore by 2027. The Committee, therefore, recommends that t he Ministry should encourage 
more State Governments and private airport developers to propose Greenfield airport 
projects and to streamline its approval process to expedite the development of airports. 
(Para 11) 
The Committee notes that the Airports Author ity of India (AAI) has embarked 
upon a capital expenditure plan of Rs. 25,000 crores during the period 2019 -2024 for the 
development/upgradation/modernization of various airports in the country. This is a 
welcome move to improve the existing airport infras tructure in order to cater to the ever -
growing air traffic demand. The Committee recommends that the Ministry/AAI may 
ensure that traffic projections of the long -term future are factored in the planning and 
execution of these projects. 
(Para 12) 
The list o f airports for which new terminal buildings are under planning or in 
progress includes several airports in Tier II and III cities. This is a positive move towards 
improving regional connectivity and providing access to air travel to a wider population. 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure that these airports are well -
connected to major nearby cities and have adequate transportation infrastructure to 
facilitate passenger traffic. 
(Para 13) 
The Committee observes that the list of airports under planning or expansion 
includes several airports that are being developed under PPP mode. PPPs can bring in 
private sector expertise and investment, which can help in accelerating the airport 
development process and improving operational efficiency. T herefore, the government 
should encourage more PPPs for airport development, especially for Greenfield airports. 
 (Para 14) 
The Committee desires to know the number of airports with throughput above 1.5 
mppa which have an ASQ rating of less than 4.5 and nu mber of airports with throughput 
less than 1.5 mppa which have an ASQ rating of less than 4.0 as on date. The Committee 
may be apprised of the steps being taken by AAI to upgrade the quality of services 
provided at each such airport with low ASQ ratings. 
(Para 17) 

Page 54 of 111 
 
Observations of the Committee 
The Committee notes that the following issues need wider consultations and deeper 
analysis:- 
iii) Various issues relating to Greenfield Airports Policy, 2008 and National Civil 
Aviation Policy, 2016 such as review of the s aid Policies, grant of „In -Principle Approval‟ 
and „Site Clearance‟ for new Greenfield projects; and 
iv) Development of Greenfield Airports under the Greenfield Airports Policy, 2008, 
across the country especially in the States where there are no Greenfield Ai rports, 
presently.  
(Para 18) 
Need for a comprehensive policy on brownfield airports 
The Committee notes that the NCAP, 2016 gives the guiding principles for the 
upgradation and expansion of existing airports. The Committee feels that the Ministry may 
come up with a clear policy as regards the criteria to be followed in terms of the decision to 
be made regarding the type of airport project to be taken up i.e., the parameters that 
should decide whether the Ministry/ AAI should opt for a greenfield project in stead of a 
brownfield or civil enclave project. The Committee feels that this clarity would permit AAI 
to work towards improving air connectivity and result in economic growth. 
(Para 23) 
Challenges Faced in Co-ordination between different Agencies and Departments  
The Committee notes the issues being faced by the Ministry in coordinating with the 
State Governments/ Airport Operators and other stakeholders for setting up and 
operationalisation of airports in the country. The Committee feels that having a rob ust 
mechanism for coordination between the multitude of stakeholders involved in this process 
is crucial in order to avoid cost and time overruns in airport projects. The Ministry should 
evolve a mechanism to coordinate with the stakeholders at the highest  level to tackle 
bottlenecks and enable the timely completion of projects. 
(Para 26) 
The Committee feels that land acquisition is a prominent issue that needs consistent 
oversight of the Ministry/ AAI as well as the State Government. Hence, a mechanism 
should be evolved to track the progress and delays in the process of land acquisition of 
airports. 
(Para 27) 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry may work with all the 
stakeholders to prescribe target deadlines, where possible, which may be scru pulously 
followed to ensure smooth progress of airport projects. 
(Para 28) 
The Committee opines that strong road, rail and metro connectivity to various 
airports is essential for the efficient operation of any airport, both for passenger as well as 
cargo o perations. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may 
coordinate with the Ministries/ Departments/ State Governments concerned to work 
towards improving connectivity to the airports. 

Page 55 of 111 
 
(Para 29) 
Delayed Greenfield and Brownfield Projects 
The Committee notes the various factors such as land acquisitions, availability of 
clearances, financial closure and so on, on which the progress of an airport project 
depends. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry which enabled the 
operationalisation of the Mopa airport and good progress in other projects like Navi 
Mumbai and Jewar. On -time completion of airport projects has a multiplier effect on the 
regional economy and directly contributes to the fast -paced growth of the nation, besides  
helping avoid huge cost overruns. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the 
Ministry may try to emulate its achievements at the Mopa, Navi Mumbai and Jewar 
airports, in case of airport projects for which in-principle approval had been granted many 
years ago.  
(Para 36) 
The Committee agrees with the observation of the Ministry that legal issues become 
inevitable as it may involve stakeholder conflicts. The Committee, however, notes that the 
timely completion of airport projects is of acute importance to  the region in question, as 
well as the nation as a whole. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
should evolve a suitable mechanism in co -ordination with all stakeholders to remove such 
bottlenecks.  
(Para 41) 
The Committee observes that s takeholder conflicts and legal disputes can cause 
significant delays in the completion of greenfield airport projects. Therefore, it is important 
for the Ministry to take proactive steps to address stakeholder grievances in a timely and 
adequate manner to prevent disputes from escalating to legal disputes.  
(Para 42) 
The Committee may be apprised of the status of Greenfield/Brownfield/Civil 
Enclave Airports at Bihta, Darbhanga, Thanjavur, Sabarimala, Calicut, Nagpur, Kannur, 
Parandur, Kotkasim, Navi Mumbai,  Jhalawar, Neemuch, Gaucher, Dehradun, Pantnagar, 
Dimapur, Mopa, Kadapa, Thanjavur and Begumpet. 
(Para 43) 
Improving connectivity to airports 
The Committee is of the view that provision for multi -modal connectivity should be 
made at the proposal stage itse lf for greenfield airports, in consultation with the airport 
developer and State Government. This will ensure that the necessary infrastructure is in 
place before the airport becomes operational. The Ministry should coordinate with the 
Ministry of Road Tra nsport and Highways, Ministry of Railways and State Government 
Departments concerned to request them to come up with robust connectivity to the airports 
under development, to enable good access from the date of their operationalisation. 
(Para 47) 
Financing of Airport Projects and Foreign Direct Investment in Civil Aviation Sector 
The Committee is aware that as per the Consolidated Foreign Direct Investment 
(FDI) Policy, 2020 issued by Department for Promotion of Industry and Internal Trade 

Page 56 of 111 
 
(DPIIT), Ministry of Commerce, the Government has permitted FDI in the Civil Aviation 
Sector as follows:-  
A. Airports 
Sector/Activity % of Equity/FDI Cap Entry Route 
(a) Greenfield 
Projects 100 % Automatic 
(b) Existing 
Projects 100 % Automatic 
B. Air Transport Services 
Sector/Activity % of 
Equity/FDI Cap Entry Route 
(1) (a) Scheduled Air 
Transport Service/ Domestic 
Scheduled Passenger Airline 
(b) Regional Air 
Transport Service 
100 % 
Automatic up to 49% 
(Automatic up to 100% for 
NRIs) 
Government route 
beyond 49% 
(2) No n-Scheduled Air 
Transport Services 100 % Automatic 
(3) Helicopter 
services/seaplane services 
requiring DGCA approval 
100 % Automatic 
 
C. Other Services under Civil Aviation Sector 
Sector/Activity % of 
Equity/FDI Cap Entry Route 
(1) Ground Handling 
Services subject to sectoral 
regulations and security 
clearance 
100 % Automatic 
(2) Maintenance and 
Repair organizations; flying 
training institutes; and technical 
training institutions. 
100 % Automatic 
(Para 51) 
The Committee notes the changes in FDI Policy,  2020 and would like to know the 
improvements that had happened as a result of the changes in the FDI Policy since 2020. It 
also feels that the changes in the FDI Policy would help drive the level of investment needed 
in order to achieve the desired growth  rate in the aviation sector in the country. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry should make efforts to attract more 
foreign investment in the Indian aviation sector, which can lead to the development of 
better infrastructure, more job opportunities, and improved economic growth.  
(Para 52) 
Land Value Capture Mechanism 
The Committee notes that land acquisition is one of the biggest expenditures 
incurred on the development of an airport. Given the consistently rising land acquisition 
costs for public infrastructure projects, the present sources for financing of the same i.e., 

Page 57 of 111 
 
budgetary allocation of the Ministry, Public -Private-Partnership and AAI revenue, might 
not be sufficient. The Committee feels that the Value Capture Mechanism can aug ment the 
financial requirements of the airport sector in the country. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may conduct a detailed analysis of the possible implementation of the 
Value Capture Mechanism to generate revenue for investment in further dev elopment, 
maintenance and expansion of airports across the country. 
(Para 55) 
Implementation of PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan for Multi -modal 
Connectivity 
The Committee takes note of the plans and programmes made by the Ministry for 
implementation of the PM Gati Shakti National Master Plan. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry may utilise the PM Gati Shakti platform to coordinate with other 
infrastructure Ministries/ Departments and to ensure excellent connectivity to all airports 
across the cou ntry. The Ministry may work with the relevant Ministries/ Departments 
towards rapid development of the necessary supporting infrastructure in the vicinity of 
airports, especially greenfield airport projects 
(Para 57) 
The Committee appreciates the initiatio n of creation of a Data Analytics Platform 
by AAI to identify infrastructure requirements around airports. The Committee 
recommends that AAI may explore the possibility of feeding the data pertaining to other 
infrastructure Ministries/ Departments availabl e through the Gati Shakti National Master 
Plan, to its upcoming Data Analytics Platform for better outputs. 
(Para 59) 
Manohar International Airport (MIA), Mopa, Goa  
The Committee notes the various steps taken by the Ministry to develop the 
Manohar International Airport at Mopa, Goa as one of the 11 Greenfield airports which 
have been operationalized since 2008. The Committee appreciates that the airport has been 
planned and constructed after diligent planning and taking various aspects into 
consideration. The configuration of the airport as regards the Passenger Terminal 
Building; Runways; Taxiway; Passenger Boarding Bridges; Air Traffic Control Tower; 
and Multi-Modal Connectivity has been developed keeping in mind the present and future 
requirements. Further, the Committee notes that sustainability initiatives and technological 
advancements implemented in the development of Mopa International airport can be 
applied to future Greenfield projects. Accordingly, the Committee recommends the 
Ministry to adopt th e best practices which have been followed at Mopa and if found 
feasible, it may be implemented at other ongoing/future Greenfield projects after due 
consideration, to ensure that both environmental and commercial aspects of development 
are catered to.   
(Para 61) 
Issues pertaining to Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports 
Modernisation of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI) scheme 
The Committee notes the details of the planned or proposed projects under the 
MAFI project of the IAF at 20 Civil Enclaves in the country . It notes that as per the details 

Page 58 of 111 
 
of Radio Navigational Aids (RNAs) which have been replaced or planned to be replaced 
under project MAFI at the Civil Enclaves as on 1st October, 2022, are as follows:- 
 RNAs replaced: 26 
 RNAs planned to be replaced: 23 
 RNAs for which no replacement plan has been received: 22  
(Para 66) 
 The Committee appreciates the timely replacement of RNAs at various Civil 
Enclaves. However, it also observes that due to various operational and administrative 
reasons, PDCs given earlier could not be adhered to and wherever PDCs have elapsed, IAF 
has been approached to get revised PDC. The Committee notes that unlike Greenfield/ 
Brownfield airports which are managed by a single operator, the Civil Enclave Airports 
are managed by two operato rs, i.e., the AAI/ State Government/ Private enterprises and 
the IAF. Hence, the Committee feels that there has to be perfect coordination between both 
the aforesaid agencies for smooth functioning of Civil Enclaves. It hopes that the 
operational/ administrative reasons for lapse of PDCs, if any, may be examined and sorted 
out with IAF in future, so as to avoid delays. The Committee recommends that the 
proposed installation of navigational aids at various Civil Enclaves may be expedited to 
facilitate air op erations of civilian aircrafts, even in poor visibility and adverse weather 
conditions, enhancing safety of air travel. 
(Para 67) 
The Committee notes the advantages, the disadvantages and the challenges faced for 
the Civil Enclaves at Defence airports. Whi le the Committee fully understands the 
requirement of these Enclaves for Defence needs, it is however of the opinion that the 
requirements of the commercial aircraft operations has to be addressed as well. Keeping in 
view the development of the region and increased business and employment potential, 
feasibility of development of full -fledged airport may be considered on a case -to-case basis 
to avoid the tough balance between defence and commercial operations at Civil Enclaves. 
The Committee therefore recomm ends that issues such as expediting swapping of land 
under land Barter Matrix formula, delinking of working permissions for lease rentals, 
extension of watch hours for civilian/ commercial flights, restrictions/ constraints for round 
the clock operations, expansion of existing airport, and duality of security agencies for 
providing security, are areas which can be jointly addressed by the Ministries of Civil 
Aviation and Defence. A mechanism beneficial for both commercial and defence operations 
should be evolved therefor. 
(Para 69) 
 The Committee is aware that „Land Barter Matrix‟ formula was used to solve the 
issues between the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Defence at the Bagdogra Airport, which 
is a Civil Enclave in Defence Airport. The Committee desire s to know from the Ministry, 
whether it is being used to sort out issues at other Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports also. 
(Para 70) 
 The Committee notes the challenges faced by the MoCA during construction and 
operations of Civil Enclaves at Defence Airpo rts. Besides, the main challenges relate to 
airports catering to fast growing civilian traffic hubs. The Committee appreciates that both 
the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Defence have developed mechanism such as the „Land 

Page 59 of 111 
 
Barter Matrix‟ formula to resolve issues. The Committee also appreciates that meetings are 
held at the highest levels involving concerned Cabinet Ministries and Secretaries, to 
remove the stumbling blocks in operations of Civil Enclaves.  
(Para 71) 
The Committee notes that it takes arou nd two years for the construction of Civil 
Enclave after permission is granted by Defence Authority. The committee recommends 
that the feasibility of reducing the time frame may be considered, keeping in view the cost 
escalation of construction of airports. 
(Para 73) 
The Committee also notes that the Air Traffic Controllers are overworked, handling 
both fighter and civilian aircrafts at Civil Enclaves which are emerging hubs. The 
Committee is of the opinion that the smooth and efficient working of the ATCs is a must to 
ensure safety of Defence and Civilian aircrafts. The Committee therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry may devise a mechanism to ensure proper workload for ATCs and also 
increase the number of ATCs at such Civil Enclaves. 
(Para 74) 
 The Committee observes that the adoption of the FUA policy has led to substantial 
fuel savings for the airlines and also a consequent reduction of carbon footprint. The 
Committee is of the opinion that this environment friendly initiative should be fully 
encouraged as it would decrease the impact on the environment and also ensure savings for 
the Airlines on account of fuel. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministries 
of Civil Aviation and Defence should proactively co -ordinate among themselves, to ensur e 
success of the FUA policy.  
(Para 79) 
Other Issues common to Greenfield Airports, Brownfield Airports and Civil Enclaves 
Security at airports 
The Committee notes that the CISF plays a pivotal role in providing security at 
airports, which is brought out b y the fact that out of a total of 353 units deployed by CISF, 
66 units or 18.7 % is deployed at the airports only. The Committee also notes that the 
responsibility of the CISF to provide security is spread across a wide spectrum of 
establishments, as it pr ovides security to 353 installations across the country including 
airports. It is also aware that the Civil Aviation Sector has seen an exponential growth and 
is expected to grow at a faster space in near future, which will enhance the need for 
manpower en gaged in providing security for airports. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation may examine the feasibility of setting up a 
specialized security agency for airports only, in consultation with the Ministry of Home 
Affairs. 
(Para 82) 
The Committee notes that the total outstanding dues of COD for CISF from the 
NASFT is more than Rs. 4707 crores. Further, the 16 JV airports account for more than 
64% of the total outstanding COD dues. The Committee notes the huge amount of 
outstanding dues which are payable to CISF by the NASFT, especially the dues of the 16 
JV airports and desires to know the reasons for the same. The Committee hopes that the 
dues will be cleared at the earliest by NASFT to enable the CISF to provide foolproof 

Page 60 of 111 
 
security at airports through deployment of enough manpower and the latest security 
gadgets at airports. 
(Para 84) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the suggestions made 
by APAO and ensure that latest technologies are employed at all airports for security as 
well as convenience of air passengers. 
(Para 86) 
Increasing the number of domestic and international airports 
Increasing airport density and availability in the country 
The Committee appreciates the various measures being undertake n by the Ministry 
to improve air connectivity across the country. The Committee notes that to make air 
travel accessible to more people across the country, it is necessary to have operational 
airports in more cities. Providing air connectivity to more citi es in an aspirational 
developing country like India stimulates economic growth by creation of new opportunities 
in terms of trade & tourism. It also facilitates access to better healthcare, education and 
other services for people across the country. The Co mmittee, therefore, recommends that 
the Ministry may ensure that a robust mechanism is in place to achieve the 
operationalization of the airports/ heliports/ water aerodromes targeted during the years 
2022-23 and 2023-24. 
(Para 93) 
 The Committee notes that India's ranking has decreased from 118 in 2009 to 121 in 
2019, in 'Air Connectivity / GDP score' as per IATA's 2020 'Air Connectivity' Report. This 
could indicate that India's air connectivity gains have not been able to keep up with its 
GDP growth. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that effective 
measures are taken to strengthen air connectivity at a rapid pace to further push India on 
its path of economic growth. 
(Para 94) 
The Committee opines that the development of airports/ helipo rts is a capital -
intensive process involving funds to the tune of hundreds of crore rupees. It is essential to 
ensure that the capacities of already developed airports are optimally utilised to enable a 
good return on the invested capital as well as to sti mulate regional economic growth. The 
Committee feels that the Ministry should devise an effective strategy to start scheduled 
operations at these airports to ensure that their capacities are optimally utilised. The 
Ministry may explore the feasibility of v iability gap funding to help fuel the demand 
needed to support scheduled operations at these airports. The Ministry may also consider 
incentivising the airlines for a limited period of time to help sustain scheduled commercial 
operations. 
(Para 96) 
Increasing the number of international airports 
The Committee observes that international air connectivity in tier 2 cities can help 
improve trade, increase tourism and attract foreign investment in the region. The 
Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may actively analyse the potential for 

Page 61 of 111 
 
international traffic at the presently operational non -international airports as well as 
upcoming greenfield airports.  
(Para 101) 
Public Private Partnership in construction and expansion of airports 
The Committee acknowledges the Ministry's efforts to privatize 25 airports between 
2022 and 2025, in line with the global trend of privatization in the aviation sector. The 
revenue generated through Tier -I PPP airports will permit the Ministry to make 
investments for th e development of airports in Tier -II and Tier -III cities, where capital 
investment is the need of the hour. The Committee believes that such a plan will ultimately 
lead to much -improved air connectivity across the country and contribute to more evenly 
distributed regional economic growth.  
(Para 105) 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may continue to seek 
Public Private Partnership (PPP) to achieve the goal of rapid development of the Indian 
civil aviation sector and to make air travel accessible for all.  
(Para 106) 
Accommodating future growth 
The Committee notes that Site Clearance has been granted for Singrauli and 
Kotkasim Greenfield airports in 2017 and 2022 respectively. The Committee may be 
apprised of the present status of these airports, along with reasons for delays, if any.  
(Para 109) 
The Committee observes that brownfield airports have a limited scope for expansion 
which results in high costs of land acquisition for expansion and rehabilitation. Civil 
enclaves, on the other ha nd, face constraints in terms of accessibility of air space, land and 
operational watch hours. The Committee feels that greenfield airports, despite the initial 
requirement of huge capital, are best suited to meet the demands of air traffic growth in 
the nearby region for several coming decades. It is often noted that airport infrastructure 
projects run into delays, sometimes for several years. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry/ AAI may consider alternate greenfield options in the 
vicinity of a brownfield/ civil enclave project before granting permission for the 
development/ expansion of the same. Extensive cost-benefit analysis may be done on a case-
to-case basis in terms of long -term costs to the Government and benefits accrued to the 
public at large over several coming decades. 
(Para 111) 
The Committee takes note of the extensive list of challenges to be faced by the 
aviation sector in the next 20 years, as per APAO. The Committee agrees with the 
observation that land acquisition delay s often cause time and cost overruns. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into such issues before awarding a 
project.  
(Para 113) 
 The Committee desires that the Ministry may work towards creation of a single 
window clearance system for all  statutory compliances to minimise delays in the execution 
of airport projects. 

Page 62 of 111 
 
(Para 114) 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the various other 
suggestions made by APAO such as creation of skill development centres for aviation, 
periodic audits, strengthening AERA and so on. The Ministry may ensure that the 
feedback received from APAO and other stakeholders, both public and private, are duly 
heard and acted upon to ensure fast-paced growth of the Indian aviation sector. 
(Para 115) 
Establishing global transit hubs for international flights 
The Committee notes that the erstwhile bilateral policy resulted in a serious 
imbalance in the number of points of call in favour of foreign carriers. The Committee may 
be apprised of the steps being ta ken by the Ministry in order to correct this imbalance and 
to develop its major airports as a global transit hub for international flights. 
(Para 119) 
 The Committee acknowledges the various challenges being faced in establishing a 
global transit hub for i nternational flights. The Committee feels that the Ministry should 
work on obtaining points of call for Indian carriers in more countries. Effective steps may 
be taken to address the slot constraints at major airports like Delhi and Mumbai. Potential 
of airports close to Delhi and Mumbai i.e., Jewar Airport and Navi Mumbai Airport, may 
be explored for their development as a global transit hub. 
(Para 120) 
Profitability of airports 
The Committee agrees with the fact that an airport in general becomes profitab le 
when adequate traffic flows from the airport. The Committee feels that the Ministry should 
work towards increasing the share of air transport for cargo movement as the same would 
help generate revenue for the airports. AAI should also work with airlines  to attract new 
routes and increase frequency on existing routes to attract maximum passengers. More 
stress should be laid on non -aeronautical revenue sources such as lounges, shopping areas 
etc. within the airports which would also provide a rich experience to the passengers. 
(Para 123) 
 The Committee further recommends that the Airports Authority of India may focus 
on improving the operational efficiency of all its airports. This can be done by streamlining 
the processes involved in airport operations, such as passenger check-in, baggage handling, 
security and ground handling services. Efforts may also be made to implement cost -cutting 
measures such as optimizing energy consumption and outsourcing non -core functions of 
the airport. 
(Para 124) 
Challenges fa ced by Private Airports Operators in the operation of airports across the 
country and possible solutions thereto 
The Committee takes note of the unduly long time of 3 to 6 years taken in the 
dispute resolution process for the airport sector matters, wherea s AERA Act, 2008 
stipulates a time period of 90 days only. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may seek the comments of the Ministry of Law & Justice, as regards formation of airport 

Page 63 of 111 
 
sector specific appellate tribunal or a dedicated bench under TDSA T, to expedite dispute 
resolution process 
(Para 127) 
The Committee is aware that construction of airport projects are highly capital 
intensive and therefore recommends that the Ministry may examine the feasibility of 
funding by Insurance Companies, Develop ment Financial Institutions etc., in consultation 
with the Ministry of Finance. 
(Para 129) 
The Committee notes the suggestions of the GMR representative regarding a 
Common Security Hold Area (SHA) and recommends that the suggestion may be discussed 
with the Ministry of Home Affairs and other security agencies involved, and if feasible, a 
plan may be worked out to benefit the passengers. It also recommends that the support 
infrastructure constructed and maintained by Government agencies should be planned 
well in advance at the planning stage and periodically reviewed to ensure smooth operation 
at the airports. 
(Para 131) 
The Committee is of the opinion that to develop India, as a trans -shipment hub for 
cargo, seamless trans-shipment, which will reduce time and costs is imperative. It therefore 
recommends that the need for re -screening of cargo may be examined in consultation with 
the Ministry of Home Affairs, to reduce the timelines for trans-shipment. 
(Para 133) 
The Committee suggests that the issue of ITC on  GST paid on works contract 
services for setting up / expansion activity at airport and inclusion of all ancillary airport 
services for enhanced amounts under the ECLGS may be examined in consultation with 
the Ministry of Finance, and a mechanism may be wo rked out so as to benefit the 
passengers in the long term. 
(Para 135) 
The Committee is of the opinion that all out efforts are required to formulate 
policies and legislations, which encourage and attract private investments in Airport 
projects. In this reg ard the Committee notes that SEZ Act, 2005, has been successful in 
setting up SEZs across the country, which have business -friendly trade laws and have 
increased investments, trade and generated employment. The Committee notes the 
suggestion of the Private  Airport Operator (PAO) and recommends that the feasibility of 
having a separate law PPP law to attract PPP investments in airports may be examined in 
consultation with the Ministry of Law & Justice. 
(Para 137) 
The Committee notes the suggestions of the Pr ivate Airport Operators (PAO) 
regarding amendments/enactments of legal provisions for calling upon financial bids for 
airport projects only upon completion of LA and R&R processes, enhancement of baggage 
allowance and legal provisions for handling of stray  dogs. The Committee recommends 
that the suggestions may be examined by the Ministry of Civil Aviation in consultation with 
the concerned Ministries, so as to expedite the process of development of airports and also 
to benefit the nation at large. 

Page 64 of 111 
 
(Para 141) 
Feasibility of creating multiple entry routes to tackle congestion in major airports 
The Committee recommends that AAI should conduct feasibility studies to assess 
whether creating an arm on the right side of Terminal-3 of the Indira Gandhi International 
Airport, Delhi would help tackle the congestion issues being faced by passengers. If found 
feasible, the same principle may be followed at other airports across the country to ensure 
minimal waiting time for passengers. Airport terminals should prioritis e  passenger 
accessibility to boarding gates. Multiple entry gates should be designed and built to ensure 
optimal throughput at airports. 
(Para 147) 
The Committee recommends that future planning at major airports should include 
capacity planning for passengers, in addition to peak hour capacities of domestic as well as 
international passengers. This would ensure that airports are equipped to handle increased 
passenger traffic and avoid congestion. The Ministry should ensure that future projections 
of the nu mber of passengers to be serviced, are duly factored at the planning stage of the 
airport development/ expansion projects in the country. 
(Para 148) 
Night landing facilities at Airports and Civil Enclaves 
The Committee notes that 23 airports in the country  have scheduled flight 
operations but do not have night landing facility. The Committee feels that night landing 
facility is a basic prerequisite to permitting an airport to operate at its full capacity. 
Besides, having night landing facilities at airports  can also help authorities in the speedy 
deployment of emergency response teams and evacuations in case of emergency situations 
in nearby regions. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry may 
thoroughly consider the benefits of installation/ upgradation of night landing facilities at all 
its airports/ heliports to make sure that the huge capital invested in the development of 
airports is optimally utilised. 
(Para 151) 
Cargo facilities at airports and civil enclaves 
The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that 
greenfield and brownfield airports are equipped with specialised infrastructure to handle 
time-sensitive, perishables, high -value cargos and regional express facilities. The 
Committee feels that the aviation sector will play a defining role in increasing India‟s cargo 
capacity to bring it at par with other top performing countries. The Ministry should ensure 
that its rules and guidelines enable a conducive environment for major growth in air cargo 
operations in  India. AAI should ensure that all its airports increase their air cargo 
capacities in line with the demands of the air cargo sector. 
(Para 155) 
The Committee notes that it is the vision of the National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 
that cargo volumes should increase to 10 million tonnes by 2027. The Committee notes that 
the Coronavirus -pandemic affected years showed a considerable decline in timers of air 
cargo handled in India. From the data available for the Financial Year 2021 -22, it is 
evident that both domestic and international air cargo figures are nearing the pre -
pandemic levels.  To meet the target of 10 million tonnes air cargo volume envisaged in 

Page 65 of 111 
 
NCAP, 2016, the cargo volume would have to increase at a compounded annual growth 
rate of well over 20 percent. The Ministry should ensure well -equipped infrastructure 
across crucial greenfield and brownfield airports to capitalise on the expanding global air 
freight market and meet its revised targets. 
(Para 156) 
Global Scenario of Air Transport/ Freight 
The Committee notes that India grew at a good pace till 2018, in terms of freight 
transported via air. However, air cargo operations in India have been hit very badly by the 
Coronavirus pandemic as compared to many other major economies. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may take suitable remedial measures to ensure that India is 
back on track for a rapid growth trajectory in the air cargo sector in the coming years. 
(Para 158) 
The Committee is of the view that air cargo operations provide an economic boost to 
the regional economy, by permitting quick transport of perishable items such as fruits and 
vegetables. The Committee therefore recommends that AAI Cargo Logistics and Allied 
Services Company Ltd. (AAICLAS) should consider investing capital in t he airports where 
cargo operations have discontinued for lack of compliance with the BCAS requirements so 
as to permit the operationalisation of air cargo operations thereat. The Committee further 
recommends that BCAS may grant some more time to AAICLAS to  meet its requirements 
and enable the airports to immediately resume the air cargo operations thereat 
(Para 160) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may analyse the various challenges 
listed and suggestions made by APAO regarding operating cargo fac ilities, and take 
suitable action to ensure that the air cargo capacity of our country is boosted. The Ministry 
may ensure proper infrastructure across  crucial greenfield and brownfield airports so that 
India can capitalise on the expansion of the global air freight market. 
(Para 164) 
Green and sustainable initiatives at airports and civil enclaves 
The Committee appreciates the multitude of steps being taken by the Ministry/AAI 
to promote the use of green energy in Indian airports. The Committee recommends  that 
the Ministry should continue to incentivize airports to adopt green and sustainable models. 
This can be done by offering tax breaks and other incentives to airports that achieve 
carbon neutrality and net-zero emissions. 
(Para 166) 
The Committee recom mends that the Airports Authority of India may closely 
monitor the progress made by different airports regarding their target for achieving 100% 
use of green energy by 2024. AAI may take necessary measures to help the airports lagging 
behind in the achievement of these targets. 
(Para 167) 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry should incentivise the use of 
electric vehicles at airports for ground transportation. The Ministry should also work with 
industry associations and other stakeholders to d evelop infrastructure for charging electric 
vehicles at airports. 

Page 66 of 111 
 
(Para 168) 
Development of Maintenance, Repair and Overhaul (MRO) Facilities 
The Committee notes that MRO demand in India is also anticipated to grow, 
thereby entailing attractive investment opportunities for domestic as well as foreign 
investors, OEMs and leading MROs across the world. The Committee recommends that 
the Ministry should make all out efforts through changes in regulations, to create a 
conducive ecosystem for foreign aircraft man ufactures like Boeing, Airbus and other 
OEMs to establish their MRO in India.    
(Para 180) 
The Committee commends the policy initiatives such as the MRO Policy 2021, 
National Civil Aviation Policy 2016, and fiscal policies such as rationalisation of GST, 
which reflect the vision of the Government to develop India as a global MRO hub. The 
Committee also notes that presently only repairs of noncore activities other than engine 
repairs etc. are being carried out in India. It hopes that the aforesaid policy wo uld enable 
the India MRO to take up major technical repairs as well. Aircraft manufacturers (OEMs) 
may be encouraged to open MRO facilities in India.  
(Para 181) 
The Committee also observes that most of the foreign Aircraft Manufacturers & 
OEMs prefer to u tilize their own MROs established abroad despite reduced labour, 
shipping, Turnaround Time and finance cost of replacements & inventory in India. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may focus on highlighting these aspects to 
prospective MROs who wan t to set up establishments in the country. The Committee is of 
the view that the growth of the MRO sector will also depend on how efficiently it can 
address and remove the key challenges faced by MRO players in India. It hopes that the 
Ministry will make a ll out efforts to implement the various fiscal measures at the ground 
level and also ensure proactive interaction with MRO industry to remove any bottlenecks 
that may arise.  
(Para 182) 
The Committee is of the opinion that since MRO services constitute a s ignificant 
portion of overall expenditure of any airlines operator, setting up MRO services in the 
country would reduce the expenditure on MRO services and subsequently reduce the 
airfares in the domestic routes, which will consequently reduce the cost of air travel and 
benefit the passengers. 
(Para 183) 
Ease of doing business in the aviation sector 
The Committee commends the various steps being taken by the Ministry to improve 
ease of business in the aviation sector in India and hopes that concerted effort s would be 
made in this direction in future as well. 
(Para 186) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should examine streamlining the 
regulatory procedures related to aviation, making them more transparent and efficient. 
The Ministry may work on simpl ifying the process of obtaining financing to boost private 
investment in the aviation sector. 

Page 67 of 111 
 
(Para 187) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may hold periodic consultations with 
industry players and investors to understand the regulatory challenges faced by them. The 
eGovernance initiative of DGCA should be expanded to cover more stakeholder 
interactions and internal processes. 
(Para 188) 
The Committee takes note of the National Mission on Design & Development of 
Regional Transport Aircraft being und ertaken by CSIR. The Committee feels that the 
design and development of indigenous regional transport aircraft would be in line with the 
vision of Atmanirbhar Bharat and would contribute towards improving air connectivity 
while creating employment opportun ities. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
may ensure that sufficient budgetary allocation is provided for this effort. 
(Para 189) 
The Committee observes that the Ministry is responsible for the administration of 
the Aircraft Act, 1934, Aircraft Rul es, 1937 and various other legislations pertaining to the 
aviation sector in the country. While the Ministry has made amendments to the Aircraft 
Act and Aircraft Rules from time to time, the mother legislation/ rules are about 90 years 
old as on date. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the feasibility 
of undertaking a thorough review of the existing legislations/ rules that better reflect the 
modern day realities and requirements of the Indian aviation sector. 
(Para 190) 
Given the import ant role played by AERA in the Indian aviation sector, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that AERA is staffed with personnel 
with suitable domain expertise. 
(Para 193) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into possible de lays in 
security clearance from BCAS for concessionaires in the aviation sector. If possible, fixed 
timelines may be prescribed for such clearances. 
(Para 194) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may examine the various regulatory 
challenges listed by APAO and work on resolving the same so as to boost Public Private 
Partnership in the country.  
(Para 195) 
Facilities for passengers 
The Committee notes that sufficient passenger facilities have been provided at 
major airports across the country. The Com mittee, however, notes that no mention has 
been made regarding the facilities provided at non -major airports. The Committee 
recommends that AAI may come up with guidelines to prescribe a certain minimum set of 
passenger facilities to be provided at all air ports across the country. This may include 
facilities for drinking water, toilets, „May I Help You‟ counters, and so on. 
(Para 200) 

Page 68 of 111 
 
The Committee appreciates the finalisation of the „Accessibility Standards and 
Guidelines for Civil Aviation‟ and believes t hat the implementation of these standards and 
guidelines would help all passengers have a safe and convenient air travel experience. The 
Committee hopes that these accessibility standards and guidelines are up to international 
standards to ensure a world -class experience for domestic and international passengers 
alike. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may put a mechanism in place to 
ensure that these standards and guidelines are strictly followed across all airports in the 
country. 
(Para 203) 
Airport-specific Issues 
Greenfield Airport in Bihar 
The Committee recommends that all efforts should be made to iron out the 
difficulties faced in the development of a Greenfield airport in Bihar with close cooperation 
of the State Government, which will help create optimum results for the public. Further, 
the Committee recommends that in the meanwhile, various options may be explored for 
modernisation of the existing Patna Airport to cater to the growing demand for aviation in 
the State. 
(Para 208) 
Bihta, Darbhanga and Sitamarhi Airports 
The Committee may be apprised of the present status of land acquisition by the 
State Government for the Bihta Airport along with reasons for delay, if any. The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the investme nt envisaged for 
the Bihta Civil Enclave is utilised in an optimum manner to ensure decongestion of the 
Patna airport. The Ministry may examine the avenues for future expansion of the Bihta 
airport and to ensure that the best possible site is chosen to sha re the load of the Patna 
airport in the future. 
(Para 214) 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may request the State Government 
to take up the land acquisition for the Darbhanga Airport on priority so as to enable AAI 
to develop a permanent Civil En clave there at. The Committee further recommends that 
the Ministry may ensure necessary infrastructure for comfortable seating of passengers at 
the Darbhanga airport.  
(Para 215) 
Proactive efforts should be made by AAI to ensure that all States reap benefi ts of 
enhanced regional air connectivity under the RCS UDAN Scheme. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may seek the willingness of the State Government of Bihar 
for inclusion of the Sitamarhi airstrip under the UDAN scheme.  
(Para 216) 
Purnea Civil Enclave 
The Committee notes that the 52 acre land acquired by the State Government for 
development of a new Civil Enclave at Purnea, is not as per AAI's proposal in terms of 
location and shape as required. It also notes that this land which was not as per  proposal 
was handed over by the State after more than 6 years of approval from the Ministry of 

Page 69 of 111 
 
Defence. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may look into the reasons behind 
this lapse and ensure that incidents like these do not recur to avoid huge delays in the 
project. 
(Para 218) 
Gaya Airport 
The Committee notes that AAI has been handed over only 23.84 acre of land out of 
its requirement of more than 200 acres of land for expansion of the Gaya Airport. The 
Committee feels that Gaya airport is one o f the most important airports in Bihar. The 
Committee recommends that the matter may be taken up with the State Government of 
Bihar at the highest level to facilitate handing over of the remaining part of the required 
land.  
(Para 220) 
The Committee further recommends that AAI may undertake a fresh assessment of 
the requirement of land for expansion of the Gaya Airport keeping future air traffic 
estimates of several decades in mind, given the original assessment was made in 2009. 
(Para 221) 
Sabarimala airport 
The Committee is of the view that the Sabarimala airport will be a major boon to 
the visitors of the Sabarimala Temple and give a boost to the regional economy.  The 
Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the Sabarimala airport project 
stays on track and any bottlenecks causing delays in its completion are proactively tackled. 
(Para 225) 
Calicut Airport 
The Committee notes that AAI has agreed to share the cost of levelling and 
stabilizing the land up to Rs. 100 crores with a condition tha t any cost beyond Rs. 100 
crores should be borne by the State Government of Kerala. The Committee recommends 
that AAI may consider meeting the entire cost of land acquisition for the expansion of the 
Calicut airport. 
(Para 227) 
Bhiwadi Airport 
 The Committ ee recommends that the Ministry may take up the matter with 
DMICDC to know the reasons behind not seeking “In -Principle” approval for the 
Greenfield Airport near Bhiwadi, Alwar, Rajasthan despite receiving site clearance for the 
same. 
(Para 229) 
Bhogapuram Airport 
 The Committee desires to be apprised of the reasons for the long delay in signing the 
MoU between AAI and Government of Andhra Pradesh, after grant of in -principle 
approval to the project by the Government of India in 2016. The Committee may also  be 
briefed about how the existing infrastructure for civil flight operations at the 

Page 70 of 111 
 
Visakhapatnam airport will be utilised and maintained during the closure of scheduled 
commercial operations for 30 years thereat. 
(Para 234) 
Chandigarh Airport 
 The Commit tee notes that the Automatic -Visual Docking Guidance System is 
presently installed at 5 parking stands of the New Civil Enclave at Chandigarh airport and 
provision for VDGS is planned for 10 more parking stands. As of now, Marshalls are being 
used for other parking stands. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may plan the 
installation of VDGS on the remaining parking stands in a time -bound manner to permit 
efficient parking of aircrafts on the parking stands. 
(Para 238) 
Miscellaneous Civil Aviation Sector Issues 
Shortage of ATCOs 
 The Committee notes that the Government has approved creation of addition 340 
posts of ATCOs in AAI in May, 2022. The Committee recommends that AAI may ensure 
that sufficient ATCOs are posted at all times to ensure smooth fun ctioning of airports 
across the country. AAI may analyse the demand for ATCOs keeping in mind the 
projected growth of the Indian aviation sector and take proactive action for timely 
recruitment of ATCOs based on the same. 
(Para 241) 
Training of pilots 
 The Committee notes that the Government has allowed for the opening of ATOs to 
provide simulator training within the country. The Committee may be apprised as to 
whether the capacity of the ATOs presently functioning in the country suffice the 
requirements for pilots in the Indian aviation sector. 
(Para 243) 
Increasing incidents of in-flight altercations 
The Committee appreciates that DGCA has issued CAR, Section 3 - Air Transport, 
Series M, and Part VI titled “Handling of unruly / disruptive passengers”, speci fying  
detailed procedures for the airlines to follow in case of incidents of unruly behavior by 
passengers during flights. The Committee recommends that DGCA may enforce a zero 
tolerance policy for incidents of unruly behaviour by passengers and strict im plementation 
of the No -Fly List may be ensured. DGCA may periodically review the SOPs and 
Emergency Procedures Manuals framed by the airline companies in this regard, to ensure 
the compliance of DGCA norms. 
(Para 250) 
The Committee recommends that a specia l Airline Wing should be formed for 
dealing with police and courts in cases of unruly passengers since at present, the pilot and 
crew members have to attend the court and visit police stations for prosecuting the unruly 
passenger. The Ministry may also coo rdinate with the concerned Departments to ensure 
that any victims of unruly passengers are not required to physically visit distant police 
stations and courts in pursuance of legal remedy in such cases. 

Page 71 of 111 
 
(Para 252) 
Capacity Constraints at Airports 
 The Committee is aware that there are various capacity constraints at the existing 
airports/ terminals. For instance, a fourth runway (29 „right‟) at Terminal -1 of the Indira 
Gandhi International Airport, Delhi has not been operationalised due to some 
administrative reasons and also due to some obstacles such as buildings in the flight path. 
The delay in operationalization of this runway is hampering the capacity of a critical 
airport as flights are being delayed affecting the operational cost of airlines. The 
Committee had taken up this issue during the examination of the Demands for Grants 
(2023-24) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) and the Secretary, MoCA had assured 
that action has been initiated for demolishing a particular building which was creating 
hindrance and this will pave the way for operationalization of the said runway. The 
Committee would like to know the present status of the action taken in this regard.  
(Para 253) 
CAG Observations 
 The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that r eplies in respect of 
observations made in CAG Reports are furnished in a time -bound manner without fail. 
The Committee may be apprised of the reasons for not furnishing reply to the Para No. 3.1 
of CAG'S Report No. 13 of 2013 (Commercial) even after a deca de has passed since the 
Report came out. 
(Para 255) 
Issues pertaining to Digi Yatra 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may ensure that the technical issues 
faced by the users of the Digi Yatra app are ironed out at the earliest. The reviews of the 
users may be duly looked into and issues highlighted thereat may also be resolved.  
(Para 257) 
* * * * 
 
 
  

Page 72 of 111 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 73 of 111 
 
 
Annexure-I 
The list of eleven (11) Greenfield Airports which have been operationalized since 2008 
are as follows:- 
S. No. Airport Year of 
Operationalization 
Project Cost 
(in INR crore) 
1 Durgapur Airport in West Bengal 2015 670 
2 Shirdi Airport in Maharashtra 2017 320 
3 Kannur Airport in Kerala 2018 2342 
4 Pakyong Airport in Sikkim 2018 553.53 
5 Kalaburagi Airport in Karnataka 2019 175.57 
6 Kurnool Airport in Andhra Pradesh 2021 187 
7 Sindhudurg Airport in Maharashtra 2021 520 
8 Kushinagar Airport in Uttar Pradesh 2021 448 
9 Donyi Polo Airport in Itanagar, Arunachal 
Pradesh 
2022 646 
10 Manohar Airport in Mopa, Goa 2023 2870 
11 Shivamogga Airport in Karnataka 2023 449 
2. The list of ten (10) Greenfield Airports where „In principle‟ approval has been  accorded 
by Government of India but yet to be operationalized/ inaugurated are as follows:- 
S.No. Greenfield 
Airport 
Current Status Size 
of the 
Proje
ct 
PDC 
1. Navi Mumbai 
International 
airport, 
Maharashtra 
● “In-principle” approval to Government of 
Maharashtra - 6th July, 2007. 
● Concession Agreement signed - January, 
2018. 
● The construction got delayed due to 
availability of Right of Way (RoW) and 
Ownership issues which delayed the 
funding of the project. 
● Construction work started in August, 
2021. 
Rs. 
19646 
Crore 
December, 
2024 
2. Vijayapura 
Airport, Karnataka 
● In-principle‟ approval to Government of 
Karnataka (GoK) -25th June, 2008. 
● State Government has informed that 
Rs. 
348 
crore 
March, 2024 

Page 74 of 111 
 
construction work is in progress. 
3. Hassan Airport, 
Karnataka 
● In-principle‟ approval to Government of 
Karnataka - 25th June, 2008. 
● State Government has informed that 
construction work is in progress. 
Rs.19
4 
crore 
February, 2024 
4. Dabra Airport, 
Gwalior, Madhya 
Pradesh 
● In-principle‟ to M/s Gwalior Agriculture 
Company Limited in Madhya Pradesh - 
December, 2008. 
● A Memorandum of Agreement (MoA) has 
to be signed by the company with the State 
Government of MP which has not been 
signed so far. 
● As informed by Government of Madhya 
Pradesh (GoMP) in July, 2021, land 
identified for airport has been taken by 
GoMP under Agriculture Land Ceiling 
Act, which is under litigation in Court. 
Rs. 
200 
crore 
Matter is sub -
Judice 
5. Karaikal in 
Puducherry 
● In Principle‟ approval to M/s Karaikal 
Airport Pvt. Ltd. - 24th February 2011. 
● There are legal issues involved regarding 
land including compensation to the land 
owners. Matter is sub-judice. 
Rs. 50 
crore 
There are legal 
issues involved 
regarding land. 
Matter is sub -
judice 
6. Dholera 
Ahmedabad, 
Gujarat, Gujarat 
Infrastructure 
Development 
Board 
● „In principle‟ approval to   Dholera 
International Airport Company Ltd. 
(DIACL), a Government of Gujarat entity 
- 27.01.2016. 
● On 03.12.2021, PIB recommended the 
proposal. Thereafter, CCEA has granted 
approval to the project on 14.06.2022 and 
the work has started. 
Rs. 
1305 
crore 
December, 
2025 
7. Dagadarthi 
Mendal, Nellore 
Dist., Andhra 
Pradesh 
● „In principle‟ approval- 07.10.2016. 
● Project was awarded by State Govt of 
Andhra Pradesh to M/s SCL Turbo 
Consortium Ltd. on 22.09.2017. However, 
the State Government has cancelled the 
bid awarded to the selected bidder. 
● As Nellore is having huge Cargo potential 
the APADCL is reworking and planning to 
release fresh RFP to develop International 
Airport with concentration on cargo 
Operations. 
Rs. 
293 
crore 
-NA- 

Page 75 of 111 
 
● The RITES has been appointed to give its 
recommendations on development of 
Cargo Airport.   
8. Bhogapuram in 
Vizianagaram 
District near 
Visakhapatnam, 
Andhra Pradesh 
● „In principle‟ approval to the State 
Government of Andhra Pradesh - 
07.10.2016. 
● Concession Agreement signed on 12th 
June 2020. 
● An MoU has been signed between AAI 
and GoAP in September, 2022 for 
mutation of land in po ssession of AAI in 
Vizag Civil Enclave in the name of AAI. 
● Financial closure yet to be achieved 
● MoCA has granted No Objection 
Certificate to Govt. of Andhra Pradesh 
(GoAP) on 13.09.2022 for closure of 
scheduled commercial operations at the 
Civil Enclave at  existing Vizag Naval 
Airfield (INS Dega) for 30 years, once the 
operation of Greenfield airport at 
Bhogapuram starts, subject to compliance 
of the provisions of MoU entered between 
AAI and GoAP. 
● MoU for Reserved Services between GoI 
and Concessionaire has  been signed on 
09.03.2023 
Rs. 
2500 
crore 
-NA- 
9. Hirasar, District 
Rajkot, Gujarat 
● „In-Principle‟ approval to Government of 
Gujarat -09.10.2017. 
● The State Government has collaborated 
with AAI for development of the airport. 
● Construction work is in progress. 
Rs. 
1405 
crore 
June, 2023 
10. Noida 
International 
Airport, Jewar, 
Uttar Pradesh 
● „In principle‟ approval to Government of 
Uttar Pradesh - 09.05.2018. 
● GoUP has signed Concession Agreement 
with M/s Yamuna International Airport 
Private Limited (YIAPL) in October, 
2020. 
● Work started in July 2021. 
● EPC contract has been awarded in 
June‟2022 and the contractor has started 
the work at site. 
Rs.10,
056 
crore 
September, 
2024 

Page 76 of 111 
 
Annexure-II 
Greenfield Airport Projects where „Site Clearance‟ has been granted 
 S. 
No. 
Name of Airport 
and promoting 
agency 
Status of the project 
1. Singrauli, Madhya 
Pradesh 
GoI granted „site clearance‟ to MP Road Development Corporation 
Limited for setting up of Singrauli Domestic Greenfield Airport for 
public use in Waidhan, District Sin grauli, Madhya Pradesh vide 
certificate dated 05.09.2017. The airport was proposed for ATR -72 for 
which 80 acres of the land is in possession of the Government. 
However, there are HT lines which need to be shifted and a number of 
people have to be compensa ted for displacement. Application for In -
Principle approval yet to be received. 
2. Kotkasim, Alwar, 
Rajasthan 
Government of India has granted the site clearance to M/s. Delhi 
Mumbai Industrial Corridor Development Corporation Limited 
(DMICDC) for setting up of a Greenfield Airport for public use near 
Bhiwadi, District Alwar, Rajasthan subject to some conditions on 
18.11.2015. Further development would depend on preparation of 
DPR, its economic viability and financial closure subject to the „in -
principle‟ approval. 
As per the decision taken in the meeting held on 03.02.2020, under the 
chairmanship of Secretary (CA), State Government and DMICDC has 
been requested to firm up their position on the Greenfield Airport 
project at Alwar. Application for In -Principle approval yet to be 
received. 
3. Mandi, Himachal 
Pradesh 
GoI granted „site clearance‟ to State Government of Himachal Pradesh 
for setting up Greenfield Airport at Nagchala, Mandi, Himachal 
Pradesh vide certificate dated 04.07.2022. An MOU and JV 
Agreement has been signed between AAI and State Government of 
Himachal Pradesh for joint implementation of the project. Application 
for In-Principle approval yet to be received. 
  
  

Page 77 of 111 
 
 
Annexure-III 
Brief on Greenfield Airports under consideration 
S. No. Proposed 
Greenfield 
Airport 
Brief Particulars 
1. Parandur 
Greenfield 
Airport, 
Chennai, Tamil 
Nadu 
State government vide DO letter dated 29.10.2021 had informed that 
it has identified 4 potential sites i.e. Thiruporur, Parandur, Padalam 
and Pannur near Chennai for gr eenfield airport and requested AAI to 
carry out the inspection of sites and their suitability for airport 
development. 
  
A technical team of AAI along with officials of Tamil Nadu Industrial 
Development Corporation Limited (TIDCO) visited the proposed four  
sites between 15.02.2022 to 17.02.2022. 
  
In the report prepared, AAI has found two sites at Parandur and 
Pannur comparatively more feasible for development of airport as per 
availability of airspace, as these are relatively free of natural 
obstructions. However, man-made obstacles are present at the sites, as 
well as some hazards such as lakes and smoke producing industries, 
the severity of which, with respect to airport operations, can only be 
ascertained after OLS survey and site survey. 
  
AAI forwarded the pre-feasibility report to CMD, TIDCO vide letter 
dated 22.03.2022. 
  
Subsequently, in July, 2022, State Government informed that after 
comparing viability and feasibility including the presence of 
habitations, industrial establishments and land acquisition cost of both 
the sites, the GoTN has shortlisted Parandur (near Sriperumbudur) as 
the location for establishing the Greenfield Airport. 
  
In August‟2022, TIDCO submitted a proposal for grant of Site 
Clearance to MoCA for the development of Greenfield  airport at 
Parandur (near Chennai), Kancheepuram District, Tamil Nadu. The 
same was forwarded to AAI, DGCA and MoD for their examination 
and comments. In September, 2022, AAI furnished its 
comments/observations on the proposal and same has been forwarded 
to TIDCO on 11.10.2022 for comments/compliance. Comments of 
MoD & DGCA on the proposal are still awaited.  
2. Greenfield 
Airport at Puri, 
Odisha 
·   Hon‟ble Chief Minister of Odisha vide DO letter dated 1.1.2021 
addressed to the Hon‟ble Prime Minister had  proposed a 
Greenfield Airport at Puri which is located at a distance of 
approx. 60 Km from Bhubaneswar by road. 

Page 78 of 111 
 
  
·   In this context, Secretary (CA), had taken a meeting on 
12.01.2021 wherein officials from State Govt. of Odisha, DGCA 
and Airports Author ity of India (AAI) were also present. During 
the meeting, it was decided that AAI would do the pre -feasibility 
study and ascertain whether the site is suitable for development of 
airport or not. 
  
·      Accordingly, a multi -disciplinary team from AAI visi ted the 
identified site at Puri in June 2021 for site inspection and 
submitted the pre-feasibility study report. 
·      AAI in its report has mentioned that Prima facie on visual 
assessment, development of Greenfield Airport at the proposed 
site appears to  be technically feasible subject to OLS survey & 
removal of identified obstacle etc. AAI has also suggested that, if 
the State Govt. intends to develop the Airport at Puri as the major 
Airport and an alternate to Bhubaneswar Airport to cater to the 
traffic needs of the State for 40 -50 years, it would be appropriate 
that an option of parallel runways may be considered and 
accordingly approx. 2300 acres of land as per the sample Airport 
Layout enclosed with the report as Annexure B may be earmarked 
/ reserved  for development of airport in phased manner and to 
control development around the airport. 
·      The report from the Team has been sent to the Government of 
Odisha on 5.8.2021. Revenue and Disaster Management Deptt. of 
Govt. of Odisha vide letter dated 1 6.08.2021 has directed 
Collector & DM, Puri to process the case further and take 
appropriate action for establishment of the Greenfield Airport at 
Puri. 
·      In July, 2022, Government of Orissa submitted an application to 
MoCA seeking grant of following approvals for the development 
of Greenfield airport at Puri: 
Ø  Site Clearance & In -Principle approvals, Techno Economic 
Feasibility Study (TEFS) Report 
Ø   Approval of MoD for Aerodrome 
Ø   Clearance from MHA 
·      After examination of the proposal in th e Ministry, State 
Government was advised to resubmit Site Clearance application 
only along with the requisite information. In September, 2022, 
State Government has re-submitted the Site-Clearance application 
after complying to comments/observations of MoCA . The 
proposal of State Government is being forwarded to AAI, DGCA 

Page 79 of 111 
 
& MoD for their comments/observations. 
3. Kottayam 
Greenfield 
Airport 
  
·      M/s. Kerala State Industrial Development Corporation (KSIDC) 
vide letter dated 30.06.2020 had submitted an ap plication for grant 
of „site clearance‟ approval for setting up of Greenfield Airport at 
Kottayam on 2263.18 acres of land falling in villages 
Erumeli(South) and Manimala under Cheruvally Estate in District 
Kottayam, close to Sabarimala Temple (approx. 48 kms). The 
proposed airport site is at an aerial distance of approx. 88 kms 
from the Cochin Airport and 110 kms from Thiruvananthapuram 
airport. 
·      The proposal was sent to AAI, DGCA and MoD for comments. 
MoD vide OM dated 21.12.2020 had conveyed that I AF has no 
objection to grant of site clearance for setting up of an international 
airport at Sabrimala, District Kottayam, Kerala by M/s. KSIDC. 
MoD had also stated that after grant of site clearance by the 
Steering Committee of MoCA, the applicant needs t o seek NOC 
from MoD as per prescribed format mentioned in the Greenfield 
Airports Policy, 2008 of MoCA. 
·      Based on the observations/comments of AAI and DGCA, State 
Govt. of Kerala was further requested to furnish pre -feasibility 
report along with supp orting documents on 22.02.2021. The 
requisite information/documents were received from Govt. of 
Kerala on 12.07.2021 and the same were forwarded to AAI and 
DGCA on 19.07.2021. DGCA and AAI have furnished its reply 
and the same have been forwarded to KSIDC on 13.08.2021 and 
24.08.2021 respectively for compliance/comments. 
·   Thereafter, the proposal submitted by the State Government on 
05.10.2021 was examined in consultation with AAI & DGCA and 
State Government was advised on 01.11.2021 to furnish Techno -
Economic Feasibilty Study (TEFS). 
·   After several reminders and follow ups, the TEFS report has been 
submitted by State Government on 30.06.2022 and the same was 
forwarded to AAI & DGCA for furnishing their comments on the 
TEFS Report. Thereafter, on 16.09 .2022, comments/observations 
of DGCA & AAI have been forwarded to KSIDC for 
comments/compliance along with inputs on following 
observations:- 
         I.      Impact of the new airport on existing airports within 150 km radius 
and the viability of the proposed airport. 
    II.         Point of Call status for International airports. 

Page 80 of 111 
 
Annexure-IV 
New Terminal Buildings/ Expansion of existing terminal buildings in progress/ planning 
stage: - 
Port Blair, Guwahati, Chennai, Lucknow (PPP), Dehradun, Leh, Patna, Pune, Vijayawada, 
Imphal, Srinagar, Goa, Surat, Bhubaneswar, Mangaluru (PPP), Madurai, Trichy, Tuticorin, 
Coimbatore, Jabalpur, Kolhapur, Tezu, Gorakhpur, Muirpur, Saharanpur, Ayodhya, Agatti, 
Dhalbhumgarh, Jamnagar, Gwalior, Sarsawa, Rajkot, Darbhanga, Ja mmu, Adampur, 
Itanagar(Holongi), Bagdogra, Udaipur and Jodhpur. 
 
New Civil Enclaves - work in progress/ planning stage (airports operated by MoD):- 
Agra, Kanpur (Chakeri), Bihta, Adampur, Halwara, Jodhpur, Jammu, Bagdogra and Gwalior 
(Expansion work) 
 
 
 


Page 81 of 111 
 
Annexure-V 
Status of the Greenfield Airports where „In principle‟ approval has been accorded by 
Government of India and the reasons for time gap in „In-Principle‟ approval and 
operationalization 
S. 
No. 
Greenfield 
 Airport 
Date of „In -
Principle‟ 
approval 
PDC Reasons for gap 
1. Mopa 
Airport, 
Goa 
March, 2000 
  
December, 
2022 
  
The Union Cabinet accorded its approval for 
setting up of a new airport of international 
standards at Mopa in Goa and to close the 
existing airport at Goa for civilian operations 
on commissioning of new airport. 
This decision of closure of existing Dabolim 
airport after operationalization of Mopa 
airport was reviewed and in 2010, Union 
Cabinet approved continuance of the existing 
airport along with new Mopa airport. 
The construction  got further delayed due to: 
i)    Finalization of Concessionaire under PPP 
took time. 
ii) Issues in Land acquisition, Resettlement & 
Rehabilitation, pre-development works,  land 
development and filling, removal of obstacles, 
connectivity to the airport, water supply, 
power, etc. 
iii) Stoppage of works due to litigation in 
Hon‟ble High Court/ Supreme Court/ National 
Green Tribunal regarding challenge to 
environmental clearance granted. 
iv) Restrictions due to Covid pandemic. 
2. Navi 
Mumbai 
Internationa
l airpor t, 
Maharashtr
a 
July, 2007 
  
December, 
2024 
The construction got delayed due to: 
i)   Change in the Ownership of the 
Concessionaireand related issues resulting into 
delay in the funding of the project. 
ii)  Issues in Land acquisition, Resettlement & 
Rehabilitation, land development by cutting of 
hills and filling, re-coursing of Ulweriver, 
shifting of EHVT line, water supply, power, 
etc. 
iii)  Finalization of Concessionaire by State 
Government under PPP took time. 
iv)   Restrictions due to Covid pandemic. 
3. Vijayapura 
Airport, 
Karnataka 
June, 2008 March, 
2024 
i)  After  approval, State Government sent 
a Project Development Agreement (PDA) with 
a private  developer. However, PDA was 
subsequently terminated due to unviability of 
the project. 
ii) Thereafter, State Government informed 

Page 82 of 111 
 
that they made all the efforts to onboard a 
developer for the project, however could not, 
resulting into delay. 
iii) State Government subsequently started 
developing the airport from its own sources. 
4. Hassan 
Airport, 
Karnataka 
June, 2008 February, 
2024 
i)  After approval, State Government send 
a Project Development Agreement (PDA) with 
a private  developer. However, PDA was 
terminated due to unviability of the project. 
ii) Thereafter, State Government informed 
that they made all the efforts to onboard a 
developer for the project, however could not, 
resulting into delay. 
iii)   State Government subsequently started 
developing the airport from its own sources. 
5. Shivamogg
a Airport, 
Karnataka 
June, 2008 
  
December, 
2022 
i)  After  approval, State Government send 
a Project Development Agreement (PDA) with 
a private  developer. However, PDA was 
terminated due to unviability of the project. 
ii) Thereafter, State Government informed 
that they made all the efforts to onboard a 
developer for the project, however could not, 
resulting into delay. 
iii)   State Government subsequently started 
developing the airport from its own sources. 
6. Dabra 
Airport, 
Gwalior, 
Madhya 
Pradesh 
December, 
2008 
  
Matter is 
sub-judice 
In July, 2021, Government of Madhya Pradesh 
(GoMP) has informed that land identified for 
airport has been taken by GoMP under 
Agriculture Land Ceiling Act, which is under 
litigation in Court. 
7. Karaikal in 
Puducherry 
February,  
2011 
  
Matter is 
sub-judice 
The project is mired with legal issues/ court 
cases regard land acquisition and 
compensation issues to the land owners 
resulting into delay. 
 
  

Page 83 of 111 
 
Annexure-VI  
 
Plans and programmes made by the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Airports Authority of 
India for implementation of PM Gati Shakti Master Plan are as follows:- 
i)  PM Gati Shakti Cell has been created in MoCA. 
ii) Officers are being nominated for at site training to BISAG-N at Ahmedabad, Gujarat. 
iii)   MoCA portal has been developed by BISAG-N. 
iv)   All the Airports / Helipor ts / Water Aerodromes to be made operational up to 2024 are 
mapped. 
v) The data is under validation / authentication. 
vi)   Project planning SOP has been shared with Network Planning Group (NPG) & 
Bhaskaracharya National Institute for Space Applications an d Geo-Informatics (BISAG-
N) for development of Greenfield & Brownfield Airport projects. 
vii) Information on upgradation of airports including extension of Runways, development of 
new passenger & cargo terminals, aprons etc. shall be provided to NPG, BISAG -N for 
ensuring updation. 
viii)  Pre -feasibility assessment report of all new Greenfield Airports along with locations 
shall be shared with DPIIT, NPG and other infrastructure Ministries for comments. 
ix)   Comments/ observations shall be suitably incorpor ated by the Ministry in the pre -
feasibility study report prior to consideration by the Steering Committee of MoCA for 
Stage-1 approval under Greenfield Airport Policy i.e., site clearance. 
x) Comments from DPIIT and NPG shall also indicate the timelines fo r approval from 
Central Government Ministries (Environment, Forest, Defence, Home, Finance etc.). 
xi)   Final detailed project report including responses to observation from DPIIT, NPG & 
other infrastructure Ministries shall be shared with DPIIT, before th e final appraisal and 
in-principle approval of the project. 
 
 
 
 

Page 84 of 111 
 
 
Annexure-VII 
List of Civil Enclaves 
S.No. Name of Airport State/  UT 
AAI International Civil Enclaves 
1 Port 
Blair 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands 
2 Goa Goa 
3 Srinag
ar 
Jammu & Kashmir 
AAI Customs Civil Enclaves 
4 Visakhapatn
am 
Andhra Pradesh 
5 Pune Maharashtra 
6 Chandigarh Chandigarh 
7 Bagdogra West Bengal 
AAI Domestic Civil Enclaves 
8 Jorhat   
Assam 
9 Silchar 
10 Tezpur 
11                  Darbhanga Bihar 
12 Bhuj Gujarat 
13 Jamnagar 
14 Jammu Jammu & Kashmir 
15 Leh 
16 Gwalior Madhya Pradesh 
17 Adampur (Jalandhar)   
Punjab 
18 Bhatinda 

Page 85 of 111 
 
19 Pathankot 
20 Bikaner   
Rajasthan 
21 Jaisalmer 
22 Jodhpur 
23 Agra   
  
Uttar Pradesh 24 Bareilly 
25 Gorakhpur 
26 Hindon 
27 Kanpur(Chakeri) 
28 Prayagraj 
29 Thanjavur (To be 
developed) 
Tamil Nadu 
30 Passighat Arunachal Pradesh (State Govt.) 
31 Bidar Karnataka (MoD/Private GMR 
Group) 
  

Page 86 of 111 
 
Annexure-VIII  
Advantages and Disadvantages of Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports as informed by the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
1. Advantages:- 
·         By sharing facilities with a defence airport, a Civil Enclave can benefit from the existing 
infrastructure, such as runways and terminal buildings. This can reduce the cost of development 
as compared to building a standalone civilian airport. 
·         Military airports often have enhanced security measures in place,  which can be beneficial 
for the operation of a civil enclave. 
·         The problem of space constraint is solved as both civil and  Military Aviation Operations are 
carried out simultaneously. 
·         Provides better platform for agencies like NSG if any emergency occurs. 
·         Better coordination is achieved between Civil and Defence Agencies. 
·         The civil aviation has n o/or limited capabilities to neutralize or prevent any hostile drone 
attack, so an integrated ecosystem of Civil and Defence Enclave bodies is likely to be in place 
for the security of overall aviation operation. 
 
2. Disadvantages:- 
·         In the Defence Enclave, the length of runway for bigger flights is an issue. While, the fighter 
jets require shorter runways, for civilian flights, the runways have to be upgraded with their 
lengths. 
·         In Civil Enclaves airports, runway is mainly used by the de fence forces for their operational 
exercises. Hence, availability of slots for commercial flights is reduced which leads to bunching 
of flights in a  particular period and subsequently leads to congestion at airports. 
·         The regular mock exercises c onducted by defence forces results in a disturbed schedule of 
the civilian flights. 
·         Restricted operations and constraints for round the clock operations 
·         Challenges for expanding the existing airport to meet the ongoing traffic growth. 
·         CISF‟s role is limited to securing the terminal building only while the concerned defence 
agency is responsible for the  operational  area.  This leads to duality of security agencies for 
Defence Enclave airports. 
 
3. Challenges faced in Civil Enclaves: 

Page 87 of 111 
 
The Committee was apprised that some issues peculiar to defence airfields are faced by AAI, 
when it comes to expansion/ development of a Civil Enclave. These are generally resolved by 
mutual coordination between AAI and Defence Authorities. Some of these issues are as follows: 
·         Obtaining of Working Permission at Defence Aerodromes: AAI is required to obtain 
working permission for carrying out construction/ development activities at Civil Enclaves. In 
few cases, IAF/ Ministry of Defence (MOD)  has granted working permission in lieu of payment 
of lease amount by AAI. Accordingly, the issue of de -linking the working permission with the 
lease amount was taken up with IAF/ MOD, who assured to consider the request of AAI on case 
to case basis. 
·         At times, there is a requirement of swapping of land between AAI and Defence Authorities 
for development of a civil enclave. In order to deal with such cases of swapping of land between 
IAF/MOD and AAI, a Land Barter Matrix is being developed and has been sent by AAI to MoD 
to resolve the land related requirements on equal value of land basis. 
·         The watch hours for operation of civil flights at Defence Enclaves are limited. The civilian 
flights get second priority in the matter. The issue is ta ken up with the concerned defence 
authorities on case-to-case basis depending upon demand from the airlines. 
 
4. The Committee was apprised of some other challenges faced by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation in obtaining approval from the Defence agencies and  the solutions thereto are 
enumerated as follows: 
i)        The opposing issues of IAF and AAI are generally related to accessibility of air space, 
operational watch hours and land. For accessibility of air space issues and watch hour issues 
regular coordination meetings are held. For land issues a Land Barter Matrix between MoD and 
AAI has been approved by Ministry of Defence, wherein equal value of land will be transferred 
between IAF and MoD. 
ii)   Obtaining of NOC from MoD for the Greenfield airport pro ject is another challenge. On 
few occasions, MoD has withdrawn its NOC after giving the initial permission. 
iii) High levy of Property Tax by the MoD in respect of the airport land which is under 
jurisdiction of Defence Forces. This higher charges result i nto higher aeronautical charges being 
levied from the Passengers. 
iv) Lease rental charged by IAF/MoD for land leased out with working permission to AAI if 
the land is not to be used jointly by IAF & AAI. 
v)   Delay in physical possession of land by AAI even after getting working permission. 

Page 88 of 111 
 
 
5. The Committee was informed that further cooperation is solicited by the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation from the Ministry of Defence in the following areas: 
•                Expediting Swapping of land under Barter Matrix formula; 
•                De-linking of working permission for lease  rentals, and 
•                Extension of watch hours for civilian flights. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Page 89 of 111 
 
Annexure-IX  
As per information provided by MAFI Cell, Ministry of Defence, details of Radio 
Navigational aids which have been replaced or planned to be replaced under project MAFI 
at joint user airfields as on 1st October, 2022 is given below: 
S. 
No. 
Name of 
Civil 
Enclave 
Operated by AAI Nav Aids 
Facility Details Remarks 
1. Agra IAF 
DVOR Replaced in MAFI-I 
DME(HP) -do- 
ILS LLZ -do- 
ILS GP -do- 
DME(LP) -do- 
  
2. Allahabad IAF 
DVOR Planned to be replaced in MAFI-
II. PDC Nov. 2022 
DME(HP) -do- 
ILS LLZ -do- 
ILS GP -do- 
DME(LP) -do- 
  
3. Bagdogra IAF 
DVOR Replaced in MAFI-I 
DME (HP) -do- 
  
4. Bhuj IAF 
DVOR Replaced in MAFI-I 
DME (HP) -do- 
  
5. Chandigarh IAF 
DVOR Replaced in MAFI-I 
DME (HP) -do- 
ILS LLZ Rwy 11 
Will continue in operation. No 
replacement plan received till 
now in MAFI. 
ILS GP -do- 
DME(LP) -do- 
  
6. Goa Indian Navy 
DME (HP) 
Will continue in operation. No 
Replacement plan received till 
now in MAFI. 
DVOR -do- 
ILS LLZ Rwy 25 -do- 
ILS GP Rwy 25 -do- 
DME(LP) Rwy -do- 
  
7. HAL 
Bengaluru HAL ILS LLZ 
No replacement plan received till 
now in MAFI. Planned to be 
replaced by AAI. 
ILS GP -do- 

Page 90 of 111 
 
DME(LP) -do- 
DVOR -do- 
DME (HP) -do- 
  
8. Gwalior IAF 
DME (HP) Replaced in MAFI-I 
DVOR -do- 
  
9. Jammu IAF 
ILS LLZ Planned to be replaced in MAFI-
II. PDC Nov 2024 
ILS GP Planned to be replaced in MAFI-
II. PDC Nov 2022 
DME(LP) Planned to be replaced in MAFI-
II. PDC Nov 2022 
DVOR Will continue in operation. No 
Replacement plan received. 
DME (HP) -do- 
  
10. Jamnagar IAF 
DVOR Replaced in MAFI-I 
DME (HP) -do- 
  
11. Jodhpur IAF 
DVOR Already replaced in MAFI-I 
DME (HP) -do- 
  
12. Jorhat IAF 
DME (HP) Replaced in MAFI-I 
DVOR -do- 
  
13. Kanpur 
(Chakeri) IAF 
DME (HP) Planned to be replaced in MAFI-
II. PDC Nov 2022 
DVOR -do- 
ILS LLZ -do- 
ILS GP -do- 
DME(LP) -do- 
  
14. Leh IAF DVOR Planned to be replaced in  
MAFI-II. PDC Nov 2022 
DME (HP) -do- 
15. Port Blair Indian Navy 
DVOR 
AAI Enroute Facility outside 
airfield. Will continue in 
operation. 
DME (HP) -do- 
ILS LLZ Will continue in operation. No 
Replacement plan received. 
DME(LP) -do- 
16. Pune IAF 
DME (HP) Replaced in MAFI-I 
DVOR Replaced in MAFI-I 
  
17. Silchar IAF DVOR Planned to be replaced in MAFI-

Page 91 of 111 
 
II. PDC April 2022 
DME (HP) -do- 
ILS LLZ Replaced in MAFI-II in March 
2022 
ILS GP -do- 
DME (LP) -do- 
  
18. Srinagar IAF 
ILS LLZ Planned to be replaced in MAFI-
II. PDC March 2023 
ILS GP -do- 
DME (LP) -do- 
DME (HP) -do- 
DVOR -do- 
  
19. Tezpur IAF 
DVOR Already replaced in MAFI-I 
DME(HP) -do- 
  
20. Vizag Indian Navy 
ILS LLZ 
Will continue in operation. No 
Replacement plan received in 
MAFI. 
ILS GP -do- 
DME(LP) -do- 
DVOR-II 
Airport VOR. Will continue in 
operation. No Replacement plan 
received in MAFI. 
DME (HP-II) -do- 
DVOR-1 
AAI Enroute Facililty outside 
airfield. Will continue in 
operation as AAI Facility. 
DME (HP-1) -do- 
Note- 
1. As per information provided by IAF, MAFI Phase -1 Period – 2016 to 2020 an d MAFI 
phase II period- 2021 to 2024. 
2. ILS-Instrumetn Landing System, LLZ -Localiser, GP -Glide Path DVOR - Dopler Very 
Frequency Omni Range, DME - Distance Measuring Equipment, LP -Low Power, Hp -
High Power and NDB-Non Direcitonal Beacon.  
 
 
 
 

Page 92 of 111 
 
Annexure-X 
 
Major Sectors of CISF deployment are as follows: 
Sl. No. Name of the Ministry/Department Number of Units 
1. Chemicals & Fertilisers 10 
2. Civil Aviation (Airports) 66 
3. Coal 10 
4. Communication & Information Technology 01 
5. Defence 05 
6. Finance 14 
7. Heavy Industry 04 
8. 
MHA (GBS, DMRC, VIP Security, LNJPNNICFS Rohini & 
SVP/NPA Hyderabad, Passenger X -Ray Screening & Cargo 
Scanning Centre, DAMEL Delhi) 
06 
09. Mines 02 
10. Petroleum & Natural Gas 37 
11. Power (including 22 State Power Units) 102 
12. Private Sector 12 
13. Railway (CCIL Tughlakabad) 01 
14. Science & Technology 34 
15. Shipping/Ports 15 
16. State Government (P&H Secretariat) 01 
17. Steel 19 
18. Tourism & Culture, Human Resources 07 
19. Urban Development 02 
20. Water Resources (FBP Farakka) 01 
21. Commerce & Industry 01 
22. Information Technology 03 
  Total: 353 
 
Out of the total 353 CISF units deployed by the Major sectors/Ministries, 66 units are 
deployed at the Airports. 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 93 of 111 
 
Annexure-XI 
Details of Airports Operationalized/To Be Operationalised are as under:- 
2022-23 
Airports operationalised(05): 
Keshod, Deoghar & Jeypore (NSOP), Ziro, Almora (H)(NSOP) 
 
Airports/ heliports/ water aerodromes under development (30): 
Kota, Vellore, Daparizo (H), Tuting (H), Nainital(H), Nagaon(H), Walong(H), Neil 
Island(W), Havelock (W), Long Island(W), Jamshedpur, Shibpur, Kargil, Rourkela, 
Cooch Behar, Dumka, Aligarh, Azamgarh, Moradabad, Bokaro, Burnpur, Utkela, 
Shravasti, Neyveli, Baddi (H), Shimla (H), Itanagar (H), Car Nicobar,  Jiribam(H), 
Tamenglong (H) 
 
2023-24 
Airports/heliports/water aerodromes under development (44): 
Ambikapur, Amravati, Ambala, Ayodhya, Campbell Bay, Daman, Ghazipur, 
Hashimara, Hazaribagh, Meerut,  Jhansi, Kalaikunda, Rewa, Muirpur (Korba), 
Ramnad, Minicoy(W), Kavaratti (W), Ratnagiri, Sarsawa (Saharanpur), Tanjore, 
Uterlai, Sholapur, Fursatganj, Thoise, Nagarjuna Sagar (W), Prakasam Barrage (W), 
Guwahati River Front(W), Umrangso Reservoir(W) Mussoorie (H), Ramnagar (H), 
Manali (H), Thanlon(H), Yinghiong (H), Dharchula(H), Haridwar(H), 
Joshimath(H), Parbung (H), Sohra(H), Dawki (H), Williamnagar(H), Agatti (WA)), 
Rangeilunda, Tura (H)& Port Blair (WA) 
AIRPORTS/ HELIPORTS/ WATER AERODROMES PLANNED TO BE 
OPERATIONALISED UNDER UDAN 
Note: The proposed airports /Heliports/ Water Aerodromes which are proposed to revive based 
on the bid received under UDAN are subject to availability of land and various regulatory 
requirements 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 94 of 111 
 
Annexure-XII 
 
The following 37 airports/ Heliports (H)/ Water Aerodromes (W) have no scheduled c ommercial 
operations: 
S. No. Airport/ Heliport/ Waterdrome S. No. Airport/Heliport/ Waterdrome 
1.              Hollongi 14. Rourkela 
2.              Safdarjung, Delhi 15. Mopa 
3.              Akola 16. Jamshedpur 
4.              Juhu 17. Banglore (Hal) 
5.              Sholapur 18. Sri SatyaSai 
6.              Kota 19. Jspl Raigarh 
7.              Hyderabad (Begumpet) 20.           Baldota Koppal 
8.              Ayodhya (Faizabad) 21.           Birlagram 
9.              Kanpur (Civil) 22.           Angul 
10.           Meerut 23.           Beas 
11.           Moradabad 24.           Banasthali 
12.           Behala 25.           Hosur 
13.           Cooch Behar     
 
  

Page 95 of 111 
 
 
Annexure-XIII  
 
Submission of Association of Private Airport Operators regarding the potential challenges 
that the aviation industry will face in the next 20 years and the steps that the Government 
should take to ensure that future growth in the aviation sector can be accommodated at 
airports without hindrances, is as follows:- 
 
1. APAO, in its written reply, informed the Committee that PPP airports have been prudent 
in undertaking capacity addition and will continue to invest in line with concession agreements. 
However, investment by airports alone is not sufficient and needs to be matched with:  
1) Investment by airlines/ Carriers towards aircraft induction.  
2) Investment by ground handling agencies and stakeholders to ensure availability of ground 
equipment.  
3) Freeing of airspace for multi fold growth in aviation and air travel over the next 20 years.  
4) Staffing by regulatory and statutory bodies to keep pace with estimated growth of aviation 
over the next 20 years.  
5) Ensuring adequate number of specialized resources viz., Pilots, Air traffic control.  
6) Investment in connectiv ity by State and Central Government e.g., investment towards 
development of metro connectivity, enhancement of road/surface connectivity for passenger and 
freight movement.  
 
2. APAO further stated that one of the practical challenges being faced by Airports in taking 
up capital expenditure is lack of flexibility of the regulator in approving the capital expenditure 
recovery sought by the airport operators. Since the quantum of investment is very large, Airport 
operators are exercising higher level of cauti on in seeking AERA approval before proceeding 
with capital expenditure programs. This might lead to timing gaps between capacity addition and 
demand especially in a rapidly growing market conditions / aviation sector in India.  
 
3. APAO opined that the pot ential challenges that the aviation industry will face in the next 
20 years are:  
• Availability of skilled manpower.  

Page 96 of 111 
 
• Availability of land.  
• Delay in Environment clearances and statutory approvals.  
• Delayed tariff approvals by AERA.  
• Cargo: Cargo logistics and supply chain would be another potential challenge that aviation 
industries will face going forward. The processing, agents, freight forwarders and the 
government will be contributing to the growth and advancement of cargo ties and processing.  
This may be a long-term challenge.  
• Route development and bilateral with various nations are growth factors to be accounted as 
challenge to cope up.  
• Land banks: The airport these days are not only the transit hubs but also a destination with wide 
range of offerings, especially Southeast Asian airports. Enough land banks to be parked for 
commercialisation and building the eco system, which helps city grow and so the state.  
• Level of service: Pax experience being one of the key features in deciding th e level of service, 
the ambience, area allocation per pax, etc., will be a change of norm going forward.  
 
4. APAO further submitted that potential challenges to be addressed at the initial stage of 
airport planning are:  
• Land acquisition - Delay in Land acquisition for the greenfield project by the government lead 
to cost overruns. Projects should not be awarded unless 70 -80% of land is acquired by the 
competent authority. Requisite clearances should be obtained before signing the concession 
agreement wi th a private airport developer to build a greenfield airport. For expansion, 
brownfield airports land acquisition is a major issue which needs to be addressed jointly by 
MoCA and State Govt, to ensure timely and cost-effective capacity additions.  
• Single window clearance for all statutory compliances  - Infrastructure projects require 
synchronization of various agencies. There is no single window clearance for timely resolution 
of issues and approvals to minimize delays in execution of these projects.  
• Inter-ministerial committee to be formed to expedite project approvals.  
• Quality of DPR documents to be improved.  
• Multi-modal connectivity - Need to develop Multi -modal connectivity to airports. This will 
ensure easy access and larger catchment area.  
• GST Input Tax Credit allowability / availability on Works Contract, Goods and Services 
on Construction of Immovable Property  - In the current form of the law, input tax credits 
pertaining to works contract services or supply of goods or services or both received by Airport 

Page 97 of 111 
 
operators would not be available (except for input tax credit of plant and machinery) due to the 
restriction placed by section 17(5) of the CGST Act. Therefore, the taxes paid by an Airport 
operator to a Contractor in relation to settin g up/expansion activity at the airport would not be 
eligible as input tax credit in the hands of the airport. Allowing the GST Input Tax Credit would 
lead to availability of credits in hands of Airport operators which would be indirectly get further 
passed on to the customers which would lower the cost of rendering the services and help in 
resolving the Cash flow issues of the Airport also.  
• Passenger Processing Systems:  New greenfield airports have been asked to allow airlines to 
use the systems of their  preference to process passenger journeys. This prevents airports from 
implementing a true “common use” approach to airport infrastructure, reduces available airport 
capacity and increases the cost of travel for passengers overall. 
• Centralised Security C oncept: For better utilisation of human resources and security 
infrastructure, departing international and domestic passengers may be screened at a common or 
integrated PESC facility. Immigration counters for departing international passengers may be 
located after PESC facilities. This will bring about much better congestion management and 
smoother passenger journey, with an increased emphasis on aviation security.  
• Common Security Hold Area (CSHA) for domestic passengers:  Once a domestic passenger 
has undergone a security check at the origin airport, she is still subjected to unnecessary security 
checks every time she deboards and makes domestic transfers. This increases the touchpoints for 
domestic transfers, engages security resources which could be bet ter used, and increases the 
turnaround time for flights. Doing away these checks and implementing CSHA will bring about 
better efficiency, reduced turnaround times and enhanced aviation security, which are critical 
elements to making aviation hubs. • Cargo : o Growth responsive design and planning of Supply 
chain and forthcoming provisions like- irradiation facility, pack houses, etc.  
• Land banks:  
• Master plan provisions  
• Acquisition with state support  
• Level of service - As per IATA ADRM recommendations.  
As regard the steps that the Government should take to ensure that future growth in the aviation 
sector can be accommodated at airports without hindrances and to facilitate future -proof airports 
in the country, APAO made the following suggestions:  
• Government to create skill development centres for aviation.  

Page 98 of 111 
 
• Monitoring certain parameters and formulation of contextual guidelines for each airport as a 
specific case.  
• Periodic audits, checks on safe operations. o Equal thrust to the stakeholders - BCAS, airlines, 
GHA.  
• Benchmarking of sister airports and best practices adoption.  
• Strengthening AERA Institutionally: Number of major airports are increasing, and also new 
airports are in pipeline for privatization. Hence, there is a need to streng then AERA by inducting 
at least two additional members, one from the field of Economics / Accounting / Legal and 
another should be industry expert with non-government background. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 99 of 111 
 
 
Annexure-XIV 
 
The details of 9 airports, out of 130 AAI ai rports (excluding 3 JVC airports) operated by AAI 
which are profit-making airports, are as follows-. 
(Rs. in crores) 
Sl. No. Name of Airport Revenue Expenditure Profit (+)/Loss (-)          
1 Behala 0.55 0.35 0.20 
2 Jammu 22.76 22.66 0.09 
3 Jamnagar 2.48 1.29 1.19 
4 
Kanpur Chakeri Flying Club 
NR 6.78 1.31 5.47 
5 NSCBI Airport, Kolkata 866.80 721.52 145.28 
6 Leh 15.02 12.20 2.82 
7 Pune 133.79 94.67 39.13 
8 Srinagar 89.05 68.89 20.16 
9 Darbhanga 6.00 3.89 2.10 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 100 of 111 
 
Annexure-XV 
The Ministry informed the Committee that all the operational airports in the country 
having scheduled flight operations have night landing facility, except in 23 airports, details 
of which are given as under: 
S.No. State Name of the airport Operator 
1. Andhra Pradesh 
  
Cudappah Airports Authority of India 
2. Kurnool State Government 
3. Assam Rupsi Airports Authority of India 
4. Arunachal Pradesh 
  
Tezu 
5. Passighat State Government 
6. Daman & Diu Diu Airports Authority of India 
7. Haryana Hisar State Government 
8. Himachal Pradesh Dharamshala   
  
Airports Authority of India 9. Kullu 
10. Shimla 
11. Karnataka Kalaburagi 
12. Lakshadweep Agatti 
13. Maharashtra 
 
Kolhapur 
14. Sindhudurg State Government 
15. Punjab Ludhiana   
  
Airports Authority of India 16. Puducherry Puducherry 
17. Sikkim Pakyong 
18. Tamil Nadu Salem 
19. Uttarakhand 
 
Pantnagar 
20. Pithoragarh State Government 
21. Chhattisgarh 
  
Bilaspur Airports Authority of India 
22. Jagdalpur State Government 
23. Uttar Pradesh Kushinagar Airports Authority of India 

Page 101 of 111 
 
Annexure-XVI 
Quantum of Air Cargo Handled, Growth & Projection for Cargo facilities at Civil Enclave Airports 
S. 
No. 
Airport FY 
2020-
21 
(in 
MT) 
FY 
2021-
22 
(in 
MT) 
Growt
h % 
FY 
2022-23 
(Apr-
Sep) 
(in MT) 
2022-23 
Tonnage 
projectio
n with 
average 
8% 
growth 
rate 
2023-24 
Tonnage 
projecti
on with 
average 
5% 
growth 
rate 
Existin
g 
Annual 
Capaci
ty 
(MT) 
Remarks 
1.        Pune 26419 28702 8.64 21,261 30998 32548 24679 Interim Integrated Air Cargo Terminal in an area of 
1650 sqm in the 2.5 acres of land acquired from IAF is 
being constructed. PDC: 31.12.2022. 
Capacity will be augmented to 43,000 MT Per annum. 
2.        Chandigarh 8069 11085 37.38 6,675 11972 12570 27146 Domestic Air Cargo facility is Existing. 
3.        Srinagar 6572 9422 43.37 5,953 10176 10685 49813 AAICLAS commissioned New Domestic Air Cargo 
Terminal (01.02.2022) and interim Int‟l air cargo 
terminal. 
4.        Bagdogra 6024 8780 45.75 4,810 9482 9957 19432  
5.        Port Blair 4094 5837 42.57 3,218 6304 6619 29054 - 
6.        Goa 3965 5127 29.31 3,007 5537 5814 23941 - 
7.        Visakhapat
nam 
3778 4326 14.51 2,519 4672 4906 23414 - 

Page 102 of 111 
 
8.        Leh 2370 2976 25.57 853 3214 3375 22161 - 
9.        Jammu 936 1483 58.44 843 1602 1682 2555 - 
10.    Jorhat 24 13 -45.83 67 14 15 * - 
11.    Adampur 0 0 0.00 - 0 0 * Domestic Cargo Movement through Domestic 
Passenger Terminal. 
No flight Operation. 
12.    Gwalior 0 0 0.00 51 0 0 * Domestic Cargo Movement through Domestic 
Passenger Terminal. 
13.    Prayagraj 0 0 0.00 40 0 0 * Domestic Cargo Movement through Domestic 
Passenger Terminal. 
14.    Tezpur 0 0 0.00 - 0 0 * Domestic Air cargo movement facilitated through 
domestic passenger terminal. Interim facility in 120 
sqm. area with capacity of 4380 MT. created and 
awaiting for security audit. 
*Movement of domestic air cargo through passenger terminal. Tonnage less than 1MT is shown as “0” or “-” 

Page 103 of 111 
 
Annexure-XVII 
Other suggestions made by APAO regarding Cargo facilities at airports and civil enclaves:- 
Domain Suggestion Remarks 
FTZ regulations       
 at the airport 
1) Easing and creating a 
separate set of regulations for 
FTZ at airports. 
FTZ at global airports have 
helped grow the air cargo 
volumes and driven economic 
growth. There is a need to 
facilitate FTZ at Indian airports 
through a separate set of 
regulations. 
Ensure a more 
dynamics review of 
deployment                              
of customs and other 
statutory agencies at 
airports for 
expeditious cargo 
processing 
1)     Customs Deployment: It is 
recommended that deployment 
by Customs at airports needs be 
in sync with growth in 
passenger and cargo volumes 
for greater efficiencies. 
2)     All required agencies viz. 
TTC, P&Q, ADC, FSSAI, etc. 
should be present at all major 
cargo terminals to support 
efficient cargo processing. 
3) Functioning of Allied 
Agencies (FSSAI, ADC, P&Q 
etc.) with the same working 
hours as Customs. 
Efficient logistics infrastructure 
is key to promoting 
international trade and driving 
global competitiveness for the 
country. Air cargo in India has 
significant growth potential and 
can act as an economic catalyst 
by opening up new 
market opportunities, moving 
products and services with 
speed and efficiency. 
The deployment of Customs 
and other agencies in line with 
the growth in the cargo volumes 
shall drive eff iciency and 
productivity at the airport‟s 
cargo terminal, thereby 
promoting the growth of air 
cargo and provide impetus to 
the dependent economic 
activities. 
State-of-art   Risk 
Management System 
(RMS) for Air Cargo 
To move towards a state -of-the-
art Risk  Management System 
designed to have fully facilitated 
clearances for air cargo with 
inspection/ checks becoming 
exceptions depending on risk 
profiles.  
Cases where the RMS 
recommends physical 
examination should be by and 
This shall result in the 
following benefits: 
a)  Faster clearance of air 
cargo thereby 
promoting growth of the 
tonnage and economy. 
b)  Drive space 
productivity and 
efficiency at cargo 
terminals. 

Page 104 of 111 
 
large minimal / exception (say 
not more than 1% - 2% of the 
shipments handled).  
RMS system should be made 
robust enough to scan, identify 
and recommend physical 
inspection only for those cases 
where risk is a genuine concern, 
this should be applicable for 
Customs and screening of cargo. 
Reduced burden on Customs 
due to reduction in need for 
physical examination. 
Transshipment 
facilities at each 
airport 
The requirement to 
rescreen Transshipment cargo 
arriving at airport should be 
waived off as the cargo has 
already been Security cleared 
from the originating airport. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 105 of 111 
 
Annexure-XVIII 
Details of Green and sustainable initiatives at airports and civil enclaves:- 
1. The Ministry informed that it has taken an initiative for working towards Carbon 
neutrality and to achieve Net Zero Emission at Indian airports on the lines of the country's 
reduction of Green House Gases (GHG) emission goals. Towards this objective, MoCA has 
written to the operators of all the Brownfield Airports with scheduled operations and developers 
of the upcoming Greenfield Airports, advising them to work towards achieving C arbon 
Neutrality & Net Zero, to get Accreditation by Airports Council International (ACI)/ISO 14064 
through empanelled verifiers and adopt Carbon Mitigation Measures as well as Carbon 
Management Plans. MoCA has also written to all the State Governments/UTs , advising them to 
ensure Carbon Emission reduction measures and Net Zero achievement targets are incorporated 
ab-initio in design/standards of the Greenfield airport development proposals, DPR, Airport 
Master plan etc. 
 
2. The Ministry added that airports have shown positive response to the initiative of MoCA. 
While Cochin Airport was already the first green airport functioning on solar power, the airports 
of Delhi, Mumbai, Hyderabad and Bengaluru have also achieved the status of being Carbon 
Neutral. Othe r non -AAI airports like Ahmedabad, Lucknow, Mangaluru, Guwahati, Jaipur, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Nasik, Sindhudurg, Kannur, Durgapur etc. have also taken steps to reduce 
their carbon footprint with the ultimate goal of Net Zero Emission. AAI has also taken var ious 
initiatives to achieve use of 100% Green Energy at its airports. Renewable energy sources for 
Airports can be Solar, Wind, Biomass, Hydro, Geothermal, Tidal. However each source has its 
constraints/limitations and is site specific. Key considerations for any airports renewable energy 
generation involve the following: 
i)     Resource availability – land, solar intensity, wind speed, proximity to sea and 
dams 
ii)    Techno commercial feasibility – Power generation vs. cost of investment, ROI 
and power intensity 
iii)   Adherence to airport specific requirement – Glare and reflection from the panels, 
current load design of terminal roof. 

Page 106 of 111 
 
3. Most of the Airports have given the target of achieving 100% use of Green Energy by 
2024. 43 AAI Airports have install ed capacity of 40,334 KWp(Solar) representing 29% share of 
total consumption of AAI. Presently 14 Airports of AAI are on 100% RE and another 24 
Airports will be added in this list by Dec -2022.19,280 KWp of Solar Capacity will be added at 
19 Airports by Dec - 22. There is a plan for providing further 40,386 KWp Solar Capacity, 
making AAI Solar capacity 100,000 KWp by Dec -2024. Further, out of 28 non -AAI operational 
airports, 14 airports have an installed RE capacity of 1,25,165 KWp. 
 
4. The Ministry highlight ed that it has advised AERA to take into account the cost 
associated with the Green Energy infrastructure for Airport Tariff Determination, to incentivize 
the airport operators to meet the goal of 100% Green Energy. In this background, AERA has 
approved projects as part of the tariff determination in following areas: 
i)     Capital expenditure towards „solar power plants‟ 
ii)    Conversion of Conventional Lighting to LED 
iii)   Conversion of Conventional Vehicles to Electric Vehicles 
iv) Conversion of CO 2 type Fire extinguisher to Lower Global Warming Potential 
(GWP), etc. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 107 of 111 
 
Annexure-XIX 
The measures undertaken by Ministry of Civil Aviation regarding ease of doing business in 
the aviation sector:- 
a)   Upgradation/ Modernisation of airports' infras tructure is a continuous process and is 
undertaken by Airports Authority of India (AAI) and other Airport Developers from time to time 
depending on the availability of land, commercial viability, socio -economic considerations, 
traffic demand/willingness of  airlines to operate to/from such airports. AAI and other Airport 
Developers have targeted capital outlay of approximately Rs. 98,000 crore in airport sector in the 
next five years for expansion and modification of existing terminals, new terminals and 
strengthening of runways, among other activities. 
b)    The Digiyatra initiative aims to provide a contactless, seamless and paperless handling of 
passengers at airports from the entry gate of the terminal to the boarding point. Project under 
Digi Yatra has been launched at three airports viz. Delhi, Bengaluru and Varanasi on 01.12.2022 
under Phase-I. Four other airports viz. Hyderabad, Pune, Kolkata and Vijayawada will also be 
awarded under Phase-I. 
c)    Modernisation of air navigation infrastructure has been taken up. 
d)    Route rationalization in the Indian airspace is being carried out in coordination with Indian 
Air Force, using modern air traffic flow management techniques to develop shorter flight routes 
and lower fuel consumption by airlines. 
e)    Greater use of digital technology is being encouraged at air cargo terminals to enhance 
efficiency and to reduce dwell times. 
f)     eGovernance has been enabled at Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) and Bureau 
of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) for  most of their stakeholder interactions and internal 
processes. 
g)    Ministry of Civil Aviation has launched Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) - UDAN (Ude 
Desh ka Aam Nagrik) on 21.10.2016 to stimulate regional air connectivity and making air travel 
affordable to the masses. As on 29.11.2022, after four rounds of bidding under UDAN, 453 
routes have commenced, operationalizing 70 Airports including 2 Water Aerodrome & 9 
Heliports. More than 2.15 lakh UDAN flights have operated and over 1.1 crore passengers  have 
availed the benefits in UDAN flights so far. The scheme has been able to provide air 

Page 108 of 111 
 
connectivity to Tier -2 &Tier-3 cities at affordable airfares and has transformed the way people 
travel. 
h)   Further, keeping in view India's growing aviation market , technology and skill base, 
Government has announced new Maintenance, Repair & Overhaul (MRO) Guidelines on 
01.09.2021 with a view to create a congenial atmosphere in the country for the development of 
the MRO industry. 
i)     The Airports Authority of In dia (AAI) has brought out a liberalised Flying Training 
Organisation (FTO) policy wherein the concept of airport royalty (revenue share payment by 
FTOs to AAI) has been abolished and land rentals have been significantly rationalised. 
j)      Ministry of Civil Aviation has released a policy for promotion of helicopter operations across 
the country. The policy covers various aspects like concessional ground handling charges, 
parking deposit, landing charges, service charges, credit facility with ATC and train ing for Air 
Traffic Control (ATC) with a view to making helicopter operations viable. As per the policy, 
State Governments/UTs are required to set up an Institutional mechanism to facilitate helicopter 
operations by obtaining permissions, approvals, cleara nces, etc. Ministry of Civil Aviation has 
also requested the State Governments and UTs to consider setting up helipads in each district for 
promoting helicopter operations. The Government through this policy, aims to stimulate air 
traffic and enhance air c onnectivity through helicopters by facilitating helicopter operations 
across the country. 
k)    Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) has undertaken the National Mission on 
Design & Development of Regional Transport Aircraft. Accordingly, Mi nistry of Civil Aviation 
has established a Monitoring Committee for implementation of Regional Transport Aircraft 
project under the Co -Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Secretary, 
Department of Scientific and Industrial Research . Last meeting of the Committee was held on 
07.11.2022, wherein it has been decided/ agreed that by the time agreement with the prospective 
technology partners is finalised, domestic and international manufacturing partners shall 
continue. 
l)     Ministry of Civil Aviation has taken up the issues of reduction in Central Excise Duty on 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) with Ministry of Finance and reduction of Value Added Tax 
(VAT) on ATF with State Governments/ Union Territories (UTs) on multiple occasions. Based  
on the request, VAT on ATF has recently been reduced in the range of 1 -4% by Andaman & 

Page 109 of 111 
 
Nicobar Islands, Arunachal Pradesh, Dadra and Nagar Haveli & Daman and Diu, Gujarat, 
Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Jharkhand, Ladakh, Madhya Pradesh, Mani pur, 
Mizoram, Tripura, Uttarakhand and Uttar Pradesh in their respective States/ UTs. Besides, 
Karnataka has also brought down the VAT on ATF to 18%. 
 
2. Moreover, 8 Advisory Groups under the Chairmanship of the Hon'ble Minister of Civil 
Aviation, comprising industry leaders and representatives of the Government, have been formed 
in various spheres of Aviation Sector, for enhanced coordination with the industry and to find 
solutions of the issues impacting the Sector. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Page 110 of 111 
 
Annexure-XX 
 
The steps taken by AAI to fill up the vacancies of ATCOs are as follows: 
a)    AAI had released an Advertisement No. 02/2022 for 400 vacancies of Junior Executives 
(ATCOs) for direct recruitment procedure commencing 07.06.2022. The final result of 
recruitment against these 400 vacancies has been declared on 28.11.2022. 
b)    158 posts of Manager (ATC), which were being filled up through Departmental 
Examination, have been filled internally through promotion. This has resulted in availability 
of posts at induction level E-1.  
c)    As a result, Direct Recruitment for another 356  posts of Jr.Executive (ATC) has been 
advertised/uploaded on AAI‟s website on 09.12.2022. 
d)    Earlier 264 vacancies of ATCOs were advertised vide Advertisement No.05/2020 dated 
26.11.2020, for which results were declared on 23.02.2022 and 190 candidates have joined. 
The second list of 70 candidates, available in waiting list of results declared on 23.02.2022, 
against the available vacancies has also been released on 24.11.2022. 
e)    Another 54 Candidates have joined  as Jr. Executive (ATC) through departmental 
examinations during the current year and selected employees are currently undergoing 
training. 
f)     Regular recruitment and training are conducted including augmentation to fulfil the  
manpower requirement of ATCOs for smooth and effective functioning of Air Navigation 
Services across Airports. 
 
2. To cope with the increasing demand, the Government has approved creation of additional 
340 posts of ATCOs in Airports Authority of India (AA I) in May, 2022. Further, the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation has also initiated process of creation of 456 more posts of ATCOs 
in AAI at different levels to mitigate shortage of ATCOs. 
 
 
 
 

Page 111 of 111 
 
Annexure-XXI 
 
The comments of the Comptroller and Auditor General (CAG)  of India on Greenfield/ 
Brownfield/ Civil Enclaves for which reply is pending from MoCA are as under: 
S. 
No. 
C&AG Audit Para/Report 
No. 
Subject/Gist of audit observation 
1. Para No. 3.1 of Report No. 
13 of 2013  (Commercial) 
Land Management. 
Audit had ob served that the Land Management 
Department was responsible to keep proper 
record and to establish ownership of land vested 
with AAI. Out of 37455.729 acres of land test 
checked in Audit, 14053.202 acres of land was 
not mutated in the name of AAI. Further, 888.44 
acres of land was under encroachment (March 
2012) due to which AAI had to defer creation/ 
operationlisation of certain facilities. Many 
agencies were unauthorisedly occupying land at 
various airports. However, in absence of 
agreements with the parti es AAI was unable to 
realize license fee/lease rent due. 
2. G-25012/1/2019-AAI 
Para No.1.1 of Report 
No.13 of 2019 
Review of revenue generation and its realization. 
3. No.G-25012/3/2019-AAI 
C&AG Audit Para No.1.4 
of Report No.13 of 2019 
Loss of revenue due to allotment of hangar space 
at lower rate of license fee. 
**** 
 

112 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

113 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
III 
THIRD MEETING 
  
The    Committee    met    at    11:00    A.M.    on    Wednesday,   the    16th  November, 
2022 in Committee Room ‘2’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New 
Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy             -             Chairman  
  
RAJYA SABHA  
  
     2.   Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
     3.   Shri A. A. Rahim 
     4.   Dr. C.M. Ramesh  
     5.   Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Anto Antony 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
10. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
11. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
12. Shri Prince Raj 
13. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
14. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15. Shri Dushyant Singh 
16. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
17. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary  
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
  
WITNESSES 

114 
 
  
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
1. Shri Rajiv Bansal                                  Secretary 
2. Ms. Rubina Ali                                      Joint Secretary 
Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India (AERA) 
1. Shri B.S. Bhullar                                  Chairperson 
  
Airports Authority of India (AAI) 
1. Shri Sanjeev Kumar                             Chairman 
  
Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) 
1. Shri Shailesh Kumar Pathak                Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) 
1. Shri Maneesh Kumar                           Joint Director General 
  
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) 
1. Shri Jaideep Prasad                                Joint Director General 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, the Secretary, 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, Chairman, Airports Authority of India, Chairman, Airports Economic 
Regulatory Authority of India and other senior o fficials to the meeti ng on the ‘Development of 
Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and Issues pertaining to Civil Enclave in Defence Airports’. 
The Chairman expressed his unhappiness about  the absence of the D irector General of Civil 
Aviation without any communication in this regard. The Chairman directed that henceforth, an 
official called to be present before the Committee must invariably seek the prior permission of 
the Committee in case he is unable to be p resent and directed that the DGCA  may be present in 
the next meeting scheduled on the 25 th November, 2022. Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation 
assured the Committee that he will ensure that the DGCA will be present in the next meeting on 
25.11.2022. 
3. The Chairman noted that Airports play a signifi cant role in accelerating the urbanization, 
rapid transportation and overall economic growth of a country. An increase in air tra ffic demand 
in existing  airports and increase in level of urbanization has led to  increased demand for air 
connectivity, which has necessitated the need for development of more Airports. 

115 
 
4. The Chairman then asked the Ministry to brief the Committee about the existing 
Greenfield/Brownfield Airports currently operational in the country and the ones pending for 
approval and also the policies/regulations/acts proposed policy changes regarding the 
development of these airports.   He also desired to know the steps taken to ensure coordination 
and cooperation between State and Central Governme nts for the development of these airports. 
He enquired about the advantages and disadvantages of both Green field and Brownfield airports 
and the challenges faced by the Ministry in site -searching and the criteria for site selection/land 
acquisition regarding these airports. The Chairman asked the Ministry to apprise the Committee 
of the number of Greenfield/Brownfield airport projects which are facing delay due to legal 
issues. The Chairman also desired to know why some of the projects like Mopa Airport in Goa, 
Navi Mumbai International Airpor t in Maharashtra etc. have been  inordinately delayed by a 
decade or more, even after obtaining the in-principle approval. 
5. The Chairman, also asked the Airports Authority of India (AAI) to apprise the Committee 
of the number of operational Civil Enclaves in the country, the issues faced in land acquisition 
and obtaining working permission by IAF/Ministry of Defence to carry out 
construction/development activities, budgetary allocations and constraints, and coordination  
mechanisms employed by the AAI with the Ministry of Defence for developing and enhancing 
facilities in Civil Enclaves. He also asked the AAI to brief the Committee on the issue of delay in 
land acquisition for new airports, ‘Land Barter Matrix’ Formula an d how it can resolve the lan d-
related issues in development of Civil Enclaves. 
6. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, through his presentation, gave an overview of 
the Greenfield policy, 2008, development of Greenfield and Brownfi eld Airports and is sues 
pertaining to Civil Enclave in Defence Airports. The Secretary informed the Committee that 
Greenfield airports are basically new airports built on fresh , unencumbered land while 
Brownfield airports are already existing airports which are further devel oped as    per 
requirement. The Secretary further informed that b efore introduction of the Greenfi eld policy in 
2008, only 3 Greenfi eld Airports were in operation i.e. Cochin, Hyderabad and Bangalore 
International Airports. Post 2008, the Ministry has grant ed in -principle approval for 21 
Greenfield Airport projects of which 8 are operational and 9 are nearing completion while 4 have 
been granted in -principle approval but development is yet to start. The Secretary informed that 
the projects at Dabra in Madhya  Pradesh and Karaikal in Puducherry are sub -judice while the 
legal impediments in Bhogapuram, Andhra Pradesh have been cleared. There is not much 
progress in the Dagadarthi project in Andhra Pradesh. 

116 
 
7. The Secretary further informed the Committee that the re are 145 operational Airports in 
India (including water aerodromes and heliports) out of which 71 airports and 28 Civil Enclaves 
are operated by AAI, 9 are Joint Ventures under AAI, 6 are under Public Private Partnership, 22 
are under State Governments, 5 are Private airports, 2 are under Ministry of Defence and 2 Civil 
Enclaves are under State Government and Private Operator respectively. The Secretary also 
informed the Committee that the target of Ministry of Civil Aviation is to develop 220 airports 
(including aerodromes and heliports), by the end of Financial Year 2025. A budgetary allocation 
of Rs. 4500 crore has been provided under the RCS UDAN Infrastructure Scheme for a period of 
four years for this purpose and more than half of it has been spent. 
8. The Committee was also informed that Civil Enclaves are joint use airports where the air 
side is entirely controlled by the  Defence forces and the city side terminal is controlled by the 
AAI. There are 31 such Civil Enclaves in country an d development of infrastructure in them is 
undertaken by  IAF under Modernisation of Airfi eld Infrastructure  (MAFI) scheme.   The 
advantage of making Civil Enclaves is that the airports were already existing but the biggest 
challenge is sharing of land or making available  land for expansion of airport. Further, as these 
airports are controlled and managed by the defence services they have ‘watch hours’, which are 
the hours during which the airport is availab le for operations by Civilian fli ghts. The Ministry 
has however worked out a "Land Barter  Matrix" where land identifi ed by the AAI is assigned a 
value as per the local Circle Rate and the total cost of which is required to be paid by AAI to the 
defence services. Likewise, airports where defence services required land fro m the AAI are 
similarly mapped on this matrix. The Ministry has been able to successfully resolve some of the 
long pending issues on exchange of land and extension of watch hours for civilian flights. 
9. Thereafter, Members raised various querie s regarding  the status of 
Greenfield/Brownfield/Civil        Enclave    Airports    at    Bihta,    Darbhanga, Thanjavur, 
Sabrimala, Calicut, Nagpur, Kannur, Parandur, Kotkasim, Navi Mumbai, Jhalawar, Neemuch, 
Gaucher, Dehradun, Pantnagar, Dimapur,   Mopa,   Kaddapa, Begumpet etc. Issues   regarding 
Night Landing Facilities at airports, status of airports which exist but have no scheduled 
commercial operations, di fferent User Development Fees (UDF) at different Airports, ‘funnel 
policy’ etc. were also raised. 
10. The Members wanted to know about airstrip development scheme in the country to which 
Secretary replied that Rs. 4500 crores have been allocated which will be spent over a period of 
four years. Members also enquired a bout non -scheduled cargo fli ghts operations wh ich are 

117 
 
restricted to only 6 Indian cities presently. A Member pointed out that Kerala is a very good 
destination for Cargo flights and this restriction is having   a negative impact and desired that the 
Ministry may intervene on this issue. Dela y in completion of Sabarimala project was also 
affecting the interests of passengers. The issue of delay in land acquisition for Dimapur airpor t 
was also  a  grave issue.  A Member wanted to know about the  delay in development of the 
Dehradun and Pantnagar airports  and another Member commented on the impact of taxi and 
hotel lobbies on development of airports and also remarked that though 40 crores had been 
allotted for the development of the Jolly Grant Airport in 2003, due to faulty planning the new 
terminal recently built had not been connected to the old terminal.   Similarly, fourth runway has 
come up in Delhi at cost of about 1000 crores but is still lying unutilized.  
11. Commenting on the "UDAN" scheme, a Member pointed out tha t  3 helicopter services 
were to b e started in Uttarakhand but only 2 or 3 have been started and even these are not 
affordable for the middle clas s people.  A  Member expressed concern at the slow pace of 
development             of Greenfield airports and wished to know whether every district headquarters in 
the country would one day, have an airport, even a small one. He pointed out that by 
2025, India would still have only 25 0 airports compared to the approximately 20,000 airports in 
the USA. Another Member raised a query on the level of futuristic planning of Indian airports, 
whether the planning had been done for the next 20, 30 or 50 years.  
12. A Member pointed out the delay in providing simulator training of Pilots to nearly 62,000 
pilots waiting for it and desired to know of the action being taken by the Ministry in this regard. 
It was also suggested that pilot shortage in India, is caused due to the fact tha t a pilot having 
expertise can fl y only one  specific type of plane, while in other countries like USA, pilots are 
permitted to fly different types of planes. 
13. A Member stated that there are only around 200 chartered and private aircrafts in India, 
but even very small countries like UAE have 758 chartered/private aircrafts which may be due to 
the reason that a lot of formalities and permissions are required for operating private aircrafts in 
India. In this connection, the Chairman expressed concern that DGCA  takes more than 6 months 
to give clearance to new aircrafts in India and directed that in the next meeting, the DGCA may 
provide the Committee with data regarding the number  of applications received and clearances 
given by DGCA in the last 3 years. 
14. A Member inquired about the development of infra structure of Patna airport  for which 
just 20 kms from the airport nearly  2300 acres land is available. He wanted to know the action 

118 
 
taken if any on the limitations in Bagdogra and Dimapur airports and on the safety aspects of 
Patna and Jolly Grant airports both of which are critical airports in the country.   He also queried 
why Civil Enclaves are made even in places where there is huge demand for airports. He cited 
the example of Darbhanga airport which has been made a civil enclave despite huge demand for 
an airport and much inconve nience is caused to passengers   who are    forced to carry their bags 
to main road for about a kilometre, and Chandigarh airport where pilots are called to park their 
planes not through RT but by a hand waving.   He reiterated the need for night landing fac ilities 
at airports. The M ember also opined that Greenfield projects have far more advantages in every  
parameter as compared to other  investments in civil enclaves or brownfi eld projects. The 
argument that Greenfield projects require more time and money fo r creation was fallacious and 
sought to know the reasons why airports are not being proposed in some States even though the 
State Governments are willing to provide land for the same. He stated that as per Entry 29 in the 
Union List of the Seventh Schedule  of the Constitution of India, the construction, regulation and 
functioning of the airports within the country is the exclusive and sole responsibility of the 
Union of India. In 2014 however the policy was tweaked so that a State Government would have 
to provide land free of encumbrance and free of cost before an airport could be made in the State 
which, in effect, is against national interest. He contrasted the situation in aviation sector with the 
National Highways where the Central Government, by virtue of its right enshrined in the 
Constitution, notifies any road in the country to serve the national interest. The Member opined 
that a holistic, futuristic vision is lacking and tweaking policy retrospectively does not benefit 
either the individual tax paye r or the nation as a whole.   The Ministry should work at its Civil 
Aviation Policy to bring out the desired results.   
15. The Chairman specifically requested the Secr etary, Ministry of Civil Aviation to give 
clarification on each and every qu estion raised  by the Hon. Members with direction that no 
question should be left unanswered by the Ministry. He also requested to furnish written re plies 
to the questionnaire before the next meeting of the Committee on 25 th November, 2022 or to 
intimate in case it is not possible for the Ministry to respond. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
16.    A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
17. The meeting adjourned at 1:40 PM. 
New Delhi,                                                                                                    Swarabji B. 
16th November, 2022                                                                                           Director 

119 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022–23) 
IV 
FOURTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 25 th November, 2022 in the 
Committee Room-4, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri  V. Vijayasai Reddy                   -                Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
5. Shri A. A. Rahim 
6. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
7. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri Tapir Gao 
9. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
10. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
11. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
12. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
13. Shri Prince Raj 
14. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
15. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16. Shri Dushyant Singh 
17. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri M.C. Tiwari, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shri Rajendra Prasad Shukla, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
*     *   *   *   *  *  *1 
 
                                                           
1 Relates to other matters 

120 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
(The Committee re–assembled after lunch break) 
 
WITNESSES 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
1. Shri Rajiv Bansal, Secretary 
2. Shri Piyush Srivastava, Senior Economic Advisor 
3. Ms. Rubina Ali, Joint Secretary 
4. Shri Satyendra Kumar Mishra, Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Pramod Kumar Thakur, Deputy Director General 
 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) 
1. Shri Sanjeev Kumar, Chairman 
2. Shri A.K. Pathak, Member (Planning) 
3. Shri Anil Kumar Gupta, Executive Director(RCS) 
 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) 
1. Shri Arun Kumar, Director General 
 
Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India (AERA) 
1. Shri B.S. Bhullar, Chairperson 
 
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) 
1. Shri Zulfikar Hasan, Director General 
 
Aircrafts Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) 
1. Ms. Puja Singh Mandol, Director General 
 
Air India Assets Holding Limited 
1. Shri Vikram Dev Dutt, Chief Managing Director 
 
Pawan Hans Limited 
1. Shri Sanjeev Razdan, Chief Managing Director 
 
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi 
1. Shri Krishnendu Gupta, Director 
 
Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) 
 1. Shri Manoj Arora, Commissioner of Railway Safety (Central Circle) 
2. Shri Rajmal Khoiwal, Chief Signal and Telecom Engineer 
3. Shri Rajiv Kumar, Deputy CRS (G) 
  
22. The Chairman welcomed all the Members of the Committee; Shri Rajiv Bansal, 
Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA); Shri Sanjeev Kumar, Chairman, Airports 
Authority of India (AAI); Shri Arun Kumar, Director General Civil Aviation (DGCA); and  
other officials, to the afternoon session of the meeting. He informed that the Committee had  
heard the views of t he Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation on the subject ‘Development of  

121 
 
Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and Issues pertaining to Civil Enclaves in Defence 
Airports’ in its meeting held on 16 th November, 2022. From the deliberations in the said  
meeting, the Committee felt the need to further hear the views of the DGCA and other senior  
officers of the Ministry. 
 
23. The Chairman then asked the Ministry to brief the Committee about the roadmap of 
the Ministry in the near future and the coordination mechanis ms employed by the MoCA, 
AAI and DGCA to develop the projected target of 220 airports by year 2025. He further asked 
the MoCA, DGCA and AAI to put forth their views regarding various Greenfield/Brownfield  
airport projects facing inordinate delays and other issues which were pointed out by the 
Members in the earlier meeting. 
 
24. The Chairman asked the DGCA to brief the Committee about its functions and 
responsibilities handled by it in the Indian aviation sector with specific reference to the 
subject under examination. He also inquired about the reasons for the undue delay in the 
grant of  clearances to new aircraft for operating in the country, construction of the 
Greenfield/Brownfield airports/Civil Enclaves projects that have been delayed for more than  
five years due to site clearance, license process or in-principle approval by the DGCA 
and concerned agencies and whether any steps have been taken to tackle such delays. The 
Chairman also desired to know the reasons for delay/denial of clearance in cases where States 
are willing to allocate land for the construction of airports.  He also pointed out that replies to  
the questionnaires sent by a Member of the Committee and some questions sent by the 
Secretariat, have not been received and desired that the replies may be expedited. 
 
25. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, assured the Committee that the replies to 
the remaining questions would be sent shortly. He then shared with the Committee two recent 
important developments in the Indian aviation sector, the first being the recent inauguration 
of the Hollongi Airport in Arunachal Pradesh adjacent to Itanagar, its capital city,  by the 
Hon’ble Prime Minister and the second being the elimination of the necessity of filling up the 
Air Suvidha form, due to declining Covid cases, by international travelers to India which is 
believed to further facilitate the inward flow of international tourists.  Referring to the issues  
raised by the Committee in its earlier meeting and in the questionnaires, the Secretar y stated 
that the Heads of the attached offices of the Ministry would address the issues concerning 
their organizations. 

122 
 
 
26. The Chairman, Airports Authority of India (AAI) addressed the issues regarding 
operational airports, nigh-landing facilities, profitability of airports, use of renewable energy 
in airports etc. He informed that presently there are 134 operational airports out of which 119  
airports are carrying out scheduled operations and 15 airports are carrying out non -scheduled 
operations and the figure keeps changing slightly due to operational reasons.  Out of the 119  
airports, 28 are run on Visual Flight Rules (VFR) and 90 use Instrument Flight Rules (IFR)  
procedure. He further informed that there are 43 airports which have CAT -I facility, 16  
airports with CAT -II facility and 6 airports have CAT -III facility. The AAI is trying to 
convert many of  the VFR airports into IFR airports but the problem arises due to lack of 
space as most of the old VFR airports are in congested areas. As regards Night Landing 
Facility, the Committee was  informed that out of the 134 airports, 89 airports have Night 
Landing Facility and 45 airports, presently do not have this facility. For Night landing facility 
the airports needs to be an IFR  airport and sufficient  land should be available for lighting 
arrangement and the Ministry is in discussion with the State Governments to provide land for 
installation of said facility at airports which do not have it. He further added that AAI is in the 
process of procuring of 34 Instrument Landing System (ILS) from Russia. Informing the 
Committee of the profitability of  the airports, the representative of AAI informed that out of 
110 odd airports,  only 10 -15 airports are consistently making operational profits. On the 
issue of airstrips, the Ministry  informed that as per the records of DGCA, there are 452 
airstrips, including the airports  mentioned before, some of which are owned by the State 
Governments and Defence authorities while some of the airstrips are also owned by the 
private owners. The Ministry  further informed that wherever land becomes available and 
opportunity arises, efforts are being made to convert airstrips into proper airports. 
 
27. The Committee was further informed by the AAI that there are 17 Flying Trainin g 
Organisations (FTOs) which are operational and 9 FTOs have been approved on AAI land in  
phase-I and are on the verge of becoming operational within next 6-8 months. Thereafter, 
in the next phase, FTOs are going to be setup at 6 more airports. Regarding use of renewable 
energy, the AAI informed that efforts are being made to convert all its 100 odd airports for  
renewable energy by December, 2024, either installing by solar plant or by procuring renewal 
energy through the distribution companies. 
 
28. The Director General of Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) while 

123 
 
informing the Committee of the aviation safety aspects, stated that India is a signatory to the  
Chicago Convention, 1944 which has set the international standards for civil aviation and  is 
followed by 193 countries across the world. There are 11,000 safety standards in the said  
Convention and it is obligatory for all the signatory countries to follow those standards, 
failing which a country may be declared an “outlaw”. He further informe d that this had 
happened once in a limited way to India in 2013 but India has now got 70 per cent rating and 
is going up to  85% rating consequent to the recent successful audit of the International Civil 
Aviation Organisation (ICAO).  India is now comparabl e to the rating of New Zealand, 
Belgium etc, thus, which indicates the significant strides made by India in this regard. The 
Director-General then informed the Committee that the primary role of DGCA was to 
implement the ICAO  SARPS (Standards and Recommended Practices).  There are eight 
critical elements in safety  oversight, namely Primary Aviation Legislation, Specific 
Operating Regulations, State Systems, Qualified Technical Personnel, Technical Guidance 
Tools, Licensing Certification,  Authorisations and Approval Obligations, Surveillance 
Obligations and Resolution of Safety  Issue. The Committee was informed out of the eight 
parameters, there are issues only regarding insufficient number of Flight Operating Inspectors 
(FOIs) which are being looked into. As  regards the certification of an airport, the DGCA 
informed that the process is slightly time  consuming as all the 350 check points as per the 
ICAO document have to be certified. Similarly for aircrafts certification, there is a detailed 
procedure involving numerous parameters and manuals that has to be followed and it takes 
time to grant clearance to a new  aircraft. However, the Ministry has implemented the e-
Governance of Civil Aviation (eGCA) to reduce  human interface which has considerably 
reduced the delays. 
 
29. Thereafter, the Ministry informed the Committee that presently, in -principle approval 
has been given to 21 airports out of which 9 have already been operationalised and the 
Ministry is expediting the operationalisation of the remaining 12 airports. Issues regarding 
some Greenfield airports at Karaikal (Pondicherry); Dabra (Madhya Pradesh); Dagadarthi 
(Andhra Pradesh); Parandur (Tamil Nadu); and Kottayam (Kerala) were also discussed. In 
reply to a  specific query of the Chairman of the Committee regarding exchange of land 
between the Defence Authorities and the Ministry of Civil Aviation for Thanjavur Airport, 
the Ministry stated that a Board of Officers comprising of both AAI and Indian Air Force 
(IAF) Officers, has been constituted to carry out survey, physical demarcation etc. and 
thereafter, the exchange of land will take place. 

124 
 
 
30. A Member stated that development of airports which are further away from the State  
capitals should be given more preference and specifically raised the issue of Kota and 
Jhalawar in Rajasthan. He also desired to know about funnels in various airports. Another 
Member pointed out that the Ministry had not given any reply to the query of the Chairman 
in the last meeting as to the time taken for the certification process and data on the number of 
aircrafts cleared in the last three years. He also pointed that some Air Operator Permits 
(AOPs) have been delayed by over a year causing inconvenience to the aircraft owners. The 
Member also  enquired about how much time it takes for aircraft clearance process in the 
USA and whether the same rules can be followed here as well to reduce the clearance time as 
both the countries  are parties to the Chicago Convention. The Member also raised issues 
regarding “type certification” for the  aircrafts brought into  the country  and enquired  as to 
what the DGCA is doing about it. Director General, DGCA informed about the various types 
of induction of  aircrafts and the time taken to certify them.  He explained that the delay 
generally takes place  when a new type of aircraft is being inducted, for which a Flight 
Operating Inspector (FOI) is has to be trained for the ‘safety oversight’ of that particular type 
of aircraft and since DGCA is  governed by global norms,  shortcuts are not possible. The 
Member also raised the issue of  training pilots to fly two -three types of aircrafts as is 
admissible in other countries. A Member  raised the issue of non -operational airport at 
Nanded (Maharashtra) and desired to know the reasons for it. 
 
31. A Member also requested the DGCA to look into the issues like Flight Duty Time  
Limitation (FDTL) and other norms and allow relaxation of rules for hours of flying of 
aircrafts. In reply, DGCA stated that they are thinking of bringing some relaxation of flying  
hours in general aviation and for this, a time consuming study has to be done keeping in mind 
the global standards. Another Member raised the issue of (eGCA) e -Governance of Civil  
Aviation and enquired about its smooth functioning , especially as regards licensing where 
there are undue delays. 
 
32. A Member expressed concerns about airports which have been constructed but 
no commercial scheduled flights are operating there. He raised the issue of Gondia Airport 
(Maharashtra) which was constructed in 2008 and flight operations were started only in 2022  
but due to lack of Night Landing Facility, operations have been discontinued and desired to  
know when the said facility will be installed. He further stated that there are 25 -30 airports in 

125 
 
the country which do not have commercial flight operations which indicates the lack of 
planning, faulty Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) and market surveys, on part of the Ministry. 
The DGCA clarified that the airports are generally constructed based on future requirements 
and growth and not based on current requirements. Hence, in some cases, commercial flight  
operations may start from day one, while in some other cases, flights may start but may be  
stopped due to operational reasons and restarted aga in after there is growth in demand for 
such flights. The Member suggested that airports should be futuristically planned based on 
latest technology, so that  the requirement  of frequent  expansions does  not arise and 
specifically raised the issue of expansion of Navi Mumbai airport where expansion has 
been planned for the fourth time. Another Member agreed that that the Ministry was making 
policies in bits and pieces instead of planning ahead for a substantial period of time. 
 
33. A Member while congratulating the Ministry for the inauguration of the Donyi Polo  
Airport at Hollongi (Arunachal Pradesh) and start of Ziro -Dibrugarh-Pasighat sector, desired 
that flight operations of seven Advanced Landing Grounds (ALGs) in Arunachal, which are  
defunct, may be made operational soon.  He also highlighted the requirement of an airport 
with Cargo facility in upper Assam at Dibrugarh, so that fruits and horticulture produce can 
be transported across the country from the North -Eastern States. The Chairman of t he 
Committee also asked the Ministry to check the feasibility of operationalization of Mechuka 
and Tuting  airports in view of National security as both the ALGs are close to the 
international border. Another Member requested for consideration of construction of an ALG 
at Mon district (Nagaland) and also raised the issue of the existing airport at Dimapur 
(Nagaland) which  required urgent expansion and increase  in number of flights  keeping in 
view the present demand. The AAI stated that the Ministry has been engaging with the State 
Government for  provision of land for expansion of the runway at Dimapur and facilitate 
landing of bigger aircraft. 
 
34. A Member pointed out that under the Seventh Schedule of Constitution of India,  land 
for construction of airports , inter-alia, is the prerogative of the Central Government in 
addition to the provision for national connectivity; whereas the State Government is only 
required to facilitate the process of acquiring the land under the Land Acquisition Act.  He 
criticized the flaw in the National Civil Aviation Policy (NCAP), 2016 which as per para 13 
(a) (iii) requires  the States to provide the land free of cost and free from all encumbrances 
without treating it as equity, before AAI takes up new airport projects. He queried the 

126 
 
rationale behind this rule which requires States to give land for airports when the same would 
not be treated  as equity  and also wanted to know why the nation’s priorities and 
infrastructure essential for a state  should be dismissed because of a flaw in the government 
policy. Giving the example of the  requirement of airport in Mon district as stated  by another 
Member, he queried that, in the event the State government does not take any action, why 
the Central Government could not exercise its authority and prepare a feasibilit y report on an 
airport in Mon, especially when  AAI would not be investing but would be  advertising for 
investing partners. The Member also  pointed out that as per  Para 5.1 of the ‘Guidelines for 
Setting up of Greenfield Airp orts’, 2008 land for such airports would have to be provided by 
the Airports Authority of India.  Thus the 2008 guidelines contradicts the NCAP, 2016 with 
regard to acquiring land for airports yet the  2008 guidelines  was reproduced again in 
December, 2016, the year the NCAP was brought out  and is on the website of the Ministry 
and quoted in all their documents.  There is however no  clarity on when this provision was 
changed and the contradiction still exists.  The Member decried that due to such flaws, states 
like Bihar do not have a Greenfield project till now, since  the Ministry keeps vacillating 
under the contradictory provisions. The Member also expressed that the Ministry of Law and 
Justice should be called before the Committee to explain the  Constitutional provisions as to 
the AAI as an entity, the Union List and the responsibility of the  GOI and how such changes 
can be made under the Constitutional provisions.  In this context,  the Chairman also desired 
the Ministry of Law and Justice may be called to seek an explanation on the applicability of 
the guidelines and the policy, vis-à-vis the Constitutional obligation as it is not a Concurrent 
Subject but a Subject under the Union List. 
 
35. A Member pointed out that the Ministry had not given any reply to the issue 
regarding the ‘Point of Call’ status to Kannur International airport (Kerala) that he had 
raised in the earlier meeting and letters to the Ministry and further suggested that it would be 
convenient for  Haj pilgrims to have an Embarkation  Point at the Kannur airport. He also 
raised the issue of  establishment of Aviation Training Academies and initiating Aircraft 
Maintenance Courses in  the State of Kerala. The Chairman reiterated that the Ministry 
may look into the issue of making Mechuka and Tuting airports operational as Civilian 
terminal has been approved at  these airports by the Ministry. Another Member also enquired 
as to whether after the operationalization of the new Mopa Airport (Goa), the Goa 
International Airport will continue  to exist, to which the  AAI clarified that both  the airports 
will remain functional. 

127 
 
 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
36. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
37. The meeting adjourned at 5:04 PM. 
 
 
New Delhi,       Swarabji B. 
25th November, 2022     Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022–23) 

128 
 
V 
FIFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 03:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 15 th December, 2022 in the 
Committee Room-4, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri  V.Vijayasai Reddy                   -                Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
3. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
4. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
5. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
6. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
7. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
8. Shri A. A.Rahim 
9. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Ram Margani Bharat 
12. Shri Tapir Gao 
13. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
14. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
15. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
16. Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
17. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
18. Shri Prince Raj 
19. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
20. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
21. Shri Dushyant Singh 
22. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
23. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
24.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
25. Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav "Nirahua"  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Arun Sharma, Joint Secretary 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary 
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
  At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee.  He informed them of the agenda for the meeting i.e.,  

129 
 
 
(i) *      *        *       *       * 
 
(ii) to hear the Chairman, Association of Private Airport Operators (APAO) and the Chief 
Executive Officer, Delhi International Airport Limited (DIAL) on the subject ‘Development of 
Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and Issues pertaining to Civil Enclave s in Defence 
Airports.’ 
  
2. *      *      *     *      *2 
 
(After the four draft Reports have been considered and adopted) 
 
Witnesses: - 
Delhi International Airport Limited (DIAL): 
i. Shri K. Narayana Rao, Group Deputy Managing Director, Grandhi Mallikarjuna Rao 
(GMR) Group; 
ii. Shri Shyam Sunder, Deputy Chief Executive Officer; and 
iii. Shri Kartik Sood, Vice President (Strategic Planning) 
  
 
Association of Private Airports Operators (APAO): 
i. Shri Jeet Adani, Chairman APAO & Director, Adani Airports; and 
ii. Shri Satyan Nayar, Secretary General, APAO 
 
4. The Chairman welcomed the senior officers of the GMR Group, DIAL, and APAO to the 
meeting and informed them that the Committee had heard the views of the Secretary, Ministry 
of Civil Aviation (MoCA), Chairman, Airports Authority of India (AAI), and Director General, 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) on the subject ‘Development of Greenfield, and 
Brownfield Airports and Issues pertaining to Civil Enclaves in Defence Air ports’ in its earlier 
meetings held on 16th and 25th November, 2022 and now by engaging with the stakeholders, 
whose agreement is a vital element in construction of airports,   hoped to get valuable 
suggestions and inputs on the challenges faced by them.   The Chairman asked the 
representatives of DIAL and APAO to share their suggestions on the existing rules/regulations 
and policies pertaining to the development of Greenfield/Brownfield airports in the country, the 
                                                           
2  Relates to other matters 

130 
 
bottlenecks faced by them, key challenges f aced in conducting various airport operations, 
administering the availability of finances and obtaining clearances especially regarding Public 
Private Partnership (PPP) mode of operations of the airports, problems of capacity saturation of 
airports and the need for long-term planning, lacunae existing in various processes of the Indian 
Civil Aviation Sector, viz., documentation, financing, taxation, technical aspects, sub -
agreements or contracts, internal and external interfaces, etc., and suggest possible solutions and 
improvements required in Concessionaire Agreements. 
 
5. Thereafter, the Chairman queried about the coordination mechanisms employed 
by  DIAL and APAO with various government agencies, such as, AAI, DGCA, Airports 
Economic Regulatory Authority (A ERA), Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) etc. and 
other private aviation stakeholders to resolve issues related to security and maintenance of 
aviation standards, crowd control, airports security checks, aeronautical tariffs, development fee, 
and carrying out various operations in Greenfield/Brownfield airports across the country. The 
Chairman also asked the representatives of APAO to put forth their views on the levying of 
‘Facilitation Fee’ by authorized travel agents on air ticket booking on govern ment accounts. The 
Members of the Committee also desired to hear the views of other Private Airport Operators 
especially Kochi, Bengaluru and Kannur Airports and also expressed that in future, the Heads of 
the organisations should appear before the Committee for interactions.  
 
6. The GMR Group representing the DIAL, through its presentation, informed the 
Committee of   its experience in airport operations, with two existing airports in India being 
operated by them, viz.   Brownfield airport in Delhi   and Greenfield airport in Hyderabad and a 
third airport, the newly inaugurated Greenfield airport in MoPA, Goa to be operationalized next 
month as well as a proposed   Brownfield airport in Nagpur and a Greenfield airport in 
Bhogapuram (Visakhapatnam). Outside India, the Group  operates a Greenfield airport in Cebu, 
Philippines and a Brownfield airport at Medan, Indonesia apart from developing a Greenfield 
airport in Greece, which will be ready in the next three years. 
 
7. Elaborating on the difficulties faced by private operators, the representatives of the GMR 
Group informed the Committee that timely resolution of tariff issues was a major problem and 
took as much as six years even though the appellate mechanism in the AERA Act stipulates that 
disputes are to be settle d within 90 days.    The reason is that such issues are settled by the 
Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal (TDSAT) which also has jurisdiction over 

131 
 
telecom disputes and cyber issues and   is unable to allot sufficient time to airports.   A separate 
appellate tribunal meant for airports or a dedicated bench with the TDSAT may solve this 
problem.  The second issue was lack of provision of long -term financing by the Indian banks to 
airport infrastructure projects which have long gestation periods.   Comparing the gestation 
period of 50 years for the DMRC at   low interest rates, it was suggested that participation of 
Pension Funds, Development Finance Institutions, Insurance companies such as Life Insurance 
Corporation of India (LIC), etc. be allowed/ facilitated to provide long -term financing at 
competitive rates of 8-10 percent to the Indian airport sector.   
 
8. On the issue of improvement of terminal infrastructure, it was suggested that allowing a 
common security area for both arrival and departure would achieve optimum utilization of assets 
with lower capital cost while reducing airport challenges for passenger s. The representative also 
highlighted the requirement of planning of infrastructural projects outside the airports, citing the 
problem of water logging at Delhi International Airport due to drainage issues on the roads 
outside the airport. Comparing the c argo handling of India and Hong Kong, the representative 
asserted that transshipment should be allowed to enable India to become a Cargo Hub. He also 
raised the issue of allowing Input Tax Credit on civil construction, arguing that it would enable 
airport charges to decrease as 70 percent of airport construction is civil cost.    It was also 
suggested that Credit facility on the Emergency Credit system should be extended for   the entire 
aviation sector including all the allied adjacent businesses.  
8. Regarding the comparative advantages and disadvantages of Greenfield and Brownfield 
airports, the Committee was informed that Greenfield airports, having the advantage of hassle -
free development due to lack of o bstructions and security hassle s but the risk of litig ation and 
time taken in R&R system is higher as compared to Brownfield airports.   Regarding suggestions 
on amendments to existing legislations, the representative opined that the regulatory mechanism 
of the AERA Act, should be made more attractive and a se parate Act for PPP projects should be 
made as more development in future is to be through PPP routes.   Easing the process for land 
acquisition and environmental clearances in construction of airports, enhancing Duty -Free 
allowance  as a passenger-friendly measure, bringing out a legislation to curb/address the stray -
dog menace around the airport peripheries, etc were also suggested.   
 
9. The Committee was also informed about the security concern caused by the 
encroachment of defence land located near the Delh i International Airport. The Committee was 

132 
 
further informed that freedom should be given for movement of civilian aircraft   in order to 
avoid detouring and wastage of Air Turbine Fuel (ATF).   
 
10. Regarding the query of the Chairman on implementati on of Conce ssionaire Agreement, 
it was opined there should be an enabling provision for need -based consequences and the 
agreement should be amended wherever the requirement arises. Regarding another query of the 
Chairman on the coordination mechanisms employed by the Group with various Government 
Departments, the Committee was informed that the Group had to deal with 55 agencies of both 
the Central and State Governments but is getting a lot of support from them.  
 
11. The Chairman observed that the problem of capacity saturation at airports is a major 
issue and asked the GMR Group the reason the problem had not been envisioned 
beforehand.  The Committee was   informed  that the existing capacity of Delhi airport is 70 
million and a master plan was devised in 2019 to increase it to 109 million by 2023.   The 
Committee was informed that steps have been taken to minimize congestion at airports viz. 
increasing X -ray screening points from 13 to 17, employing additional staff for queue 
management, enhancing communication inside airports, employing ‘on e-passenger-one-
handbag’ policy, installing artificial intelligence (AI) -based waiting time display systems and 
communicating with various airlines to reduce peaks -hour operations, etc and a significant 
reduction in waiting time was already being seen.  
 
12. The representatives of APAO also informed that the shortage of manpower in CISF, the 
Immigration and the Air Traffic Controllers has also been hampering the airport operations for 
the last couple of years and causing airport congestion. All three being rese rved activities of the 
Government, the staff has to be provided by the Government but there were no service level 
agreements for CISF and Immigration staff.   Upon query by the Chairman, the Committee was 
further informed that presently, Rs 200/ - is being charged per domestic passenger as Aviation 
Security Fee (ASF) which goes into the National Aviation Security Fee Trust. This amount is 
later distributed equally to all the airports by AAI. This mechanism was devised to distribute 
funds equally as smaller a irports in India having less passenger traffic were not getting enough 
funds. However, in bigger Airports where more CISF staff is required due to more passenger 
traffic, there is always a shortage of such funds and this also results in congestion due to l ack of 
security personnel.  A Member pointed out that the Government has abolished 3000 CISF posts 

133 
 
as technology had made them redundant. The Chairman asked that a more detailed note may be 
given on this issue for study by the Committee.  
 
13. The Committee ex pressed concern at the issue of congestion at Delhi International 
Airport and the inability of the airport operators to handle this situation. A Member pointed out 
that Airports are bound by the Operation, Management & Development Agreement (OMDA), 
Schedule III of which states that 95% of the passengers have to be cleared through checking -in 
within 10 minutes. However, most of the passengers spend much more than 10 minutes time. He 
also stated that as per the Schedule IX of the said Agreement, there is a pe nalty clause of 1.5% 
of the monthly revenue and enquired whether the DIAL has been penalized yet under the 
Schedule IX.   The Committee also desired that the possibility of installation of full body 
scanners at all major airports may be explored for faster clearance of passengers. 
 
14. The Chairman also pointed out that all the passengers are made to pass through the 
commercial shopping complexes at airports and many Members were of the opinion that, even 
allowing for the Revenue Model, provision of essential fa cilities to passengers should be the 
focus rather than shopping areas.   The representative submitted that due to the OMDA 
requirement that 90 percent of all flights are to be done through the boarding gates, two long 
tiers had to be built whose approach i s through the retail area.   The Committee also raised 
various other issues such as security staff shortage, longer travel distance between aerobridge 
and flight which causes inconvenience to air passengers, longer waiting hours/reporting time 
before flight boarding, lack of business class in domestic flights from Thiruvananthapuram to 
Delhi, issue of display boards, provision of a separate entry gate for frequent flyers, provision of 
facilities to pregnant women inside airports, buggy facilities for senior citizens and pregnant 
women, implementation of hub & spoke and multimodal airport policies to boost the revenue in 
Indian aviation sector, training security staff in passenger etiquette and gender sensitization, 
provision of free drinking water at airports , lack of coordination between private airport 
operators and airlines, implementing innovative technologies to ease security checks for 
disabled and pregnant passengers, opening multiple entry points for passengers, levying of 
service charges, parking char ges for visitors, User Development Fee by the private airport 
operators, speedy forest clearance for airports, lack of facilities for handicapped passengers, 
tackling the stray dog menace at airports etc.  
 

134 
 
15. The Committee pointed out the lack of future plan ning at major airports to deal with 
increased passenger traffic. A Member pointed out that DIAL has a capacity of around 70 
million passengers at present and plans to increase its capacity to 110 million passengers in near 
future by enhancing the peak capacity of slots by virtue of bays and remote bays and parking but 
enhancing the capacity for passengers was not part of the plan.   He demonstrated that 
when passenger traffic increases, the entry points for terminals have to be increased. However, 
instead the Group is talking about increasing the number of slots and flights but not the entry 
points for terminals as a result of which the total congestion would remain. He contended that if 
there is congestion in T-3, it would have to be split into three entries . He recommended creating 
an arm on the right side of Terminal -3 as T -3A,T-3B and T -3C which would increase the 
number of terminals.  The Group representative admitted that the concept of the arm was a novel 
concept that would be definitely studied by the organisation.  The Member also commented on 
the issues of shortage of CISF staff raised by the Group, pointing out that the Government has 
flexible management of core areas to be given to security and non -core areas but the 
organisation had not addressed the same.  He also remarked that the organisation had talked only 
about business principles whereas the Committee had the larger vision in mind and wanted to 
hear about the challenges faced by operators in order to understand all the issues. The Chairman 
directed that all the issues raised by the Hon'ble Members may be addressed.  
 
16. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
 
17. The meeting adjourned at 5:12 PM. 
 
New Delhi,                                                                              Swarabji B.  
15th December, 2022                                                                                                   Director 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 

135 
 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
  
 The    Committee    met    at    3:00    P.M.    on    Thursday,   the    5th January, 2023 
in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy             -             Chairman   
RAJYA SABHA  
2. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
3.  Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA 
18. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
19. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
20. Shri S. S. Palanimanickam 
21. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
22. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
23. Shri Prince Raj 
24. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
25. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
27. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
28. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary  
  
 
Witnesses  
Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law and Justice) 
Shri Niten Chandra, Secretary 
     (Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure)  
(After the witnesses of Department of Legal Affairs took their seats) 
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the witnesses who were 
present. The Chairman informed that the purpose of today’s meeting is to hear the views of 
Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice on the subject ‘ Development of 
Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and Issues Pertaining to Civil Enclaves in  Defence 
Airports’. He desired the views of the Secretary, D/o Legal Affairs on the following issues:-  

136 
 
 whether the development of Airports, falling under Entry 29 in the Union List of the 
Constitution, is solely under the purview of the Central Government  and if so, the 
constitutional legality of the provisions at para 13(a)(iii) of the National Civil Aviation 
Policy, 2016 which requires land to be provided free of cost and free from all 
encumbrances by State Government without treating it as equity. 
 whether the M/o Civil Aviation’s 2008 Guidelines for setting up of Greenfield Airports, 
which have contradictory provisions regarding land acquisition, have been completely 
superseded by the National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016. 
 whether the Central Government has the power to ask the State Government to give land 
free of cost, free from encumbrances for a project that the Central Government would like 
to execute. 
3. The Secretary, D epartment of  Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice informed 
that:-  
 as per the Allocation of Business rule , the role of Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry 
of Law and Justice is restricted to interpretation of law. 
 development of airports falls in the exclusive  and sole  jurisdiction of the Central 
Government, being a part of the Item No.29 of the Union List as per the Seventh 
Schedule of the Indian Constitution. 
 the National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 is intra-vires of the Constitution. 
 the National Civil Aviation Polic y (NCAP), 2016 clearly states that ‘the existing sub -
sectoral policies, if any, will automatically stand amended and modified to the extent of 
provisions contained in this National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 with effect from the date 
of approval of this Policy’. 
 it is within the scope of the Parliament/Ministry  to decide upon a provision in the A ct on 
a subject which is within the purview of the Union List. 
4. A Member raised the issue of AAI having the responsibility of providing the land 
through the Guidelines issued in 2008 which were re -published in December, 2016 , thus 
contradicting the National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016. The Secretary, Dep artment of Legal 
Affairs submitted that these are executive instructions which the Ministry of Civil Aviation 
has made, which is within the mandate of the concerned Ministry. 
5. The Committee desired to hear both the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the 
Department of Legal Affairs together, in its next meeting , to seek further clarifications on the 
issue.  
 *    *       *      *3 
                                                           
3 Relates to other matters 

137 
 
 New Delhi,                                                                                                          Swarabji B. 
5th January, 2023                                                                                                     Director  

138 
 
Annexure 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
5th January, 2023 
3:00 P.M. 
Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law and Justice) 
(i) Shri Niten Chandra, Secretary 
(ii) Dr. Anju Rathi Rana, Additional secretary 
(iii) Shri Surendra Kumar, Assistant Legal Advisor 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

139 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM 
& CULTURE (2022-23) 
VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
  
The    Committee    met    at    11:00    A.M.    on    Friday,   the    6th January, 2023 
in Main Committee Room, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
2. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy             -             Chairman   
RAJYA SABHA  
  
3. Shri Manas Ranjan Mangaraj 
4. Shrimati Rajani Ashokrao Patil 
      4.   Shri A. A. Rahim  
      5.   Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
LOK SABHA 
29. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
30. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
31. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
32. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
33. Shri Prince Raj 
34. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary  
  
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Defence 
Shrimati Nivedita Shukla Verma, Special Secretary 
Ministry of Home Affairs 
Shri Mritunjay Kumar Narayan, Additional Secretary (P-II) 
Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) 
Shri Sheel Vardhan Singh, Director General 
     (Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure)  
 
 

140 
 
(After the officers of Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Defence and CISF took 
their respective seats) 
 
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the witnesses who were 
present. The Chairman informed that the purpose of today’s meeting is to hear the views of 
Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Home Affairs and Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) on 
the subject ‘ Development of Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and Issues Pertaining to Civil 
Enclaves in Defence Airports’. The Chairman asked the representatives of the Ministries to share 
their views and valuable suggestions on the existing rules/reg ulations and policies pertaining to 
the development of Greenfield/Brownfield airports in the country and the bottlenecks faced 
therein with specific reference to their Ministries. He queried the Ministry of Defence about:- 
 the issues relating to the grant of permissions for the upgradation/ expansion of Civil 
Enclaves in Defence Airports and the availability of land for the purpose. 
 the existing mechanism for coordination with the Ministry of Civil Aviation to 
resolve the pending issues. 
 the applicability of ‘Barter Matrix Formula’ for solving issues pertaining to land for 
Civil Enclaves.  
He asked the representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs and Director General, CISF to 
brief the Committee about:-  
 the present mechanism for assessment and posting of security personnel at various 
airports across the country. 
 the steps being taken to address the shortage of security personnel at various airports.  
 the collection and distribution of Aviation Security Fee among the airports.. 
18. Special Secretary, Ministry of Defence (MoD) informed the Committee that:-  
 the Department of Defence is mandated with the task of managing all issues relating to 
Defence land. 
 the Department of Military Affairs is responsible for operational issues including requisite 
support to civil operations at Defence airports . 
19. Joint Secretary  (Lands), Department of Defence  (MoD), through his presentation on the 
subject, informed the Committee that:- 
 the transfer of defence land to the Central  Government/ State Government s/ Autonomous 
Bodies/ Organizations controlled by the Government/  local bodies , for various public 
infrastructure projects, including for development of airports, is regulated by a Ministry of 
Defence policy of the year 2016. 
 working permission has been issued for 35 airport development projects since 1 st January, 
2020 while 4 applications are pending. 

141 
 
 a Land Barter Matrix (LBM) between Air Force and Airports Authority of India (AAI) has 
been approved by the Ministry on 2 nd September, 2022 to ease the process of granting 
working permission. 
20. Joint Secretary, Department of Military Affairs ( Ministry of Defence ) informed the 
Committee that:- 
 128 routes have been cleared and 1 request for a route is being progressed by the IAF at 
present. 
 two Airspace Management Coordination Cells have been set up to resolve quick handover of 
the air space to the civil operators. 
 civil aircraft operations are permitted during the watch hours for the Air Force. 
 out of the total 39 Joint User Aerodromes, 26 airfields have been successfully modernized 
under Modernisation of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI) project  while work is under progress 
at 10 airfields.  
21. The Special Secretary, MoD informed the Committee that there is no contradiction between 
the National Civil Aviation Policy (NCAP) 2016 and MoD land policy as the provision of 
NCAP, 2016 is an arrangement between Ministry of Civil Aviation/ AAI and State Government, 
while the MoD policy is an arrangement of th e MoD with the Central/ State Government/ any 
Government body that requests defence land for public infrastructure projects.  
22.   Director General, Central Industrial Security Force (CISF), through his powerpoint 
presentation, informed the Committee that:- 
 CISF is securing 66 airports across the country, including 23 hypersensitive airports, 38 
sensitive airports and 5 normal airports. 
 about 10 lakh passengers  and 18 lakh baggages  go through CISF security at the airports 
every day. 
 CISF has increased the number of security lines at Delhi airport from 13 to 18, besides 3 
security lines which are being run on need basis. 
 Since 1st July, 2019, CoD of CISF is centrally paid by National Aviation Security Fees Trust 
(NASFT), which has been created by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
 as on 30th November, 2022, outstanding dues of CoD of CISF is Rs. 4707.76 crores. 
 more than 3,000 CISF posts were abolish ed on the basis that the duties at airports were 
divided into core duties and non -core duties, where non -core duties can be given to Private 
Security Agencies (PSAs). 
 There is need for standardization of PSAs in terms of their professional skills. 
 misbehavior by CISF personnel is not tolerated and soft skill training is given to the 
personnel. 
23. Members raised various queries regarding:-  
 delay in transfer of defence land to AAI in Thanjavur, 

142 
 
 utilization of old Cochin airport after 1998, 
 incidents of misbehavior of CISF personnel towards passengers, 
 need for training of CISF personnel in English and regional language, 
 providing stainless steel cutlery during flight even though nail cutters are not allowed, 
 issue of congestion at major airports, and 
 involvement of CISF during the planning stage for Greenfield airports, etc.  
9. The representatives of Ministry of Defence, Ministry of Home Affairs and CISF 
responded to some of the queries raised by the Members and took note of the suggestions made 
by the Members. 
10. The Chairman directed that written replies to the points which had not been answered 
may be sent within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
11. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
12. The meeting adjourned at 1:01 PM. 
 
New Delhi,                                                                                                               Swarabji B. 
6th January, 2023                                                                                                            Director 
  

143 
 
Annexure 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
6th January, 2023 
 
Ministry of Defence 
1. Shrimati Nivedita Shukla Verma            Special Secretary 
2. Air Marshal R. K. Anand                        Director General (Admin) 
3. Lt. General Adosh Kumar                        Director General (Lands Works & Environment) 
4. Shri Rakesh Mittal                                    Joint Secretary, Department of Defence 
5. AVM Hardeep Bains                                Joint Secretary, Department of Military Affairs 
6. AVM P.V. Shivanand                              Assistant Chief of the Air Staff (ACAS) Ops (AD) 
7. RAdm Janak Bevli                                   Assistant Chief of Naval Staff  (ACNS) (Air) 
8. Ms. Meena B. Sharma                              SADG, Directorate General Defence Estates 
9. Shri Valeti Premchand                             ADG, Directorate General Defence Estates 
 
 Ministry of Home Affairs 
1. Shri Mritunjay Kumar Narayan               Additional Secretary (P-II) 
Central Industrial Security Force (CISF) 
 
1. Shri Sheel Vardhan Singh                       Director General 
2. Shrimati Nina Singh                                 Additional Director General (Headquarters) 
3. Shri Vijay Prakash                                  Inspector General (APS-1) 
4. Dr. Anil Pandey                                      Deputy Inspector General (Ops) 
5. Shri S. K. Raghuwanshi                         Assistant Inspector General (Tech) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

144 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM 
& CULTURE (2022-23) 
IX 
NINTH MEETING 
  
The    Committee    met    at    3:00  P.M.    on    Monday,   the    30th January, 2023 
in Committee Room ‘4’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
5. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy             -             Chairman   
Rajya Sabha 
 
6. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
7. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
8. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
9. Shri A. A. Rahim 
10. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11. Shri Tapir Gao  
12.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
13.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
14.  Shri S. S.Palanimanickam  
15.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
16.  Shri Prince Raj 
17.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
18.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
19.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary  
  
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
Shri Arun Kumar, Director General, Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
Department of Legal Affairs (Ministry of Law & Justice) 
Dr. Niten Chandra, Law Secretary 
     (Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure)  

145 
 
 
 
(After the officers of Ministry of Civil Aviation and Department of Legal Affairs took 
their respective seats) 
 
2. The Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee and the witnesses who were 
present. The Chairman informed that the agenda of the meeting was to seek certain clarifications 
on the subject  ‘Development of Greenfield and Brownf ield Airports and Issues Pertaining to 
Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports ’ from the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Department of 
Legal Affairs, in pursuance of the examination of the subject by the Committee . The Chairman 
asked the representatives of the M inistry and the Department  to inform whether the Central 
Government has the powers to ask the State Governments to provide land free of cost for 
development of airports, which is the constitutional obligation of the Central Government. He 
highlighted the contradictory requested them to apprise the Committee about the republishing of 
the 2008 Guidelines for setting up of Greenfield Airports in December, 2016, after the National 
Civil Aviation Policy (NCAP) of 2016 came into existence.  He further sought to be apprised of 
any instances wherein land has been provided by Airports Authority of India (AAI) since the 
introduction of NCAP 2016.  The Committee desired to know the rationale behind mandating 
State Governments to provide land for development of airports free of cost without any equity. 
24. DG, DGCA informed the Committee that land for development of airports is not being 
provided by the State Governments  in all cases . He highlighted the examples of  Cochin and 
Sabarimala airports which have bee n developed by crowdsourcing of funds while Pakyong 
airport is completely funded by the Central Government. On a query of the Committee regarding 
whether State Governments can be forced to provide land for development of airports, he 
informed that the idea is to pool resources and that NCAP is an executive order suggestive in 
nature, which nudges the State Governments to provide the land for development of airports. He 
confirmed that the NCAP is not binding on the State Governments.  
25. A Member of the Committee highlighted various provisions of the Airports Authority of 
India Act, 1994 and 2008 Guidelines for setting up of Greenfield Airports and stated that the 
2016 NCAP is in contravention of the Act and the Union List of the Constitution . In response to 
a query of the Committee, Law Secretary, Department of Legal Affairs informed the Committee 
that 2016 NCAP is legal and valid as per the provisions of the AAI Act and the Constitution. 
The Law Secretary was of the view that the law may need improvements. 

146 
 
5. Joint Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation informed the Committee that the Ministry had 
consulted the Ministry of Law and Justice, Ministry of Finance and NITI Aayog before  
finalizing the NCAP. The Committee decided that the views / comments of the said Ministries  
and NITI Aayog on the subject and the NCAP issue, may be heard at a later date. 
6. On a query of the Chairman, DG, DGCA informed the Committee that airlines have been 
empowered to deal with unruly passengers and that  Tokyo Convention regulates misbehavior of 
passengers and that  there is a provision for penalizing the airlines in case of non -reporting of 
such incidents.  He stated that action is initiated under the Indian Penal Code (IPC) where 
applicable and that 143 persons have been  placed in the restricted list so far.  The Committee 
suggested that special Airline Wing should be formed for dealing with police and courts in cases 
of unruly passengers  since the pilot and crew members have to attend the court at present for 
prosecuting the unruly passenger.  
7. Members raised various queries regarding lack of airports in Bihar, issues relating to land 
and night landing at Bagdogra Airport, delays in civilian flights at civil enclaves due to Defence 
activities, need for futuristic plannin g for development of airports, plan to decongest airports, 
improving metro connectivity to airports, tackling the increasing number of incidents of 
misbehavior by passengers in flights, scope for development of heliport facility at Varanasi, 
absence of direct flight from Delhi to Itanagar especially in view of the G20 Summit, exorbitant 
pricing of tickets especially from/to North-East States, development of airports at Kota -Jhalawar 
in Rajasthan, status of development of Sabarimala Airport, no more Advanced  Landing Grounds 
(ALGs) in Arunachal Pradesh, extension of runway at Dibrugarh and Dimapur Airports, need for 
installation of Instrument Landing System (ILS) at Pasighat Airport, etc. 
8. The representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation and Department of Legal Affairs  
responded to some of the queries raised by the Members and took note of the suggestions made 
by the Members. 
9. The Chairman directed that written replies to the points which had not been answered 
may be sent within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
10. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
11. The meeting adjourned at 5:22 PM. 

147 
 
 
New Delhi,                                                                                                               Swarabji B. 
30thJanuary, 2023                                                                                                           Director 
  

148 
 
Annexure 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
3:00 P.M. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Arun Kumar Director General, Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
2. Shri Zulfiquar Hasan Director General, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
3. Ms. Puja Singh Mandol Director General, Aircrafts Accident Investigation Bureau 
4. Shri Sanjeev Kumar Chairman, Airports Authority of India 
5. Shri Vikram Dev Dutt CMD, Air India Assets Holding Limited 
6. Shri S. K. Vyawahare Member, Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India 
7. Shri A. K. Pathak Member (Planning), Airports Authority of India 
8. Shri Piyush Srivastava Senior Economic Advisor, MoCA 
9. Ms. Rubina Ali Joint Secretary, MoCA 
10. Shri Asangba Chuba Ao Joint Secretary, MoCA 
11. Shri Padam Lal Negi Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor, MoCA 
12. Shri Anil Kumar Gupta Executive Director (RCS), AAI 
13. Shri Pramod Kumar Thakur Deputy Director General, MoCA 
 
Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry of Law & Justice  
S.No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Dr. Niten Chandra Law Secretary  
2. Dr. Anju Rathi Rana Additional Secretary 
3. Shri Surendra Kumar Assistant Legal Adviser  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

149 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Thursday, the 23rd March, 2023 in Committee Room 
‘4’, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Extension, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy             -             Chairman   
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri A. A. Rahim 
5. Dr. C. M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
  
Lok Sabha 
7.  Shri Tapir Gao 
8.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
10. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
11.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
12.  Shri Prince Raj 
13.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
14.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
15.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
16.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
17.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
18.  Shri Dinesh Lal Yadav “Nirahua” 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Swarabji B., Director 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director 
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
 
 Shri Kaustubh Sudhakar Bhalekar, OSD to Hon’ble Chairman  
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed the Members that the agenda of the meeting was to consider and adopt 
four draft Action Taken Reports of the Committee and to hear the representatives of the Mi nistry 
of Civil Aviation, Department of Expenditure (Ministry of Finance), Department of Economic 

150 
 
Affairs (MoF), Department of Revenue (MoF), and NITI Aayog on the subject 'Development of 
Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and Issues Pertaining to Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports'. 
3. The Committee, thereafter, took up the first agenda for the meeting i.e., consideration and 
adoption of the following draft Action Taken Reports on:- 
i. 313th Report on 'Promotion of Indian Tourism in Overseas Markets - Role of Overseas 
Tourist Offices and Indian Embassies'; 
ii. 319th Report on 'Progress made in the implementation of Sagarmala Projects'; 
iii. 323rd Report on 'Commission of Railway Safety'; and 
iv. 326th Report on 'Role of Indian Missions Globally for the growth of Tourism in India' 
4.         The Committee considered the aforesaid draft Reports.  After a brief discussion, the 
Committee adopted the four draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairma n to carry 
out minor modifications of typographical and factual errors and formatting in all the Reports. 
5.         The Committee authorized the Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala, M.P. and in his absence, 
Shri A. A. Rahim, M.P., to present the abovementioned Rep orts in Rajya Sabha on 24 th March 
2023. The Committee also authorized Shri Tapir Gao, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Kamlesh 
Paswan, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
WITNESSES 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 Shri Rajiv Bansal, Secretary 
Department of Expenditure (Ministry of Finance) 
 Dr. T.V. Somanathan, Finance Secretary & Secretary (Expenditure) 
Department of Economic Affairs (Ministry of Finance) 
 Shri Ajay Seth, Secretary 
Department of Revenue (Ministry of Finance) 
 Shri Rajiv Talwar, Special Secretary & Member, Custom 
NITI Aayog 
 Shri Sanjay Kumar, Director General, Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office 
     (Complete list of witnesses is attached as Annexure)  
   
6.         Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, 
Department of Expenditure (Ministry of Finance), Department of Economic Affairs (MoF), 
Department of Revenue (MoF) and NITI Aayog to the meeting. He informed that the agenda of 

151 
 
the meeting was to seek the vi ews of the Ministry/Departments on certain specific aspects 
pertaining to National Civil Aviation Policy (NCAP), 2016 as part of the  examination of the 
subject ‘Development of Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and Issues Pertaining to Civil 
Enclaves in Defence Airports’.   
7. The Chairman asked the representatives of the Departments and NITI Aayog to elaborate 
on the views furnished specifically with regard to Para 13(a)(iii) of the NCAP at the stage of 
consultation on the Policy. He sought to know whether  any financial difficulties were being 
observed in the implementation of ‘Guidelines for setting up of Greenfield Airports, 2008’ which 
stated that land for Greenfield airports has to be provided by AAI. He also sought their views on 
possibly amending the NCAP, 2016 to remove the mandate for State Governments to provide 
land free of cost and without equity for the development of airports. 
8.         The Finance Secretary & Secretary (Expenditure) began his deposition by informing the 
Committee that the Depa rtment had not offered any comment on Para 13(a)(iii) of the NCAP at 
the time of consultation on the Policy. He added that the Department did not have any objection 
to it. He stated that the said paragraph envisages cost sharing with the State Governments,  which 
is not adverse to the objectives of the Department.  
9. The Finance Secretary observed that the lists of subjects given in the Seventh Schedule of 
the Constitution have been interpreted as demarcating the legislative and executive powers over 
the sector, not necessarily as an exclusive realm for financial matters. He cited the examples of 
Central Government Schemes viz., Modernization of Police Forces and Police Infrastructure, 
Modernisation of Prisons, Swachh Bharat Mission and so on, even though Pu blic Order, Prisons 
and Public Health are subjects under the State List. He stated that there is no bar on State funds 
in Central subjects. 
10.         The Finance Secretary stated that theoretically, value capture mechanism can be looked 
into as a potential source of funding for airport projects. 
11.         The Chairman enquired whether, under the federal system of democracy, the Central 
Government can frame a policy without consulting the State Governments compelling them to 
contribute land free of cost without expecting any equity. The Finance Secretary opined that it is 
desirable to consult State Governments in such cases. He added that the Government is often 
able to take up individual cases in a slight deviation from the policy because the policy is n ot a 
law.  
12.   A Member of the Committee enquired as to why the policy is then invoked to reject 
requests for the development of an airport even if there is desirability or possibility of the Central 

152 
 
Government to build the airport. The Finance Secretary  stated that the policy is binding on the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation and Ministry of Finance but the Union Cabinet can go beyond the 
policy. 
13.       The Secretary, Department of Economic Affairs stated that all fairly viable airports can 
be taken up by the private sector but beyond big cities, there is an issue of viability. He informed 
the Committee that adding the cost of land to the project would result in a large number of 
projects becoming unviable. He cited the example of railway projects wherein hu ndred per cent 
cost of the land for any new line to be constructed, is to be borne by the State Government, along 
with 50 per cent of the project cost. He added that the Department of Economic Affairs had not 
commented on Para 13(a)(iii) of the NCAP at the time of consultation regarding the policy.  
14.     A Member of the Committee stated that the Policy mandates the State Governments to 
provide land even in case an airport project is viable. Another Member highlighted the issue of 
almost all airports in t he North -Eastern States being unviable and sought to know about the 
resolution for the same under the NCAP. The Chairman opined that the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation should ask for viability gap funding in case of unviable projects, not force upon the 
State Governments to provide land free of cost. 
15.       Director General, NITI Aayog informed the Committee that NITI Aayog had not given 
any specific comment about Para 13 when it was referred. He stated that the promotion of 
competitive and collaborative federalism is one of the cornerstones of NITI Aayog which is why 
it did not offer any comment on Para 13. He opined that it is an operational matter of the 
Ministry. He was of the view that the policy is not only a nudge; it makes it mandatory for the 
State to provide land. The Chairman requested the DG, NITI Aayog to furnish replies to a 
questionnaire on Para 13(a)(iii) of the NCAP, at the earliest. 
16.       The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation (MoCA) stated that the Ministry will consider 
whatever recommendations the Committee would make on this subject with an open mind. He 
submitted that the NCAP is a direction of the Cabinet and the Ministry is bound to comply with 
the directions of the Cabinet. He added that the Ministry would consider any varyin g views 
opined by the Committee. He informed the Committee that fares are not regulated in any manner 
and that airlines have fare buckets that fill up depending on passenger interest. He shared that 50 
per cent of the seats are offered at a reduced fare un der the RCS routes while balance seats are 
unregulated. He highlighted that one or two airlines are defaulting on operationalisation in many 
sectors because of their financial condition.  

153 
 
17.   The Secretary, MoCA informed the Committee that Air India has placed a large order for 
aircraft induction over the next six years, which would help improve the situation of shortage of 
flights. He further informed that many aircraft of many airlines are grounded for want of engines 
which would be resolved on easing of global supply chains. 
18.       Members of the Committee raised queries pertaining to the lack of flights from various 
airports across the country such as Kushinagar Airport, Darbhanga A irport, Itanagar Airport, 
Kannur International Airport and Calicut Airport. The Committee highlighted the issue of the 
Darbhanga sector being auctioned to SpiceJet for operations under RCS. SpiceJet is flying less 
number of flights from Darbhanga and the s ector cannot be operated by anyone else as per the 
policy in this regard. 
19.       Members of the Committee raised various queries pertaining to the following issues:- 
 discontinuation of cargo operations from Patna, Bhubaneswar, Pune, Jammu, Vizag and 
Coimbatore due to non-compliance with BCAS requirements; 
 need for an upper limit for charging fares for flights; 
 amount of funds spent in Civil Aviation under the package announced for Bihar by the 
Hon’ble Prime Minister; 
 lack of facilities for people coming to receive family/friends at Darbhanga airport and for 
passengers waiting to board flights; 
 land-related issues regarding the development of the airport at Mehsana (Gujarat); 
 the targeted date of operationalisation of Gorakhpur airport extension in Bihar; 
 status of operationalisation of Gondia airport in Maharashtra; 
 lack of development of Advanced Landing Grounds (ALGs) in Dirang, Daporijo and 
Anini in Arunachal Pradesh; and 
 delay in the development of Sabarimala airport. 
20. The Secretary, Ministry of Civ il Aviation stated that the volume of cargo at various 
airports where cargo operations have been discontinued is low. He added that there is a viability 
issue and it is not making commercial sense for the cargo terminal operator to invest money to 
arrange additional machines and screeners at these airports. A Member of the Committee 
highlighted the need for AAI Cargo Logistics and Allied Services Company Ltd. (AAICLAS) to 
invest money in these airports to meet the BCAS requirements so as to permit the 
operationalisation of cargo operations thereat. 
21. The representatives of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Department of Expenditure, 
Department of Economic Affairs, Department of Revenue and NITI Aayog responded to some of 
the queries raised by the Members and took note of the suggestions made by the Members. 

154 
 
22.       The Committee decided to hear various stakeholders on the issue of fixing of airfares in a 
meeting to be held at a later date. 
23. The Chairman directed that written replies to the points which h ad not been answered 
may be sent within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
24.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
25.       The meeting adjourned at 5:31 PM. 
 
New Delhi,                                                                                                  Swarabji B. 
23rd March, 2023                                                                                                            Director 
  

155 
 
Annexure 
LIST OF WITNESSES WHO APPEARED BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT-
RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
3:30 P.M. 
  
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1. Shri Rajiv Bansal Secretary, MoCA 
2 Shri Vikram Dev Dutt Director General, Directorate General of Civil 
Aviation 
3 Shri Zulfiquar Hasan Director General, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
4 Ms. Puja Singh Mandol Director General, Aircrafts Accident Investigation 
Bureau 
5 Shri Sanjeev Kumar Chairman, Airports Authority of India 
6 Shri Pramod Kumar Thakur DDG, MoCA 
7 Shri A. K. Pathak Member, Airports Authority of India 
8 Shri Piyush Srivastava Senior Economic Advisor, MoCA 
9 Ms. Rubina Ali Joint Secretary, MoCA 
10 Shri Asangba Chuba Ao Joint Secretary, MoCA 
11 Shri Anil Kumar Gupta Executive Director, AAI 
12 Shri Joyanta Chakraborty Director, MOCA 
13 Shri B.S. Bhullar Chairperson, AERA 
 
Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance  
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1 Shri Rajiv Talwar Spl. Secretary & Member, Custom 
 
Department of Expenditure and Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1 Dr. T.V. Somanathan Finance Secretary & Secretary (Expenditure) 
2 Shri Ajay Seth Secretary (Economic Affairs) 
3 Shri Baldeo Purushartha Joint Secretary 
4 Shri Mukesh Kumar Gupta Director 
 
NITI Aayog 
S. No. Name of the Officer Designation 
1 Shri Sanjay Kumar DG, Development Monitoring and Evaluation Office 
(DMEO) 
2 Sh Sudhendu Jyoti Sinha Adviser 

156 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM & 
CULTURE (2022-23) 
XXIX 
TWENTY NINTH MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  11:00 A.M. on  Monday, the 19th July, 2023 in Committee 
Room-D, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New Delhi. 
  
Members present: 
1. Shri V. Vijayasai Reddy           - Chairman  
 Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak 
3. Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala 
4. Shri A.A. Rahim 
5. Dr. C.M. Ramesh 
6. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 Lok Sabha 
7. Shri Tapir Gao 
8. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
9. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
10. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
11. Shri Prince Raj 
12. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
13. Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
14. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
  
SECRETARIAT 
Shri Sumant Narain, Joint Secretary  
Shrimati Monica Baa, Additional Director  
Shrimati Subha Chandrashekar, Deputy Secretary  
Shri Ranajit Chakraborty, Under Secretary 
  
At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee. He informed them that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and adopt 
the following Reports:- 

157 
 
(i) *       *       *       * 
(ii) ‘Development of Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and Issues Pertaining to Civil 
Enclaves in Defence Airports’; and 
(iii) *        *        *       *4 
2.       A Member raised points of dissent to some of the re commendations in the two draft 
reports, viz., ‘Development of Greenfield and Brownfield Airports and Issues Pertaining to 
Civil Enclaves in Defence Airports’ and ‘ *       *       *       * ’. After a brief discussion, the 
Committee adopted the aforesaid three draft Reports and authorized the Chairman to carry 
out minor modifications of typographical and factual errors and formatting in all the Reports. 
3.       *       *       *       * 
 
4.       The Committee authorized Shri Jugalsinh Lokhandwala, M.P., and in his absence, Shri 
C.M. Ramesh, M.P., to present the aforesaid Reports in Rajya Sabha on 24 th July, 2023. The 
Committee also authorized Shri Prince Raj, M.P. and in his absence, Shri  Tirath Singh 
Rawat, M.P. to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same date. 
5.       *       *       *       * 
 
6.       *       *       *       * 
 
7.        The Meeting adjourned at 12:02 P.M. 
                                                                                                                                       
New Delhi,                                                                                                  Sumant Narain  
19th July, 2023                                                                                             Joint Secretary  
                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                      
             
  
 
 
                                                           
4 Relates to other matters 