SIXTIETH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/60threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:59:17]
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,
 TOURISM & CULTURE
SIXTIETH REPORT
ON
DEVELOPMENT OF TOURISM IN THE COUNTRY 
 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON  21.11.2002)
 (LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON  21.11.2002)
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
 
NOVEMBER, 2002/KARTIKA, 1924 (SAKA)
C O N T E N T S
 
1.         COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE                                                     
2.         INTRODUCTION                                                                                         
3.         REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE                                                                  
4.         OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE     
5.         MINUTES                                                                                          
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT & TOURISM
(2002)
 *1.   Shri Dipankar Mukherjee  - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad
     #3.    Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4. Shri S.S. Chandran
5. Shri K. Rahman Khan
6. Shri K.B. Krishna Murthy
7. Dr. A.K. Patel
8. Shri Satish Pradhan
9. Shri K. Kalavenkata Rao
  **10.Shri Balwant Singh Ramoowalia

SIXTIETH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/60threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:59:17]
@11.            Dr.C.Narayana Reddy
@@12.            Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
     $13.  Shri Rajnath Singh ‘Surya’
14. Shri Vikram Verma
15.Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi
           
LOK SABHA
16. Shri Raj Babbar
17. Shri G.M. Banatwalla
18. Shri Anil Basu
19. Shri Suresh Chandel
20. Shrimati Reena Choudhary
21. Shri T.T.V. Dhinakaran
22. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
23. Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
24. Shri Akbor Ali Khandokar
25. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
26. Shri S.P. Lepcha
27. Shri Vijay Kumar Malhotra
28. Shri Shivaji Mane
29. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
30. Shri Vilas Muttemwar
31. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
32. Shri Sundar Lal Patwa
33. Shri Braj Mohan Ram
34. Shri Gunipati Ramaiah
35. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
36. Shri Vijay Sankeshwar
 
*Appointed as the Chairman w.e.f. 19.3.2002 vice  Shri Khagen Das who ceased to be a Member of Rajya Sabha
 w.e.f.                      25.2.2002 consequent upon his election to the Lok Sabha.
        **Nominated w.e.f. 4th April 2002.        # Nominated w.e.f. 22nd April 2002.
        $ Nominated w.e.f. 14th May 2002.       @ Nominated w.e.f. 17th July 2002
@@ Nominated w.e.f. 20th July 2002.
 
(i)
37. Capt. Satish Sharma
38. Shri Th. Chaoba Singh
39. Shri Vinay Kumar Sorake
40. Shri Kalava Srinivasulu
41. Shri Kodikunnil Suresh
42. Shrimati Jayaben B. Thakkar
43. Shri Sunder Lal Tiwari
44. Shri A.K.S. Vijayan
45. Shri S.D.N.R. Wadiyar
 
SECRETARIAT
 

SIXTIETH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/60threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:59:17]
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
            Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Committee Officer
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION
         I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport & Tourism*, having been
 authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby present this Sixtieth Report on “Development of
 Tourism in the Country”.
 
2.    The Committee considered the subject and held discussions with the representatives of the Department of Tourism,
 Government of India, Governments of Kerala, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Tamilnadu, Goa, Rajasthan, Pondicherry,
 the Administrations of Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands, travel/tour operators and hoteliers’ associations
 during its study visits.
 
3.    The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of all the agencies concerned for placing before the
 Committee the material and information desired in connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by
 the Members.
 
4.    The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 6
th August 2002.
 
NEW DELHI;
August 6, 2002
Sravana 15, 1924 (Saka)
DIPANKAR MUKHERJEE
Chairman
Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism & Culture
 
 
_____________________________________________________________________
*Renamed as Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture vide Rajya
 Sabha Parliamentary Bulletin Part-II No.40086 dated 18
th October 2002.
 
REPORT
 
Tourism has emerged as one of the world's most important economic activities.  It is not only a major social
 phenomenon of the modern society with enormous economic consequences but also the world's largest export industry.
 According to the World Tourism Organisation (WTO), about 698 million tourists travelled internationally in 2000 and
 spent about US$ 476 billion.  The importance of tourism as an instrument for economic development and employment
 generation, particularly in remote and backward areas, has been now well recognized the world over.
 
2.       India is a country of continental dimensions with a fascinating kaleidoscope of diverse races, languages, religions,
 customs and traditions.  Tourism has emerged as a major industry of the Indian economy contributing substantially to
 foreign exchange earnings and also as potential generator of employment opportunities.  The spillover effect of tourism
 by creation of employment opportunities in related services sectors is tremendous.  According to a World Tourism and
 Travel Council (WTTC) study, the travel and tourism economy in India employed 17.7 million people in the year 2000,
 which is 5.6 percent of the country's total employment for that year.  Tourism is presently India's third largest export
 industry after readymade garments and gem and jewellery.  The international tourist traffic was only 16,829 in 1951. 
 During the last 50 years, the international tourist arrivals have gone upto 2649378 during the year 2000, which reflects
 a compounded annual growth rate of about     11 percent.  The foreign exchange earnings from tourism in the country

SIXTIETH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/60threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:59:17]
 have increased from Rs.7.70 crores in 1951 to Rs.14238.63 crores in the year 2000.   The foreign tourist arrival to India
 and the estimated foreign exchange earnings through tourism along with the growth rate for the years 1991 to 2001 are
 as under:-
 
Year Foreign Tourist Arrivals
(in nos.)
% Change Estimated Foreign
 Exchange Earnings
(Rs. in Crore)
% Change
1991 1677508 - 4110.50 -
1992 1867651 11.3 5886.95 43.2
1993 1764830 -5.5 6465.72 9.8
1994 1886433 6.9 7281.66 12.6
1995 2123683 12.6 8633.30 18.6
1996 2287860 7.7 9919.96 14.9
1997 2374094 3.8 10725.64 8.1
1998 2358629 -0.7 11950.78 11.4
1999 2481928 5.2 12951.00 8.4
2000 2649378 6.7 14238.00 9.9
2001 2537282
(provisional)
-4.2 14006.45
(provisional)
-1.6
 
3.       The Department of Tourism, Ministry of Tourism and Culture, is the nodal agency for the formulation of national
 policies and programmes and for the coordination of activities of various Central Government Agencies, State
 Governments/Union Territories and the Private Sector for the development and promotion of tourism in the country. 
 The role of the Department of Tourism has been to coordinate and supplement the efforts of the State/U.T.
 Governments in development of tourism through Central financial assistance, to catalyse private investment, strengthen
 promotional and marketing efforts and to provide trained manpower resources. 
         
4.       Tourism industry in India enjoys bright prospects as the country possesses a rich cultural heritage and tourist spots
 which offer a diversity of attractions and places of historical and archaeological importance.  The Committee is of the
 view that although tourism is an important foreign exchange earner and its employment potential is vast, its virtues
 have not been exploited optimally and have largely remained untapped.  Realising the multiple spin-off effects of
 tourism for the Indian economy, the Committee took up the subject "Development of Tourism in the Country" for
 examination and report.  The Committee held discussion with the representatives of the Department of Tourism,
 Government of India, various State Governments, travel/tour operators and hoteliers' associations on the steps taken for
 the development of tourism in the respective States and the problems/hurdles faced in promoting development of
 tourism in the country.
 
5.       The Committee's interaction with the various agencies involved in the tourism industry in the country revealed
 that tourism cannot be promoted unless tourist infrastructure is vastly developed.  Further, creation of tourism
 infrastructure would be meaningful only if the areas have the minimum amenities and infrastructure like roads, water,
 electricity, sewerage and telecommunication facilities.
 
SINGLE WINDOW CLEARANCE SYSTEM
 
6.       The problems faced by the private entrepreneurs in establishing tourism projects were brought to the notice of the
 Committee by the hoteliers' associations etc.  The Committee was informed of the administrative and procedural
 hurdles which the private sector has to face while obtaining clearances/No-Objection Certificates (NOCs) for water
 supply, electricity, sewerage etc. from the State Governments.  The Committee drew the attention of the Department of
 Tourism on the issues raised by the private entrepreneurs.  In reply, the Department of Tourism informed that the role
 of the Department of Tourism is basically catalytic in nature as it is not in control of land, electricity, water supply etc.
 which are with the State Governments/Union Territories.  However, the Department of Tourism is committed towards
 the development of tourist infrastructure in the country and encourages participation of the private sector in
 supplementing the efforts of the Government in their endeavour for developing tourist infrastructure of international
 standards.  They have, therefore, also suggested to the State Governments/Union Territories to facilitate the private

SIXTIETH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/60threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:59:17]
 investors by way of reducing/removing the hassles in obtaining various clearances/NOCs by implementing a Single
 Window Clearance System.  The State Governments/Union Territories have also been advised to provide necessary
 support facilities and incentives to encourage private sector investment in tourism.  It was further informed that during
 the State/UT Tourism Secretaries meeting held in September 2000, the issue regarding Single Window Clearance of
 hotel projects was one of the Agenda items.
 
7.       The Committee was also informed that the Task Force set up by the Ministry of Tourism regarding Action Plan
 for Development of Tourism also laid emphasis on identification development of zones for hotels and other tourism
 establishments in major tourist centres and ensure Single Window Clearance of projects in such zones.  These
 recommendations made by the Task Force had been circulated to the State/UT Governments.  When asked about the
 response of the State Governments/Union Territories to adopting a Single Window Clearance System, the Department
 of Tourism informed that the general view presented by the State Governments was that as a large number of
 agencies/departments in their respective State/UT were involved, the matter regarding Single Window Clearance is
 needed to be examined by each State/UT.  The Department of Tourism had also sent a communication to all the
 State/UT Governments to know the progress made in their respective State/UT in respect of creating Single Window
 Clearance facility for tourism projects.  It was also informed that certain States like Gujarat, Haryana, Rajasthan, Kerala
 and Karnataka have set up administrative mechanisms to expedite clearances of such projects.   Department of Tourism
 have assured that they shall continue to take up this matter on priority basis and as one of the prime agenda items to be
 placed at all fora where the State/UT Governments are going to deliberate on development of tourism infrastructure.
 
8.       The Committee had, in its 48
th Report on the Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the Department of Tourism,
 expressed the view that the Government, through its own limited resources, has not been able to provide the requisite
 funds for the development of tourist infrastructure in the country.  Accordingly, the Committee had recommended for
 early implementation of the Single Window Clearance System.  The Committee is of the opinion that the participation
 of the private sector can go a long way in supplementing the efforts of the Government in developing the tourist
 infrastructure in the country and the private sector takes into consideration long-term perspective in facilities required
 therefor.  The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Central/State/UT Governments must try to remove
 the obstacles faced by the private investors and ensure early implementation of the Single Window Clearance System
 for tourism projects.  
 
LACK OF 'VISA-ON-ARRIVAL' SCHEME
 
9.       The Committee was informed by the representatives of various State Governments, tour/travel operators
 association etc. that one of the major constraints in the development of tourism in the country was the lack of 'visa-on-
arrival' scheme at the airports which had a negative effect on the foreign tourist arrival.
 
10.     The Committee enquired from the Department of Tourism regarding the progress made with regard to granting
 visa-on-arrival to the foreign tourists at the airports.  The Committee was informed that the Department of Tourism had
 prepared a proposal in this respect and it was to be considered by the Committee of Secretaries.  However, in view of
 the objection from the Ministry of Home Affairs to the effect that visa-on-arrival was not found feasible due to local,
 administrative, infrastructural and security constraints, the meeting of the Committee of Secretaries to consider this
 issue was dropped.  However, Hon’ble Minister of Tourism and Culture had requested the Hon’ble Home Minister to
 look into the matter again and had also personally discussed the issue with him.  The Hon’ble Home Minister also
 proposed to have a meeting with the Minister of Tourism and Culture to discuss the matter further.  The matter had also
 been further taken up by the officers of the Department of Tourism with the Ministry of Home Affairs.  The
 Department of Tourism have further informed that modalities for implementation of the 'visa-on-arrival' scheme were
 being worked out by the Department in consultation with the Ministry of Home Affairs, Intelligence Bureau and
 Ministry of Civil Aviation. The scheme was intended to be introduced at Mumbai and Delhi airports initially for a
 limited number of nationalities.  Once the scheme starts working successfully, further liberalisation may be considered.
 
11.     The Committee agrees that the security considerations of the country cannot be compromised.  However, it must
 also be admitted that granting visa-on-arrival to the foreign tourists at the airports can certainly give a boost to the
 foreign tourist arrivals in the country.  The Committee is of the view that a step in this direction can be taken by

SIXTIETH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/60threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:59:17]
 initially introducing visa-on-arrival for tourists from friendly countries, countries which do not pose a security threat to
 our country and are tourism generating markets.  Later, if the scheme is successful and helps in foreign tourist influx to
 the country, it can be extended to other countries too on a case-to-case basis.
 
SPECIAL TOURIST POLICE FORCE
 
12.     The Committee has been informed that India is counted among the unsafe destinations by international tourists. 
 There are a large number of reports regarding the atrocities/harassment etc. of the foreign tourists by the unscrupulous
 elements in the country.  Incidents of foreign tourists being physically harmed, robbed and murdered are not
 uncommon.  There are also reports of the international travellers being exploited/taken for a ride by the so-called tourist
 agencies.  The Committee enquired from the Department of Tourism regarding the steps taken to keep a check on the
 occurrence of incidents of harassment of tourists.  The Committee was informed that the Department of Tourism does
 not have any control on these incidents since it was basically a law and order problem.  However, the Department had
 held discussions at various fora with the representatives of the State Governments to introduce suitable legislation and
 deploy Special Police Force which could provide safety and security to the tourists in the destinations they prefer to
 visit. This Special Tourism Police Force was meant to provide service in a spirit of courtesy and hospitality.  The
 Governments of J&K, Goa, Kerala, Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan have already created a Special Tourism Force in
 their States. The Governments of West Bengal, Maharashtra, Karnataka and Delhi are also in the process of introducing
 requisite legislation for deployment of Special Tourist Police.  Other State Governments had also been requested to
 enact a suitable legislation in their respective States to curb the cheating and other mal-practices related to tourists and
 to develop a sense of safety and security by deployment of the Special Tourism Police Force.
 
13.     The Committee feels that the issue relating to the safety and security of the tourists, especially foreign tourists is
 very important and needs to be looked into seriously.  The Committee is of the view that incidents of harassment of
 foreign tourists bring a bad name to the country and have an adverse effect on the foreign tourist arrival.  Deployment
 of Special Tourism Police Force can be an effective tool for ensuring safety and security of the tourists.  The
 Committee appreciates the creation of the Special Tourism Police Force by some of the states.  The Committee also
 suggests that the police personnel of the States should also be provided special 'tourist-oriented' training.  Such form of
 official protection to international and domestic tourists would certainly instil confidence amongst the tourists visiting
 these territories.  A successful implementation of such measures will definitely encourage the other State Governments
 in implementing similar schemes for the promotion of tourism in their respective States.
 
RATIONALISATION OF TAXES ON THE TOURISM INDUSTRY
 
14.     During its visit to the various States, the Committee was informed by the representatives of the hotels' and
 restaurants' associations of the heavy tax burden on the hotel industry such as Expenditure Tax, Luxury Tax, Sales Tax
 on Food and Beverages.  Not only the hotel industry is reeling under heavy taxation, but there is also a lot of disparity
 in various State level Taxes.  The Union Government has imposed a Expenditure Tax @ 10%.  The rates for Luxury
 Tax and the methodology of applying such taxes vary from 0% to 25% from State to State.  Some of the States
 calculate luxury tax on published tariff of hotel rooms and not on actual payment made by the customer.  Again, sales
 tax on beverages and liquor etc. sold in the hotel vary substantially.  Sales Tax applicable in some of the States is as
 under:-
State Sales Tax applicable on (as % of billings)
           Food                      Imported Liquor
Maharashtra 20% 21%
Goa 10.0% 21%
Rajasthan 12.0% plus
15% surcharge on sales tax
44% plus
15% surcharge on sales tax
Tamilnadu 10% 70%
Andhra Pradesh 8% Beverages taxed at point of sale at
 APBCL
Kerala 9.2% 90%

SIXTIETH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/60threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:59:17]
 
15.     The representatives of the hotel industry in Andhra Pradesh complained that the enhancement of sales tax from
 5% to 8% through the uniform national floor rate system had been a big blow to the tourism development in the state,
 particularly when the uniform floor rates were not being implemented in the neighbouring States.  The disparity
 discouraged the tourists from coming to Andhra Pradesh.
         
16.     During its interaction with various associations of Travel/Tour operators, the Committee was apprised of the issue
 of high road tax etc. levied on the tourist vehicles.  The representatives of the Indian Association of Tour Operators,
 while apprising the Committee of the problems faced by the Travel Agents/Tour Operators in the southern States,
 complained about the lack of coordination/cooperation among the southern States.  The Committee was informed that
 vehicle tax on local vehicles and vehicles coming from other States vary significantly from State to State.  It was stated
 that the taxes on tourist coaches/cars were very high in Andhra Pradesh.  Private Vehicles were not being registered in
 Tamilnadu.  Karnataka & Kerala were also increasing taxes very often.  It was further stated that the high rate of road
 taxes had also created problems for free movement of tourist vehicles in these States.  The tourist coaches/cars were
 being detained for long hours at various check posts by the tax authorities causing inconvenience to the tourists.
 
17.     It was further brought to the notice of the Committee that if a tourist group wished to visit Puttaparti - Bangalore -
 Mysore - Thiruvananthapuram - Kanyakumari - Chennai tour for 12 days.  They have to pay Rs.36,000/- (@ Rs.3000/-
 per day) as tax alone for the journey.  The Committee was further informed that the Northern States like Uttar Pradesh,
 Himachal Pradesh and Haryana were accepting Rs.12,000 as tax for 3 months from the vehicles coming from other
 States.  The low rates of taxes had attracted tourists to the northern States and had given a boost to the tourism industry
 in these States.  They had, therefore, suggested that all the Southern States may be considered one zone.  In order to
 have a free flow of tourist traffic, the State can collect full tax on tourist vehicle on quarterly basis for zonal permit
 vehicles & neighbouring states may be advised to collect Rs.12,000 quarterly as in case of Uttar Pradesh, Himachal
 Pradesh, Haryana etc.
 
18.     The Committee enquired from the representatives of the Department of Tourism and Governments of Andhra
 Pradesh and Tamilnadu regarding the problems faced by travel/tour operators as well as the tourists due to the lack of
 uniformity and higher rate of taxes.  The representatives of the Department of Tourism informed the Committee that the
 Central Government was fully aware of the matter and efforts were underway at various levels to impress upon the
 State Governments to rationalize the taxes both in transport as well as in the hotel sectors.  The Committee was further
 informed that the issue also came up for discussion at the Tourism Ministers' Conference and the State Governments
 have been asked to rationalize their taxes in both the transport and the hotel sectors.  The Committee was also informed
 that a meeting of the Secretaries of Tourism of various States was being convened by the Ministry of Tourism in which
 all relevant issues would be discussed and efforts would be made to get the taxes rationalised.  The representatives of
 the Govt. of Tamilnadu also informed the Committee that the matter was under consideration and steps were being
 taken for rationalization of road tax for tourist vehicles.
 
19.     The Committee feels that the hotel industry is the backbone of tourism.  The major share of tourism revenue to the
 government is contributed by this sector.  However, there are a lot of taxes and sometimes duplication of taxes at both
 Central and State levels on the hotel sector.  The multiple taxes have imposed a heavy financial burden on the hotel
 industry.  The Committee observes that taxes on hotel rooms and food levied by both the Centre and the States add upto
 over 45 percent, making the industry grossly uncompetitive.  The Committee is of the view that there ought to be
 coordination and synergy between the Centre and the State Governments on the tax front and that there is an urgent
 need to rationalize both Central and State taxes on tourism.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central
 Government/State Governments must come forward with rationalisation of taxes and provide concessions for the hotel
 industry to give a fillip to the arrival of the tourists in the States.  Further there should be uniformity in the rate of
 various taxes levied by the State Governments on the hotel industry.
 
20.     The Committee observes that there is a lack of uniformity in taxes, laws and regulation across the States.  While
 the State Governments are taking steps to develop tourism in their respective states, the lack of coordination among
 them and the higher rates of road tax/disparity in the taxes in the states, especially southern States have had negative
 effect on the growth of tourism in these states.  These factors also result in hardships for the tourists as also increase the
 cost of travel for the tourists.  The Committee therefore, recommends that there should be a composite transport permit

SIXTIETH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/60threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:59:17]
 for tourist vehicles.  The Committee also recommends that the Central and the State Governments should take
 immediate steps to create uniformity between the local vehicles and the visiting vehicles.  Steps should also be taken to
 facilitate easy travel and free inter-State movement for tourist vehicles.
 
TOURISM DEVELOPMENT IN ANDAMAN & NICOBAR AND LAKSHADWEEP ISLANDS
 
21.     Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands are among the world's most spectacular islands.  The precious
 heritage of ecology and culture of these islands is supported by an extremely fragile ecosystem.  Andaman & Nicobar
 consist of 572 emerald islands, islets and rocks out of which 36 islands are inhabited.  The lands are covered with dense
 forest and endless variety of exotic flowers and birds.  The rare flora and fauna, under-water marine life and corals,
 with crystal clear water and mangrove-lined creeks offer a dream view of the rare gifts of nature.  The coral islands of
 Lakshadweep consists of 36 islands of which 11 are inhabited and have become very popular tourist destinations in the
 recent years.  Considering the limited infrastructure, the administration of these islands propose to promote low volume
 high value tourist inflow to these islands because of the fragile eco-system of the rain forest and under water corals.
 
22.     The Committee's discussion with the administrations of the Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands
 brought out that connectivity to the island was the main bottleneck in the development and promotion of tourism in the
 islands.  The mode of connectivity to these islands is by air and sea.  Port Blair is connected with Chennai and Calcutta
 by air and by passenger ships from Chennai, Kolkata and Visakhapatnam.  However, capacity on these sectors is not
 adequate which restricts the flow of tourists to these islands.  It was brought out that tourist traffic had grown very
 gradually in the islands.  The figures of tourist arrival in the Andaman & Nicobar Islands from 1995 to 1999 are as
 under:-
Year Domestic Tourists Foreign Tourists Total Tourists
1995 64490 3849 68339
1996 67958 5796 73754
1997 73558 4724 78082
1998 74732 4915 79647
1999 77448 6035 83483
 
The slow rise is more attributable to the restrictions imposed on the foreigners on their stay in these islands, non-
availability of air and ship tickets which have given some adverse publicity.  The Committee was informed that because
 of the short run-way at the Port Blair air-field, only Boeing 737s were landing there and that too with load penalty. 
 However, the work on extension of run-way was under process and considerable increase in tourist arrival was
 expected once the run-way was extended.   The Committee was also informed that the Director General, Civil Aviation
 has given permission for foreign tourists charter flights to land at Port Blair.  The shortage of accommodation was
 another constraint which was hampering the growth of tourism in the islands.  Also the bulk of the accommodation
 available was restricted to areas in and around Port Blair. 
 
23.     As regards Lakshadweep Islands, there is only one airport at Agatti and the Indian Airlines is operating Dornier
 Aircraft at Kochi-Agatti sector and occasionally at Kochi-Agatti-Goa sector.  The Dornier Aircraft is having a limited
 carrying capacity and it does not provide assured services round the year.  Tourist infrastructure is available in only six
 islands namely Bangaram, Kadmat, Minicoy, Kavaratti, Agatti and Kelpeni.  The Agatti and Bangaram islands have
 fully furnished resorts with facilities for water sports. The resort at Kadmat Island has elaborate facilities for water
 sports like scuba diving, wind surfing, kayaking, and water skeing.  It was also informed that the other islands have no
 air connectivity though there is a proposal for construction of airfields at Kavaratti, Minicoy, Andrott, Kadmat and
 Kiltan Island.  During its visit to Lakshadweep, the Committee was also informed that the inter-island shipping services
 is inadequate and too slow to suit tourist convenience.  However, that the administration proposed to purchase some
 cruise boats, speed boats and catamarans to provide faster and better mode of transport for this purpose.
 
24.     The Committee feels that Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands have the potential of growing into top
 destinations for beach tourism and water sports.  But for the constraint of transportation of tourists from the mainland,
 these islands would have attracted a still larger number of tourists, earning revenue and generating employment for the
 local islanders.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the work on the extension of runway at Port Blair may be
 completed at the earliest and the frequency of flights may also be increased so that more and more tourists are able to

SIXTIETH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/60threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:59:17]
 land there.  The Committee welcomes the decision of DGCA to permit the foreign tourist charter flights to land at Port
 Blair and recommends that this fact may be given wide publicity amongst national as well as international tour
 operators.  Similarly, round the year air services, well connected with other important centres like Kochi,
 Thiruvananthapuram and Goa may be introduced to give a boost to the development and promotion of tourism in the
 Lakshadweep Islands. Further, clearance to the proposals for construction of airfields at Kavarati, Minicoy, Andrott,
 Kadmat and Kiltan Islands should be expedited.  The Committee also feels that creating eco-friendly tourist
 infrastructure and water sports facility involves huge expenditure.  Due to the limited resources available to these two
 Union Territories, it may not be possible for the administration of these islands to create infrastructure and other
 facilities in the islands.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the administration of these islands should create
 conducive atmosphere for private investment and, thereafter, invite private sector participation in developing the
 necessary infrastructure, accommodation and high quality eco-friendly tourists/resorts.
         
PERMIT SYSTEM FOR THE TOURISTS
 
25.     Tourism is restricted in the Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands to ensure that the environment is not
 ecologically damaged.  Indian nationals need no permit to visit Andaman.  All foreign nationals can stay in the islands
 for 30 days which can be extended upto 45 days with the approval of the Lt. Governor.  There are many islands where
 only day visit is permitted.  As regards Lakshadweep Islands, at present, the tourists have to obtain entry permit for the
 islands.  While all the islands are open for Indian tourists, the foreign tourists are permitted only in Bangaram, Kadmat
 and Agatti Islands.  The Committee was informed that some foreigners are so fascinated with the natural beauty of the
 islands that they want to extend their stay beyond the permissible period either to enjoy nature or even to find
 possibilities of investment.  The Administration of Lakshadweep informed that the encouraging response from
 Bangaram made the Lakshadweep Administration to initiate proposal for opening up three more islands namely,
 Thinnakara, Cheriyam and Suheli Valiyakara for international tourism.  However, the proposal had been pending with
 the Ministry of Tourism since 1993.  It was further informed that a proposal to open all the islands to foreign tourists
 was submitted to the Ministry of Home Affairs for approval.
 
26.     The Committee is of the view that foreign tourists constitute an important component of tourists who wish to visit
 the Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands.  The restrictions on foreigners to stay beyond permitted period in
 the Islands and visiting only selected islands has discouraged the foreigners from visiting these islands.  The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to optimally exploit the potential of tourism in these islands, the
 restrictions on the foreigners on visiting the islands may be removed and they may be permitted to stay/enjoy the
 beauty of the islands for longer periods.  The Committee also feels that opening up new islands for foreigners also
 needs to be given priority and recommends that the Central Department of Tourism should take up with the Ministry of
 Home Affairs the proposal regarding opening up of more islands for the foreign tourists.
 
27.     The problems relating to permit system were also brought to the notice of the Committee by the State
 Government and Travel Agents' Association of Sikkim.  Similar problems also exist in some of the North-East States. 
 The Committee was informed that since March 2000, foreign tourists applying for permit to visit Sikkim to the Indian
 Mission abroad are required to pay a special fee of U.S. Dollars 30 in addition to the fee for the Indian visa.  The
 Committee was also informed that the Government had allowed the domestic tourists to visit Nathula Pass, Yuma
 Sonadong and Lachen-Thangu.  The Committee was also informed that recently the Ministry of Home Affairs had
 opened some of the areas of Nagaland for foreign tourists.
 
28.     The Committee appreciates the Government for having opened some areas of Nagaland for foreign tourists and
 hopes that this step will certainly have a positive effect on the growth of tourism in that area.  However, the Committee
 is of the view that the levying of U.S. Dollars 30 from the foreigners who wished to visit Sikkim will discourage the
 foreign tourists from visiting Sikkim.  The Committee recommends that the government should consider abolishing the
 permit system for foreign tourists, as has been done in the case of Assam and Meghalaya.  The Committee hopes that it
 will definitely help in boosting foreign tourist arrivals in the state.
 
CONSTRAINTS OF COASTAL REGULATION ZONE ACT
 
29.     During its discussion with the representatives of the various State Governments, the Committee was informed that

SIXTIETH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/60threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:59:17]
 the provisions of the CRZ do not allow development of tourism projects in the coastal areas and are detrimental to the
 long term development plans of various States.  It was brought to the notice of the Committee that the habitation
 patterns, establishment of industrial, commercial and social institutions etc. in these States reflect the interdependence
 of coast and economic activities.  However, the CRZ notifications have declared the coastal stretches of seas, bays,
 estuaries, creeks, rivers and backwaters which are influenced by tidal action  to 500 metres from the High Tide Line
 (HTL) and the land between Low Tide Line (LTL) and HTL as Coastal Regulation Zone.  In addition, the notification
 has also set a minimum set back of 100 metres or the width of the inland water body, whichever is less.  Many of the
 States have complained that both these distance restrictions are arbitrary and have been made without taking regional
 considerations and geographical peculiarities into consideration. The Administration of Andaman & Nicobar Islands
 have pointed out that many of the islands are so small that the shore distance is less than 200 metres from the High Tide
 Line.  The Administration had also envisaged 7 eco-friendly tourism projects, many of which could not be implemented
 due to the stringent CRZ regulations. The Administration of Lakshadweep Islands informed that the Island
 Development Authority had recommended opening Thinnakara Island for tourist but proposal was pending with the
 Ministry of Environment.  The Government of Kerala had expressed the view that the notification in its present form
 may not be made applicable to the State in view of the geographical peculiarities and high density of population in the
 state.  The Government of Kerala is blessed with innumerable backwaters and many rivers in addition to a long 575 km.
 coastline.  The high aesthetic value combined with a rich cultural heritage inland gives Kerala high tourism potential. 
 Beach tourism being a high demand tourism area, Government of Kerala had sought relaxation from the Union
 Government in regulation to beaches having high tourism potential.  Government of Tamilnadu has also pointed out
 that they wished to encourage tourism in the state by providing more facilities and especially utilizing the beaches on
 the East Coast.  However, due to the CRZ restrictions, major tourism projects worth Rs.1000 crores i.e. Special
 Tourism Area on Chennai- Mamallapuram sector were awaiting clearance.
 
30.     The Committee is of the view that the impact of tourism on the environment and ecology requires serious
 consideration.  There is no doubt that unplanned tourism not only degrades the environment physically and otherwise
 but also carries the seeds of its own destruction.  However, the Committee feels that the provisions of CRZ Act do not
 take into account the unique features of the coastal lines of various States in the country, particularly of Andaman &
 Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands and Kerala.  India has many beautiful beaches, which can be developed from
 tourism point of view.  The Committee recommends that the Government should, therefore, seriously consider relaxing
 the provisions of the Costal Regulation Zone Act.  The Ministry of Environment and Forests should also take a liberal
 view and consider positively the proposals seeking relaxation of CRZ restrictions for tourism projects.
 
LACK OF CONNECTIVITY
 
31.     The problem relating to the lack of the connectivity of the various States and the places of tourist interest in the
 country was also brought to the notice of the Committee.  The Government of Sikkim requested for upgradation of
 Bagdogra Airport to an international airport in order to establish air link with neighbouring countries like Nepal,
 Bhutan and Bangladesh.  They also requested for augmenting the number of seats in all long distance fast trains to the
 North-East region like Rajdhani Express, North-East Express, Darjeeling Mail etc.  The Administration of Pondicherry
 requested for new railway lines from Cuddalore to Pondicherry, Mahabalipuram and Egmore and also to change the
 existing metre gauge into broad gauge.  Stating that the existing airport for Pondicherry was not adequate, they also
 requested for strengthening the existing runway of the airport so that smaller aircraft can be operated at least once a
 week from the nearby cities like Bangalore, Chennai etc.  The representatives of the Government of Andhra Pradesh
 pointed out that lack of direct flights from overseas destinations into Hyderabad was a major deterrent for development
 of tourism in the State.  The Government of Tamil Nadu requested for more trains from northern states as also the
 opening of a new international airport.  All the State Governments the Committee had the opportunity to interact with
 made similar requests for rail and air connectivity.
 
32.     The Committee feels that there exists a fairly large domestic tourist movement in the country.  However, one
 major stumbling block before the inter-state tourism is poor connectivity.  Domestic Tourism cannot be promoted
 unless the air, rail and road links across the various states and places of tourist interest in the country are improved.  In
 absence of a comfortable access to the places of tourist interest, the tourist cannot be encouraged to visit such places. 
 The Committee, therefore, recommends, that the tourist destinations in the country should be well connected by rail,
 road and air with the urban centres/cities of the region to ensure easy accessibility.  Also the movement of the trains

SIXTIETH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/60threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:59:17]
 should be regularised and speeded up.  The Committee also feels that tourism is closely interlinked with the Civil
 Aviation Sector.  Air linking of the various tourist places in the country as well as places abroad from where tourist
 arrival is expected is essential for development of tourism in the country.  The Committee also recommends that efforts
 should be made to explore the possibility of upgrading the Veer Sarvarkar Airport at Port Blair and Bogdogra Airport
 into international airports so that these places could find a place on the international tourist map.  Also, The Ministries
 of Civil Aviation and Railways should take steps for providing the necessary infrastructure and improve air and rail
 connectivity to the various states in the country.
 
CONCLUSION
 
33.     The Committee is of the view that tourism industry in India enjoys bright prospects as the country has some of the
 finest beaches, hill resorts, historical places, heritage property, pilgrim centres and wildlife backwater spots which offer
 a diversity of attractions.  The diverse cultural heritage, festivals, art forms, cuisines can form a fine blend of tourism
 products.  Tourism serves as a potent, positive force to stimulate economic development, improve ecology and foster
 national integration through mutual understanding.  Tourism transcends territorial boundaries and concerted efforts are
 needed to promote tourism for economic development.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the tourism
 industry should be properly planned, developed and managed at all levels of government in participation with the
 private sector.  It will certainly strengthen the country's cultural structure and natural heritage and lead to positive
 economic results including enhanced employment and income opportunities in rural areas.  
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
 AT A GLANCE
 
SINGLE WINDOW CLEARANCE SYSTEM
 
The Committee had, in its 48th Report on the Demands for Grants (2001-2002) of the Department of Tourism, expressed
 the view that the Government, through its own limited resources, has not been able to provide the requisite funds for the
 development of tourist infrastructure in the country.  Accordingly, the Committee had recommended for early
 implementation of the Single Window Clearance System.  The Committee is of the opinion that the participation of the
 private sector can go a long way in supplementing the efforts of the Government in developing the tourist infrastructure
 in the country and the private sector takes into consideration long-term perspective in facilities required therefor.  The
 Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Central/State/UT Governments must try to remove the obstacles
 faced by the private investors and ensure early implementation of the Single Window Clearance System for tourism
 projects.  
(Para 8)
LACK OF 'VISA-ON-ARRIVAL' SCHEME
 
The Committee agrees that the security considerations of the country cannot be compromised.  However, it must also be
 admitted that granting visa-on-arrival to the foreign tourists at the airports can certainly give a boost to the foreign
 tourist arrivals in the country.  The Committee is of the view that a step in this direction can be taken by initially
 introducing visa-on-arrival for tourists from friendly countries, countries which do not pose a security threat to our
 country and are tourism generating markets.  Later, if the scheme is successful and helps in foreign tourist influx to the
 country, it can be extended to other countries too on a case-to-case basis.
(Para 11)
 
SPECIAL TOURIST POLICE FORCE
 
The Committee feels that the issue relating to the safety and security of the tourists, especially foreign tourists is very
 important and needs to be looked into seriously.  The Committee is of the view that incidents of harassment of foreign
 tourists bring a bad name to the country and have an adverse effect on the foreign tourist arrival.  Deployment of
 Special Tourism Police Force can be an effective tool for ensuring safety and security of the tourists.  The Committee
 appreciates the creation of the Special Tourism Police Force by some of the states.  The Committee also suggests that

SIXTIETH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/60threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:59:17]
 the police personnel of the States should also be provided special 'tourist-oriented' training.  Such form of official
 protection to international and domestic tourists would certainly instil confidence amongst the tourists visiting these
 territories.  A successful implementation of such measures will definitely encourage the other State Governments in
 implementing similar schemes for the promotion of tourism in their respective States.
(Para 13)
RATIONALISATION OF TAXES ON THE TOURISM INDUSTRY
 
The Committee feels that the hotel industry is the backbone of tourism.  The major share of tourism revenue to the
 government is contributed by this sector.  However, there are a lot of taxes and sometimes duplication of taxes at both
 Central and State levels on the hotel sector.  The multiple taxes have imposed a heavy financial burden on the hotel
 industry.  The Committee observes that taxes on hotel rooms and food levied by both the Centre and the States add upto
 over 45 percent, making the industry grossly uncompetitive.  The Committee is of the view that there ought to be
 coordination and synergy between the Centre and the State Governments on the tax front and that there is an urgent
 need to rationalize both Central and State taxes on tourism.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Central
 Government/State Governments must come forward with rationalisation of taxes and provide concessions for the hotel
 industry to give a fillip to the arrival of the tourists in the States.  Further there should be uniformity in the rate of
 various taxes levied by the State Governments on the hotel industry.
(Para 19)
 
The Committee observes that there is a lack of uniformity in taxes, laws and regulation across the States.  While the
 State Governments are taking steps to develop tourism in their respective states, the lack of coordination among them
 and the higher rates of road tax/disparity in the taxes in the states, especially southern States have had negative effect
 on the growth of tourism in these states.  These factors also result in hardships for the tourists as also increase the cost
 of travel for the tourists.  The Committee therefore, recommends that there should be a composite transport permit for
 tourist vehicles.  The Committee also recommends that the Central and the State Governments should take immediate
 steps to create uniformity between the local vehicles and the visiting vehicles.  Steps should also be taken to facilitate
 easy travel and free inter-State movement for tourist vehicles.
(Para 20)
 
TOURISM DEVELOPMENT IN ANDAMAN & NICOBAR AND LAKSHADWEEP ISLANDS
 
The Committee feels that Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands have the potential of growing into top
 destinations for beach tourism and water sports.  But for the constraint of transportation of tourists from the mainland,
 these islands would have attracted a still larger number of tourists, earning revenue and generating employment for the
 local islanders.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the work on the extension of runway at Port Blair may be
 completed at the earliest and the frequency of flights may also be increased so that more and more tourists are able to
 land there.  The Committee welcomes the decision of DGCA to permit the foreign tourist charter flights to land at Port
 Blair and recommends that this fact may be given wide publicity amongst national as well as international tour
 operators.  Similarly, round the year air services, well connected with other important centres like Kochi,
 Thiruvananthapuram and Goa may be introduced to give a boost to the development and promotion of tourism in the
 Lakshadweep Islands. Further, clearance to the proposals for construction of airfields at Kavarati, Minicoy, Andrott,
 Kadmat and Kiltan Islands should be expedited.  The Committee also feels that creating eco-friendly tourist
 infrastructure and water sports facility involves huge expenditure.  Due to the limited resources available to these two
 Union Territories, it may not be possible for the administration of these islands to create infrastructure and other
 facilities in the islands.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the administration of these islands should create
 conducive atmosphere for private investment and, thereafter, invite private sector participation in developing the
 necessary infrastructure, accommodation and high quality eco-friendly tourists/resorts.
(Para 24)
 
PERMIT SYSTEM FOR THE TOURISTS
 
The Committee is of the view that foreign tourists constitute an important component of tourists who wish to visit the
 Andaman & Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands.  The restrictions on foreigners to stay beyond permitted period in the
 Islands and visiting only selected islands has discouraged the foreigners from visiting these islands.  The Committee,

SIXTIETH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/60threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:59:17]
 therefore, recommends that in order to optimally exploit the potential of tourism in these islands, the restrictions on the
 foreigners on visiting the islands may be removed and they may be permitted to stay/enjoy the beauty of the islands for
 longer periods.  The Committee also feels that opening up new islands for foreigners also needs to be given priority and
 recommends that the Central Department of Tourism should take up with the Ministry of Home Affairs the proposal
 regarding opening up of more islands for the foreign tourists.
(Para 26)
 
The Committee appreciates the Government for having opened some areas of Nagaland for foreign tourists and hopes
 that this step will certainly have a positive effect on the growth of tourism in that area.  However, the Committee is of
 the view that the levying of U.S. Dollars 30 from the foreigners who wished to visit Sikkim will discourage the foreign
 tourists from visiting Sikkim.  The Committee recommends that the government should consider abolishing the permit
 system for foreign tourists, as has been done in the case of Assam and Meghalaya.  The Committee hopes that it will
 definitely help in boosting foreign tourist arrivals in the state.
(Para 28)
 
CONSTRAINTS OF COASTAL REGULATION ZONE ACT
 
The Committee is of the view that the impact of tourism on the environment and ecology requires serious
 consideration.  There is no doubt that unplanned tourism not only degrades the environment physically and otherwise
 but also carries the seeds of its own destruction.  However, the Committee feels that the provisions of CRZ Act do not
 take into account the unique features of the coastal lines of various States in the country, particularly of Andaman &
 Nicobar and Lakshadweep Islands and Kerala.  India has many beautiful beaches, which can be developed from
 tourism point of view.  The Committee recommends that the Government should, therefore, seriously consider relaxing
 the provisions of the Costal Regulation Zone Act.  The Ministry of Environment and Forests should also take a liberal
 view and consider positively the proposals seeking relaxation of CRZ restrictions for tourism projects.
(Para 30)
 
LACK OF CONNECTIVITY
 
The Committee feels that there exists a fairly large domestic tourist movement in the country.  However, one major
 stumbling block before the inter-state tourism is poor connectivity.  Domestic Tourism cannot be promoted unless the
 air, rail and road links across the various states and places of tourist interest in the country are improved.  In absence of
 a comfortable access to the places of tourist interest, the tourist cannot be encouraged to visit such places.  The
 Committee, therefore, recommends, that the tourist destinations in the country should be well connected by rail, road
 and air with the urban centres/cities of the region to ensure easy accessibility.  Also the movement of the trains should
 be regularised and speeded up.  The Committee also feels that tourism is closely interlinked with the Civil Aviation
 Sector.  Air linking of the various tourist places in the country as well as places abroad from where tourist arrival is
 expected is essential for development of tourism in the country.  The Committee also recommends that efforts should
 be made to explore the possibility of upgrading the Veer Sarvarkar Airport at Port Blair and Bogdogra Airport into
 international airports so that these places could find a place on the international tourist map.  Also, The Ministries of
 Civil Aviation and Railways should take steps for providing the necessary infrastructure and improve air and rail
 connectivity to the various states in the country.
(Para 32)
 
CONCLUSION
 
33.       The Committee, therefore, recommends that the tourism industry should be properly planned, developed and
 managed at all levels of government in participation with the private sector.  It will certainly strengthen the country's
 cultural structure and natural heritage and lead to positive economic results including enhanced employment and
 income opportunities in rural areas.  
 
MIN
UTES
 

SIXTIETH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/60threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:59:17]
XV^
FIFTEENTH MEETING
 
            The Committee met at 2.30 P.M. on Tuesday, the 6 th August 2002 in Committee Room ‘A’, Parliament House
 Annexe, New Delhi.
 
            MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Dipankar Mukherjee   - Chairman
 
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Dr. A.K. Patel
4. Dr.C.Narayana Reddy
5. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
6. Shri Rajnath Singh 'Surya'
7. Shri S. Viduthalal Virumbi  
 
LOK SABHA
8.      Shri G.M. Banatwalla
9. Shri Anil Basu
10. Shri K.H. Muniyappa
11. Dr. Prasanna Kumar Patasani
12. Shri Bishnu Pada Ray
13. Shri Th. Chaoba Singh
14. Shri Vinay Kumar Sorake
15. Shri Sunder Lal Tiwari
16. Shri A.K.S. Vijayan
 
SECRETARIAT
            Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
            Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
            Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
            Shri K.N. Earendra Kumar, Committee Officer
 
2.                     *          *          *
 
3.         The Committee then considered its draft Sixtieth Report on “Development of Tourism in the Country” and after
 some discussion adopted the Report with slight modifications.  The Committee decided to present the Report to both
 the House of Parliament on Tuesday, the        13
th August 2002.  The Committee authorised the Chairman to nominate
 the Members who would be presenting the Report to the Parliament.
 
4.                     *          *          *
 
5.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3.35 P.M.
______________________________________________________________________
^ Minutes of I
st to XIVth  meetings relate to other matters.
*** Relates to matters not included in this Report.
 
*XIX
NINETEENTH MEETING
            The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Monday, the 11 th November 2002 in Room No.63, Parliament House, New

SIXTIETH REPORT
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/60threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:59:17]
 Delhi.
 
MEMBERS PRESENT
1.            Shri Dipankar Mukherjee   - Chairman
 
         RAJYA SABHA
2.            Shri Ghulam Nabi Azad
3.            Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
4.            Shri K.Rahman Khan
5.            Shri K.Kalavenkata Rao
6.            Shri Balwant Singh Ramoowalia
7.            Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
8.            Shri Rajnath Singh 'Surya'
9.            Shri S. Viduthalai Virumbi
 
         LOK SABHA
10.        Shri Raj Babbar
11.        Shri G.M. Banatwalla
12.        Shri Suresh Chandel
13.        Shri P.S. Gadhavi
14.        Shri Shivaji Mane
15.        Shri K.H. Muniyappa
16.        Shri Vilas Muttemwar
17.        Shri Gunipati Ramaiah
18.         Shri Vinay Kumar Sorake
19.        Shri Kalava Srinivasulu
20.        Shri A.K.S. Vijayan 
 
SECRETARIAT
Shri Satish Kumar, Additional Secretary
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Deputy Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Under Secretary
Shrimati Subhashree Panigrahi, Committee Officer
 
2.         *                      *                      * The Committee also decided to present its Sixtieth Report on “Development of
 Tourism in the Country” to both the Houses of Parliament on the same date.  This Report was adopted by the
 Committee on 6
th August 2002 but could not be presented during last session.  The Committee authorised the Chairman
 to nominate the Members who would be presenting the Reports to the Parliament.
 
3.         A summary record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept.
4.         The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 3.45 P.M.
_____________________________________________________________________
*Minutes of  XVI
th  to XVIIIth  meetings relate to other matters.
*** Relates to matters not included in this Report.