        PARLIAMENT OF INDIADEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARON TRANSPORT, TOURIS Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New DelhiFebruary
THREE HUNDRED Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred Ninth Report on the Demands for Grants (2025(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11(Laid on the Table of 
  PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA  RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEEON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE      Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi February, 2026 / Magha, 1947 (Saka)  
REPORT NO.385
THREE HUNDRED EIGHTY FIFTH REPORT  Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred SeventyDemands for Grants (2025-26) of Ministry of Tourism   resented to the Rajya Sabha on 11th February, 2026) Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11th February, 2026)  Y STANDING COMMITTEE REPORT NO. 385
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Seventy- 26) of Ministry of 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://sansad.in/rs  
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
   PARLIAMENT OF INDIA RAJYA SABHA  DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  TOURISM AND CULTURE   THREE HUNDRED EIGHTY FIFTH REPORT  Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred Seventy- Ninth Report on the Demands for Grants (2025-26) of Ministry of Tourism    (Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 11th February, 2026) (Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 11th February, 2026)    RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT NEW DELHI  February, 2026 / Magha, 1947 (Saka)  
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
PA G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii-iv 
 4. REPORT                                1-35 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   36-37  - 
    6. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended

i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2025-26) 
 
(Constituted on 26th September, 2025) 
 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha   -  Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shrimati Sudha Murty 
3. Shri Golla Baburao 
4. Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
5. Shri Jaggesh 
6. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala  
7. Shri S. Kalyanasundaram 
8. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
9. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
10.  Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
 
Lok Sabha  
11. Shri Mian Altaf Ahmad  
12. Shri Pradan Baruah 
13. Shri R. K. Chaudhary 
14. Shri Anil Firojiya  
15. Shri Tapir Gao  
16. Shri Vishweshwar Hegde Kageri  
17. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
18. Shrimati June Maliah  
19. Shri Ajay Kumar Mandal  
20. Shri K. E. Prakash  
21. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy  
22. Dr. M. P. Abdussamad Samadani  
23. Kumari Selja  
24. Shri Avimanyu Sethi  
25. Shri Anurag Sharma  
26. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar  
27. Shri Tangella Uday Srinivas 
28. Shri Devesh Chandra Thakur  
29. Shri Amarsing Tisso 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
31. Shri K. C. Venugopal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Kushal Kumar Pathak, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Deputy Secretary 
Shri N. Romesh Singh, Deputy Secretary  
Ms. Arshi, Senior Secretariat Assistant 
 
 

ii 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this Three Hundred Eighty Fifth Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contained in its Three 
Hundred Seventy Ninth Report on the Demands for Grants (2025-26) of Ministry of Tourism. 
2. The Three Hundred Seventy Ninth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on 
the 25th March, 2025. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Seventy Ninth Report were received from the Ministry of Tourism on 19th 
September, 2025. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 4th 
February, 2026.   
 
 
(Sanjay Kumar Jha) 
NEW DELHI;                                                          Chairman, 
February 04, 2026                                                  Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Magha 15, 1947 (Saka)                                       Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                       Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
Acronyms 
Acronym Full Form 
AYUSH AYUSH (no explicit expansion in document; traditional medicine context)  
BE Budget Estimate  
BIS Bureau of Indian Standards  
BPRD Bureau of Police Research and Development  
BBA-TT Bachelor of Business Administration in Tourism and Travel 
CBDD Challenge Based Destination Development  
CBSP Capacity Building Scheme for Service Providers  
CNA CNA (monitoring model/modules; no explicit expansion)  
CSMC Central Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee  
DoE Department of Expenditure  
DMOs Destination Management Organizations  
DPP Detailed Perspective Plan  
DPPH Domestic Promotion and Publicity including Hospitality  
DPR Detailed Project Report  
DPRs Detailed Project Reports  
EOI Expression of Interest  
FCIs Food Craft Institutes  
FEEs Foreign Exchange Earnings  
FTAs Foreign Tourist Arrivals  
FUTF Fund Utilization Task Force  
IHMs Institutes of Hotel Management  
IIDP Incredible India Digital Platform  
IHCAE Indian Himalayan Centre for Adventure and Ecotourism 
INPT Indian Naval Physical Training School  
ITAs International Tourist Arrivals  
IITTM Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management  
IDPMS Integrated Digital Project Management System  
MBA-TTM Master of Business Administration in Tourism and Travel Management  
MoHFW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare  
MSDE Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship  
MVT Medical Value Travel  
NABH National Accreditation Board for Hospitals and Healthcare Providers  
NAF National Adventure Foundation  
NCHMCT National Council for Hotel Management and Catering Technology 
NDTM National Digital Tourism Mission  
NIWS National Institute of Water Sports  
NIM Nehru Institute of Mountaineering  
NPMU National Programme Management Unit  

iv 
 
Acronym Full Form 
OPMD Overseas Promotion and Publicity including Marketing Development Assistance 
OPP Overseas Promotion and Publicity  
PMKVY Pradhan Mantri Kaushal Vikas Yojana  
PPP Public-Private Partnership  
PRASHAD Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual Heritage Augmentation Drive  
RE Revised Estimate  
RFP Request for Proposal  
RTSOI Responsible Tourism Society of India  
RTCCs Regional Tourism Coordination Councils  
SAF State Assessment Framework  
SASCI Special Assistance to States/UTs for Capital Investments 
SD 1.0 Swadesh Darshan 1.0  
SD 2.0 Swadesh Darshan 2.0  
SOPs Standard Operating Procedures  
SSC State Steering Committee  
TFL Travel for LiFE  
TCGL Tourism Corporation of Gujarat Limited  
TEDMA Tourism Experience Development and Management Agencies  
TISC Tourism Implementation Support Cell  
TIRS Tourism Implementation Rating System  
TTDI Travel & Tourism Development Index  
TTDC Tamil Nadu Tourism Development Corporation 
UC Utilization Certificate  
UCs Utilization Certificates  
UNEP United Nations Environment Programme  
UTDB Uttarakhand Tourism Development Board  
UTs Union Territories  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

1 
 
 
 REPORT  
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Tourism 
on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Three Hundred Seventy Ninth 
Report on ‘Demands for Grants (2025-26) of Ministry of Tourism’ which was presented to 
both the Houses of Parliament on 25th March, 2025.  
  
  
2.         The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 19th September, 2025 
in respect of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have 
been categorized as follows:- 
  
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 10, 11, 12, 19, 21, 33, 36.2, 36.3, 38, 39, 43, 46, 49, 50. 
Total: 14 
  
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 13, 14, 15, 16, 20, 20.1, 20.2, 20.5, 23, 24, 25, 29, 30, 32, 36, 36.1, 
37, 44, 45, 48, 51, 52, 53. 
Total: 23 
  
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not 
been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 20.3, 20.4, 28, 29.1. 
Total: 4 
  
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: Nil                                                                                             
Total: Nil 
  
  
 
 
 

2 
 
CHAPTER-I 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
  
Comparative Analysis between Budgetary Allocation for Financial Year 2023-24, 2024-
25 and 2025-26 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. To address the chronic underutilization of funds, the Committee recommends 
implementing a three-tier monitoring mechanism for Swadesh Darshan and PRASHAD 
schemes, comprising central oversight, state-level coordination committees, and destination-
specific implementation teams with defined quarterly milestones and real-time digital 
tracking systems. Furthermore, the Ministry should strategically leverage the Public-Private 
Partnership (PPP) model to enhance operational efficiency and attract additional investment 
for tourism infrastructure development. Specific tourism circuits could benefit from private 
sector involvement in not just construction but also in management and innovation of visitor 
experiences, bringing entrepreneurial dynamism to heritage and spiritual tourism 
destinations. The Committee also recommends establishing a dedicated Project Management 
Unit within the Ministry with tourism infrastructure Specialists and financial experts to 
conduct pre-feasibility assessments and ensure project viability before fund disbursement.  
(Para 10) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The suggestion of the Committee is noted. 
 
1.2 The Ministry of Tourism under Swadesh Darshan 2.0 and PRASHAD Schemes 
follow the 2-3 tier system for execution of scheme.  As per the guidelines of the above 
mentioned Schemes, the Ministry centrally monitors the progress through Mission 
Directorate (chaired by Joint Secretary/Additional Secretary level officer and Central 
Sanctioning and Monitoring Committee (CSMC), constituted under the chairmanship of 
Secretary (Tourism).  Further, SD 2.0 provisions for State Steering Committee (SSC) under 
the chairmanship of Chief Secretary and State Mission Director at State level and 
Destination Management Committee under the chairmanship of District Collector has been 
constituted. Ministry of Tourism has also set up a National Programme Management Unit 
(NPMU) to oversee programme implementation.  The scope of work of NPMU primarily 
includes the following:  
(i) Provide program management support 
(ii) Preparation of Detailed Perspective Plan (DPP) for the identified themes, benchmarks 
and standards 
(iii) Preparation of toolkits and SOPs 

3 
 
(iv) Preparation of model RFP/ EOI / agreements 
(v) Support in processing the Project Concept and Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) 
(vi) Provide MIS support in monitoring the scheme 
(vii) Provide support for O&M and PPP 
(viii) Provide capacity-building support, documentation of best practices 
(ix) Impact Assessment 
(x) Provide any other related support as may be required 
  
1.3 The Ministry of Tourism is also advising States to prepare Destination Master Plans 
for identified destinations.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2 The Committee expresses serious concern over the sharp decline in allocation for the 
Restructured Overseas Promotion and Publicity Scheme, which has been reduced to an 
inadequate ₹3.07 crore in 2025-26. This drastic reduction threatens India's competitiveness 
in the global tourism market where competing destinations are substantially increasing their 
marketing investments. The Committee recommends establishing an Integrated Global 
Tourism Marketing Framework that leverages digital platforms and artificial intelligence to 
deliver personalized, targeted international campaigns. The Incredible India Digital 
Platform (IIDP) should be enhanced with AI-driven personalization capabilities, virtual 
tourism experiences, and seamless booking interfaces to provide potential international 
visitors with immersive pre-visit experiences of India's diverse destinations.  
(Para 11) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Recommendation of the Committee is duly noted. 
  
2.2 The Ministry is working on revamping the existing Overseas Promotion and Publicity 
Scheme to make it more targeted and  result oriented. The objective of revamping the scheme 
is to leverage user generated content creation for targeted promotional campaigns through 
digital platforms to re-position Incredible India in targeted global markets. 
  
2.3 It is submitted that the revamped Incredible India website has personalization features 
and seamless booking interfaces.  
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee strongly recommends allocation specifically for a comprehensive 
digital marketing campaign targeting key international source markets. This initiative should 
incorporate advanced data analytics to identify high-potential visitor segments, create 
personalized digital experiences, and measure campaign effectiveness with precision. The 

4 
 
Ministry should collaborate with leading technology partners to develop virtual reality tours 
of India's iconic destinations, interactive cultural experiences, and AI-powered trip planners 
that can be accessed through mobile applications and the Incredible India website. 
Implementing a 360-degree digital presence strategy across social media platforms, travel 
forums, and international digital publications would ensure maximum visibility with efficient 
resource utilization. 
(Para 12) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The recommendations of the Committee are duly noted.  
  
3.2 The Ministry is undertaking data driven policy decision to formulate market specific 
action plans and strategies, including digital promotion strategies. A comprehensive plan will 
be undertaken including various digital platforms and social media channels. 
 
Utilisation of Budgetary Allocations 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4 The Committee notes with serious concern the chronic pattern of fund 
underutilization by the Ministry of Tourism, which represents not merely an administrative 
challenge but a fundamental impediment to the growth of India's tourism potential. The 
alarming statistics of only 33.4% utilization of allocated funds in 2023-24 (₹801.81 crore out 
of ₹2400 crore) and the continuation of this trend in 2024-25 (only ₹396.82 crore utilized 
thus far out of ₹2479.62 crore) indicates deep-rooted systemic inefficiencies that require 
comprehensive structural reforms. While the Ministry has attributed this underperformance 
to administrative bottlenecks, procedural delays, and coordination challenges with 
implementing agencies, the Committee finds these explanations inadequate and reflective of 
entrenched operational weaknesses that demand immediate redressal. 
(Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 The observation of the Committee is noted.  In this regard, it is to mention that the 
Ministry of Tourism under Swadesh Darshan scheme sanctioned projects till 2018-19, after 
which the scheme was reviewed. Thereafter, the scheme of Swadesh Darshan was revamped 
as Swadesh Darshan 2.0 with the focus on Destination Centric Approach.  Accordingly, the 
Ministry of Tourism till now has sanctioned 48 projects under SD 2.0 for Rs. 1930.31 Crore.  
Further, 36 projects have been sanctioned under Challenge Based Destination Development 
(CBDD), a sub-scheme of Swadesh Darshan for Rs. 623.13 Crore.  Since a robust pipeline of 
sanctioned projects has now been recreated under SD 2.0, Ministry of Tourism is hopeful of 
achievingits financial targets from FY 2025-26 onwards.   
  

5 
 
4.2 It is submitted that for financial year 2024-25 under DPPH scheme, in Revised 
Estimate Rs. 92.95 Crores was allocated out of which 89.69 Crores were utilized. 
  
4.3  It is also submitted that for the FY 2024-25, an amount of Rs. 30 crore was allocated 
under Overseas Promotion and Publicity (OPP) Scheme. Out of this, Rs. 29.26 crore was 
utilized during the last FY which is more than 97% of the total Budget Estimate allocated 
under the Scheme. It is further submitted that the existing Scheme is being revamped to 
tackle deficiencies in the existing scheme and to make it more relevant due to the changing 
times. 
  
4.4 The Ministry of Tourism does regular monitoring of funds through the CNA model, 
as the information is updated in the CNA modules on day to day basis. Under the scheme of 
Assistance to IHMs/FCI/IITTM/NCHMCT, budget provision of Rs.37.50 Crore was kept at 
RE for FY 2023-24, of which an amount of Rs.31.71 Cr was utilized during the financial 
year. Whereas, budget provision of Rs.32.00 Crore was kept at RE stage for FY 2024-25, of 
which an amount of Rs.24.40 Cr was utilized during the financial year. The reason for 
underutilization of funds is lack of timely receipt of Utilization Certificate and pegging of 
funds to a particular project. The concern of pegging of funds to a particular project has now 
been addressed and optimum utilization of funds is expected to be achieved. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5 The Committee recommends establishing Regional Tourism Coordination Councils 
(RTCCs) that bring together clusters of states with similar tourism characteristics for 
quarterly coordination meetings to address regional implementation challenges. These 
councils would facilitate peer learning, regional tourism circuit development, and coordinated 
infrastructure planning while creating a forum for regular interaction between the Ministry 
and state implementation agencies. Additionally, the Ministry should develop Standard 
Operating Procedures (SOPs) for all critical processes including fund requests, utilization 
certificate submission, and project closure documentation, eliminating ambiguities that 
frequently cause delays. Further, the Committee recommends creating a Tourism 
Implementation Support Cell (TISC) in each state tourism department with dedicated 
officials trained specifically in Ministry of Tourism scheme implementation protocols. These 
structural enhancements to state coordination would address the root causes of 
implementation delays while creating sustainable mechanisms for ongoing collaboration. 
(Para 21) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 The observation of the Committee regarding Regional Tourism Coordination 
Councils (RTCCs) is noted. 
  
5.2 The Ministry of Tourism actively engages and collaborates with all stakeholders, 
including State Governments and Union Territory Administrations, for the development and 

6 
 
promotion of tourism across the country. Meetings are conducted with State 
Governments/UTs on regular basis to deliberate on sectoral issues and address challenges, 
ensuring coordinated tourism development on a pan-India scale. In addition to these 
interactions, National and Regional Conferences of State Tourism Ministers are periodically 
organized to review the sector, discuss ongoing schemes and policies, and share initiatives 
aimed at fostering holistic tourism growth in collaboration with States, UTs, and other 
stakeholders.  
 
New Tourism Hubs nearby National Highways 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6 The Committee recommends the development of tourism hubs along national 
highways, showcasing the unique regional heritage, cuisine, and offering world-class 
facilities. As a model, the Committee suggests the Ministry consider the Mithila Haat, located 
along National Highway-57 in Madhubani, Bihar. This hub beautifully reflects the rich 
traditions, flavors, and creative spirit of Mithila, offering visitors an immersive cultural 
experience. In line with this, the Committee recommends targeting 100 such sites in the 
coming year to refocus efforts on developing the local cuisine, art, culture, and heritage of 
each state. This initiative aims to attract tourists from around the world while also promoting 
and popularizing local brands and identities. 
(Para 33) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted.   
 
6.2 Development of tourism amenities is primarily done by the concerned State 
Governments. However, the Ministry of Tourism complement these efforts by extending 
financial support to the States/UTs under its Swadesh Darshan scheme.  Accordingly, the 
Ministry of Tourism has sanctioned wayside amenities along with highways under SD 1.0 
scheme.   
 
Analysis of Foreign Tourist Arrivals 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7 The Committee recommends a fundamental reimagining of India's tourism marketing 
approach through the implementation of an AI-driven Personalized Tourism Marketing 
Ecosystem. This would leverage the revamped Incredible India Digital Platform (IIDP) to 
create highly targeted, personalized marketing campaigns for different international markets 
based on sophisticated data analytics and AI algorithms. The system would analyze potential 
visitors' digital footprints, travel preferences, and cultural interests to deliver customized 
tourism propositions rather than generic promotional content. Furthermore, the Ministry 

7 
 
should develop market-specific digital personas representing key tourist segments from major 
source countries, enabling the creation of tailored content strategies that resonate with 
specific cultural contexts and travel motivations. The Committee also recommends 
establishing a Global Digital Influencer Network dedicated exclusively to promoting Indian 
tourism experiences, systematically engaging with content creators who have significant 
followings in key international markets. This revolutionary approach would transform 
tourism marketing from mass communication to precision engagement, substantially 
improving conversion rates and expanding India's share in the global tourism market. 
(Para 36.2) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 The recommendation of the Committee is duly noted.  
 
Transforming the Chalo India Initiative into a Strategic Diaspora Engagement 
Program 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8 The Committee recommends a significant enhancement of the Chalo India Global 
Diaspora Campaign, transforming it from primarily an incentive program into a strategic 
diaspora engagement framework that systematically cultivates the Indian diaspora as tourism 
ambassadors. The Ministry should implement a tiered Diaspora Tourism Ambassador 
certification program, providing specialized training, promotional materials, and digital 
tools to formally recognized diaspora members who actively promote Indian tourism. 
Furthermore, a sophisticated tracking and attribution system should be developed to measure 
the direct impact of diaspora-generated tourism, enabling performance-based incentives and 
recognition for top-performing ambassadors. The initiative should incorporate regular 
virtual forums connecting diaspora communities with tourism stakeholders in India, creating 
channels for continuous feedback on international visitor experiences and emerging 
preferences. Additionally, the Committee recommends establishing Diaspora Tourism 
Innovation Grants to support creative diaspora-led projects that enhance India's tourism 
appeal in their respective countries. This strategic approach would transform the diaspora 
from passive supporters to active, measurable contributors to India's tourism growth, with 
clearly defined performance indicators ensuring accountability and effectiveness.  
(Para 36.3) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The recommendations of the Committee are duly noted.  
 
 
 
 

8 
 
Developing Destination-Specific Transformation Initiatives 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9 The Committee recommends that beyond the general development of 50 tourist 
destinations announced in the 2025-26 budget, the Ministry should implement a Strategic 
Destination Transformation Program that selects 10 high-potential destinations annually for 
comprehensive development as global tourism excellence centers. Each selected destination 
would receive integrated support including infrastructure enhancement, digital 
transformation, capacity building, and targeted international promotion, creating showcase 
models of world-class tourism management. The program should incorporate Destination 
Experience Laboratories where innovative tourism concepts, technologies, and service 
models can be tested and refined before broader implementation. Furthermore, the 
Committee recommends establishing Destination Management Organizations (DMOs) with 
public-private governance structures for each selected destination, ensuring professional 
management and sustainable growth through dedicated expert oversight. These initiatives 
would transform India's approach to destination development from incremental improvement 
to comprehensive excellence, creating globally competitive tourism products that 
significantly enhance India's tourism appeal and international rankings. 
(Para 38) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted. 
 
Accelerating Medical and Wellness Tourism Through Specialized Ecosystems 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10 Building upon the 'Heal in India' initiative announced in the 2025-26 budget, the 
Committee recommends developing a comprehensive Medical and Wellness Tourism 
Ecosystem that integrates healthcare excellence with exceptional tourism experiences. This 
would involve establishing specialized Medical Tourism Corridors in key cities, with 
integrated services including international patient facilitation centers, specialized 
accommodation, wellness tourism packages, and cultural experiences designed specifically 
for medical travelers and their companions. The Ministry should implement a rigorous 
Medical Tourism Certification System for healthcare facilities and associated service 
providers, ensuring consistently high standards specifically tailored to international patients' 
needs and expectations. Furthermore, the Committee recommends developing International 
Insurance Coordination Mechanisms to streamline payment processes for international 
patients, removing a significant barrier to medical tourism growth. These specialized 
interventions would position India as the definitive global leader in medical and wellness 
tourism, capturing a substantially larger share of this high-value tourism segment 
(Para 39) 
 

9 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. 
 
10.2 The Government of India recognizes medical value travel and wellness tourism as 
important sectors having the potential of accelerating the country’s development and 
attaining the objective of Aatmanirbhar Bharat. India offers a range of tourism opportunities 
to Medical Value Traveller to combine the treatment with a visit to tourist destinations. 
 
  
10.3 Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (MoHFW) launched India’s official portal for 
Medical Value Travel (MVT) for those who want to avail medical treatment in India. This 
portal helps streamline the information and patient journey of international medical travellers 
to India. The portal can be accessed by web-link https://healinindia.gov.in/. 
 
  
10.4 The National Accreditation Board for Hospitals and Healthcare Providers 
(NABH) under the MoHFW provides accreditation to Wellness Centres and also has 
developed accreditation standards for AYUSH treatment and wellness centres. 
 
  
10.5 Government of India issues Medical Visa to those foreigners who visit India to seek 
medical treatment in established /recognised specialised Hospitals / Treatment Centres in 
India for serious ailments and Medical Attendant Visa to the attendant / family members of 
the patient coming to India for medical treatment. 
 
 
Growth in Domestic Tourists Footfalls 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
11 The Committee welcomes the surge in domestic tourism, yet emphasises the need for 
enhanced infrastructure, visitor management, and sustainable tourism policies to prevent 
over-tourism and environmental strain. It therefore urges the Ministry to proactively 
collaborate with State Governments to implement capacity assessments for major destinations 
and ensure balanced regional tourism development. 
(Para 43) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 The recommendation of the Committee is noted.  
 
11.2 Considering the importance of enhanced infrastructure, visitor management and 
sustainable tourism policies to prevent over-tourism and environmental strain, the Ministry is 
focusing on the model of sustainable development.  Accordingly, the Ministry has already 
sanctioned 48 projects under SD 2.0 initiative for Rs. 1930.31 Crore and 36 projects under 
Challenged Based Destination Development (CBDD) (a sub-scheme of Swadesh Darshan) 
for Rs. 623.13 Crore.  This is in addition to the 76 projects sanctioned earlier for Rs. 5287.90 
Crore under SD 1.0 and 58 projects sanctioned under PRASHAD scheme for Rs. 1898.54 

10 
 
Crore.  Further, the Government of India under SASCI scheme has sanctioned 40 projects 
worth Rs. 3295.76 Crore.  
Growth in Domestic Tourists Footfalls 
Recommendation/Observation 
12 While the Dekho Apna Desh initiative has been instrumental in promoting domestic 
travel, the Committee advises the Ministry to undertake a formal review of its impact to 
evaluate its effectiveness and guide future initiatives. 
(Para 46) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 The recommendation of the Committee is duly noted. 
 
Transforming Hospitality Education through Industry-Integrated Learning 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
13 The Committee emphasizes that traditional curriculum development processes in 
hospitality education have become inadequate for preparing professionals in the rapidly 
evolving tourism landscape where technological proficiency, sustainability expertise, and 
experiential delivery capabilities are increasingly essential. The Committee recommends 
establishing a National Tourism Education Innovation Council comprising industry leaders, 
academic experts, digital technology specialists, and international hospitality education 
partners to fundamentally reimagine hospitality curriculum beyond incremental updates. This 
collaborative body would develop core curriculum frameworks incorporating emerging 
competencies including digital guest experience management, sustainable tourism 
operations, cultural interpretation techniques, and tourism entrepreneurship. Furthermore, 
the Committee recommends implementing a Mandatory Industry Immersion Program 
requiring all hospitality faculty to complete annual industry placements of at least four 
weeks, ensuring instructors maintain current practical knowledge alongside theoretical 
expertise. Additionally, the Ministry should establish a Hospitality Education Digital 
Transformation Initiativethat provides all IHMs and FCIs with integrated learning 
management systems, virtual reality training environments for practical skills development, 
and AI-powered personalized learning pathways that adapt to individual student learning 
patterns. These innovations would transform hospitality education from institution-centered 
to learner-centered while ensuring graduates possess the precise competencies required for 
India's tourism growth. 
(Para 49) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 The recommendations of the Committee have been duly noted. The mandate of 
National Council for Hotel Management& Catering Technology (NCHMCT) is to co-
ordinate the growth and general advancement in the development of hospitality management 
education through its affiliated Institutes. A Task Force was constituted under the 
chairmanship of Senior Economic Advisor (Tourism) to review the curriculum, courses and 

11 
 
pedagogy of tourism and hospitality institutes under the purview of Ministry of Tourism. On 
the basis of task force recommendations and in consultation with several industry experts and 
academicians NCHMCT has revamped its curriculum with introduction of 17 new subjects, 
inclusion of AI and technology aspects as well as focus on sustainability, environment and 
wellness.  
13.2 Under the aegis of Ministry of Tourism, the 21 Central IHMs have entered into a 
Memorandum of Understanding with the 10 leading Hospitality chains, where area of 
collaboration was focused on Student Engagement, Faculty Development, Short-term tourism 
& hospitality skilling & education and Institutional & Infrastructural Development. Some of 
the key areas where these leading Hospitality chains are contributing into advancement of 
IHMs are Faculty and student development through industrial visits and guest lectures, 
Segment specific specialized training, use of Artificial Intelligence in the hotels, Training 
Workshops, Industrial training, Session with the Front Office Manager, Chefs etc.  
13.3 IITTM has adopted AI-enabled learning modules and e-content delivery. IITTM is 
also planning to initiate industry immersion programs for faculty in collaboration with 
hospitality partners and travel trade bodies. 
 
Pioneering Sustainable Funding Models for Tourism Education 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14 The Committee recognizes that the current allocation of ₹35 crore for FY 2025-26 
represents a significant constraint on the necessary expansion and modernization of 
hospitality education infrastructure. Beyond conventional funding approaches, the 
Committee recommends establishing a Tourism Education Investment Fund through strategic 
partnerships with major tourism industry stakeholders, international development agencies, 
and corporate CSR initiatives. This dedicated fund would provide sustainable financing for 
infrastructure development, technology acquisition, and faculty excellence programs across 
hospitality education institutions. The Committee also recommends developing a Tourism 
Education Revenue Diversification Framework that enables institutes to generate 
supplementary income through establishing commercial training restaurants, student-
operated boutique hotels, specialized consulting services, and executive education programs 
for industry professionals. Furthermore, the Ministry should implement the Destination 
Adoption Program wherein tourism-intensive destinations contribute to hospitality education 
infrastructure in exchange for dedicated workforce development programs tailored to their 
specific requirements. These innovative funding mechanisms would transform hospitality 
education financing from government-dependent to multi-stakeholder supported, 
substantially expanding available resources while creating greater alignment between 
educational institutions and industry needs. 
(Para 50) 
14.1 The recommendations of the Committee are duly noted. 
***** 
 

12 
 
 
CHAPTER-II 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
  
Comparative Analysis between Budgetary Allocation for Financial Year 2023-24, 2024-25 and 
2025-26 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. While the allocation for domestic tourism promotion remains relatively consistent at 
₹136.90 crore for 2025-26, the Committee recommends a more balanced approach that 
strengthens both domestic and international tourism sectors. The Ministry should develop a 
Dual Growth Strategy that identifies complementary objectives for both sectors, with 
domestic tourism focusing on developing emerging destinations and international tourism 
emphasizing unique cultural and experiential offerings. To stimulate domestic tourism 
innovation, the committee recommends allocating ₹50 crore specifically for developing and 
promoting new tourism concepts such as Caravan Tourism across states with appropriate 
infrastructure and regulatory frameworks. This initiative would diversify tourism offerings 
while creating new entrepreneurial opportunities in emerging tourism segments.  
(Para 13) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 The Ministry of Tourism promotes India in a holistic manner, through various 
initiatives. As part of on-going activities; promotion of various tourism destinations and 
products of India including Caravan Tourism are taken up. 
  
1.2 Development of Tourism is primarily done by the respective State Governments/ UT 
administrations. However, the Ministry of Tourism under its Swadesh Darshan scheme 
complements these efforts by sanctioning projects for development of tourism 
infrastructure.  Based on the recommendation of the State Governments, submission of 
project proposals and adherence of the scheme guidelines etc., the Ministry of Tourism may 
consider sanctioning projects under various themes including Caravan Tourism.  A separate 
allocation for the same may not be required.  
  
1.3 Ministry of Tourism had earlier formulated a policy for development and promotion 
of caravan and caravan camping parks. The States of Maharashtra, Kerala, Goa and UT of 
Andaman & Nicobar Islands have caravan tourism policies. The State of Chhattisgarh has 
included caravan tourism in their tourism policy. 
  

13 
 
1.4 The Ministry is also envisaging the development of curated residences centered 
around thematic products such as wellness, cuisine, wildlife, culture etc. to enhance global 
tourism. 
 
 Recommendation/Observation 
2 The Committee views with grave concern the reduction in allocations and negative 
recoveries recorded under the 'Safe Tourist Destinations for Women' initiative. This 
regression contradicts the fundamental principle of inclusive tourism development and may 
significantly impact women travelers' confidence in Indian destinations. The Committee 
recommends establishing an Inter-Ministerial Women's Tourism Safety Task Force 
comprising representatives from the Ministries of Tourism, Women & Child Development, 
Home Affairs, and state tourism departments to develop comprehensive safety protocols, 
monitoring mechanisms, and emergency response systems specifically designed for women 
tourists. Additionally, the Ministry should allocate funds for implementing technology-driven 
safety measures, including GPS-enabled transportation monitoring, CCTV surveillance at 
tourist hotspots, and a centralized tourism safety application with real-time assistance 
features and emergency response capabilities. 
(Para 14) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Security of tourists is essentially a State Government subject. However, the Ministry 
of Tourism has been periodically requesting all State Governments and Union Territories for 
availing the benefits of the ‘Safe Tourism Destinations for Women’ under Nirbhaya fund 
which can be utilized for projects specifically designed to improve the safety and security of 
women tourists. In regards to the proposal submitted by Madhya Pradesh Tourism Board, 
Government of India sanctioned Rs. 16.79 crore (approx.) under the “Safe Tourism 
Destination for Women” Scheme. The final and 3rd installment of Central share of Rs. 5.27 
crore was released by Ministry of Tourism in the financial year 2024-2025. 
  
2.2 In addition, Ministry of Tourism had sought partnership with Ministry of Home 
Affairs, Bureau of Police Research and Development (BPR&D) for creation of dedicated 
uniformed Tourist Police at the local level, especially at the important tourism destinations.  
  
2.3 The State Governments and Union Territory Administrations of Telangana, Andhra 
Pradesh, Delhi, Goa, Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and 
Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim and Uttar Pradesh have 
deployed tourist police, in one form or the other. 
 
 
 
 

14 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3 The Committee acknowledges that environmental sustainability must transition from 
an auxiliary consideration to a core principle in tourism development. To institutionalize 
this approach, the Committee recommends developing the National Sustainable Tourism 
Certification System with clearly defined parameters for ecological impact, resource 
efficiency, and community engagement. This system would incentivize tourism businesses to 
adopt green innovations and responsible practices through preferential marketing and 
access to specialized funding mechanisms. Furthermore, the Ministry should establish five 
Regional Centers for Sustainable Tourism Excellence that would function as knowledge 
hubs for research, training, and practical implementation of sustainable tourism principles, 
focusing on developing models for responsible destination management in different 
geographical contexts across India. 
(Para 15) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Ministry of Tourism launched ‘Travel for LiFE’ (TFL) program under Mission LiFE 
envisioned by the Hon’ble Prime Minister, to bring large-scale behavioural change amongst 
tourists and tourism businesses, to inculcate sustainable practices for protection of the 
environment and local culture. The Travel for LiFE (TFL) program launched in 2023 
envisages to mainstream sustainability into the tourism sector towards developing a 
sustainable, responsible and resilient tourism sector. The Travel for Life pledge for visitors 
and residents promotes responsible tourism by encouraging visitors and residents to adopt 
eco-friendly practices, reduce environmental impact and develop a culture of sustainability. 
The Travel for Life Certification program recognizes businesses that adopt sustainable 
practices in tourism, with standards designed to reduce environmental impact while 
enhancing community benefits. The Ministry also conducted five regional workshops in 
collaboration with Responsible Tourism Society of India (RTSOI) and United Nations 
Environment Programme (UNEP) for the capacity building of States. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4 Recognizing the critical importance of skilled human resources in delivering quality 
tourism experiences, the Committee recommends substantially increasing allocations for 
tourism education institutions including IHMS, FCI, IITTM, and NCHMCT. The Ministry 
should develop an integrated Tourism Skills Enhancement Program with modernized 
curricula incorporating digital competencies, sustainable tourism management, experiential 
tourism design, and entrepreneurial skills development. Additionally, the Committee 
recommends establishing specialized training centers in partnership with industry leaders to 
develop expertise in emerging areas such as wellness tourism, adventure tourism 
management, and cultural interpretation. These institutions should establish international 
exchange programs with leading global tourism education centers to ensure alignment with 
evolving global standards and innovative practices in tourism management. 
(Para 16) 
 

15 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 As of now, there are 56 Institutes of Hotel Management (IHMs) [comprising 21 
Central IHMs, 33 State IHMs, 2 State IHMs (running under PPP mode)] and 13 Food Craft 
Institutes (FCIs), which have come up with the support of the Ministry. Ministry of Tourism, 
considers proposals for setting up of new State IHMs/ FCIs based on the request received 
from the respective State, alignment with the scheme guidelines, its’ feasibility report, etc. 
Further, a Task Force was constituted under the chairmanship of Sr. Economic Advisor 
(Tourism) to review the curriculum, courses and pedagogy of tourism and hospitality 
institutes under the purview of Ministry of Tourism. The said Task Force had participants 
from the leading hospitality chains. The suggestions of the department heads of these leading 
hospitality chains were taken on record, while furnishing its’ report. The report of the Task 
Force has been finalized and  is under execution mode. Also to submit that Indian Institute 
of Tourism & Travel management (IITTM) has introduced  modules on digital 
competencies, sustainable and experiential tourism and entrepreneurship. 
 
Utilisation of Budgetary Allocations 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee recommends implementing a comprehensive Integrated Digital 
Project Management System (IDPMS) modeled after successful implementations like Tamil 
Nadu's tourism data collection and analytical method for tracking visitor footfalls. This 
centralized platform would facilitate end-to-end project lifecycle management, from 
proposal submission to fund disbursal and utilization certificate processing with embedded 
automatic alerts and escalation protocols for pending actions. The system should 
incorporate real-time dashboards accessible to all stakeholders including the Ministry 
officials, state tourism departments, and implementing agencies, providing transparency on 
project status, fund utilization, and procedural bottlenecks requiring immediate intervention. 
This digital infrastructure would enable predictive analytics to identify potential 
implementation challenges before they create delays and would maintain a comprehensive 
digital repository of all project documentation, eliminating physical document submission 
requirements that frequently cause delays. 
(Para 20) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 The Ministry of Tourism has initiated the development of a Project Management 
System aimed at streamlining the entire project lifecycle. This system will facilitate seamless 
management from proposal submission to fund disbursal and submission of utilization 
certificates. Designed to enhance efficiency and transparency, it will ensure smooth 
coordination across various stages of project implementation. Additionally, features for real-
time monitoring may be incorporated to enable timely tracking and effective execution of 
projects. It is expected that the system will improve oversight and ensure accountability in 
the execution of tourism-related projects across the country. 
  

16 
 
5.2 So far as the collection of footfall data is concerned, this may be noted that, this 
Ministry has developed a uniform methodology which is presently under implementation 
phase across States.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6 The Committee recommends the development of a Tourism Implementation Rating 
System (TIRS) to evaluate and rank states based on their efficiency in implementing tourism 
projects, timely submission of required documentation, and overall fund utilization patterns. 
This performance-based framework would create healthy competition among states while 
providing objective metrics for allocating additional resources to high-performing regions. 
States consistently demonstrating superior implementation capabilities should receive 
incentives including priority funding for new projects, relaxed procedural requirements, and 
recognition through annual tourism implementation excellence awards. Conversely, states 
with persistently poor implementation records should receive targeted capacity-building 
interventions and simplified pilot projects to build implementation expertise before receiving 
allocations for more complex initiatives. This rating system would create accountability 
while providing valuable data on implementation challenges specific to different regions. 
(Para 20.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 Observation of the Committee is noted. The Ministry will look into the possibility of 
introducing a rating system to rank the states based on their efficiency in implementation of 
tourism projects.   
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7 The Committee recommends establishing a specialized Fund Utilization Task Force 
(FUTF) comprising financial experts, project management specialists, and representatives 
from high-performing state tourism departments. This dedicated team would conduct 
monthly reviews of fund utilization patterns, identify procedural bottlenecks, and implement 
rapid interventions to accelerate fund absorption. The FUTF should develop standardized 
templates for all documentation required throughout the project lifecycle—including 
detailed project reports, utilization certificates, and closure documents—thereby eliminating 
inconsistencies that frequently delay approvals. Additionally, the task force would provide 
hands-on implementation support to underperforming states through expert deployment, 
targeted training programs, and developing simplified process maps for complex 
procedures. The FUTF would also conduct quarterly implementation audits to identify 
systemic issues requiring policy interventions and would maintain a comprehensive 
knowledge repository of implementation challenges and successful resolution strategies. 
(Para 20.2) 
  
 
 

17 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 The Ministry of Tourism has established a National Programme Management Unit 
(NPMU) comprising project management and financial experts. This unit supports the 
Ministry in conducting regular reviews and maintaining consistent follow-ups with State 
Implementing Agencies. It also develops standardized templates and documentation for 
Detailed Project Report (DPR) formulation, Utilization Certificates (UC), and closure 
documents. Additionally, the unit plays a key role in identifying and escalating issues that 
require policy interventions to the Ministry. The NPMU also maintains a comprehensive 
knowledge repository that captures various implementation challenges faced during project 
execution. This repository also documents effective resolution strategies, serving as a 
valuable reference for future projects. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8 The Committee strongly recommends transitioning to a performance based 
budgeting approach wherein future allocations are directly linked to demonstrated 
implementation capacity and past utilization efficiency. This fundamental shift from the 
current input-focused budgeting to an outcome oriented approach would create powerful 
incentives for improved fund utilization while ensuring that resources are allocated where 
they can be most effectively deployed. The budgeting process should incorporate a two-tier 
allocation strategy: a base allocation determined by strategic priorities and tourism 
potential, and a performance-linked component based on past implementation efficiency. 
Additionally, the Ministry should implement mid-year budget reviews with provisions for 
reallocation from underutilizing schemes to high-performing initiatives, ensuring maximum 
utilization of available resources. This approach would bring fiscal discipline while creating 
a results-oriented culture within the Ministry and implementing agencies. 
(Para 20.5) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 The observation of the Committee is noted. The Ministry will look into the 
possibility of introducing performance based budgeting approach wherein future allocations 
are directly linked to demonstrated implementation capacity and past utilization efficiency. 
  
8.2 In this connection, it may further be noted that a holistic approach is adopted under 
the Swadesh Darshan scheme while considering the projects for sanctioning to ensure that a 
diverse and comprehensive representation of tourism destinations is considered to distribute 
the benefits of tourism development more equitably across the country. This approach allows 
for the growth of tourism in emerging areas, providing them with opportunities for economic 
development and infrastructural improvement.  In addition, elements such as tourism 
potential, connectivity, capacity to general employment, sustainability etc.   are also given 
adequate attention.   
  
8.3 The Ministry of Tourism maintains financial discipline under this scheme to ensure 
that the allocated funds are used effectively and efficiently. The funds are disbursed in a 

18 
 
structured manner through a system of trenches or instalments. The next instalment of funds 
is only released after the implementing agency has utilized at least 75% of the previous 
instalment. This mechanism ensures that funds are not just released in bulk without proper 
utilization, but rather with a measure of accountability and progress in the project’s 
implementation. 
  
8.4 The Ministry of Tourism also plays a proactive role in maintaining financial 
oversight by conducting mid-year budget reviews. Based on these reviews, the Ministry 
proposes revised financial estimates, if necessary, allowing for flexibility and adjustments in 
the funding to accommodate changes in project requirements or unforeseen circumstances.  
 
Analysis of Budgetary Allocation under Central Sector Schemes 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9 The Committee has reviewed the provisions made in the budget of the Ministry of 
Tourism for the financial years 2023-24, 2024-25, and the estimates for 2025-26. The 
assessment includes an examination of allocations for various schemes, including Swadesh 
Darshan (SD 1.0) Scheme, Swadesh Darshan Scheme 2.0, and the Challenge-Based 
Destination Development Scheme. The Committee has also considered the Revised Estimates 
for 2023-24 and 2024-25 and has noted significant shortfalls in expenditure. The following 
allocations and revisions were noted:  
● In FY 2023-24:  
⮚ Budget Estimate (BE): ₹1412.00 crore  
⮚ Revised Estimate (RE): ₹818.00 crore  
● In 2024-25:  
⮚ Budget Estimate (BE): ₹1750.00 crore  
⮚ Revised Estimate (RE): ₹350.00 crore  
● In 2025-26:  
⮚ Budget Estimate (BE): ₹1900.00 crore 
(Para 23) 
10 The Committee observes that the Revised Estimates for both 2023-24 and 2024-25 
were significantly lower than the Budget Estimates indicative of persistent underutilisation 
of allocated funds. The Committee notes with concern the following issues affecting fund 
utilisation:  
  
i. Delays in Fund Disbursement: The Ministry has attributed the underutilisation of 
funds in 2023-24 to delays in the submission of requisite documents by State 
Governments and implementing agencies, which are essential for fund release.  

19 
 
ii. Project Implementation Challenges: The transition from Swadesh Darshan 1.0 to 2.0 
has posed challenges, particularly in finalising Detailed Project Reports (DPRs) and 
engaging Tourism Experience Development and Management Agencies (TEDMA).  
iii. Underutilisation in 2024-25: The sharp reduction in Revised Estimates (₹350 crore 
from ₹1750 crore) points to a slowdown in the execution of projects under the 
Swadesh Darshan Scheme and other initiatives. 
iv. Pending Approvals under Challenge-Based Destination Development Scheme: The 
Ministry has yet to finalise approvals for projects under this sub-scheme, further 
delaying the utilisation of allocated funds. 
(Para 24) 
11 The Committee therefore recommends the Ministry work closely with State 
Governments to ensure that all necessary documents, including utilisation certificates (UCs) 
and project closure reports, are submitted promptly to prevent delays in fund disbursement. 
It further urges the Ministry develops clear timelines including a mechanism for monitoring 
of project execution under Swadesh Darshan 2.0 to ensure timely utilisation of allocated 
funds and expediting the assessment and approval of projects under the Challenge-Based 
Destination Development Scheme to ensure timely implementation. The Committee also 
advises for a strengthened coordination between the Ministry, State Governments, and 
implementing agencies for the effective execution of tourism infrastructure projects. 
(Para 25) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 It is mentioned that the Ministry of Tourism under Swadesh Darshan scheme 
sanctioned projects till 2018-19, after which the scheme was reviewed. Thereafter the 
scheme of Swadesh Darshan was revamped as Swadesh Darshan 2.0 with the focus on 
Destination Centric Approach.  Accordingly, the Ministry of Tourism till now has 
sanctioned 48 projects under SD 2.0 for Rs. 1930.31 Crore.  Further, 36 projects have been 
sanctioned under Challenge Based Destination Development (CBDD), a sub-scheme of 
Swadesh Darshan for Rs. 623.13 Crore.  Since a robust pipeline of sanctioned projects has 
now been recreated under SD 2.0, Ministry of Tourism is hopeful to achieve its financial 
targets from FY 2025-26 onwards.  
  
11.2 In order to ensure effective utilization of funds by the State Governments /UT 
Administrations, the following steps have further been taken: 
  
i. Ministry is working closely with State Governments to ensure that all necessary 
documents, including utilisation certificates (UCs) and project closure reports, are 
submitted promptly to prevent delays in fund disbursement. 
ii. Ministry is providing clear timelines including a mechanism for monitoring of 
project execution under Swadesh Darshan 2.0 and Challenge-Based Destination 
Development for effective implementation. 

20 
 
iii. All efforts are being made to strengthen co-ordination between the Ministry, States 
Governments and Implementing Agencies, such as regular monitoring, issuance of 
guidance notes and other instructions, site visits etc. 
 
National Mission on Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual, Heritage Augmentation 
Drive (Prashad) Scheme 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12 The Committee acknowledges the potential of the SACI Scheme as a vital financing 
mechanism for tourism infrastructure but notes with concern the inconsistent participation 
patterns and persistent delays in DPR submissions that threaten to undermine the scheme's 
effectiveness given its fixed termination date of March 31, 2026. To address these 
implementation challenges, the Committee recommends transforming the challenge-based 
selection process into a phased approach with quarterly submission windows and 
corresponding fast-track review mechanisms, enabling continuous engagement rather than 
single-deadline approaches. The Ministry should establish a dedicated DPR Technical 
Support Cell comprised of infrastructure planning specialists, tourism experts, and financial 
analysts to provide hands on assistance to states struggling with proposal development, 
effectively reducing preparation time and enhancing submission quality. Additionally, the 
Committee recommends implementing Regional Knowledge Exchange Forums where high-
performing states can share implementation strategies, technical approaches, and 
administrative innovations with those experiencing challenges, creating peer-learning 
networks that accelerate collective capabilities. These structural improvements would 
significantly enhance state participation while maintaining the scheme's competitive 
elements that drive innovation and excellence. 
(Para 29) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 Department of Expenditure (DoE) vide letter dated 09.08.2024 issued detailed 
guidelines for Special Assistance to States/UT’s for Capital Investments (SASCI).  Part-III 
of the DoE guidelines dated 09.08.2024 pertains to Development of Iconic Tourist Centers 
to Global Scale.  Ministry of Tourism formulated the operational guidelines of the scheme 
and circulated vide OM no.  SD-8/2/2024-SD dated 27.08.2024 to all States. Along with this 
OM, a template for formulation of Project Proposal/ DPR was also circulated. The last date 
for submission of proposals for the States was 15th October, 2024 and the Ministry had to 
recommend the eligible projects for funding to Ministry of Finance by 15th November, 
2024.   
  
12.2 Further, an evaluation criteria was formulated   for assessment of the project 
proposals received.  Accordingly, in line with the criteria and as per the scheme guidelines, 
the Ministry of Tourism recommended the projects to Department of Expenditure which 
further sanctioned 40 projects under SASCI initiatives across 23 States for Rs. 3295.76 
Crore.  

21 
 
  
12.3 The projects are to be implemented immediately by the State Implementing 
Agencies. As of now, there is no proposal before the Ministry of Tourism for continuation of 
SASCI scheme for sanctioning of new tourism projects during the current Financial Year. 
 
Integrating Digital Transformation Across Infrastructure Initiatives 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
13 The Committee recommends leveraging the framework of the emerging National 
Digital Tourism Mission to create an integrated digital ecosystem across all tourism 
infrastructure development schemes. This would involve establishing unified digital 
standards for project proposal submission, implementation tracking, and outcome 
measurement across all schemes, eliminating the siloed approach that currently impedes 
cross-scheme learning and coordination. The Ministry should develop a Unified Tourism 
Infrastructure Interface that provides real-time visibility into project status, fund utilization, 
and implementation challenges across all schemes, enabling data-driven decision making 
and timely interventions. Additionally, the Committee recommends implementing AI-driven 
predictive analytics to identify potential implementation bottlenecks before they emerge, 
allowing for pre-emptive resolution of common challenges that typically cause delays. This 
digital transformation would fundamentally enhance the efficiency of all tourism 
infrastructure development initiatives while creating unprecedented transparency and 
accountability throughout the implementation cycle. 
(Para 30) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 The observation of the committee is noted.   
 
13.2 While deliberating on the implementation of National Digital Tourism Mission 
(NDTM), it has been noted that the Incredible India portal has recently been revamped and 
made live as a comprehensive digital platform to cater to all tourism-related information and 
service needs. Since both NDTM and the Incredible India 2.0 website aim to achieve the 
same objectives, it has been decided, in orderto avoid duplication of efforts,that NDTM may 
be discontinued and all digital requirements of the tourism sector will be addressed through 
the Incredible India 2.0 website. 
 
Promotion & Marketing 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14 The Committee has examined the Ministry of Tourism’s promotional initiatives, 
including the Domestic Promotion and Publicity including Hospitality (DPPH) Scheme and 
the Overseas Promotion and Publicity including Marketing Development Assistance 

22 
 
(OPMD) Scheme, the latter currently under review. While the Ministry’s efforts to enhance 
domestic and international tourism visibility are acknowledged, the Committee notes 
persisting concerns regarding fund utilisation, programme effectiveness, and strategic 
planning. The sharp reduction in Revised Estimates for 2024-25, from ₹176.97 crore to 
₹92.95 crore is especially noted which seems to indicate delays in fund disbursal or 
underperformance in implementation. Frequent budget cuts highlight inefficiencies in 
planning and execution, and delays in the OPMD review may weaken India's international 
tourism outreach. The Committee also notes that delays in overseas engagement may reduce 
India’s global market share. It is, therefore, recommended that the Ministry ensures full 
utilisation of allocated funds, expedites the OPMD review, introduces measurable impact 
assessments, enhances domestic outreach, and expands global partnerships through 
collaboration with Indian Missions and international stakeholders. The Committee urges the 
Ministry to promptly address these inefficiencies and improve accountability in tourism 
promotion. 
(Para 32) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 The recommendations of the Committee are duly noted. The Overseas Promotion and 
Publicity Scheme for tourism is currently under review, and work is already underway to 
improve the existing guidelines in order to align with the prevailing market conditions and 
demands. The Ministry has been collaborating more strategically and intensively with 
selected Indian Missions abroad. A country specific action plan aimed at promoting India as 
a preferred tourist destination has been prepared and shared with the Ministry of External 
Affairs for their feedback and suggestions. 
 
Analysis of Foreign Tourist Arrivals 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
15 The Committee has conducted a comprehensive assessment of India's tourism 
performance metrics, including foreign tourist arrivals (FTAs), international tourist arrivals 
(ITAs), foreign exchange earnings (FEEs), and the overall contribution of tourism to GDP. 
While acknowledging the Ministry's various promotional initiatives such as participation in 
international trade fairs, roadshows, and the innovative Chalo India Global Diaspora 
Campaign, the Committee observes that despite post-pandemic recovery, significant 
challenges persist in establishing India as a premier global tourism destination. Current 
data indicates that India ranks 39th in the global travel and tourism competitiveness index 
despite possessing extraordinary potential through its rich cultural heritage, diverse 
landscapes, and emerging global influence. This positioning represents a substantial gap 
between India's tourism capabilities and its actual market performance, necessitating 
transformative strategies to enhance competitiveness and sustain long-term growth in the 
international tourism sector. 
(Para 36) 
 

23 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 The Ministry of Tourism has been continuously monitoring various indicators of 
tourism metrics (Foreign Tourist Arrivals, International Tourist Arrivals, Foreign Exchange 
Earnings) along with the Travel and Tourism Development Index (TTDI). Multiple 
measures/ steps are being taken for the improvement of these matrix. 
  
15.2 The steps taken / are being taken towards improving the rank of India in TTDI are 
mentioned in the reply to recommendation No. 36.1. 
 
Implementing a Multi-Dimensional Competitiveness Enhancement Strategy 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16 The Committee recommends that the Ministry develop a comprehensive Tourism 
Competitiveness Enhancement Framework based on a thorough analysis of India's strengths 
and weaknesses in the global tourism ecosystem. This framework should leverage India's 
significant advantages in natural resources (scoring 5.88 out of 7), cultural resources (5.62), 
and non-leisure resources (5.05), while systematically addressing areas of 
underperformance. The Ministry should establish a dedicated Tourism Competitiveness Task 
Force comprising industry leaders, academic experts, and government representatives to 
identify specific barriers to India's advancement in global rankings and develop targeted 
interventions. Furthermore, the framework should incorporate innovative benchmarking 
mechanisms that regularly compare India's performance against rapidly advancing tourism 
destinations, particularly in emerging markets with similar tourism profiles. Beyond 
conventional tourism metrics, the framework should incorporate sustainability parameters, 
digital readiness indicators, and visitor satisfaction indices to ensure a holistic approach to 
competitiveness enhancement. This structured approach would transform India's 
competitiveness strategy from reactive to proactive, positioning the country to advance 
significantly from its current 39th position toward the top 20 global destinations by 2030. 
(Para 36.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 Ministry of Tourism is continuously monitoring India’s Rank in Travel and Tourism 
Development Index (TTDI).  
16.2 The steps undertaken/ are being taken are as follows:  
a) Monitoring of India’s Rank in every publication (2019, 2021, 2024). 
b) Analysis and evaluation of all the indicators under every dimension and pillar of 
TTDI. 
c) Constitution of Coordination Committee for timely monitoring of progress and 
status. 
d)  Mapping of all the indicators to relevant line ministries and departments for their 
comments and appropriate measures towards further improvement. 

24 
 
e) Identifying and rectifying the gaps in the data-based indicators and indicators which 
are perception based. 
f) Coordinating with Publishing agency and data agencies to highlight the identified 
issues and solutions to rectify same. 
g) Further, Ministry is in the process of developing the State Assessment Framework 
(SAF) to assess the tourism ecosystem of States/Union Territories based on 55 
indicators which have been converged from TTDI. 
  
16.3 SAF is based on the following objective – 
a) Competitive model of assessment for States/ UT travel and tourism sector. 
b) Identification of weaknesses, strengths, and improvements. 
c) Comprehensive picture of States/ UT travel and tourism sector. 
d)  
Implementing Next-Generation Visa Facilitation Programs 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
17 Recognizing visa complexity as a significant barrier to tourism growth, the 
Committee recommends implementing a Progressive Visa Liberalization Roadmap that 
systematically expands visa-free access based on strategic tourism priorities rather than 
conventional diplomatic reciprocity. The Ministry, in coordination with the Ministry of 
External Affairs, should develop data-driven criteria for identifying and prioritizing high-
potential source markets for visa liberalization, considering factors beyond current arrival 
numbers to include average spending patterns, length of stay, and potential for market 
growth. Furthermore, the Committee recommends implementing a Digital Nomad Visa 
Program specifically designed to attract long-term international visitors who can work 
remotely while experiencing India's diverse destinations, effectively creating a new category 
of extended- stay tourism that generates sustained economic impact. For markets where 
visa-free access is not immediately feasible, the Ministry should implement an Advanced 
Traveler Authorization System enabling simplified entry for pre- approved visitors from key 
tourism markets. These innovations would significantly reduce barriers to entry while 
maintaining necessary security protocols, positioning India as a leader in intelligent border 
facilitation for tourism growth. 
(Para 37) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 The Ministry of Tourism has been regularly engaging with tourism 
associations/hospitality stakeholders, Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of External 
Affairs with regard to matters related to Visa. 
 
17.2 It has been conveyed by Ministry of Home Affairs that: -  

25 
 
“lndia has a robust visa regime in place to enable lawful inward movement of foreigners 
including foreign tourists, professionals and skilled workforce, business persons, students, 
etc. Government has taken a number of initiatives over the last few years to liberalize, 
streamline and simplify visa regime with a view to facilitate the legitimate foreign travellers 
while simultaneously ramping up the technological infrastructure to enhance internal 
security. Liberalization and simplification of the visa regime, including the visa for foreign 
tourists is an ongoing process which is done after taking into consideration the issues of 
security, inbound tourism and investments, bi-lateral relations etc.” 
  
17.3 The matter regarding Progressive Visa Liberalization Roadmap, implementing a 
Digital Nomad Visa Program have been taken with Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry 
of External Affairs. 
 
17.4 Ministry of Tourism, in association with MHA and MEA, is currently trying to 
simplify the e-visa regime along with streamlining the e-visa form. A stakeholders meeting 
was organized by the Ministry in April 2025 to take inputs and feedback from the tour 
operators and various interlinked associations while applying for the e-tourist visa. Ministry 
of Tourism has been working with both these in-line Ministries (MHA & MEA) to 
streamline the system, which will reduce the waiting time as well as be able to simplify the 
procedures involved. 
 
Growth in Domestic Tourists Footfalls 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
18 The Committee notes that the success of pilgrimage and heritage tourism demands a 
need for greater investment in cultural circuits and historical site preservation. The 
Committee urges the Ministry to extend financial support to State Governments for the 
upkeep and enhancement of such sites. 
(Para 44) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 While the Ministry of Tourism provides financial assistance for development of 
tourism infrastructure to provide better facilities and amenities to the tourists, maintenance 
and operation of the created assets is the responsibility of the concerned State Government/ 
UT Administration. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
19 The Committee observes the uneven distribution of domestic tourist visits and flags it 
as a matter of concern, as some States remain underrepresented in national tourism circuits. 
It is recommended that the Ministry target emerging destinations through regional 
promotional strategies and incentives for eco-tourism, rural tourism, and adventure tourism. 

26 
 
(Para 45) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 The Ministry of Tourism promotes India in a holistic manner, through various 
initiatives. As part of on-going activities, promotion of various tourism destinations and 
products of India including eco-tourism, rural tourism and adventure tourism are taken up. 
 
19.2 The Ministry organized Best Tourism Village Competition to honour and encourage 
villages that best exemplify a tourism destination which preserves cultural and natural assets, 
promotes community-based values and lifestyles and has a clear commitment to 
sustainability in all its aspects - economic, social, and environmental. The competition 
recognized villages excelling in various tourism activities including adventure tourism. 
 
Strategic Expansion of Hospitality Education Infrastructure 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
20 The Committee, while acknowledging the expansion efforts in hospitality training 
institutes, identifies critical geographical disparities that severely limit access to quality 
tourism education in several high-potential tourism regions. This education infrastructure 
gap creates persistent workforce challenges and hinders the development of local tourism 
ecosystems. The Committee recommends implementing a Tiered Hospitality Education 
Framework that strategically distributes training facilities based on tourism potential and 
workforce needs rather than conventional administrative considerations. This framework 
would establish three distinct institutional models: Comprehensive Institutes of Hotel 
Management (IHMs) in regional hubs, specialized Focused Culinary Institutes (FCIs) 
aligned with distinct culinary heritage zones, and flexible Community Tourism Skill Centers 
in emerging tourism destinations. The Ministry should prioritize establishing at least one 
specialized hospitality training institute in each North Eastern State by 2027, with particular 
focus on developing centers of excellence that align with each region's unique tourism 
attributes—adventure tourism in Arunachal Pradesh, cultural tourism in Assam, and 
ecological tourism in Meghalaya. Additionally, the Committee recommends introducing the 
Tourism Satellite Campus model, wherein established IHMs develop extension facilities in 
underserved regions, leveraging existing administrative infrastructure while expanding 
geographical reach cost-effectively. This transformative approach would systematically 
address geographical disparities while ensuring that educational infrastructure aligns 
precisely with each region's specific tourism development trajectory. 
(Para 48) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 Ministry of Tourism is in agreement with the recommendations of the Committee 
that addressing geographical disparities through strategically located IHMs, FCIs, and 
Community Tourism Skill Centers will not only expand access to quality hospitality 
education but also create localized talent pools aligned with regional tourism profiles.  

27 
 
  
20.2 It is submitted that Central IHMs in Guwahati (Assam) and Shillong (Meghalaya); 
State IHM in Gangtok (Sikkim); State IHMs being run in PPP mode at Dimapur (Nagaland) 
and Agartala (Tripura); FCI at Tura (Meghalaya) have come-up with the support of Ministry 
of Tourism, Govt. of India. In addition, 3 State IHMs at Imphal (Manipur), Aizawl 
(Mizoram) and Itanagar (Arunachal Pradesh), including 1 FCI at Namchi (Sikkim) are in 
pipeline. IITTM is also exploring proposals for setting up Community Tourism Skill Centers 
and extension campuses in underserved regions. 
 
Elevating Specialized Tourism Training through Centers of Excellence 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
21 The Committee acknowledges the critical importance of specialized tourism training 
exemplified by the National Institute of Water Sports (NIWS), while noting significant 
limitations in both geographical reach and integration with mainstream tourism education. 
The Committee recommends transforming NIWS into the National Center for Adventure 
Tourism Excellence with expanded scope encompassing all adventure tourism segments 
including mountaineering, trekking, wildlife tourism, and desert expeditions, creating a 
comprehensive ecosystem for adventure tourism human resource development. The Center 
should establish Regional Adventure Tourism Training Hubs in five strategic locations—
Uttarakhand (mountaineering), Goa (water sports), Rajasthan (desert tourism), Madhya 
Pradesh (wildlife tourism), and Sikkim (eco-adventure tourism)—ensuring specialized 
training reaches diverse geographical areas with distinct adventure tourism potential. 
Furthermore, the Committee recommends implementing an Integrated Adventure Tourism 
Certification System aligned with international standards that creates clearly defined career 
pathways for professionals across different adventure tourism segments. Additionally, the 
Ministry should develop the Adventure Tourism Digital Knowledge Repository, a 
comprehensive online platform providing training resources, safety protocols, and best 
practices accessible to adventure tourism operators nationwide. These transformative 
initiatives would elevate specialized tourism training from isolated programs to a 
comprehensive national framework that develops world-class human resources across the 
adventure tourism ecosystem. 
(Para 51) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 National Institute of Water Sports (NIWS)-Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel 
Management (IITTM) Goa is an autonomous Organisation under Ministry of Tourism, 
Government of India. The Organisation is responsible for the following activities: 
a) To develop the skill and train the manpower in water sports and lifesaving skills.  
b) Research and Consultancy in waterbodies consisting of both Inland and Sea front 
zones that includes: 

28 
 
i. Feasibility study for the waterbodies. 
ii. Risk Assessment for new developed activities in water sports. 
iii. Safety Audit/ Physical Inspection of Parasailing Operations, Scuba Diving 
Centers, sea-walk and underwater submersible scooter, etc.  
c) Develop safety benchmarking protocol for water sports operations. 
d) To Develop Guidelines and SOPs for Water sports activities and also assisting State 
Governments for proper implementation. 
e) NIWS is working with Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS) for developing of Scuba 
Diving and Water sports operations and Training Standards.  
f) NIWS provides the technical inputs to State Governments in terms of guidelines, 
SOPs and equipment specifications.  
 
21.2 As of now the Organisation has trained around 40,000 youth of the Nation and out of 
this 90% are employed in the sector. NIWS is also acting as a bridge between the 
stakeholders/ operators and the State Governments by providing the technical norms to both 
the sides. The Organisation is also providing consultancy services to State Governments of 
around 25 States of India.  
 
21.3 The Organisation has signed the MoU’s with the following bodies: 
a) Directorate General of Resettlement (under Ministry of Defence). 
b) Indian Naval Physical Training School (INPT- under Ministry of Defence). 
c) National Adventure Foundation (NAF- under Ministry of Sports and Youth 
Affairs). 
d) Andaman & Nicobar Administration. 
e) Uttarakhand Tourism Development Board (UTDB), Uttarakhand. 
f) Madhya Pradesh Tourism Development Corporation. 
g) Tourism Corporation of Gujarat Limited (TCGL). 
h) Odisha Tourism  
i) Tamil Nadu Tourism Development Corporation (TTDC). 
j) Jharkhand Tourism Development Corporation (JTDC) 
 
21.4 Along with courses in water sports, the institution is also providing higher education 
courses in Tourism Management (MBA-TTM, BBA-TT and PhD in tourism in collaboration 
with Jawaharlal Nehru University).  
 

29 
 
21.5 Further, it may be informed that Nehru Institute of Mountaineering (NIM) at 
Uttarkashi, Uttarakhand is among the best mountaineering institutes in India and also 
considered as the most prestigious mountaineering institute in Asia. 
 
21.6 At Namchi, Sikkim, the Indian Himalayan Centre for Adventure and Ecotourism 
(IHCAE) provides high standard eco-tourism and adventure related training courses. 
 
Capacity Building for Service Providers 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
22 The Committee acknowledges the importance of skill development in improving 
India’s tourism competitiveness but notes that the CBSP scheme has not yet achieved uniform 
accessibility. Many rural and emerging tourism hubs lack structured training facilities, 
limiting opportunities for communities that would benefit most from employment in the 
sector. It therefore urges the Ministry to imbibe a more balanced regional approach by 
increasing training coverage in underserved areas. 
(Para 52) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1 In order to augment the manpower to the hospitality sector, Ministry of Tourism has 
undertaken intensive training programme involving skilling and up-skilling and re-skilling 
under CBSP scheme. During the Financial Year 2024-25, Ministry decided to scale up the 
training level by roping in private sector and also coordinate with Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE). Further, during the Financial Year 2025-26, 
Ministry of Tourism has collaborated with Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) under Pradhan MantriKaushalVikasYojana (PMKVY)and have 
identified jointly about 57 destinations to undertake training programme. Ministry of Tourism 
has provided them the various job roles under tourism sector which should be taken on 
priority basis for training the manpower. MSDE has initiated the process in consultation with 
tourism and hospitality partners. 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

30 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Utilisation of Budgetary Allocations 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
1 The Committee recommends a fundamental restructuring of the PRASHAD Scheme 
implementation framework to address the specific challenges of brownfield projects, which 
have proven particularly problematic due to their complexity and the presence of existing 
infrastructure. The Ministry should develop a specialized "Brownfield Project 
Implementation Protocol" with modified timelines, distinct approval processes, and 
specialized technical assistance. Furthermore, the scheme should incorporate a phased 
implementation approach for complex projects, breaking them into smaller, more 
manageable components with separate funding streams and implementation timelines. The 
Ministry should establish a PRASHAD Excellence Cell staffed with heritage conservation 
experts, religious tourism specialists, and infrastructure development professionals who can 
provide specialized technical assistance to implementing agencies. These targeted 
interventions would address the specific challenges that have hindered the PRASHAD 
Scheme's implementation while ensuring that its critical objectives of enhancing spiritual 
tourism infrastructure are achieved. 
(Para 20.3) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Observations of the Committee is noted. 
  
1.2 The Ministry is in the process of awarding Impact Assessment of the scheme to IIM. 
Based on the recommendations of the report submitted by IIM, necessary modifications will 
be made to the structure, processes and overall scheme guidelines for future development 
under PRASHAD Scheme. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
1.3 The Committee recommends the Ministry to provide a detailed update on the 
status and timeline of the ongoing Impact Assessment of the PRASHAD Scheme, 
including the expected date of completion, the scope of the assessment being conducted 
by IIM, and any preliminary findings or steps taken so far based on the assessment 
process. 

31 
 
1.4 The Committee further recommends establishing a regular, independent 
monitoring and evaluation system alongside the Impact Assessment, ensuring 
continuous feedback and course correction for both brownfield and greenfield projects 
throughout the implementation lifecycle. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2 The Committee recommends an urgent revival of the RSOPPMDA scheme with a 
comprehensive restructuring focused on market-specific promotion strategies and 
leveraging digital platforms for cost-effective global outreach. The Ministry should establish 
a dedicated International Tourism Promotion Cell with marketing specialists and digital 
experts to expedite the development and implementation of promotion campaigns. 
Furthermore, the Ministry should implement a rolling approval mechanism for marketing 
initiatives that eliminates the need for annual scheme restructuring while maintaining 
necessary oversight. The Committee also recommends developing strategic partnerships 
with Indian diplomatic missions abroad, leveraging their presence and local knowledge for 
more effective tourism promotion. Additionally, a comprehensive digital marketing strategy 
should be implemented with country-specific campaign approaches, recognizing that 
different international markets require tailored messaging and promotion channels. 
(Para 20.4) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The scheme for Overseas Promotion and Publicity for tourism is under review. The 
formulation of revamped scheme guidelines is already under process. The Ministry has been 
working in association with identified Indian Mission overseas for the last two years in 
enhanced and strategical manner. A country specific action plan for promotion of India as a 
preferred destination in specific identified source markets has been drafted and shared with 
Ministry of External Affairs for their inputs and views. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
2.2 The Committee recommends the Ministry to provide an update on the status 
and progress of the revamped scheme guidelines, including consultations with Indian 
Missions and the Ministry of External Affairs, and developments regarding new 
international tourism promotion initiatives. 
2.3 The Committee further recommends institutionalizing the strategic partnership 
with Indian diplomatic missions by establishing formal communication protocols, joint 
planning workshops, and performance review mechanisms for targeted tourism 
promotion, ensuring transparency and accountability. 
 
 
 
 

32 
 
 
National Mission on Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual, Heritage Augmentation 
Drive (Prashad) Scheme 
Recommendation/Observation 
3 The Committee expresses profound concern regarding the implementation 
inefficiencies plaguing the PRASHAD Scheme, particularly at high-footfall pilgrimage sites 
where infrastructural inadequacies continue to compromise visitor experiences despite 
substantial allocations. To address these persistent challenges, the Committee recommends 
implementing a comprehensive Digital Monitoring and Implementation Framework modeled 
after Tamil Nadu's innovative tourism data collection and analytical method for tracking 
visitor footfalls. This system would enable real-time monitoring of project progress, fund 
utilization, and visitor experience metrics through a centralized dashboard accessible to all 
stakeholders. The Ministry should establish Implementation Credibility Ratings for all 
participating states and implementing agencies based on past performance metrics, 
particularly focusing on utilization certificate submission timeliness and project completion 
rates. States with consistently high ratings should receive implementation incentives 
including expedited approvals and priority funding for new projects. Furthermore, the 
Committee recommends restructuring the brownfield project implementation protocols within 
PRASHAD, creating specialized guidelines with modified timelines and technical assistance 
mechanisms specifically designed to address the unique challenges of developing 
infrastructure at existing pilgrimage sites with operational constraints. 
(Para 28) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The observations of the Committee are noted.  
  
3.2 It may be noted that development of Portal for PRASHAD along with other 
infrastructure development schemes of the Ministry of Tourism is under process. Once the 
same is established and developed, it will help in improved programme monitoring.  
  
3.3 Further, it may also be noted that the Ministry is in the process of awarding Impact 
Assessment of the scheme by IIM. Based on the recommendations of the report submitted by 
IIM, necessary modifications will be made to the structure, processes and overall scheme 
guidelines for future development under PRASHAD. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
3.4 The Committee recommends that the Ministry prescribe a clear timeline for the 
commissioning of the integrated PRASHAD monitoring portal and ensure 
incorporation of uniform indicators on physical and financial progress. A limited 
public-facing interface may also be developed to strengthen transparency and enable 
timely oversight. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to provide a 
detailed update on the status and timeline of the ongoing Impact Assessment of the 

33 
 
PRASHAD Scheme, including the expected date of completion, the scope of the 
assessment being conducted by IIM, and any preliminary findings or steps taken so far 
based on the assessment process.  
Accelerating Completion of Central Agency Projects 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4 The Committee notes with significant concern that only 60% of projects sanctioned 
under the Assistance to Central Agencies for Tourism Infrastructure Development Scheme 
have reached completion, creating substantial risk of asset deterioration and visitor 
dissatisfaction at key tourism destinations. To catalyze project execution, the Committee 
recommends implementing a Multi-Tier Performance Monitoring System with quarterly 
reviews of all ongoing projects conducted jointly by the Tourism Ministry and implementing 
agency leadership, establishing clear consequences for persistent delays including 
conditional future funding and leadership accountability mechanisms. The Ministry should 
develop a specialized Project Acceleration Task Force deployable to stalled projects to 
provide technical interventions, administrative solutions, and coordination support to 
overcome implementation barriers. Furthermore, the Committee recommends establishing a 
Tourism Infrastructure Excellence Program wherein Central Agencies achieving exceptional 
implementation efficiency receive recognition, performance incentives, and priority 
consideration for future projects, creating positive reinforcement for operational excellence. 
These innovations would transform the accountability framework while providing practical 
mechanisms to accelerate project completion rates across all implementing agencies. 
(Para 29.1) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 The observations of the Committee are noted.  
  
4.2 A National Programme Management Unit (NPMU) has been on-boarded by Ministry 
of tourism which will help with improved monitoring and coordination with Central 
Agencies. 
  
4.3 It may also be noted that the Ministry is in the process of awarding Impact 
Assessment of the Central Sector Schemes of the Ministry by IIM. Based on the 
recommendations of the report submitted by IIM, necessary improvements will be made to 
the scheme for improved efficiency. 
 
Further Recommendation/ Observation 
4.4 The Committee recommends the Ministry to provide a detailed update on the 
status and timeline of the ongoing Impact Assessment of the PRASHAD Scheme, 
including the expected date of completion, the scope of the assessment being conducted 
by IIM, and any preliminary findings or steps taken so far based on the assessment 
process.  

34 
 
4.5 The Committee recommends empowering the NPMU with an expanded 
mandate and enhanced resources to conduct quarterly joint reviews with Central 
Agencies, focusing rigorously on progress monitoring, timely fund utilization, and 
resolution of bottlenecks. This will institutionalize multi-tier accountability and foster 
timely corrective actions. 
 
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
  
  
-Nil- 
  
***** 
  

36 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
 
Utilisation of Budgetary Allocations 
 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to provide a detailed update on the status 
and timeline of the ongoing Impact Assessment of the PRASHAD Scheme, including 
the expected date of completion, the scope of the assessment being conducted by IIM, 
and any preliminary findings or steps taken so far based on the assessment process. 
(Para 1.3) 
The Committee further recommends establishing a regular, independent monitoring 
and evaluation system alongside the Impact Assessment, ensuring continuous feedback 
and course correction for both brownfield and greenfield projects throughout the 
implementation lifecycle. 
(Para 1.4) 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to provide an update on the status and 
progress of the revamped scheme guidelines, including consultations with Indian 
Missions and the Ministry of External Affairs, and developments regarding new 
international tourism promotion initiatives. 
(Para 2.2) 
The Committee further recommends institutionalizing the strategic partnership with 
Indian diplomatic missions by establishing formal communication protocols, joint 
planning workshops, and performance review mechanisms for targeted tourism 
promotion, ensuring transparency and accountability. 
(Para 2.3) 
 
National Mission on Pilgrimage Rejuvenation and Spiritual, Heritage Augmentation 
Drive (Prashad) Scheme 
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry prescribe a clear timeline for the 
commissioning of the integrated PRASHAD monitoring portal and ensure 
incorporation of uniform indicators on physical and financial progress. A limited 
public-facing interface may also be developed to strengthen transparency and enable 
timely oversight. The Committee further recommends the Ministry to provide a 
detailed update on the status and timeline of the ongoing Impact Assessment of the 
PRASHAD Scheme, including the expected date of completion, the scope of the 
assessment being conducted by IIM, and any preliminary findings or steps taken so far 
based on the assessment process.  
(Para 3.4) 
 

37 
 
Accelerating Completion of Central Agency Projects 
 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to provide a detailed update on the status 
and timeline of the ongoing Impact Assessment of the PRASHAD Scheme, including 
the expected date of completion, the scope of the assessment being conducted by IIM, 
and any preliminary findings or steps taken so far based on the assessment process.  
(Para 4.4) 
The Committee recommends empowering the NPMU with an expanded mandate and 
enhanced resources to conduct quarterly joint reviews with Central Agencies, focusing 
rigorously on progress monitoring, timely fund utilization, and resolution of 
bottlenecks. This will institutionalize multi-tier accountability and foster timely 
corrective actions. 
(Para 4.5) 
 
 
 