PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/37threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:00]
I N T R O D U C T I O N
 
            I, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Transport and Tourism, having been authorised by the Committee to present on their behalf, present this Thirty-Seventh Report on the
 Demands for Grants 1999-2000 of the Ministry of Tourism.           
2. The Committee at its meeting held on 23rd  March,1999, considered the Demands for Grants 1999-2000 of the Ministry of Tourism  and heard the Secretary, the Ministry of 
 Tourism on the subject. 
3.The Committee expresses its thanks to the officers of the Ministry for placing before the Committee, the material and information desired in connection with the examination of the
 Demands for Grants of the Ministry and for giving evidence before the Committee. 
4.The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 7
th April, 1999.
 
 
New Delhi                                                                                         PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA
7
TH April,1999                                                                                                        Chairman
Chaitra 17,1921(Saka)                                                                   Committee on Transport & Tourism 
  
 
REPORT
 
 
Demand No. 82 pertains to the Ministry of Tourism.  The Ministry of Tourism in their written note has informed that tourism is a major social phenomenon of the modern society with
 enormous economic consequences.  Its importance as an instrument for economic development and employment generation particularly in remote and backward areas has been now
 well recognised the world over. 
The provisions in this demand mainly include allocations for the Secretariat of the Ministry of Tourism, the expenditure on the headquarter establishment of the Directorate General of
 Tourism and the regional and field offices under it, expenditure on production and publicity material for the promotional programmes, both domestic and overseas; provisions for
 creation of infrastructural facilities like Tourist Bungalows, Yatri Niwas, Wayside Amenities etc. and Grants in Aid to the various Tourism Training Institutes of the Ministry of
 Tourism. The Director General of Tourism functions as the nodal agency for the formulation of national policies and programmes and the coordination of activities of various Central
 Government agencies, State Governments and the Private Sector for the development and growth of Tourism in the country. 
Tourism is the world’s largest export industry.  According to the World Tourism Organisation, about 612.8 million tourists travel internationally in 1997 and spent about US$ 444
 billion.  It is estimated that tourism accounts for about 8% of the total world exports and more than 30% of international trade in services.  In 1997-98 travel and tourism was expected
 to provide direct and indirect employment for 212 million people and accounted for 10.7% of the global work force. 
The international tourist traffic to India during 1951 was just 16,829.  Over a period of 46 years, the arrivals increased to 2.37 million in 1997 and registered a compounded annual rate
 of growth of about 3.8%.  The foreign exchange earnings from tourism during 1997-98 was estimated to be about Rs.11,264 crores (US $ 3173 million).  The rate of growth in foreign
 exchange earning from tourism is exceptionally high.  The foreign exchange earnings for 1998-99 is projected to be Rs.12215.19 crores. During the Eighth Five Year Plan period, the
 foreign tourist arrivals including the nationals of Pakistan and Bangladesh recorded an annual growth of 5.6%.  The growth rate in arrivals, exclusive of nationals of Pakistan and
 Bangladesh, was 8.1%.  During the year 1997-98,  tourist arrivals were 23,70,985 inclusive of the nationals of Pakistan and Bangladesh as compared to 23,34,438 during 1996-97.  
The most significant feature of the tourism industry is its capacity to generate large scale employment opportunities particularly in remote and backward areas as it is a labour intensive
 industry.  It offers enormous potential for economically utilising the natural attractions like landscapes, mountains, beaches, rivers, etc. which would otherwise remain either idle or
 underutilised.  It also applies to a multitude of man-made attractions like monuments, palaces, forts and unique rural and city environments. 
The Ministry of Tourism has under its administrative control the following public sector undertakings/autonomous bodies:- 
India Tourism Development Corporation Limited
National Council for Hotel Management and Catering Technology
Indian Institute of Tourism & Travel Management
Institutes of Hotel Management, Catering Technology and Applied Nutrition at different locations in the country
Food Craft Institutes at different locations
Indian Institute of Skiing & Mountaineering
National Institute of Water Sports 
The details of the Budget allocations of the Ministry of Tourism for the last two years are as below: 
 
 
Major
Head
   1998-99(BE)
Plan     Non Plan     Total
1998-99(RE)
Plan   Non Plan   Total
1999-2000
Plan  Non Plan  Total

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/37threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:00]
 
 
Revenue
 
138.50    22.05      160.55 88.00   23.24    111.24 138.50  24.14    162.64
Capital  22.00                      22.00 22.00                 22.00 22.00
 
 
Total 160.50    22.05      182.55 110.00  23.24   133.24 160.50  24.14    184.64 
 
 
 
The Committee was informed that the budget estimate on plan side for year 1998-99 was Rs. 160.50 crores which was reduced to Rs.110.00 crores by Ministry of Finance at Revised
 stage.  An allocation of Rs.184.64 has been made for the Ministry of Tourism for 1999-2000, out of which Rs.160.50 crores are on the plan side.  The Budget estimates and revised
 estimates for 1998-99 were Rs. 182.55 crores and 134.24 crores respectively.
 The Committee expressed its deep concern to the fact that the budget estimates on plan side for year 1998-99 was Rs.160.50 crores which was reduced to Rs.110.00 crores by
 Ministry of Finance at Revised stage and expenditure was incurred accordingly.  The Committee further observed that tourism being a highly labour intensive industry holds a huge
 potential in providing employment in the country especially in the rural/backward areas and that it is also a third largest industry in terms of earning foreign exchange after export of
 garments and gems and jewellery. The Committee notes that on one side Government of India has declared tourism as an industry and converted the Department Of Tourism into the
 Ministry, however, on the other side the Government has decreased the plan allocation of the Ministry of Tourism at revised estimate stage.  This has been done not only this
 particular year but is being done during the last so many years.  This reduction in the budgetary allocations affected the growth and development of tourism in the country negatively. 
 The Committee was also informed that today tourism has become one of the major export industry of every country in the world and is playing a significant role in their economies. 
 Now a days, smallest countries i.e. Singapore etc. which have only some scenic beauties, beaches, resorts etc. are spending lot of money for the promotion of tourism and to attract
 tourist from all over the world.  They are trying to create their countries as major tourist destination points. Tourism industry, has now become number one industry of some of the
 countries which is helping in earning foreign exchange.  Today our country is celebrating 1999-2000 year as the ‘Explore India-Millennium Year’ to create public awareness about
 economic and social benefits of tourism amongst administrators, planners and masses;  improvement of the efficiency of the tourist facilitation; development of various tourism
 products in India as environmental friendly and sustainable destinations and encouraging the State Government and Private sector to create infrastructure facilities by providing
 incentives on a selective basis. The Committee has noted that during the last two years i.e. 1997-98 and 1998-99 the plan allocations were reduced to Rs.100 crores and Rs.110 crores
 from Rs.110.35 crores and Rs.160.50 crores.  The Committee was of the opinion that whatever amount is given in the plan side should not be reduced at R.E. stage in future.  The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government of India should increase plan side allocations of the Ministry of Tourism proportionately or atleast 20% increase of the
 previous year’s budget allocation. The Committee also reiterates its earlier recommendation mentioned in its 31
st Report on demands for Grant 1998-99 of the Ministry of Tourism
 that the involvement of private sector should be encouraged which will help in solving the problems of finance. The Committee also observed that since sufficient funds are not
 utilised in the beginning of the financial year major cuts are imposed by the Ministry of Finance at the time of revised estimates.  The Committee further recommends that instead of
 spending the amount in the last four or five months Ministry should try to incur the maximum expenditure in the beginning of each financial year i.e. in April, May and June on those
 projects/schemes which are already under progress.  In this way sufficient funds would be utilised and the Ministry may approach for more funds while sending their revised
 estimates.  
The Committee further recommends that tourism sector should be treated at par with the export industry and whatever incentives/facilities are available to export industry should also
 be made available to this sector keeping in view of vast potential and spin off benefits of tourism sector. 
 
11.            FACILITIES FOR FOREIGN TOURIST
 
It has been observed by the Committee that Airport is the first place where the tourist comes into contact with the local people and his interaction on arrival start with the various
 agencies viz. Custom, Visa, Immigration, Foreign Exchange, Transport, Shopping at duty free shops etc.  The Committee understands that the foreign tourist encounters lot of
 problems with all these agencies and besides it the airports in the country also lack adequate toilet/drinking water facility and other civic amenities.  The foreign tourist is also targeted
 by touts who fleece him to no end.  The tourists feels cheated and carries the impression that instead of getting welcome from India they are being harassed and neglected.  The
 Committee was of the view that first impression is the last impression and when tourist would not get proper treatment at the Airport itself their entire expectations towards the
 country would get negated and after getting back to their own country it is not known what sort of Indian picture they will depict to their own country men.  The Committee therefore
 recommends that there should be one high ranking Officer at all the Airports for maintaining efficient coordination amongst all the agencies like customs, immigration, visa, security,
 foreign exchange, operating at the Airport.  This power should preferably be vested with the Airport Director. The Ministry of Home Affairs may take necessary steps to provide
 better security to the tourists not only at the airports but within  the country as well.
 
     DOMESTIC CAMPAIGN

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/37threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:00]
 
An important feature of the tourism is its contribution to national integration and environment of social and cultural lives of people.  Over 100 million domestic tourists visiting
 different parts of the country every year returned with a better understanding of the people living in the different regions of the country and the cultural diversity of India.  
The Committee, however, has observed that the Ministry of Tourism has given more attention on overseas campaign to attract foreign tourists and the needs of the domestic tourists
 has been somewhat neglected.  The special packages, which are offered to the foreign tourists so as to earn foreign exchange, are not made available to the domestic tourist.   The
 awareness about the tourism especially in the middle class families is increasing day by day due to which they are more interested to visit and know their country.  One school of
 thought is of the view that tourism may also act as a possible solution in tackling the tension prevailing in the society.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of
 Tourism should also prepare special packages in consultation with the State Governments and ITDC for the domestic tourist as well. The Committee also reiterates its earlier
 recommendations as contained in its 31st Report on demands of Grant 1998-99 of the Ministry of Tourism for giving proper attention and funds allocation to the domestic campaign.   
 
     OVERSEAS CAMPAIGN AND PROMOTION
 
The Department of Tourism performs its main marketing function through a network of 18 Government of India tourist offices located overseas with specific area demarcations under
 six distinct regions as given below: 
New York – Responsible for the entire North American and South American continent.
Frankfurt- Responsible for continental Europe
London – Responsible for U.K. and Ireland
Dubai – Responsible for West Asia and South Africa
Sydney – Responsible for Australia
Tokyo – Responsible for East Asia 
Under these offices, there are sub-offices located at Los Angeles, Toronto, Paris, Milan, Amsterdam, Madrid, Geneva, Stockholm, Bahrain, Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, and Bangkok
 who work under the guidance of the above regions. 
 
The Committee was also informed that an allocation of Rs.67.80 crores has been made on plans
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                rism
 
 receipts which was only 0.38% & 0.39% and 0.68% & 0.71% during 1996 and 1997 respectively.  The Committee, therefore, is of the view that a thorough review is required of the
 overall functioning of the tourist offices abroad/overseas campaign and that this review should be done involving the India/foreign tour and travel operators, hoteliers and other
 connected organisations like domestic and foreign airlines, Indian embassies/missions abroad, voluntary organisations so that a coordinated effort may be evolved to make these
 campaigns more effective and result oriented in attracting foreign tourists to the country.
 
SURVEYS AND STUDIES CONDUCTED BY MINISTRY OF TOURISM 
 
The Committee was informed that the Ministry of Tourism has conducted following surveys and studies during the year 1997-98:- 
Tourism potential survey of Pachmari and Khajiar
International passenger survey 1996-97
Infrastructure development for Eco tourism in Orissa
Tourism potential study of Orissa
Feasibility study for setting up a convention centre at Leh
Preparation of a concept plan and design for the development of Chumukedima village in Nagaland. 
The Committee is of the view that a large amount of money has been spent on the above mentioned studies/surveys which were conducted to assist the Ministry of Tourism in chalking
 out policies/programmes for the development of the tourism in the country.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that findings of these surveys/studies particularly that of
 International Passenger Survey, 1996-97 should be taken into consideration while making planning of the Tourism Development in the particular tourist area.  Findings of these
 surveys/studies should be implemented strictly for future planning and should not be dumped  in the cold storage and that action taken notes may be furnished to the Committee within
 two months. 
 
     RAPID ACTION CELL
 
The Committee in its 31
st report recommended for the constitution of some sort of coordination Committee comprising of all the concerned Ministries/agencies so as to keep a check
 on the occurrence of incidents of harassment and atrocities and directed that the Ministry of Tourism should have its own ‘Rapid Action Cell’ under the officer of the rank of the Joint
 Secretary, so that it takes prompt action in such matters 
The Committee is happy to know and appreciates the initiative taken by the Ministry of Tourism for constitution of Rapid Action Cell headed by Additional Director General, Tourism

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/37threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:00]
 who is of the rank of Joint Secretary, Director (Travel Trade) and Director (Overseas Marketing) are the other members of this cell. 
The Committee is of the view that the information regarding the Constitution of Rapid Action Cell for the benefit of the tourist has not been widely disseminated and publicised.  The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should widely advertise and disseminate the information of the constitution of the cell through their print media and
 advertising programmes.    This will definitely give confidence and relief to the tourists and will create a positive image of India in the minds of the tourists from abroad.  This has
 also become essential and important as India is celebrating the year of 1999-2000 as ‘Explore India-Millennium Year’ and would also go along way in reversing the negative impact
 created by the foreign media regarding our country.  The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should also have its own Public Relations Professional Agency
 which will help to create the positive image of India as a major tourist destination. 
 
TOURISM INFRASTRUCTURE AND PRODUCT  DEVELOPMENT
 
The development of tourism infrastructure and improvement of tourism product during 1999-2000 would consist of integrated development of tourist/pilgrim centres, special tourism
 areas, major tourism projects, setting up of Prayatan Bhawan.  The budgetary allocations for this purpose is as under :
 
Proposed outlay                            50.00 crores
Approved outlay                           32.20 crores
 
In order to ensure integrated development of tourism infrastructure including basic amenities and other facilities, the Ministry of Tourism would provide assistance to State/Union
 Territory Governments for  the implementation of composite projects.  The assistance will be provided to selected tourist/pilgrim centres upto a maximum of Rs. One crore subject to
 matching contribution by the State/Union Territory Governments.  The Central Assistance will be provided over a period of two years at the rate of Rs.50 lakhs per year.
      The Committee noted that a provision of Rs.32.20crores
as grants-in-aid has been made for development of tourist centres/areas.  The Committee was informed by the Secretary that a new method of funding by way of grant-in-aid towards
 projects cost was introduced during 1992-93.  As per the scheme 28% of the project cost is provided by the Central Government and 12% is provided by the State Government.  The
 balance 60% has to be raised as loan from financial institutions or banks.  This method of funding is applicable to bankable projects requiring large investments.  It was expected that
 the State Governments would be able to mobilise  more resources from financial institutions for investment in tourism projects through this method .  The Committee noted that since
 the share of Central Government is 28% and State Government is 12% and from financial institutions/banks they have to take loans upto 60% which makes the share of State
 Governments to be 72% which is on a very high side.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to make this scheme more attractive the share of both Central and State
 Governments should be 50% each.   
 
     TRAINING OF OFFICERS AND GUIDES 
The Committee was informed that the availability of trained guides in tourist centres and monuments is a major requirement of tourism promotion.  The Ministry of Tourism is,
 therefore, giving considerable importance to train guides. An amount of Rs.0.30 crore has been provided under this programme. A three tier training programme at the national, state
 and local levels has recently been drawn up and is being implemented through Government of India Tourist Offices, State/UT Governments and others.  These courses include
 programmes for fresh tourist guides and language and refresher courses for those already engaged in guide services.  It is also proposed to provide training to the officers and staff in
 the field of information technology and tourism related courses.
 
            The Committee is of the opinion that an amount of Rs. 0.30 crores is not sufficient for the training of guides and officers.  The training should be given to the guides in such a
 way so that they could explain the importance of the Tourist places in India which would increase the knowledge of tourists towards Indian Culture and heritage. Accordingly, the
 Committee recommends that All India Training Course for travel guides should be introduced in order to develop tourism in the country and for this purpose Ministry should increase
 their budget proposals.
 
CENTRAL ASSISTANCE FOR THE    DEVELOPMENT OF FACILITIES FOR DOMESTIC TOURISTS
 
The Committee was informed that an amount of Rs.21.00 crores has been provided for the following schemes under which Central Financial assistance is given to States/U.T.
 Governments for the creation of low priced accommodation facilities, way side amenities etc. for the benefit of domestic and budget tourists :-
 
Construction Schemes 
Budget Accommodation
Wayside amenities
Cafeterias/Restaurants
Public Conveniences
Tourist Reception Centres
Pilgrim Sheds/Dormitories etc. at the pilgrim centres

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/37threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:00]
Yatri Niwas/Yatrika
Health Resorts
 
The Committee was informed that assistance under the above schemes would be provided under the normal funding and equity scheme.  However, one of the stipulated condition for
 providing assistance to these projects is that the State Government will transfer the title of land on which these facilities are developed to Government of India.  This particular
 stipulation delays the completion of project as most of the State Governments are not in a position to transfer the title of land to Government of India.  In order to remove the
 bottlenecks in completion of projects the Ministry of Tourism decided to do away with this condition however Ministry of Finance has not agreed to the proposal. The Committee was
 of the opinion that the schemes are good which would certainly be useful for the development of tourism in the country. The Committee recommends that the condition of transferring
 the title of the land to Government of India should be waived off.  
The Committee also observed that not much emphasis has been laid on the construction of budget accommodation for low priced tourists, the lack of which has not only led to the
 increase in cost of boarding/lodging but also resulted in unhygienic and insanitary conditions around places of tourist interest and growth of unwanted and  unauthorised  hotels etc. 
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry should provide special attention to the creation of budget accommodation  this year as well as in the coming years
 and provide more funds under this head.  It also further recommends that as an example one central assisted scheme may be undertaken in each State to develop a tourist place entirely
 funded by the Central Government which should be complete in all respects viz. Low priced accommodation, clean environment and adequate civic amenities which would go a long
 way in encouraging the State Governments to undertake similar programmes. 
 
19.       CIVIC AMENITIES ON NATIONAL HIGHWAYS FOR TOURISTS
 
The Committee noted with concern that there are shortage of toilet/drinking water facility on the national highways.  The Committee was of the view that most of the tourists are of
 adventurous nature and they prefer to perform their journeys by roads, but since the above facilities are not commonly available on national highways they find it inconvenient to
 travel on those roads.  Sometimes the road sides are used for easing out which creates insanitary conditions.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that such facilities may be
 created on the national highways 100% funded by the Central Government and that a condition may be added in the licence/lease granted to the petrol pumps and restaurants on
 national highways to provide drinking water and toilet facility for the tourist and other travelling public.  The maintenance of toilet/drinking water facilities and other civic amenities
 so created under this scheme may be given to private parties/voluntary agencies.
 
20.     COASTAL REGULATION ZONE RESTRICTIONS 
 
The Committee in its 31
st report recommended for  relaxation in Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) Restrictions,  keeping in view of the increasing importance and awareness of the
 tourism and status of the tourism as an industry. 
It has come to notice of the Committee that the Ministry of Environment and Forests has refused for such relaxations in the CRZ restrictions. 
The Committee express its deep concern on the stand taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forest in this regard.  The Committee is of the view that India has many beautiful
 coastal beaches, sight scenes etc. which can be developed from the point of tourism.  Today some small countries like Singapore etc. are earning heavy foreign exchange through
 tourism. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendations contained in its 31st report and desires the Ministry of Environment and Forests should take liberal view and
 flexible stand keeping in view of the importance of tourism in today’s context and should relax to some extent such restrictions for the purpose of tourism projects.
 
21.     TOURIST TRANSPORT SCHEME
 
The Committee was informed that in the 9
th Plan the Ministry of Finance weeded out the scheme of Ministry of Tourism namely a Tourist Transport Scheme under which assistance
 was provided to the State Governments for projects of tourist vehicle, safari jeeps, cruise vessels etc.  The Ministry of Tourism had taken up the matter with the Planning
 Commission/Ministry of Finance to revive the scheme specially for areas such as North Eastern regions, Sikkim, hills of West Bengal, Uttar Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu &
 Kashmir and Bhuddhists circuits, and Sunderbans etc.  However the Planning Commission did not agree to the revival of scheme. 
The Committee is of the view that the tourist transport scheme is important for the development of Tourism industry specially in the North eastern States and hilly districts of U.P.
 West Bengal, J & K and Himachal Pradesh etc. which have a great potential in this regard.  The Committee therefore recommends that his scheme should not be weeded out by the
 Ministry of Finance and may be included in the 9
th Five Year Plan.
  
22.            VIEWS OF INDIAN ASSOCIATION OF TOUR  OPERATORS (IATO)
 
The Committee also heard the President of the IATO  on the status of the tourism industry in the country vis-à-vis the budgetary proposals made in 1999-2000 budget.  The Committee
 was informed by the President, IATO that tourism industry has very high potential in generating employment in the country specially in the rural and backward areas as it is a highly
 labour intensive industry.  The Committee was further informed that this industry is earning large amounts of precious foreign exchange for the country and that it should be treated
 on par with the exporters for all purposes and benefit under section 80 HHC of Income Tax Act be extended to those who are engaged in the tourism industry, special import licenses

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/37threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:00]
 as granted  to Export Houses or Trading Houses be also given to them and Marketing Development Assistance to tourism industry as given to exporters should also be extended to
 tourism industry. 
The Committee was further explained that as far as general approach to the development of tourism in the country is concerned the emphasis should be on cleanliness surrounding the
 places of tourist interest, Air India should be asked to increase its services and seat capacity from important destinations the world over so as to bring foreign tourists to India, visa on
 arrival should be allowed and more and more foreign airlines be allowed to operate their services to India especially from the places/regions on which Air India does not operate any
 services. 
The Committee took note of all these issues which were explained to it by IATO and desired that the Ministry of Tourism may take necessary action on them and where these issues
 are the concern of other Ministries like extention of Income Tax exemptions under 80 HHC, equality with exporters, increase in services and seat capacity of Air India/Indian Airlines
 and services of foreign airlines to India, and granting visa at the Airport on arrival may be taken up at appropriate level with the respective Ministries. 
           
23.  INDIA TOURISM DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION
 
The Committee understands that although I.T.D.C. has been earning profits but these are declining with each passing year.  The Committee was also informed that
 disinvestment/restructuring of the I.T.D.C. is also under consideration and due to this they are not able to take any decision with regard to the new investments in various projects. 
 The delay in taking a decision has been effecting the financial performance of I.T.D.C. 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that decision with regard to the disinvestment/restructuring of I.T.D.C. should be taken at an early date so that it is able to take its investment
 decision in time to check the decline in its financial performance.
SUMMARY OF THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS
1. The Committee has noted that during the last two years i.e. 1997-98 and 1998-99 the plan allocations were reduced to Rs.100 crores and Rs.110 crores from Rs.110.35 crores and
 Rs.160.50 crores.  The Committee was of the opinion that whatever amount is given in the plan side should not be reduced at R.E. stage in future.  The Committee, therefore,
 recommends that the Government of India should increase plan side allocations of the Ministry of Tourism proportionately or atleast 20% increase of the previous year’s budget
 allocation. The Committee also reiterates its earlier recommendation mentioned in its 31
st Report on demands for Grant 1998-99 of the Ministry of Tourism that the involvement of
 private sector should be encouraged which will help in solving the problems of finance. The Committee also observed that since sufficient funds are not utilised in the beginning of
 the financial year major cuts are imposed by the Ministry of Finance at the time of revised estimates.  The Committee further recommends that instead of spending the amount in the
 last four or five months Ministry should try to incur the maximum expenditure in the beginning of each financial year i.e. in April, May and June on those projects/schemes which are
 already under progress.  In this way sufficient funds would be utilised and the Ministry may approach for more funds while sending their revised estimates.  
The Committee further recommends that tourism sector should be treated at par with the export industry and whatever incentives/facilities are available to export industry should also
 be made available to this sector keeping in view of vast potential and spin off benefits of tourism sector.
 The Committee was of the view that first impression is     the last impression and when tourist would not get proper treatment at the Airport itself their entire expectations towards the
 country would get negated and after getting back to their own country it is not known what sort of Indian picture they will depict to their own country men.  The Committee therefore
 recommends that there should be one high ranking Officer at all the Airports for maintaining efficient coordination amongst all the agencies like customs, immigration, visa, security,
 foreign exchange, operating at the Airport.  This power should preferably be vested with the Airport Director. The Ministry of Home Affairs may take necessary steps to provide
 better security to the tourists not only at the airports but within  the country as well.
 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that Ministry of Tourism should also prepare special packages in consultation with the State Governments and ITDC for the domestic tourist
 as well. The Committee also reiterates its earlier recommendations as contained in its 31
st Report on demands of Grant 1998-99 of the Ministry of Tourism for giving proper attention
 and funds allocation to the domestic campaign.                  receipts which was only 0.38% & 0.39% and 0.68% & 0.71% during 1996 and 1997 respectively.  The Committee,
 therefore, is of the view that a thorough review is required of the overall functioning of the tourist offices abroad/overseas campaign and that this review should be done involving the
 India/foreign tour and travel operators, hoteliers and other connected organisations like domestic and foreign airlines, Indian embassies/missions abroad, voluntary organisations so
 that a coordinated effort may be evolved to make these campaigns more effective and result oriented in attracting foreign tourists to the country.
 
The Committee is of the view that a large amount of money has been spent on the above mentioned studies/surveys which were conducted to assist the Ministry of Tourism in chalking
 out policies/programmes for the development of the tourism in the country.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that findings of these surveys/studies particularly that of
 International Passenger Survey, 1996-97 should be taken into consideration while making planning of the Tourism Development in the particular tourist area.  Findings of these
 surveys/studies should be implemented strictly for future planning and should not be dumped  in the cold storage and that action taken notes may be furnished to the Committee within
 two months. 
7.         The Committee is of the view that the information regarding the Constitution of Rapid Action Cell for the benefit of the tourist has not been widely disseminated and
 publicised.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should widely advertise and disseminate the information of the constitution of the cell through their
 print media and advertising programmes.    This will definitely give confidence and relief to the tourists and will create a positive image of India in the minds of the tourists from
 abroad.  This has also become essential and important as India is celebrating the year of 1999-2000 as ‘Explore India-Millennium Year’ and would also go along way in reversing the
 negative impact created by the foreign media regarding our country.  The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should also have its own Public Relations

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/37threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:00]
 Professional Agency which will help to create the positive image of India as a major tourist destination. 
8.         The Committee noted that since the share of Central Government is 28% and State Government is 12% and from financial institutions/banks they have to take loans upto 60%
 which makes the share of State Governments to be 72% which is on a very high side.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that in order to make this scheme more attractive the
 share of both Central and State Governments should be 50% each.   
9.         The Committee is of the opinion that an amount of Rs. 0.30 crores is not sufficient for the training of guides and officers.  The training should be given to the guides in such a
 way so that they could explain the importance of the Tourist places in India which would increase the knowledge of tourists towards Indian Culture and heritage. Accordingly, the
 Committee recommends that All India Training Course for travel guides should be introduced in order to develop tourism in the country and for this purpose Ministry should increase
 their budget proposals.
 
The Committee was of the opinion that the schemes are good which would certainly be useful for the development of tourism in the country. The Committee recommends that the
 condition of transferring the title of the land to Government of India should be waived off.
 The Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry should provide special attention to the creation of budget accommodation  this year as well as in the coming years
 and provide more funds under this head.  It also further recommends that as an example one central assisted scheme may be undertaken in each State to develop a tourist place entirely
 funded by the Central Government which should be complete in all respects viz. Low priced accommodation, clean environment and adequate civic amenities which would go a long
 way in encouraging the State Governments to undertake similar programmes. 
The Committee noted with concern that there are shortage of toilet/drinking water facility on the national highways.  The Committee was of the view that most of the tourists are of
 adventurous nature and they prefer to perform their journeys by roads, but since the above facilities are not commonly available on national highways they find it inconvenient to
 travel on those roads.  Sometimes the road sides are used for easing out which creates insanitary conditions.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that such facilities may be
 created on the national highways 100% funded by the Central Government and that a condition may be added in the licence/lease granted to the petrol pumps and restaurants on
 national highways to provide drinking water and toilet facility for the tourist and other travelling public. The maintenance of toilet/drinking water facilities and other civic amenities
 so created under this scheme may be given to private parties/voluntary agencies. 
The Committee express its deep concern on the stand taken by the Ministry of Environment and Forest in this regard.  The Committee is of the view that India has many beautiful
 coastal beaches, sight scenes etc. which can be developed from the point of tourism.  Today some small countries like Singapore etc. are earning heavy foreign exchange through
 tourism. The Committee, therefore, reiterates its earlier recommendations contained in its 31
st report and desires the Ministry of Environment and Forests should take liberal view and
 flexible stand keeping in view of the importance of tourism in today’s context and should relax to some extent such restrictions for the purpose of tourism projects.
 The Committee is of the view that the tourist transport scheme is important for the development of Tourism industry specially in the North eastern States and hilly districts of U.P.
 West Bengal, J & K and Himachal Pradesh etc. which have a great potential in this regard.  The Committee therefore recommends that this scheme should not be weeded out by the
 Ministry of Finance and may be included in the 9
th Five Year Plan. 
The Committee took note of all these issues which were explained to it by IATO and desired that the Ministry of Tourism may take necessary action on them and where these issues
 are the concern of other Ministries like extention of Income Tax exemptions under 80 HHC, equality with exporters, increase in services and seat capacity of Air India/Indian Airlines
 and services of foreign airlines to India, and granting visa at the Airport on arrival may be taken up at appropriate level with the respective Ministries.   
The Committee understands that although I.T.D.C. has been earning profits but these are declining with each passing year.  The Committee was also informed that
 disinvestment/
restructuring of the I.T.D.C. is also under consideration and due to this they are not able to take any decision with regard to the new investments in various projects. 
 The delay in taking a decision has been effecting the financial performance of I.T.D.C.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that decision with regard to the disinvestment/restructuring of I.T.D.C. should be taken at an early date so that it is able to take its investment
 decision in time to check the decline in its financial performance.