 
 
       
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
December, 2024 / Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
371
_ 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred Fifty 
Fourth Report on the subject Construction Of Road-Over Bridges 
(ROBs), Road-Under Bridges (RUBs), Service Roads And Review Of 
Road Survey Guidelines, Etc. 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on  19th December, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 3rd  February, 2025) 
 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website:     https://sansad.in/rs 
 E-mail:     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 


 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
THREE HUNDRED SEVENTY FIRST REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Three Hundred 
Fifty Fourth Report on the subject Construction Of Road-Over 
Bridges (ROBs), Road-Under Bridges (RUBs), Service Roads And 
Review Of Road Survey Guidelines, Etc. 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 19th  December, 2024) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on   3rd February, 2025) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2024 / Agrahayana, 1946 (Saka) 
Hindi version of this publication is also available 

 
 
 
 
C O N T E N T S 
 
P A G E S 
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE      i 
2. INTRODUCTION        ii 
3. ACRONYMS                iii-iv 
 4. REPORT                                1-55 
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   56-59 
6. ANNEXURES         60-69 
    7. *MINUTES   
 
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
______________________________________ 
 
*To be appended
70-72


i 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
(2024-25) 
 
(Constituted on 26th September, 2024) 
 
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
3. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
4. Shri Jaggesh 
5. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala  
6. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
7. Shrimati Sudha Murty  
8. Shri Surendra Singh Nagar  
9.  Shri Imran Pratapgarhi 
10.  Shri Neeraj Dangi* 
 
Lok Sabha  
11. Shri Mian Altaf Ahmad  
12. Shri Pradan Baruah 
13. Shri R. K. Chaudhary 
14. Shri Anil Firojiya  
15. Shri Tapir Gao  
16. Shri Vishweshwar Hegde Kageri  
17. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
18. Shrimati June Maliah  
19. Shri Ajay Kumar Mandal  
20. Shri K. E. Prakash  
21. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy  
22. Dr. M. P. Abdussamad Samadani  
23. Kumari Selja  
24. Shri Avimanyu Sethi  
25. Shri Anurag Sharma  
26. Shri Suresh Kumar Shetkar  
27. Shri Tangella Uday Srinivas 
28. Shri Devesh Chandra Thakur  
29. Shri Amarsing Tisso 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
31. Shri K. C. Venugopal 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Dr. Kushal Kumar Pathak, Joint Secretary 
Shrimati Monica Baa, Director 
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Deputy Secretary 
Shri N. Romesh Singh, Under Secretary  
___________________________________________________________________________ 
*Nominated as Member w.e.f.  10th October, 2024 in lieu  of  Shri  V. Vijayasai Reddy who ceased to 
be  Member of Committee w.e.f. 10th October, 2024. 
 

ii 
 
 
 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do 
hereby present this  Three Hundred Seventy First Report on the Action Taken by the 
Government on the Recommendations/ Observations of the Committee contai ned in its Three 
Hundred Fifty -Fourth Report on the subject Construction Of Road -Over Bridges (ROBs), 
Road-Under Bridges (RUBs), Service Roads And Review Of Road Survey Guidelines, Etc. 
2. The Three Hundred Fifty Fourth  Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on 
the 10th August, 2023. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Three Hundred Fifty Fourth Report were received from the Ministry of Road, Transport and 
Highways on 11th March, 2024. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  16th 
December, 2024.   
 
 
(Sanjay Kumar Jha) 
NEW DELHI;                                                           Chairman, 
December 16, 2024                                                 Department-related Parliamentary Standing            
Agrahayana 25, 1946 (Saka)                            Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                 Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

iii 
 
 
 
ACRONYMS 
AI   Artificial Intelligence 
APRDC   Andhra Pradesh Road Development Corporation 
AR   Augmented Reality 
ATR   Action Taken Report 
BIM   Building Information Modelling 
BOT   Build Operate Transfer 
CAG   Comptroller and Auditor General 
CALA   Competent Authority for Land Acquisition 
CRRI   Central Road Research Institute 
DPR   Detailed Project Report 
EPC   Engineering, Procurement, and Construction 
FRCM   Fortnightly Regional Coordination Meetings 
FRP   Fiber Reinforced Polymer 
GAD   General Arrangement Drawing 
GETCO   Gujarat Energy Transmission Corporation 
GPR   Ground Penetrating Radar 
HAM   Hybrid Annuity Model 
IRC   Indian Roads Congress 
ITS   Intelligent Transportation Systems 
LHS   Left Hand Side 
LiDAR   Light Detection and Ranging 
LVUP   Light Vehicular Underpass 
LVUP   Light Vehicular Underpass 
MLC   Member of Legislative Council 
MoEF&CC   Ministry of Environment, Forest, and Climate Change 
MoRTH   Ministry of Road Transport and Highways 
MoU   Memorandum of Understanding 
MUTCD   Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices 
MVAA   Motor Vehicles Amendment Act 
NDT   Non Destructive Testing 
NH   National Highway 
NHAI   National Highways Authority of India 
NHIDCL   National Highways and Infrastructure Development 
Corporation Limited 
O&M   Operations and Maintenance 
PCR   Police Control Room 
PGR   Pedestrian Guard Rail 
PM 
GatiShakti  
 Prime Minister GatiShakti National Master Plan 
PRAGATI   Pro Active Governance and Timely Implementation 

iv 
 
PUP   Pedestrian Underpass 
PWD   Public Works Department 
ROB   Road Over Bridge 
RORACS   Railways Online Approval System for General 
Arrangement Drawings 
RSA   Road Safety Audit 
RUB   Road Under Bridge 
RWH   Rain Water Harvesting 
SHM   Structural Health Monitoring 
SVUP   Small Vehicular Underpass 
UMLC   Unmanned Level Crossing 
VR   Virtual Reality 
VUP   Vehicular Underpass 
 

1 
 
  REPORT  
The Report of the Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways 
on the recommendations/observations as contained in its Three Hund red Fifty Fourth  Report on 
‘Construction Of Road -Over Bridges (ROBs), Road -Under Bridges (RUBs), Service Roads And 
Review Of Road Survey Guidelines, Etc.’ which was presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 
10th August, 2023.   
2.      The Action Taken Replies were received from the Ministry on 11th March, 2024 in respect 
of all the observations/ recommendations contained in the Report. The replies have been 
categorized as follows:- 
Chapter-I: 
Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 10, 19, 45, 49, 50, 55, 64, 72, 87, 99, 101, 102, 104, 105, 121, 123, 126, 
131, 133, 134, 135, 167, 168, 178, 179, 198, 209, 210, 211, 212, 213, 214. 
Total: 32 
  
Chapter-II: 
Recommendations/Observations which the Committee does n ot desire to pursue in view of 
the replies of the Ministry: 
Paragraph Nos.: 12, 17, 27, 29, 30, 32, 39, 47, 48, 51, 58, 62, 63, 65, 66, 70, 71, 77, 78, 90, 
92, 96, 97, 110, 112, 114, 115, 119, 139, 140, 141, 149, 162, 163, 164, 172, 182, 187, 194, 
196.  
Total: 40 
Chapter-III: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have not been 
accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 16, 38, 43, 44, 69, 73, 79, 80, 82, 84, 85, 117, 132, 142, 143, 144, 166, 
180, 181, 184, 185, 186, 192, 193, 195. 
Total: 25 
  
Chapter-IV: 
Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry are still 
awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: 94 
Total: 1 
 
3. The Committee desires that final reply in respect of the recommendation/observation which 
has been categorized as interim reply by the Committee should be furnished at the earliest. 
 

2 
 
Chapter-I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
Construction of ROBs and RUBs 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee apprecia tes the increase in annual average progress in the number of 
Level Crossings (LCs) replaced with Road -Over-Bridges and Road -Under-Bridges. However, 
it also notes that the target of replacement of 1100 LCs set for 2023 -24 is lower than the 
annual average of  1207 progress achieved during 2014 -2023. The Committee is of the view 
that the target should be increased and the pace of replacement of LCs with ROBs/ RUBs 
should be expedited in the interest of greater safety and seamless mobility of the commuting 
public. 
(Para 10) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 As per the policy of the Ministry, all LCs on National Highways are to be replaced by 
ROB/RUB. Construction of ROBs/RUBs on NHs are taken up either on standalone basis or as part 
of improvement/ upgradation project of  a section of NH. The  recommendations of the Committee 
are noted and construction of ROBs/RUBs in replacement of existing LCs on NHs  will be 
expedited.  
Elimination of Level crossing 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee notes with satisfaction th at all unmanned level crossings on Broad 
Gauge have been eliminated by January 2019. However, existence of 559 Unmanned Level 
Crossings in both Metre Gauge and Narrow Gauge needs to be replaced with ROB/RUB 
expeditiously in a focused and time bound manner. 
(Para 19) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 This matter comes under purview of the Ministry of Railways. Hence the recommendations 
have been forwarded to Ministry of Railways for necessary action. 

3 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
 
3. Incorporating the elements of community engagement into the guidelines would involve 
measures such as conducting public consultations, holding informational sessions, and actively 
seeking feedback from the affected community. By involving local residents, businesses, and 
other stakeholders in the decision-making process, road construction projects can better serve 
their specific needs and mitigate potential negative impacts. This may include implementing 
traffic management plans, providing alternative routes, adjusting construction schedules  to 
meet local requirement or minimising disruption. 
(Para 45) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 The elements like traffic diversion plan, construction zone safety measures, construction 
scheduling are prepared based on existing standards and guidelines of Indian Roads Congress which 
are developed based indigenous research, international best practices and stakeholders feedbacks in 
different projects. Nevertheless further action will be taken for community engagement in these 
matters. 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. Ground Penetrating Radar (GPR) should be used to penetrate the ground or structure, 
allowing for subsurface inspection of ROBs/RUBs. It can identify hidden defects, such as 
voids, delamination, or corrosion in concrete or steel elements. GPR can provide va luable 
information on the internal condition of the structure without the need for invasive 
investigations. 
Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) Systems should be adopted to involve the installation of 
sensors and monitoring devices on ROBs/RUBs to continuou sly monitor their structural 
behaviour. These sensors can measure parameters like vibrations, strains, and deflections, 
providing real-time data on the performance and health of the structure. SHM systems enable 
early detection of structural abnormalities and help in proactive maintenance and 
intervention. 
(Para 49) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Ground Penetrating Radar is being widely used to assess underground utilities. Foundation 
of ROBs/RUBs are generally not distressed as they are not located on river bed . Ministry has 
recently used guidelines for structural health monitoring on real time basis of bridges and structures 

4 
 
including ROBs and RUBs based on span length, location such as in coastal/highly polluted areas, 
age and history of previous rehabilitation/retrofitting measures using various kinds of sensors. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. Non-Destructive Testing (NDT) Techniques, such as ultrasonic testing, magnetic 
particle testing, and radiographic testing, can be employed for ROB/RUBs inspection. These  
techniques assess the integrity of structural components, detect cracks, weld defects, or 
corrosion, and identify potential failure points. NDT methods are typically used in 
combination with visual inspections to provide a comprehensive assessment of the structure's 
condition. 
(Para 50) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Schmidt Hammer Test, Ultrasonic Pulse Velocity Test and other NDTs are carried out for 
condition assessment of different components of bridges and structures including ROBs/RUBs. 
 
Environment clearances and land acquisition 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee appreciates the initiatives of the Ministry of Road Transport and 
Highways in addressing the most important issue of land acquisition in fast tracking the 
ROB/RUB projects. The Bhoomira shi portal has undoubtedly expedited the process of land 
acquisition for National Highways. However, the Committee urges upon the Ministry and 
NHAI to accord continued priority to the land acquisition issue and fails to appreciate as to 
why huge Government  funds are parked with Competent Authority for Land Acquisition 
(CALAs). 
    (Para 55) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1  The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has launched Bhoomi Rashi Portal as a 
single point platform for online processing of Land Acquisit ion notification and payment of 
compensation to accelerate Highways infrastructure in India. The portal is a new mile stone in the 
nation’s journey towards digitization and transparency. The objective of the portal is to fast track the 
process of Land Acquisition notifications and to obviate the necessity of parking of huge amount of 
government fund with Competent Authority for Land Acquisition. 
6.2  The Ministry has made it mandatory for payment of compensation of Land Acquisition 

5 
 
through Bhoomi Rashi Port al for the projects of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highway and 
National Highways Authority of India (NHAI). The Ministry is continuously impressing upon the 
NHAI to make payment only through Bhoomi Rashi portal. The efforts has also been made for on -
boarding of National Highways Infrastructure Development Corporation Limited (NHIDCL) for 
payment of compensation through Portal. 
 6.3  The Present system of payment of compensation in respect of Ministry of Road Transport 
and Highways does not allow park ing of any fund with CALA. In case of NHAI, limit is 
created/fund is deposited for particular projects in CALA account up to which CALA can make 
payment through PFMS directly into account of the beneficiary. Therefore, the present system in 
NHAI inherently does not allow parking of Government funds with CALA. However, in some cases 
CALA could not be able to release compensation due to litigations in Courts, non -acceptance of 
award by beneficiaries, mismatch of beneficiaries’ details, arbitration awards etc. and the funds/limit 
remain parked/unpaid in CALAs Accounts.  
6.4  NHIDCL deposits the LA compensation amount with the concern CALA after passing of 
award under section 3G of National Highways Act, 1956 so as to enable them to distribute the 
compensation amount to beneficiary. No payment is deposited to concerned CALA’s account prior 
to 3G Award. In addition, NHIDCL has opened Zero balance accounts for the CALAs with only 
drawing rights so that money gets placed with the CALA for disbursement only. However,  in some 
cases, the CALAs are in the process of shifting to Zero balance accounts system.  
6.5  It is anticipated that once all the Implementing Agencies are completely on - boarded on 
Bhoomi Rashi Portal, there would be no parking of government funds with CALAs in any manner. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee also recommends that Ministries should assign competent contract 
managers who have the necessary skills and expertise to effectively manage contracts. These 
managers should have a strong und erstanding of contract law, project management, and 
negotiation skills. Imparting them adequate skill training will enable them to fulfil their 
responsibilities.  
(Para 64) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 Consultants (AE/IE /PMC) are engaged for project manageme nt of EPC /BOT projects. 
Further, the projects are monitored by field units of NHAI/NHIDCL/PWD. Projects are monitored 
/reviewed by Ministry, NHAI and NHIDCL headquarters at Delhi also. Therefore, there is already 

6 
 
established mechanism to manage the contra ct. Nevertheless, process is being strengthened to 
enhance competencies of the key personnel of AE/IE for more effective contract management. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Railways should look for a cost -effective and durable solution to the problem o f 
water-logging by modifying embankment height, providing suitable cross and longitudinal 
drains, cutting off the ingress of water from the catchment area into the subway, etc. 
(Para 72) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 Following steps are being taken to prevent water logging at various underpasses: 
 
i. Rain Water Harvesting (RWH) wells are provided to collect & dispose off rain water 
at LHS. 
ii. Fixed Pumps, Mobile Pumps & Heavy -duty pumps are arranged & deployed to 
discharge rain water from LHS. 
iii. Covering sheds are prov ided at critical LHS to prevent entry of rain water into the 
LHS. 
iv. Flood gauges are provided at LHS to indicate depth of water logging (More than 3 feet 
depth), during heavy rain. 
v. Caution boards are provided at LHS Not to enter in LHS if depth of water is b eyond 
dangerous level (more than 3 feet in depth). 
vi. Protection walls & Humps at the approach roads are provided to prevent entry of 
outside water into the LHS. 
vii. Dedicated team of Officer's & Supervisor's has been deputed to regularly inspect and 
monitor the water logging status in LHS. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Railways should relook into ‘Gate 
Mitra’ scheme and ensure that these personnel are being provided with all basic amenities.  In 
the Committee’s view , proper implementation of the Gate Mitra scheme will promote the 
safety of road users, besides generating employment. 
(Para 87) 

7 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 Rail Mitra were provided at unmanned level crossing gates for counseling of road 
users and to prevent possibility of any unsafe incident at Unmanned level crossings (UMLCs).  
However, all UMLCs on Broad Gauge (BG) have been eliminated by Railways on 
31.01.2019. Deployment of Rail Mitra has since been discontinued from 2019 onwards.  
 
 
Inefficient Safety Barriers 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee recommends that all measures should be taken to ensure that the safety 
barriers are appropriately designed and constructed to withstand the impact forces generated 
by heavy vehicles.  Also, these should be provided with sufficient height to prevent them from 
breaching the barrier.  Increasing the height and capacity of safety barriers is essential for 
maintaining the integrity of the bridge and protecting the road users, thereby minimizing the 
risk of fatal crashes. 
(Para 99) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 Crash barrier is provided as per provision of IRC -119 and Ministry’s guidelines dated 
01.01.2020. Crash barriers is required to be successfully crash tested  and result evaluated as per   
codal provisions. As per present IRC standards, New Jersey crash barriers are invariably provided in 
bridges and structures at the carriageway edge. 
Absent Signage and Hazard Markings 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee recommends that bridge infrastructure planning and maintenance should 
prioritize the inclusion and proper maintenance of traffic signs and hazard markers to ensure the 
safety of road users, pedestrians, and cyclists. Regular inspections, timely repairs, and routine 
maintenance are essential to ensure that these vital elements effectively communicate important 
information, guide road users, and mitigate potential hazards, thus contributing to safer and 
more organized bridge crossings. 
(Para 101) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 The Ministry has taken up Bridge Management System for  planning and condition survey and 

8 
 
maintenance of  existing bridges on entire NH net work in the country. As regards , traffic signage 
,delineators ,road marking and other road safety  ,IRC codes such as IRC 35,67 etc. are followed . 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
12.      The Committee also recommends establishing standardized designs for road signs that 
comply with national or international standards, such as those set by the Manual on Uniform 
Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD).  Also, the re should be use of clear and easily recognizable 
symbols, colours, and fonts to improve readability and comprehension. 
(Para 102) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 IRC code on road signages "IRC -67:2022:Code of Practice for Road signs" has been 
developed based on Vienna conventions and research works carried out in our country. 
 
Inadequate Anti-glare Measures 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Committee recommends for proper implementation of appropriate anti -glare 
measures on bridge sections to enhance visibilit y, reduce the risks associated with glare, 
and ensure the safety of all road users, especially during night time. 
(Para 104) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 As per IRC -SP-99, glare reduction devices are installed   for reducing the headlight glare of 
opposing traffic at night over the crash barriers ,in the flush type median, on bridges & overpass 
sections, and on horizontal curves. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee also recommends implementing advanced technologies, such as 
adaptive lighting systems or intelligent transportation systems (ITS) in automobiles that 
adjust lighting levels based on real -time conditions. These systems can automatically dim 
or adjust lighting intensity to reduce glare during specific periods or in response to 
changing weathe r conditions. The Committee feels that the road authorities can 

9 
 
significantly enhance road safety and reduce the risk of accidents caused by blinding 
glare. 
        (Para 105) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 The Ministry vide letter dated 27 th February, 2024 ha s requested  Chairman of the 
Automotive Industry Standards Committee (AISC) to consider the issue and formulate necessary 
standard after deliberation with the committee members.   As per IRC -SP-99 , Glare reduction 
devices are installed   for reducing the hea dlight glare of opposing traffic at night over the crash 
barriers in the flush type median, on bridges and overpass sections, and on horizontal curves. 
Lack of designed U-turn facilities under the bridges 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee recomm ends implementing U -turn facilities under bridge sections 
where feasible. These U -turn facilities should have controlled access points, clear signage, and 
proper lane markings, allowing motorists to make use of it safely. 
(Para 121) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 U-turn facilities are provided for ROBs located in built -up area having service road along 
approaches to ROB. 
Inadequate Treatment of Merging and Diverging Points 
Recommendation/Observation 
16.    The Committee recommends for providing adequate length for acceleration and 
deceleration lanes, clear signage, and road markings. Consistent lane designations and trafﬁc 
control measures, such as trafﬁc signals or yield signs, should be implemented to guide drivers 
and minimize conﬂicts. Additionally, regular maintenance and periodic assessments of these 
points are essential to address any signage obstructions, pavement deterioration, or visibility 
issues. By implementing these recommendations, bridge sections can facilitate smooth and safe 
transitions for merg ing and diverging trafﬁc, enhancing overall trafﬁc ﬂow and reducing the 
risk of crashes. 
 (Para 123) 
Reply of the Ministry 

10 
 
16.1      Acceleration lanes, deceleration lanes, and proper signage   are provided for entry from 
service lane to main carriageway an d vice-versa as per IRC Codal provisions. Maintenance of  NH 
section including service roads are taken up as per existing contract provisions. It may be mentioned 
that starting from current FY entire length of NHs has been covered under 
improvement/maintenance contract.  
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee recommends that a robust monitoring mechanism may be put in place 
not only to oversee the progress of ongoing ROB/RUB projects but also to identify and address 
any bottlenecks in execution 
 (Para 126) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 There is multi-tier mechanism in MoRTH and its executing agencies to review NH projects. 
Such reviews include critical analysis of ongoing ROB/RUB projects and take effective steps to 
address the bottlenecks. Besides, the Zo nal Railways conduct coordination committee meetings to 
sort out the pending issues related to approvals, etc. 
Inter-ministerial coordination mechanism 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Committee notes that PM Gati Shakti - National Master Plan for Multi -modal 
Connectivity has provided an excellent platform for integrated planning and coordinated 
implementation of all infrastructure projects, including ROBs/RUBs, whether on a standalone 
basis or as part of corridor projects. 
(Para 131) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 PM GatiShakti Portal is leveraged for integrated project planning of NH projects including 
ROBs/RUBs. 
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee also recommends that the roles, responsibilities, and mandates of each 
Ministry involved in road develo pment must be clearly defined. It must be ensured that there 

11 
 
is clarity on the specific areas in which each Ministry is responsible for and how they interact 
with other Ministries to ensure time -bound resolutions of issues. This will minimize delay, 
overlaps, conflicts, and uncertainties in decision-making and implementation. 
(Para 133) 
 
19.1. The Committee feels that there remains a communication gap among the Ministries, 
leading to avoidable delay.  The Committee, therefore, recommends establishing effect ive 
communication channels between the Ministries, such as dedicated focal points or inter -
ministerial co -ordinating officers. These officers can serve as a single point of contact for 
communication, coordination, and information exchange between the Ministries. 
(Para 134) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1.1 Roles, responsibilities and mandate of different Ministries involved in road development are 
well defined and there is hardly any overlap. Suggestion for effective communication channels, 
single point contact,  etc. will be further explored to streamline decision making process and time -
bound resolution of issues. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Ministries should establish mechanisms for information sharing and data 
integration among the Ministries/ Agencies  involved in road development. They can create a 
centralized repository or platform where relevant data, reports, and project updates can be 
shared among the concerned Ministries/authorities. This will enable Ministries to access and 
utilize comprehensive information for decision-making and project monitoring. 
(Para 135) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 PM GatiShakti is exactly facilitating data integration and data sharing among the user 
Ministries and their executing agencies. There are other data repositories on specific subjects, e.g. 
National Geo-science data repository for geological dat. Efforts are being made to integrate all such 
data repositories with PM GatiShakti. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
21. Further, since the Technical Committees, Apex Committees,  Highway Research Board 
and its Committees are involved in the preparation of initial drafts, reviewing critically the 
draft prepared, state -of-the-art reports, explanatory handbook on Codes with solved 

12 
 
examples, etc., the Ministry may consider providing t hem support through budgetary 
allocation for their works including for bearing expenditure on intercity travels, 
accommodation, local travel, and honorarium. 
(Para 167) 
21.1. The Ministry may provide budgetary allocation to the IRC to organize workshops, 
seminars, and webinars in order to disseminate the knowledge on latest IRC guidelines to the 
practicing highway engineers in the interest of creating a large pool of engineers with 
knowledge on the cutting-edge technology in the rapidly evolving road design  and engineering 
sector. 
(Para 168)  
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1. IRC committee Members work on voluntary basis as per the practice since long. Ministry 
sanctions funds to IRC for specific activities / requirements from time to time including organising 
works of seminars / conferences. 
Induction of new technologies 
Recommendation/Observation 
22. The Committee notes the reply of RDSO, Indian railways that in most cases, India is at 
par with the advanced nations.  However, the Committee suggests adopting Build ing 
Information Modelling (BIM) technology which enables the creation of detailed 3D models 
that integrate various aspects of the ROB/RUB development process, including architectural, 
structural, and utility design. Further, Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmen ted Reality (AR) 
technologies can also be used to provide immersive experiences and simulations during the 
design and construction phases of ROBs/RUBs. They allow engineers and project teams to 
visualize and interact with virtual models, facilitating bette r design review, construction 
planning, and stakeholder communication. 
(Para 178) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1 Various IT tools are being used in NH projects at different levels and there is continued 
focus on more digitalization to enhance efficiency of project implementation and minimize disputes. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
23. The Committee also emphasizes on usage of Advanced Construction Materials such as 
fiber-reinforced polymers (FRPs), high -performance concrete, and composite materials to 

13 
 
enhance the durability, strength, and lifespan of ROBs/RUBs. These materials offer improved 
resistance to corrosion, seismic forces, and other environmental stress factors. 
(Para 179) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1       IRC has published Guidelines for use of GFRP bars.  Ministry has also issued policy 
circular for use of Ultra High Performance Fiber Reinforced Concrete in long span bridges. NH 
projects are being executed on EPC / HAM / BOT (Toll) modes where design is prepared by the 
contractor and the contractor has all  freedom to use materials and technology of his choice 
depending upon their suitability and costing for a particular project. 
 
Need for VUP/CUP  
Recommendation/Observation 
24.      The Committee reiterates that CRRI’s suggestion that wherever the highway p asses 
through built areas, the need for VUP/ Light Vehicular Underpass (LVUP) must be built as 
part of Road safety Audit (RSA) report conforming to IRC: 84 (2019) or IRC: 87 (2019), 
including the provision of half-subway, i.e. depressed Pedestrian Under Pass (PUP). 
                      (Para 198)  
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1 VUP / LVUP / SVUP is provided in the National Highway projects as per guidelines 
contained in respective 2 / 4/ 6 laning manual of IRC. 
 
Good Samaritan Law 
Recommendation/Observation 
25. The Committee recommends that first aid education for every police personnel must be 
mandatory along with their regular training. All Police PCRs must be equipped with the 
requisite first aid equipments and items, etc.  
(Para 209) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1 The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 is the principal instrument through which road transport is 
regulated in the country. The same has been amended first time in a comprehensive way by The 
Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019, passed by the Parliament and pub lished in the Gazette of 

14 
 
India on 9th August 2019.  
25.2 The Ministry is regularly conducting awareness campaigns through social media, electronic 
media, and print media to promote road safety. The Ministry is also running the Road Safety 
Advocacy scheme u nder which it supports NGOs, Trusts, Corporates, Academic Institutions etc. 
by providing financial assistance for administering Road Safety Advocacy. 
25.3 As per the rule 138, sub -rule (4) clause (d) of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989, the 
driver of every vehicle shall ensure to carry first aid kit containing all necessary items mentioned 
in the clause. 
25.4 Further, the subject matter of police personnel pertains to Ministry of Home Affairs. 
Therefore, the recommendation of committee is forwarded to  Ministry of Home Affairs vide 
Ministry’s letter no. RT25035/28/2024-RS dated 16.02.2024 for suitable action.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
26. Further, the scope of the ‘Good Samaritan Law’ must be enlarged beyond helping a 
road accident victim. Victims of  natural calamities like drought and flood, fire incidents, or 
victims of any medical condition, etc. must be included in the ambit of ‘Good Samaritan 
Law’, as the nature of helping victims of above situations, is identical with the road accident 
victims and hence must be part of Good Samaritan Law.  
(Para 210) 
Reply of the Ministry 
26.1 The Ministry is mandated with the task of constructing and maintaining National Highways 
in the Country, the formulation of broad policies relating to regulation of road tr ansport in the 
country, received care on time.  
26.2 MoRTH has published rules for the protection of Good Samaritans who, in good faith, 
voluntarily, and without expectation of any reward or compensation render emergency medical or 
non-medical care or assistance at the scene of an accident to the victim or transports such victim to 
the hospital.  
26.3 The objective and mandate of the scheme is to motivate the public to help the road accident 
victims in emergency situation, along with inspiring and motivating others to save innocent lives. 
26.4 Further, the subject matter of natural calamities like drought and flood, fire incidents 
pertain to Ministry of Home Affairs. Therefore, the recommendation of committee is forwarded to 
Ministry of Home Affairs for suitable actions. 
 

15 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
27. The Committee feels that for reaping the best results out of ‘Good Samaritan Law’; 
mass training and awareness is needed. ‘Scouts & Guide’ system which used to be in schools 
earlier can be truly instrumental in  this regard. ‘First Aid Training’ and handling and 
assisting a person injured in a road accident or in any natural calamity, is an essential part 
for every student trained under the ‘Scout and Guide’ System. This needs to be resurrected 
in all schools and the Ministry should appropriately sensitise and take up with the concerned 
authorities for building citizenship rooted in sublime values.   
(Para 211) 
Reply of the Ministry 
27.1 The Ministry is regularly conducting awareness campaigns through social media, electronic 
media, and print media to promote road safety. The Ministry is also running the Road Safety 
Advocacy scheme under which it supports NGOs, Trusts, Corporates, Academic Institutions etc. 
by providing financial assistance for administering Road Safety Advocacy 
27.2 MoRTH has also prepared a set of interventions required for inculcating Road Safety 
among Children and school students and sent it to Ministry of Education for consideration and 
inclusion as a part of the National Curriculum Framework (NCF) for School Education, 2023. 
27.3 Further, the subject matter of Scouts & Guide pertains to Ministry of Youth Affairs & 
Sports. Therefore, the recommendation of committee forwarded to Ministry of Youth Affairs & 
Sports vide Ministry’s letter no. RT-25035/38/2023-RS dated 22.01.2024. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
28. The Committee also recommends sensitizing  the police of its duties and  
responsibilities during such a situation. Increased fund allocation to public funded hospitals 
has the potential to esta blish robust emergency care units, besides creating adequate 
infrastructure. Police and judiciary must be adequately sensitized so that they remain alive 
towards the protection of Good Samaritans. 
(Para 212) 
Reply of the Ministry 
28.1 The Ministry is regularly conducting awareness campaigns through social media,electronic 
media, and print media to promote road safety.  
28.2 The Ministry is also running the Road Safety Advocacy scheme under which it supports 

16 
 
NGOs, Trusts, Corporates, Academic Institutions et c. by providing financial assistance for 
administering Road Safety Advocacy. 
28.3 Further, the subject matter of Hospitals pertains to Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.   
Therefore, the recommendation of committee forwarded to Ministry of Health and Fa mily Welfare 
vide Ministry’s letter no. RT-25035/38/2023-RS dated 22.01.2024.    
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
29.       To provide for accountability of various Government authorities and encouragement 
for Good Samaritans, the Committee recommends that a “ Grievance Redressal Mechanism” 
be instituted nationally. The new section 134A of the MVAA 2019 protects the Good 
Samaritans but does not guide one over the breach of the obligations of the police  and the 
hospital. Si n ce these subjects are a part of state lists, the states must be encouraged to come 
up with rules regarding the grievance mechanism in case of breach of compliance. 
(Para 213) 
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1 Noted. The matter is being examined in the Ministry as per Act and relevant rules for 
necessary compliance. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
30. Besides, campaigns to increase the awareness of the rights of Good Samaritans must 
be undertaken to educate the public. Further, in pursuance to the guidelines for Good 
Samaritans issued  by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare mentioned therein, both 
public and private hospitals and police stations must publish  the charter on the rights of 
Good Samaritans. This will go a long way in encouraging the spirited public and help greater 
information dissemination on right of the good Samaritans. 
(Para 214) 
Reply of the Ministry 
30.1 The Ministry is regularly conducting awareness campaigns through social media, electronic 
media, and print media to promote road safety. The Ministry is also running the Road Safety 
Advocacy scheme under which it supports NGOs, Trusts, Corporates, Academic Institutions etc. 
by providing financial assistance for administering Road Safety Advocacy. 
30.2 Further, Ministry has also published guidelines vide G.S.R. 594(E) dated 29th Septembe r 
2020 mentioning that “Every public and private hospital shall publish a charter in Hindi, English 

17 
 
and vernacular language, at the entrance or other conspicuous location, and on their website, 
stating the rights of Good Samaritans under the Act and the rules made there under.” 
Miscellaneous 
 Emphasis on NHAI to provide information regarding patches  for opening retail 
outlets on NHs so that oil marketing companies can put up their advertisements 
and proper guidelines regarding NoC of retail outlets for prom oting Ease of 
Doing Business; 
Improvement and upgradation of NH is a continuous process .Similarly  roads joining 
NH are being developed from time to time by   the concerned govt department. Apart 
from retail outlet, access is provided to private properties  which come up at different 
location as per local need. As such eligibility of a particular site for setting up a retail 
outlet is subject to change from time to time depending upon above factors and it is 
not practical to provide such information. 
 Requirement of bridge on Godavari river from Devarapalli to Maredumilli to 
bypass Rajahmundry city and to reduce distance; 
This proposed bridge does not lie on NH. Therefore does not come under purview of this 
Ministry.  
 Construction status of the National Highwa y connecting Hajipur to Sonepur and 
NH- 527C, Muzaffarpur bypass connecting Ramdayalu to Motihari and Old NH -
77 in Bihar. 
These projects are on NHs with NHAI and details are enclosed as  Annexure-A, B & 
C. 
 Delay in construction and bad condition of Himmat N agar-Jaipur-Delhi highway, 
Ahemdabad-RadhanpurNational highway, Bechraji -Mehsana highway, Hajipur -
Sonpur NH, NH 527 C and Muzzafarpur Bypass etc; 
Regarding the slow speed of work for three years, is may be stated that appointed date of 
the project is 02 -01-2019. Concessionaire performed well till March 2020 and achieved 
physical Milestones as per schedule. From March 2020 project progress started suffering 
due to impact of COVID -19 pandemic, extreme rainfall in previous year, non -
performance of Concessionai re and some other problem. There has been a significant 

18 
 
improvement in the project highway in the last year as many as 28 structures out of 32 
structures have been opened to traffic and surfacing has been done in almost the whole 
project length including s ervice roads. Project has been delayed due to following 
reasons: 
 Structure located @ Ch. 533+205 is not completed due to a delay in approval from 
GETCO for shifting of high tension GETCO lines. 
 Contractor has also faced the financial crunch due to financial crisis of YES Bank. 
 Structures located @Ch. 491+305 & Ch. 492+843, Hon'ble MP, Shri Dipsinh Rathod 
has requested for considering a Viaduct Structure instead of reinforced earth approaches. 
Accordingly, the work of originally provisioned flyovers @ Km.491 +305 & Km. 
492+843 was kept in abeyance and a proposal for providing a viaduct from Km. 
490+290 to Km. 493+290 was processed and tender was invited by RO/Gujarat. Later 
on, Hon'ble MP vide letter dated 14.03.2023 has suggested completing the half -finished 
flyover work at Motipura Circle and Sahkarijin char rasta by the existing Concessionaire 
to ensure immediate completion to alleviate traffic congestion within the city of 
Himmatnagar. Accordingly, as per the suggestion of Hon'ble MP, NHAI has now 
restarted the balance work of construction of the flyovers at Motipura work and Sahkari 
Jin Char Rasta. 
 Structure located at @Ch. 512+085 is delayed to drawing finalization and inadequate 
mobilization of resources and manpower from the side of Contractor. 
3 ROBs are delayed due to delay in design and drawing approvals from Railways. 
Inadequate mobilization of manpower and resources at site. 
The Authority endeavours to complete the said location in all likelihood by March, 2024. 
 Report of surveys conducted on NH -58, NH-52, NH-11, NH-10, the money spent 
on these surveys and the consultant monitoring them; 
 i.)Details of NH-52, NH-11, NH-10 with NHAI are enclosed as Annexure D. 
 ii). Ajmer Nagaur NH -58 construction work has been ongoing since 20.08.2020 therefore, 
no NSV was conducted recently.  
 Kota- Darah NH-52 last NSV was done on 22-06-2023 
 Sikar Bikaner NH-11 last NSV was done on 22-05-2023  
Project Name NSV Date Expenditure (Lakh) Consultant Remarks 
Ajmer 
Nagaur NH -
58 
- - - - 
Kota- Darah 
NH-52 22.06.2023 4.12 
M/s L .N.M infra –
Project Pvt. Ltd. 
(AE) 
Done by 
Authority 
Engineer 
appointed on 

19 
 
the Project 
Highway. No 
separate 
expenditure 
done. 
Sikar Bikaner 
NH-11 21.05.2023 4.80 
M/s Dhruv 
Consultancy 
Service Ltd (IE) 
Done by 
Independent 
Engineer 
appointed on 
the Project 
Highway. No 
separate 
expenditure 
done. 
 
 The issue regarding NH16 and NH 216 A from Visakhapatnam to Vijayawada; 
The stretch is with NHAI and there is no issue on the same. 
 Water-logging issues in RUBs in Bhandara -Gondiya constituency and other places 
including Minto road in New Delhi; 
There are no RUBs on National Highways in Bhandara-Gondia Constituency. 
 Starting construction work of Mehsaul ROB in Sitamarhi to prevent the death of 
patients due to obstruction of ambulance movement caused by traffic blockage ; 
Project of construction of approach road of ROB in lieu of Railway Level Crossing No - 56 
at Railway KM 104/8 -9 near Mehsaul Chowk in Sitamarhi - Parsauni (Old Alignment of 
NH- 77) in the district of Sitamarhi has been sanctioned by Ministry for Rs63.78 Crore on 
25.01.2022.The work is in progress and its target date of completion is 22.08.2024. 
 Need for increasing manpower at the railway crossing in Arunachal Pradesh 
(Murkongselek to Pasighat) along with the requirement of construction of ROBs/RUBs 
in the area; 
The stretch of NH -515 from Kandulijan Gaon (Km 438.800) to Oyan (Km 520.300) is 

20 
 
being developed to 4 -lane facility by NHIDCL. Out of which, stretch from Km 511.00 
(Ruksin Gate/Assam-Arunachal border) to Km 520.300 (Oyan) falls in Arunachal Pradesh 
(Note:above chainages are as per Old NH -52).In this 4 -laning work, a Bypass of about 9 
Km length is being developed to bypass the Jonal Town which takes off from the existing 
alignment at Km 505.150 and again meets at Km 514.700. Thus, after construction of  Jonal 
Bypass, this section of existing NH will cease to be NH as per MoRT&H guidelines. 
Regarding the requirement of construction of ROBs/RUBs in the area ,it is to inform that a 
RailwayLine from Murkongselek to Pasighat is under construction by NFR and t his under 
construction  Railway line will cross the old NH -52 (new NH -515) at two locations in 
  above mentioned bypassed section. Since the Railway Line is crossing the existing 
alignment, , the NFR Railway is proposing construction of ROB at their own c ost on these 
locations to eliminate Level crossing. 
 Issue of repairing of ROB at NH -29 in Manipur as also increasing the number of 
spans to be repaired and widening the same. In addition, traffic problem on ROB due 
to the absence of railways in Manipur was also flagged; 
There is no ROB on NH -29 in Manipur. 
 Status of completion of upgradation on economic corridor connecting five states to a 
six-lane highway and two-lane service road on either side;  
Total length of NH -66 passing through the state of Kerala is 643.5Km, out of which 
61.45Km completed and further 582.05Km is under implementation and the details are 
attached as Annexure E. 
 Status of 6 lane road tunnel being constructed along Wadakkanchery -Thrissur 
Section of NH-544 near the Kuthiran hills in ke rala- the reasons for its delay and the 
estimated time line for its completion; 
i)The project of 6 -laning of Vadakkenchery –Thrissur section (km 240 to km 270) of NH -47 
(New No.NH-544) was awarded to M/s.Thrissur Expressway Ltd. on BOT(Toll) pattern with 
Concession Agreement signed on 24.08.2009. The Appointed Date was initially fixed as 
07.10.2010 and subsequently was revised to 15.09.2012 due to non -fulfillment of condition 
precedent by the both the parties, waving off the claims by each other, under the p rovision 
available in the Concession Agreement vide Supplementary Agreement dated 30.12.2015. 
Based on the above revised Appointed Date, the Schedule Project Completion Date(SPCD) was 
fixed as 17.03.2015. 

21 
 
ii) The tunneling work could not be started until September 2014 due to requirement of Right of 
Way at tunnel entry and also pending restricting of loan for the project. 
iii) Work on Tunnel entry approach cutting commenced on 07.10.2014. Drilling and Blasting 
work on LHS and RHS Tube Tunnel respectively co mmenced from June 2016 and August 
2016, which accordingly, was completed in March 2017 and June 2017. 
iv)  During the above period, the tunneling work was stopped for 4 months due to protest from 
local public for drilling and blasting in view of minor dama ges to their properties. Further, 
Concessionaire has paid a compensation of Rs. 3 Crores on adhoc basis as directed by Hon’ble 
High court of Kerala and thereby resumed the work in Jan 2017.  
v) The work of tunnel was restarted after January 2020 and again got halted due to Covid -19 
Pandemic and Monsoon 2020. And again recommenced on November 2020. 
vi) Accordingly Concessionaire was able to open the 3 -lane tunnel on LHS for traffic on 
30.07.2021 and 3-lane tunnel on RHS was opened for traffic on 20.01.2022. 
vii) There were several claims & counter claims of concessionaire & NHAI, a settlement 
agreement was signed on 27.09.2021 between the concessionaire and NHAI.  
viii) The project then achieved Provisional completion on 08.03.2022 with list of pending 
work as punch list. All work is already completed except lining of tunnel which is targeted 
to be completed by 10.03.2024. 
 Provision for adequate lighting arrangement inside the tunnels in Konkan 
Railway especially during monsoon season. 
Matter has been referred to MoR for necessary action. 
 The implementation of all the proposed provisions of the Motor vehicle 
Amendment Act 2019 (MVA Act 2019) needs to be made more effective. 
The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 is the principal instrument through which road transport is  
regulated in the country. The same had been amended by the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 
2019, passed by the Parliament and published in the Gazette of India on 9th August 2019. 
Ministry of Road Transport &Highways vide notification S.O 3110(E) dated 28 .08.2019 and 
S.O 3147(E) dated 30.08.2019 had appointed 1st day of September 2019 as the date on which 
around sixty sections of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 had come into force. 
  
For implementation of the rest of the provisions of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019, 
this Ministry had constituted six  committees involving States / stakeholders for suggesting draft 
amendments in the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 consequent to the notification of the 
Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019 (MVAA).  

22 
 
Ministry of Road Transport &Highways vide letter dated 29 th December, 2022 has submitted 
the completion certificate and status report to Rajya Sabha Secretariat with regard to framing of 
rules after passing of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019.  
Ministry of Road Transport &Highways vide letter dated 6 th January, 2020 has issued an 
advisory to all the States and Union Territories regarding the implementation of the 
provisions of Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act 2019 after seeking legal advice of 
Ministry of Law and Justice. 
 The National Road Safety Board should be formed as early as possible. 
National Road safety Board has been mandated vide Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019. 
In 2019, A new Section 215(B) has been included in Motor Vehicle A ct, 1988. The newly 
created board will render advice to Central as well as State Governments on all aspects 
pertaining to road safety and traffic management including formulation of standards for road 
safety, road infrastructure, registration and licensing of motor vehicles, sustainable utilisation of 
road transport eco-system, provision of new vehicle technology, safety of vulnerable road users, 
educating and sensitising drivers and other road users etc. 
2. In this connection, the process of filling up the  post of Chairman and Members in the 
National Road Safety Board has been started last year. Now, Ministry as per direction of 
Secretary RT&H is in communication with the Ministry of Finance to increase the 
Monthly salary of the Chairman and Member of the B oard so that more officer can apply 
for the post. Along -side, Ministry is processing the approval of the Cabinet for the 
constitution of the Board. 
 There is a need for critical analysis of reason for missing the road safety targets to 
reduce accidents, deaths and injuries by 50% by 2025 and further requirement of 
robust action plan for achieving the same by 2030. 
Temporary road safety works on all identified black spots has been completed and as 
on date permanent rectification work on 3981 black spots out o f 5803 identified black 
spots based on accident data for the years 2016 -18 has been completed. Permanent 
rectification works on the remaining black spots are targeted for completion by 2030. 
 The speed limits on the express ways needs to be reduced up to 10 0 kmph instead 
of 120 kmph as it is the main reason for accidents, deaths and injuries. Further, 
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways and States should come up with 
speed management guidelines or policies at the earliest. 
The Rule 118 of the Central  Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989   mandates fitment of Speed 
Limiting Device or Speed Limiting Function Devices in Transport vehicles.  The 

23 
 
Central Government had fixed the speed limit of various classes of Motor Vehicles 
vide S.O. 1522(E) dated 06 th April, 2018.  Keeping in view the improved engine 
technology, additional safety features and better & varied road infrastructure, a need to 
review speed limit for Motor Vehicles at various types of road stretches has been 
felt. Accordingly, MORTH vide letter dated 30 th December, 2022 had constituted a 
Committee to review the speed limit of various classes of motor vehicles or various 
types of road stretches fixed vide notification No. 5.0 1522(E) dated 06th April, 2018 
and Committee  shall make suitable recommendations to the Government. 
 The relaxation in norms for pillions in Kerala wherein children who are under 12 
years of age can be carried with two others on two wheelers must be withdrawn 
with immediate effect. 
This Ministry has received a representation dated 01.05.2023 from Hon’ble Member of 
Parliament, Shri Elamaram Kareem (Rajya Sabha) requesting MORTH to allow the 
journey of children upto the age of 10 years in two -wheeled motor cycles as third 
person.This Ministry vide D.O. Letter No. RT -11017/05/2023-MVL dated  31st May, 
2023 had replied to Hon’ble Member of Parliament stating that it would not be prudent 
to allow more than one person in addition to the driver to be carried thereon. 
 Child Road Safety standards for helmet and headgear are needed to be notified 
by the Ministry. 
This Ministry, vide notification dated 15th February, 2022, has amended   rule 138 of 
Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989 and has prescribed norms related to safety 
measures for children below four years of age riding or being carried on a moto r cycle. 
This has been notified under Section 129 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 which 
mandates that the Central Government may by rules provide for measures for the 
safety of child below four years of age riding or being carried on a motor cycle. 
Further, it specifies use of a safety harness and crash helmet. It also restricts speed of 
such motor cycles to 40 kmph.  These rules had come into force after one year from the 
date of publication of the Central Motor Vehicles (Second Amendment) Rules, 2022 
i.e. from 15th February, 2023. 
 Road accident on NH -66 Kovalam - Mukkola stretch due to unscientific road 
construction; 

24 
 
Accident happened on the project stretch of Four Laning of Kazhakkoottam to Mukkola 
Section from Km.1+800 to Km.26+798 of NH-66 in the State of Kerala under NHDP Phase 
III due to unscientific road construction is NIL. The O&M Contractor engaged by NHAI is 
maintaining the road stretch in traffic worthy condition and special care given for 
maintaining road safety furniture. However, the accidents happened on the subject project in 
last three years is as below:- 
  
Year 
2021 
Year 
2022 
Year 2023 
90 199 209 
 
 The number of surveys and investigations conducted on ROBs on NH 29 in 
Nagaland connecting Maligaon to Imphal, which has one ROB that was 
inaugurated in 1973 and the upgradation/ repair of one road from Mon 
headquarters to Nimonagarh, Charaideo (Assam) via Hongphoi village along with 
the construction of a road from Y-anner to Mundun Heritage Model village. 
The work of DPR preparation for Rehabilit ation of Dimapur ROB on NH -29 near 
Tragopan Hotel Junction, Dimapur was assigned to Consultant   by State PWD, 
Nagaland.For analysing the distress condition and estimating rehabilitation measures, 
NDT (Non-Destructive Testing) was performed on Structural Me mbers of the ROB.   
  Based on the recommendation by the DPR consultant, the rehabilitation of the ROB 
at Dimapur was sanctioned by MoRTH on 29.03.2023 for Rs. 2.79 Cr.  The work was 
awarded to M/s Innovative Construction on 14 th July, 2023 and appointed dat e was 
fixed as 28th August 2023. As informed by State PWD, Nagaland, work has not started 
at site till date due to non finalization of traffic diversion plan by District 
Administration. 
 Current construction status of six by -pass roads near Rajahmundry viz.  
Diwancheruvu ROB, Gammon India ROB, Rajanagaram ROB, Lalacheruvu 
ROB, Bommuru ROB and Vemagiri ROB; 
i) DPR for construction of underpasses at Diwancheruvu / Gammon junction is in 
progress.   
(ii) The proposals for Construction of underpasses at Lalacheruv u, Bommuru, ITC 

25 
 
and Vemagiri on NH-216A is under   consideration in  NHAI 
(iii) The construction of Trumpet interchange at Rajanagaram has been taken up by 
Andhra Pradesh Road Development Corporation (APRDC), Government of Andhra 
Pradesh and work is in progress. 
 
 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY: 
 
Progress of projects under the Setu Bharatam Programme 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes  that only 25% of ROB/RUB projects have been completed since 
the inception of the Setu Bharatam scheme in March, 2016. The construction of the ROB/RUB 
projects indicates staggered growth. The majority of the projects are either in progress or 
have not been started as yet. The Committee recommends that the Ministry makes concerted 

26 
 
efforts to achieve the aims and targets of the Setu Bharatam Programme. If needed, Ministry 
should increase the allocation of funds under this programme for timely construction of 
ROBs/RUBs. Also, the Ministry should strive towards completing all the pending ROBs/RUBs 
projects in a time-bound manner to ensure safe and smooth flow of traffic besides minimising 
road fatalities. 
(Para 12) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Altogether 149 ROBs/R UBs are to be constructed under Setu Bharatam program. Till date 
45 nos have been completed, 55 nos are at different stages of implementation and 35   nos have been 
sanctioned which are to be commenced. Only 14 nos. are yet to be sanctioned. Progress of Set u 
Bharatam Programme is periodically monitored at several levels in Ministry to expedite progress. 
Co-ordination meetings are also held with Ministry of Railways to expedite various approvals from 
Railways. There are no fund constraints for construction of  ROBs/RUBs under Setu Bharatam 
Programme.  
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee while taking note of the utility of service roads recommends that NHAI 
should put up signboards along the service roads on the highway,  indicating that the traffic on 
these roads is two -way and not one -way. City commuters are under the impression that the 
traffic on the service roads is one-way.  This creates hurdles for those coming from the opposite 
direction. Service roads should have painted arrows directing two-way traffic on the stretch.   
(Para 17) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 Generally, Service Roads are designed for either two -way or one -way traffic movements 
keeping in view the status of National Highway, location, traffic levels on Service Road, length of 
Service Road and facility for underpasses/Flyovers and accordingly entry/exit arrangements, signs, 
marking provided. 
 
MoU between the Ministry of Railways and the Ministry of Road, Transport and Highways 
regarding the construction of ROBs/RUBs on National Highways 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. In this regard, the Committee underscores the need for replacement of LCs with 

27 
 
ROB/RUB on priority and recommends that the Ministry should examine whether there is 
proper co -ordination between the Railways and Central/ State G overnments in identifying, 
prioritizing and allocating resources to various ROB/RUB projects sanctioned. 
(Para 27) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 MoU between MoR & MoRT&H has been signed in December 2014 to facilitate 
construction of ROBs/RUBs on NHs. As far a s replacement of LCs on NHs are concerned entire 
funding is done by MoRT&H and there are no constraints of funds. However, regular co -ordination 
meeting is conducted with Railways to facilitate various approvals required for construction of 
RoBs/RuBs. 
Status of ROBs/RUBs/Level Crossings on National Highways 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee notes that out of total 405 Level Crossings on NHS, only 24 have been 
completed, and around 213 LC s, the work is under process, or the GAD approval is awaited.  
The Committee also observes that in around 135 cases, approval is pending on the part of 
NHAI. The Committee takes note of the fact that only 6% of the LCs have been successfully 
replaced with ROB/RUB. The Committee suggests that a dedicated inter -agency co-ordination 
mechanism involving railway authorities, road transportation agencies, local governments, 
and other relevant stakeholders may be put in place to ensure effective planning, fund 
allocation, and timely implementation of level crossing eliminati on projects in a time bound 
manner. 
(Para 29) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1       Replacement of existing level crossings on NHs is accorded top priority in Ministry. The 
work is taken up either on standalone basis or as part of improvement and upgradation of a section 
of NH.Field officers of the Ministry of Railways conduct review meetings with the officers of PWD, 
NHAI and NHIDCL to resolve issues related to ROB/RUB. Policy matter /long pending issues with 
Ministry of RT&H and Ministry of Railways are also de liberated in Group of Infrastructure meeting 
chaired by Hon’ble Minister (RTH). 

28 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee recommends the Ministry/ NHAI to implement a robust monitoring 
and evaluation system to track the progress of level -crossing elimina tion projects. The 
Committee urges upon the Ministry/ NHAI to regularly assess the effectiveness of 
implemented measures and identify areas for further improvement. 
(Para 30) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 MoU between MoR & MORT&H has been signed in December 20 14 for construction of 
ROB/RUB on NHs. Regular meetings are conducted at Division levels of Railways to sort -out 
various approvals required from Railways for construction of ROBs/RUBs on NHs. The said 
meetings are attended by officers of MoRT&H/NHAI/NHIDCL & State PWDs. 
Status of Level Crossings (LCs) and Road over Bridges/Road under Bridges (ROBs/RUBs) on 
Indian Railways 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee notes that there are still 427 Manned Level Crossings on National 
Highway (NH) and 954 on St ate Highways.  Given the unfinished task at hand, the pace of 
construction of ROBs/RUBs on Railway Level Crossings needs to be accelerated to avoid 
accidents, clear congestion and ensure dependability of road transportation. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends the Ministry to expedite the progress of eliminating level Crossings in 
a time-bound manner. 
(Para 32) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 MoRTH is primarily responsible for development & maintenance of NHs. As of now there 
are 218 nos of Level crossings on NH s which are proposed for replacement as ROBs/RUBs. 
Ministry is taking all necessary actions for early commencement / completion of these ROBs/RUBs.  
As regards, replacements of existing LCs on State Highways etc., funds are  being provided 
exclusively under Central Road Infrastructure Fund Setu Bandhan since year 2021-22. 
Recommendation/Observation 
7.      The Committee also  notes that in the case of ‘New Highway Construction Projects’, 

29 
 
‘Compromising Stages’ along with ‘Solutions’ must be added in each surve y mentioned under 
‘Road Survey Guidelines’ and be a mandatory part of DPR. Further, the detailed design of 
highways of Merging and Diversion, Intersection, Cuts and U -Turns including drawings, etc., 
prepared by the Contractor must be proof checked by IIT/N IT before its approval by NHAI 
and must be uploaded in public domain on NHAI Portal.  The Committee recommends that 
the road safety measures being integral to the road projects must be strictly implemented, so 
that the varied levels of road safety will val idate or otherwise the road design and engineering, 
which in turn, can help develop the standard of road safety. 
(Para 39) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1       Several types of Surveys and Investigations such as Topographic Survey, Pavement 
Inventory and Condition Survey, Traffic Surveys, Geotechnical Investigations, Bridge Condition & 
Inventory Surveys, Hydrological and Hydraulics Studies are conducted as part of preparation of 
DPR for improvement & upgradation of a section of NH. Detailed design prepared by a Contractor 
is proof checked and Safety Audited by Proof Consultant & Safety Consultant respectively who are 
engaged with the approval of MoRT&H & its executing agencies. Design of different components 
of highway projects are also proof checked by IITs/NITs  wherever necessary. Road Safety Audits 
are carried out at each stage of the Project i.e. DPR preparation, construction, post construction 
before issue of completion certificate & operation. Accordingly, remedial measures are taken up for 
construction and maintenance of safe NH. 
Use of technology for inspections 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. Modern technology for periodic inspection of ROBs/ RUBs can help in the early 
detection of damage, minimize human errors and lower maintenance costs.  The Committee, 
therefore, feels that more steps should be taken to adopt modern technology for inspection of 
ROBs/RUBs. Drones equipped with high -resolution cameras and sensors can be used to 
capture aerial imagery of ROBs/RUBs, providing a detailed visual assessment of th e 
structure's condition. The images can be analysed further to identify any signs of damage, 
deterioration, or structural weakness. Drones are particularly useful for accessing hard -to-
reach areas and can significantly reduce inspection time and costs. 
(Para 47) 
  

30 
 
8.1 Laser scanning technologies, such as LiDAR, can be used to generate accurate 3D 
models of ROBs/RUBs. LiDAR sensors emit laser pulses and measure the reflected light, 
creating precise point cloud data. This data can be used to assess the geomet ry, dimensions, 
and deformations of the structure, detecting any irregularities or deformations that may 
indicate structural deficiencies. 
(Para 48) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1.1. Visual as well as equipment based periodical inspection, evaluation and monito ring has been 
mandated for all bridges and structures including ROBs/RUBs. Close access to structural 
arrangements underneath bridge/structure deck is provided through use of mobile bridge inspection 
unit, where the bridge inspector closely examine condition of different components of bridges and if 
needed conduct different non-destructive tests. Drone and LiDAR are generally used for topographic 
surveys and can also be used for ROB/RUB condition assessment. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
9. Data Analysis and Visualization Software should be used to process and analyse the 
data collected from various inspection technologies. These tools facilitate the interpretation of 
data, enabling engineers and inspectors to identify anomalies, assess risks, and generate 
reports on the condition of ROBs/RUBs. Data Visualization software helps in presenting the 
raw inspection data in a clear and easily understandable format, which can be interpreted 
correctly to facilitate decisions. 
(Para 51) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 Various software/analysis tool are used internationally for data analysis and       visualization 
to assess rehabilitation/retrofitting of different component(s) of bridges and structures including 
ROBs/RUBs or reconstruction. Under Indian Bridge Management System , software/analysis tool is 
being developed through consultant (civil and IT joint venture) for determining health index and 
prioritization of bridges and structures including ROBs and RUBs. Similar exercise is being done 
through IIT Madras for simply supp orted prestressed concrete box girder superstructure using real 
time data from different sensors for vibration, strain, corrosion, inclination, temperature, etc. Similar 
software/analysis tools are planned to be developed for other kinds of bridge topologies. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 

31 
 
10. The Committee observes that the MoRTH/ Railways should regularly engage with the 
Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change (MoEF& CC) to address policy and 
project-specific issues, ensuring swift clearances and resolution of operational challenges. The 
MoEF&CC has taken proactive steps to streamline the process of obtaining statutory 
clearances, particularly for Stage -I and Stage -II forest clearances. This includes issuing 
directions for the one -time submission o f Essential Details Sought (EDS) and eliminating the 
requirement for hard copies of proposals. Fortnightly Regional Coordination Meetings 
(FRCM) are conducted to monitor the progress of clearances and expedite forest clearances. 
Additionally, Inter -Ministerial Co -ordination and Monitoring Committee meetings are held 
to address policy matters and address long-standing proposals. 
(Para 58) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 Policy matter on inter -ministerial issues are deliberated and resolved  in Group of 
Infrastructure meeting chaired by Hon’ble Minister (RTH). Besides, regular meetings are conducted 
with State Forest Departments at different levels to sort out the pending issues regularly. 
Poor contract management 
Recommendation/Observation 
11. The Committee notes that CAG has flagged off the issue of poor contract management, 
such as delays in the finalisation of the negotiated rates and grant of extensions despite poor 
progress by the contractor. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should look into the 
issue on priority as such problems have resulted in avoidable expenditures and delays.  
(Para 62) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 The Ministry has been taking several proactive steps to avoid delays in fulfilment of  
Authority's obligations, amend existing provisions  of contract/concession agreements wherever 
required to bring absolute clarity in provisions, fast track the decision making process, etc. for 
efficient contract administration.  Projects are also reviewed at different levels such as by Secretary 
(RTH), Ho n’ble Minister [RTH]   and Secretary(Co -ordination) in PMG. Critical projects 
are reviewed under PRAGATI also. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 

32 
 
12. The Committee also desires to be apprised of the reasons as to why the Ministry/NHAI 
allows contractors to hire or lease out to sub-contractors for carrying out specific work instead 
of splitting the project into smaller parts so that contractors with limited wherewithals could 
also bid for the same and legitimately get awarded on merit as principal contractor for the  
assigned work. 
(Para 63) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 In a given project the contractor is permitted to sub contract  parts of the works which 
are essentially required for successful completion of the project. All the terms and conditions 
including quality a ssurance, quality control, safety  connected measures are equally applicable 
to sub contracted works as per scope of the contract agreement and the main contractor remains 
responsible for all activities of the sub -contractor. Splitting of the work will comp romise on use of 
advanced machinery, planning, process control, etc. and quality of work  will be compromised by 
the small contractors. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. The Ministry may also develop a transparent and efficient payment management 
system. Emph asis should be laid on establishing clear protocols for verifying contractor 
invoices, approving payments, and addressing any payment disputes promptly. Timely and 
accurate payments can help maintain contractor’s motivation, besides ensuring timely 
completion of project.   
(Para 65) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 Online payment management system is in -place.  Contract/concession agreement has clear 
protocol for timely payment and to ensure cash flow of the contractor. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee suggests that the Ministry should incorporate performance incentives 
and penalties into the contract terms. Incentives can motivate contractors to contribute 
significantly to the project, exceeding expectations, while penalties can lead to poor 
performance or non-compliance. 
(Para 66) 
Reply of the Ministry 

33 
 
14.1 These are in-built clauses for bonus /damages in the contract /concession agreement for early 
completion and delays in completion respectively. Besides, the contractor/concessionaire is free to 
use new/innovative material/technology within the ambit of technical schedules to economize time 
and cost of construction. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
15. The Committee recommends that a comprehensive hydrological study of the area 
surrounding the ROBs, RUBs  and service roads should be undertaken to understand the flood 
patterns, including the frequency, duration, and intensity of floods. Such a study will help 
determine the design requirements that address the issues of flood mitigation for the 
ROBs/RUBs. 
(Para 70) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 Hydrological studies are part of project preparation and the studies are undertaken for relevant 
components of a NH project including RoBs/RUBs. Such studies include calculation of surface run 
off/discharge of rivers/streams/channels, their intensity, duration and and return period. Such data are 
utilized to hydraulics of bridges, drainage system, etc. so that there is no flooding/water logging in 
ROBs/RUBs. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Ministry can also construct f lood barrier walls or embankments around the RUBs 
to prevent floodwater from entering into the underpass. These barriers can be designed to 
withstand the anticipated flood levels and provide protection to the RUBs during flood 
occurrences. 
(Para 71) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 Adequate drainage measures as per hydrological analysis/site requirements are provided in 
RUBs to prevent flooding/water logging. 
 
Delay in construction 
 
Recommendation/Observation 

34 
 
17. The Committee recommends that Ministries should ad opt digitalization of GAD 
approval as it will help the stakeholders to check online the status of the approval.  This can 
reduce the undue delay in the construction of ROBs/RUBs. Further, there is a need for an inter-
ministerial co -ordination mechanism to bring all the stakeholders on one platform for better 
discussion and understanding.  
(Para 77) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 Online approval system (RORACS) has been developed by Ministry of Railways for approval 
of General Arrangement Drawing (GAD) of ROB/RU B and the same is successfully used as a result 
of which approval time for GAD has been considerably reduced. There is also Railways Zonal level 
Coordination Committee meetings where the contentious issues are resolved. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Ministry should also come up with an expected timeline of events along with the 
deadline, and the updated status should be brought into the public domain for better 
information of MPs, MLAs and other citizens. Further, the charter shall also have the detai ls of 
contractors, engineers and officers involved. This will set the accountability of all the 
stakeholders involved.  
(Para 78) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 References from MP, MLAs, MLCs and other public representatives are dealt with 
expeditiously and the desired information are furnished on priority. 
 
Damaged Pavement Surface 
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee recommends that timely repair and maintenance of damaged pavement 
surfaces on service roads should be undertaken on priority in the inte rest of road safety.  
Routine inspection should be carried out at regular intervals to identify and address any issues 
such as waterlogging, potholes, cracks, or uneven surfaces. Adequate resources and manpower 
need to be allocated for timely repairs, incl uding resurfacing, relaying or patching of service 
roads as needed. The safety of all road users needs to be prioritized by maintaining smooth and 
well-maintained service roads. 

35 
 
(Para 90) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 Projects Highway section including Servic e roads are maintained as per schedule of 
maintenance for EPC and BOT projects for the projects under O&M /Concession period    as time 
limit for rectification of defects and maintenance specifications of Ministry’s specification for road 
and bridge works. For the stretches under maintenance contracts are also maintained as per    site 
requirements following Ministry’s specification for road and bridge works. 
 
Lane Drop 
Recommendation/Observation 
20. The Committee observes that lane drops with poorer site geo metrics have higher conflict 
rates.  The Committee is of the view that there is a need to revise existing guidelines/criteria to 
ensure that bridge sections are designed with consistent geometry, including the same 
number of lanes, similar to those of the through road for fast and long distance traffic.  
Lane drops must be designed properly from the outset, in as much as traffic control devices 
are not as effective in reducing conflicts as are proper site geometrics.  
(Para 92) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 Variation in Carriageway width are caused principally due to change in traffic levels and in all 
such cases proper transition is provided along with safety measures as per IRC standards.  
Further carriageway & Paved shoulder in approaches to bridges & structu res are carried onto the 
bridges and structures as per current IRC standards. However, in some old bridges where there is 
difference in the width  of bridges/structures compared to approaches, proper transition is provided 
along with safety measures. 
 
Inadequate Illumination 
Recommendation/Observation 
21. The Committee takes note of the technological advances made in the field of street 
lighting and recommends that installation of street lights, preferably with automatic sensors, 
retro-reflectors may be unde rtaken for proper road illumination. In the case of power supply 
failure or damage to the street lights, the retro -reflectors act as reliable visual guides, 
reflecting light from headlights and assisting drivers in manoeuvring safely and staying on the 
correct path. 

36 
 
(Para 96) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 Advanced lighting system such as LED, automatic sensor controlled light, solar energy 
supply etc are already being used in NH Projects. 
Recommendation/Observation 
22. The Committee recommends conducting compr ehensive lighting audits to assess the 
adequacy of current lighting conditions on roads.  Areas with inadequate lighting should be 
identified and prioritized based on factors such as traffic volume, accident history, and 
visibility requirements. 
(Para 97) 
Reply of the Ministry 
22.1    Road Safety Audit is carried out both in day time and night time. The requirements of 
illumination are assessed during the night time safety audit and accordingly lighting systems are 
provided / augmented. 
Issue of vegetation/plantation 
Recommendation/Observation 
23. The Committee, therefore, recommends that no plantation be done up to 25m at the 
median while approaching a crossing. Cuts in the median, and exit/ entry to or from service 
lane need to be ensured for clear visibility to avoid chances of crashes/accidents. 
(Para 110) 
Normally the median width is reduced in approaches to junctions and near median openings to 
accommodate storage lane and no median plantation is carried out at such locations. In all at -graded 
intersections care is taken to provide adequate site distance to the vehicles coming from each leg for 
safety and easy manoeuvrability. 
 
Inadequate Pedestrian Facilities 
Recommendation/Observation 
24. To ensure safe and comfortable walking conditions, the Committee  recommends 
that it is crucial to provide hassle -free pedestrian facilities based on the requirement.   
Places with high pedestrian traffic require wider footpaths. Pedestrian facilities should 

37 
 
also consider accessibility requirements for individuals with d isabilities or limited 
mobility. 
(Para 112) 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1 As per IRC Code, pedestrian /walking zone width is provided as per pedestrian requirement 
and land use of the locality. Minimum width is kept 2 m keeping in view the movement  of 
two wheel chairs. 
 
Absent Pedestrian Guard Rails 
Recommendation/Observation 
25.        To address the lack of pedestrian guardrails on service roads, the Committee 
recommends the Ministry to perform thorough audits of high -trafﬁc areas, intersections, and 
road segments to identify locations where pedestrian guardrails are most needed.  Guard  rails 
should be provided at all safety -critical areas with a higher concentration of vulnerable road 
users, such as near schools, hospitals, and areas with a significant pedestrian population. 
Additionally, it must be ensured that the guardrails are desig ned with appropriate standards, 
considering the height, strength, and visibility requirements for optimal pedestrian safety. 
 (Para 114) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1 Road Safety Audit is carried out in DPR, construction and operation stages on the NHs 
including service roads to find out   the deficiencies on the existing service roads including the PGR 
identified if any during the safety audit and necessary corrective measures are taken. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
26. There is also a need to conduct public aw areness campaigns to educate pedestrians and 
drivers about the importance of using designated pedestrian crossings, respecting guardrails, 
and adhering to traffic rules for pedestrian safety. 
(Para 115) 
Reply of the Ministry 
26.1 Road Safety Week Campaign  are regularly organized. Ministry has been engaging services 
of NGOs on annual basis to promote and propagate road safety awareness campaigns. 
 

38 
 
Discontinuous Service Roads 
Recommendation/Observation 
27. The Committee recommends that it is important for roa d-owning agencies to address 
discontinuous service lanes to ensure the safety of local traffic and minimize the risks associated 
with merging the service lanes with the main highway. Continuous service roads offer a 
dedicated route for local traffic. This reduces the risk of collisions due to merging with the 
highway. Road planning and design should take into account the needs of the local traffic and 
ensure provisioning of appropriate infrastructure, including merging lanes, acceleration lanes, 
deceleration lanes, and proper signage. This will help minimize conflicts between local traffic 
and high-speed highway traffic, improving overall road safety. 
(Para 119) 
Reply of the Ministry 
27.1 Service roads are provided in  built up areas along NHs as per IRC Guid elines/manuals. 
Acceleration lanes, deceleration lanes, and proper signage  are provided for entry from service lane 
to main carriageway and vice-versa as per IRC Codal provisions. Bridges / ROBs are also provided 
on service roads to maintain their continuity wherever required. 
 
Maintenance and upgradation 
Recommendation/Observation 
28. The Committee is of the view that the Ministries should conduct regular inspections of 
ROBs and RUBs to identify any signs of deterioration, structural issues, or maintenance  
requirements. These inspections should be carried out by qualified engineers and experts to 
assess the condition of the built infrastructure. The study assessment should be placed in the 
public domain and MPs and MLAs of the concerned area may also be app raised about the 
findings of the inspection report. 
(Para 139) 
28.1 The Committee recommends the Ministries to evaluate the load -carrying capacity of 
ROBs/RUBs periodically and consider structural upgrades if required. This may involve 
strengthening the ex isting structure, modifying load limits, or implementing weight 
restrictions to ensure the safety and longevity of the infrastructure. 
(Para 140) 
Reply of the Ministry 

39 
 
28.1.1 Periodic visual inspection of all bridges and structures including ROBs & RUBs ar e 
conducted to assess condition of the same. Mobile Bridge Inspection Unit is used to have close 
access to the underneath of ROBs. In case based on visual inspections, further investigations are felt 
necessary, different non destructive/semi destructive tests are conducted on affected parts. Based on 
such investigations, repair /rehabilitation /retrofitting work(s) are taken up on the ROBs & RUBs.  
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
29. The Ministries/ Agencies must ensure proper lighting and signage along ROBs/R UBs 
for improved visibility and safety. Installation of adequate lighting systems and prominent 
signage indicating height restrictions, speed limits, and other important information benefit 
the road users. 
(Para 141) 
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1 Lighting and signage are provided on ROBs and RUBs as per IRC standards and guidelines. 
Recommendation/Observation 
30. The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the CRRI in the field of road 
development. However, the Committee is of the view that the CRRI should a lso come up with 
binding guidelines for adoption of sustainable technology and materials for road development 
and the road designs keeping in view the national goals and aspirations. 
(Para 149) 
Reply of the Ministry 
30.1 There are various IRC codes and Min istry’s guidelines for use of sustainable material and 
technology such as Fly ash, waste plastic, slag, construction & demolition waste, Recycled asphalt 
pavement etc., based on research findings  /testing /evaluation by CRRI and other reputed academic 
and research institutes. New materials and products are accredited by IRC for pilot use in road 
projects and based on performance evaluation guidelines / standards are developed subsequently for 
such products. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
31. The Committee in t his regard recommends that compliance with IRC guidelines must 

40 
 
be made a mandatory requirement for all road development projects. Further, the Committee 
suggests that independent third -party audits should be conducted to assess compliance with 
IRC guidelines. Engaging qualified auditors who are familiar with IRC guidelines can provide 
an unbiased evaluation of project compliance and identify any gaps or non -compliance issues 
that need to be addressed. 
(Para 162) 
Reply of the Ministry 
31.1 NH projects are ge nerally implemented in EPC / HAM / BOT (Toll) mode of contracts. In 
all such contracts design, construction and maintenance are carried out as per applicable 2/4/6 
laning manual of IRC. As such IRC guidelines and standards are binding on the contractor / 
concessionaire except the modifications /deviations expressly allowed in the contract or in those 
respective manuals.  Third party quality audit through separate consultancy firms / independent 
quality monitors are conducted on specific works based on compla ints / pre -mature distress / 
failure. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
32. The Committee further notes that effective implementation of Rule 166 of the Central 
Motor Vehicles Rules (CMVR) can ensure road safety. Rule 166 (dealing with road, design, 
construction, and maintenance standards) under the Central Motor Vehicle Rules, 1989 7, was 
added via G.S.R 584(E), dated 25th September 2020 (w.e.f. 1 -10-2020) to give effect to Sec 
198A of the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Act, 2019. The rule states as follows: 
“(1)The design, construction, and maintenance of national highways shall be in 
accordance with the standards and speciﬁcations of the Indian Road Congress 
(IRC) as may be applicable, or any other instructions or guidelines issued by the 
Central Government from time to time…” 
           (Para 163) 
Reply of the Ministry 
 
32.1      The rule 166 of the Central Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 provides as under:- 
"166. Road Design, Construction and Maintenance Standards. - (1) The design, construction and 
maintenance of nation al highways shall be in accordance with the standards and specifications of 
the Indian Road Congress as may be applicable, or any other instructions or guidelines issued by the 
Central Government from time to time.  
  

41 
 
32.2      Subject to the previous appr oval of the Central Government or State Government, as the 
case may be, deviations from applicable standards, specifications, instructions and guidelines issued 
under sub -rule (1) or (2), may be made due to local conditions including but not limited to sit e 
constraints or built up area or land acquisition, and a copy of the said approval shall be annexed as 
part of the relevant contract.  
32.3   The contract shall clearly define the terms designated authority,  consultant and 
concessionaire. Deviation from I RC standards and guidelines for specific site constraints are 
allowed in limited cases and in all such cases the deviations are clearly brought out in Schedule D 
of Contract/Concession agreement. Additional safety measures are taken wherever such deviation s 
from standards / guidelines are made. It is further to add the terms such as Authority, Consultant, 
Concessionaire etc., are clearly defined in the contract/concession agreement. 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
33. The Committee notes that the IRC guideline s are mammoth in nature, as there are 
over 200 guidelines introduced and renewed by IRC since it was established in December 
1934. Currently, the IRC guidelines include a range of subjects like the method of recording 
accidents, and practices for road user s, apart from the guidelines on road, design, 
construction, and maintenance. Therefore, for effective implementation of the codes 
pertaining to road design, construction, and maintenance by the designated authority, 
contractor, consultant, or concessionair e, it is imperative that such IRC guidelines be 
speciﬁcally called out under Rule 166 CMVR, or else there will be chances on missing out 
important standards at any point while implementing road safety standards at all or any of 
the three stages. 
(Para 164) 
Reply of the Ministry 
33.1 Considering need, demand, engineering practice etc., of various category of roads in the 
country, IRC frames Standards, codes, specifications guidelines, Manuals, etc., for planning, design, 
construction, operation, maintenance of Expressways, NHs, SHs, MDRs, ODRs, Village Roads, 
Urban Roads including aspects of machinery, environment, safety, ITS, etc. These IRC Standards, 
codes, specifications guidelines, Manuals, etc. are also revised time to time based on industry 
feedback, R &D outcome, advancement in material/ technology, global advancement. All these 
documents are available to all stakeholders involved in design, construction and maintenance .The 
Consultant and Contractors use the said documents since the IRC Documents are p eriodically 
revised  based on indigenous research, international best practices and feedback from stakeholders, 

42 
 
details of individual code may not be included in CMVR otherwise frequent amendment of CMVR 
will be necessary. 
Recommendation/Observation 
34. The Committee, accordingly, recommends that the Ministry must examine the 
feasibility of adopting and implementing the proposed design suggested at (b) which is based 
on international standards. 
(Para 172) 
Reply of the Ministry 
34.1 The figure is not specified in any existing IRC Manual. The selection of type & choice of 
intersections, interchanges are largely depending on design speed, sight distance available, 
availability of pedestrians/ cyclist in addition to human factor, traffic & road, environmental 
consideration, economic factors, etc. The technical details/specifications of intersections, 
interchanges are covered in IRC: SP: 41; IRC: SP: 73 -2018; IRC: SP ; 84-2019; IRC: 87 -2019 & 
IRC: 73:2023. Existing IRC standards and guidelines are regularly revised  / updated based on 
stakeholder’s feedback, indigenous research outcomes and international best practices. 
Recommendation/Observation 
35. The Committee also recommends the usage of Geospatial technologies, such as 
Geographic Information Systems (GIS) and r emote sensing, to enable accurate mapping, 
analysis, and visualization of the project area. These tools assist in land surveying, route 
planning, environmental impact assessment, and site selection for ROB/RUB development. 
(Para 182) 
Reply of the Ministry 
35.1 PM Gati Sakti which is based on GIS platform is being extensively used in Highway 
projects including ROBs/ RUBs. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
36. The Ministry should engage with various stakeholders, including local communities, 
transport authorities, private sector entities, and financing institutions, seeking their input 
and addressing any concerns or expectations they may have. The Ministry should also foster 
partnerships and collaboration to enhance the success and sustainability of PPP projects. 

43 
 
(Para 187) 
Reply of the Ministry 
36.1 Stakeholders  consultation are held on different matters regularly and their valuable inputs 
are considered in formulation of policies/guidelines for projects including PPP projects. During 
project preparation conducting stake holder consultation is a mandatory requirement. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
37. The Ministries should also encourage road design that optimizes energy efficiency. 
This can include factors such as minimizing excessive grades, optimizing alignment to reduce 
vehicle energy consumption, and incorporating intelligent transportation systems (ITS) to 
improve traffic flow and reduce congestion-related emissions. 
(Para 194) 
Reply of the Ministry 
37.1 Life cycle cost analysis is normally carried out for various aspects of Highway design where 
vehicle operating cost during the design life is duly taken into account apart from construction and 
maintenance cost. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
38. The Ministries should enhance Environmental Impact Assessments for road  projects 
to evaluate the potential ecological, social, and cultural impacts. Further, such assessments 
should be placed in the public domain. Assessment of the project's potential effects on 
ecosystems, habitats, and natural resources should also be under taken to develop appropriate 
mitigation measures to minimize negative impacts. 
(Para 196) 
Reply of the Ministry 
38.1 Environmental Impact Assessment is part of project preparation as per provision of MoEF 
&CC guidelines. Based on such Environmental impact assessment studies, Environmental 
management plan is prepared by the contractor before commencement of construction which is 
reviewed / approved by AE / IE. Under the scope of the contract the contractor is obliged to 
implement the actions specified in Env ironmental Management Plan. As part of completion tests 
Environmental audit is carried out by AE / IE to determine whether provisions of Environmental 
management plan are carried out by the contractor or not. Satisfactory Environmental audit report is 
mandatory requirement for issuance of completion certificate of the project. 

44 
 
 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Chapter-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE: 
 
Construction of Service Roads 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that the National Highways (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002 provides 
for control of land within the National Highways, right of way and traffic movement on the 
National Highways and also for removal of unauthorized occupation thereon. 
(Para 16) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 As per National Highways (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002, the Ministry has notified 
Highway Administration to implement provisions of this Act including removal of unauthorized 
occupation. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
1.2       The Committee, in this regard, would like to know the current status and the details 
of the steps that have been taken by the Ministry. 
Present Road Survey Guidelines 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee notes that the NSV data being technical in nature is of limited utility for the 

45 
 
general public. The Committee, however, feels that the survey data must be made public so that 
the organizations and NGOs related to road sector can make use of it in strengthening policies. 
(Para 38) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 NSV data is huge in size and may be of limited uti lity for the general public. Nevertheless 
NSV data are provided to anybody who wants such data for any project/stretch. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
2.2 The Committee w ould like to know the number of instances, when 
agencies/individuals have sought such information from the Ministry either through RTI or 
any other medium. 
 
Analysis of existing road survey guidelines 
Recommendation/Observation 
3.1        The Committee not es that community engagement plays a crucial role in road 
construction projects as it caters to the needs, requirements, and difficulties faced by the local 
communities. These communities often experience disruptions in their daily lives due to 
construction of highways. 
(Para 43) 
 
3.2      The Committee observes that a notable limitation of the existing guidelines, particularly 
for highways and expressways, is the lack of emphasis on community engagement and the impact 
of road projects on local communities. 
(Para 44) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.3 Social impact assessment, Mandatory Community Consultation is part of the project 
preparation of every NH project. In green field as well as brown field NH projects vehicular 
underpass, light vehicular underpass and sm all underpasses are now being provided as per 
requirement for smooth crossing of NH by local communities and enhanced safety of both NH 
traffic and local community. Activities are also undertaken to minimise adverse environmental 
impacts on local communities. 

46 
 
 
Further recommendation/observation 
3.4 The Committee would like to know whether any meetings with local community 
leaders/representatives are held before finalisation of DPR. The Committee also would like 
to know whether decisions/suggestions in the m eetings are factored in the finalisation of 
DPR. 
 
Flooding/ water logging issues 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee notes that several instances of flooding/water logging on ROBs, RUBs and 
service roads have been reported in the recent past. This not only results in great public 
inconvenience but also damages the roads for future use. 
(Para 69) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Adequate drainage measures as per hydrological analysis/site requirements are provided. 
For the efficient design of drainage syste m, the RFP document for preparation of DPR 
Consultancy Service has been recently strengthened. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
4.2 The Committee recommends that the drainage pipes and outlets must be properly 
cleaned before the onset of the Monsoon. The  survey must be conducted to identify such 
locations where water logging is a constant phenomenon. The Ministry must ensure that  
these locations  are free from water logging during Monsoon.  The Committee also 
recommends that the drainage design and construction needs to be further improved.  
  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
5. The Committee recommends conducting regular inspections and maintenance of the 
drainage systems, pumps, and flooding barriers to ensure their proper functioning, especially 
during monsoon season. Debris or obstructions that may hinder the flow of water during floods 
should be cleared regularly. 
(Para 73) 
Reply of the Ministry 

47 
 
5.1 Drainage system including longitudinal drains, chute drain culverts etc are cleaned pre -
monsoon and post -monsoon. Flood protection works are inspected pre -monsoon and post - 
monsoon and any repair works required are duly carried out. Wherever pumps are required for 
pumping out stagnant water, the same are repaired in time and kept in good working condition 
throughout the monsoon period. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
5.2      The Committee would like to know the measures taken by the Ministry, in this regard, 
during the last two years. 
Shortage of manpower 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. The Committee notes that th e issue of the shortage of staff is a concern at a time when the 
country is moving ahead with a huge number of road networking projects.  Since the time factor is 
of paramount importance, every effort should be made to complete the ongoing projects on time . 
The role of human resources in the project management, being critical, the Committee may be 
apprised about the staff requirement. The Committee expresses the view that in case of any 
shortage, recruitment process must be rolled out. In the case of consul tants, the Committee seeks to 
know the total number of consultants with the Ministries and the basis for their appointment. 
(Para 79) 
 
6.1 The Committee recommends that recourse be taken to five R's - (i)  Revive or create posts, 
(ii)  Restructure the orga nization to bring in efficiency, (iii) Recruit young talent, (iv) Reframe 
policy/processes, (v) Refresh minds by giving interim professional training and also to revive and 
create posts.   
(Para 80) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.2    MoRTH is the cadre contortin g authority of the Central Engineering Service (Roads) 
cadre. Assistant Executive Engineer (AEEs) is the entry level post in the cadre recruited through 
Engineering Services Exams conducted by UPSC on regular basis. The Ministry also deals with 
Subordinate Technical Staff of General Central Services Cadre comprising posts viz. Assistant 
Engineer, Technical officer, Senior Technical Assistants with total strength of 88. 
6.3.     However, with the exponentially increased NH network length and the proposed 
development of NHs under various schemes, there is a need to increase the intake of CES  (Roads) 
officers. Further, 20% of the technical posts of NHAI are fitted by CES (Roads) officers. 

48 
 
6.4      In order to address the shortage of CES (Roads) officers in the Ministry and its 
implementing agencies, cadre review of CES (Roads) has been undertaken from time to time. 
Consequent to the last cadre review in 2017, the cadre strength of CES (Roads) was increased from 
242 to 328. Presently, a fresh proposal for cadre r eview for increase in number of posts of CES 
(roads) cadre from 328 to 425 is under consideration after the recommendation of Cadre Review 
Committee under Cabinet Secretary. Further, NHAI has also identified 518 vacancies in the various 
grades under differ ent recruitment modes, deputation and di rect recruitment, to fill up under 
Mission Recruitment Mode during the year 2023-24. 
6.5  The Ministry has revived 17 posts of Senior Technical Assistant and 04 posts or of 
Technical Assistants of Subordinate Technic al Staff of General Central Services Cadre in the year 
2022 with the approval of the Department of Expenditure. 
6.6  As regard to consultant in the Ministry, it is stated that the consultants are engaged in the 
Ministry based on their administrative requir ement which changes time to time after following the 
duty procedure prescribed by Department of Expenditure & GFR Rules, 2017. 
6.7  In order to enhance the skill of the CES (Roads) officers, the Ministry had established an 
institute namely Indian Academy o f Highway Engineers which provides the intensive trainings to 
these officers on the latest evolving technologies in the Road Sector on regular basis. 
6.8 As regard NHAI, 72 no of External Professionals has been engaged by NHAI from April 
2018 to till date based on the norms for engagement of External Professionals have been approved 
by the Authority in its 113th meeting held on 15.06.2017.As regards staff requirement, status of the 
recruitment process has been indicated in Annexure-I. 
Further recommendation/observation 
6.9 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should expedite the recruitment process 
and fill up the vacancies for smooth working and expansion of road infrastructure. Further, 
the cadre review with provision for capacity building should be taken undertaken as early as 
possible keeping in mind the five R’s recommended by the Committee. 
Budgetary Allocation 
Recommendation/Observation 
7. The Committee notes that the provisioning and utilization of funds for the construction of 
ROBs/ RUBs could be made better. There needs to be more co-ordination between the Railways and 
the State Governments in providing a budget and executing the works. Further, the large chunk of unspent amount 

49 
 
under the Setu Bharatam programme is an overarching concern. There  is a need for proper channelization and 
utilization of the earmarked funds. 
(Para 82) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 There is no separate funds allocation for ROB/RUB work  under Setu Bharatam or any other scheme /program 
and expenditure are incurred from the overall allocation of the State/UT. 
Further recommendation/observation 
7.2 The Committee recomm ends that a separate allocation must be provided to States for construction of 
RoBs/RuBs so that the process is expedited and there are no delays in the construction. 
 
(ii) Road Safety related issues 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. The Committee notes that the Motor Vehicles Amendment Act (MVAA), 2019 creates adequate 
accountability framework to ensure that road -owning agencies, contractors and concessionaires are he ld 
accountable for faulty road design and construction. To operationalise this at the State level, the Act provides 
discretionary powers to States to create Rules under  Section 210D.  The Section 210 D authorizes State Governments 
to make rules for design,  construction and maintenance standards for National Highways and roads other than 
National Highways, respectively. 
(Para 84) 
 
8.1 The Committee, therefore, recom mends that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should persuade 
State Governments to fr ame such rules under Section 210D of the MVAA Act at the earliest.  The Committee may also 
be kept apprised of the matter.   
(Para 85) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.2 The Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 is the principal instrument through which road transport sector is  regulated in 
the country.  Ministry deals with various rules and regulation framed under the Motor Vehicles Act 1988 and Central 
Motor Vehicles Rules, 1989 pertaining to Transport Sector.  
8.3 The Section 210D of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 provides as under:- 
                  210D. Power of  State Government to make rules - The State Government may make rules for design, 
construction and maintenance standards for roads other than national highways, and for any other matter which is, or 
may be, prescribed by the State Government.” 
Further recommendation/Observation 
8.4 The Committee reiterates that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should persuade State 
Governments to frame such rules under Section 210D of the MVAA Act to create adequate accountab ility 
framework to ensure that road -owning agencies, contractors and concessionaires are held accountable for 
faulty road design and construction.  
Absent Pedestrian and Cyclist Facilities 
9. The Committee recommends including  pedestrian and bicycle facilit ies as a mandatory and integral part of 

50 
 
bridged sections to accommodate the requirements of all road users, promoting safety, accessibility, and sustainable 
transportation options. Moreover, the mandatory inclusion of pedestrian and bicycle facilities on b ridges promotes 
social equity, providing equal access to all members of the community, regardless of their mode of transportation 
or physical abilities.  
(Para 117) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 Footpaths are provided on Major bridges and ROBs for pedestrians. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
9.2 The Committee notes that there are many roads where pedestrian and cycling facilities are not 
available. The Ministry should identify such roads and provide pedestrian and cycling facilities at the earliest. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
10. The Committee recommends that the Government should establish a Central Coordinating Body or a 
Committee comprising representatives from key ministries involved in road development, namely, the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highway s, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change, and Ministry of 
Railways. This body will facilitate regular communication, coordination, and decision -making among the Ministries. 
Such a step will also help overcome the delay in construction due to waiting in approval of clearances. 
(Para 132) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 Group of Infrastructure Committee is the body at highest level that address es policy level 
issues for faster implementation of infrastructure projects including N H projects. The Committee 
also reviews and take effective action to ensure that pending approvals for infrastructure projects 
are expedited. There is one to interaction/coordination with concerned Ministries at executive levels 
to expedite decision making. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
10.2 The Committee would like to know how frequently the Group of Infrastructure 
Committee meets . The Committee also suggests to include Public Representatives in this 
Group of Infrastructure Committee for better communication and functioning.  
Recommendation/Observation 
11. With reference to encroachments, the Committee recommends that the Ministries should 
conduct a comprehensive survey and mapping of the ROB/RUB area to identify encroachments and 
unauthorized structures by using modern surveying techniques, such as drones or satellite imagery 
so that proper remedial measures can be taken to get rid of encroachments around the infrastructure. 

51 
 
(Para 142) 
 
11.1 The concerned authorities must ensure to take legal actions ag ainst encroachers in accordance with relevant 
laws and regulations. They should initiate eviction proceedings and enforce penalties for unauthorized occupation. 
Adequate humanitarian support and assistance should be provided to those affected by encroachme nt- induced eviction. 
(Para 143) 
 
11.2 Further, the Committee recommends that the engagement with the local community and stakeholders should be 
strengthened to obviate any future encroachments. The relevant NGOs, advocacy bodies and local opinion of leade rs 
may also be roped in to create awareness about non-encroachment of the public infrastructure spaces. 
(Para 144) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.3 Encroachments on National Highways including the locations around ROBs and RUBs are identified during 
physical inspections of NHs as well as captured in surveys conducted with Network Survey Vehicle.  
11.4 As per National Highways (Land and Traffic) Act, 2002, the Ministry has notified Highway Administration to 
implement provisions of this Act including   removal of encroachments/unauthorized occupations and encroachments on 
NHs including locations around ROBs and RUBs are removed through such provisions.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
11.5 The Committee recommends that removal of encroachments must be a priority for  improving the 
accessibility and safety of road users. The details of steps taken till now to remove encroachment must be shared 
with the Committee. 
 
Fund allocation and support to IRC 
12. The Committee recommends that the Ministry may consider deputing so me officers having 
interest and inclination toward standardization, R&D to work in the IRC.  Also, the Ministry may 
consider providing a reasonable amount of corpus seed fund to the IRC to manage the function of 
its Secretariat, the modalities of which may be worked out in consultation with the IRC.  
(Para 166) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 As of  today, IRC Secretariat has  staff of 38 (3 Technical & 35 Non - Technical) against total sanctioned 
strength of 64 personnel to manage routine activities of the IRC to achieve its objective. Four retired officers from 
MORTH/ CRRI are also working as Technical Consultant in IRC.IRC has its own revenue from membership, sale of 
publications, accreditation of materials, sponsorships etc. Ministry also provide funds to IRC fo r specific activities as 
and when required but R&D works are primarily carried out by academic / research institutes for which Ministry 
sanctions research projects to such institutes. The outcomes of such research projects are utilized by Technical 
committees of IRC for framing new guidelines / revising existing guidelines. 
 
Further recommendation/Observation 

52 
 
12.2 The Committee feels that the Ministry should evolve some alternative to provide a reasonable amount of 
corpus seed fund to the IRC to manage the functions of its Secretariat, the modalities of which may be worked 
out in consultation with the IRC. 
 
 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. Artificial Intelligence (AI) enabled Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) technologies can be integrated 
into ROBs/RUBs to enhance road safety and better traffic management. These include systems for automated traffic 
control, real -time monitoring of road conditions, traffic signalling, and vehicle detection. ITS can improve the 
efficiency of traffic flow, reduce congestion, and enhance overall safety. 
(Para 180) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 Intelligent Transport System is being adopted in Expressways and high speed corridors.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
13.2 The Committee recommends that the Intelligent Transport System must also be launched in National 
and other State Highways to enhance road safety and better traffic management.  
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. Smart Sensors embedded in ROBs/RUBs can continuously monitor the structural health, detecting and 
alerting to any anomalies or signs of deterioration. SHM systems provide real -time data on the structural integrity, 
stress, vibrations, and deformation of the infrastructure, facilitating proactive maintenance and preventing failures.  
(Para 181) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 Structural health monitoring on real time basis using sensors is carried out in some very  important 
bridges. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
14.2 The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should identify the bridges showing signs of 
deterioration and thereafter structural health monitoring should be done of all those bridges on a regular basis.  
 
Private Sector Participation 
15. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry should conduct comprehensive feasibility studies to assess the 
viability of implementing PPP models for ROB/RUB development. The Ministry should evaluate factors such as 
project size, revenue potential, market conditions, and potential private sector interest. Feasibility studies will provide 
valuable insights into the suitability of PPP and help in making informed decisions. 
(Para 184) 
 
15.1 The Committee recommends that an assessment of legal and regulatory framework should be pursued to 

53 
 
evaluate the existing legal and regulatory framework and to identify any barriers  or limitations to implementing PPP 
in ROB/RUB development.  The Ministry should also identify necessary amendments or new legislations required to 
facilitate PPP arrangements, ensure transparency, and provide a favourable business environment for private 
partners. 
(Para 185) 
Reply of the Committee 
15.2 Economic and Financial viability of all NH projects including ROBs and RUBs are determined as a rule. 
However, ROB/RUB as stand alone projects are generally not viable / practicable on PPP mode considering s ize and 
therefore these stand alone projects are implemented on EPC mode. Corridor projects including ROBs and RUBs are 
implemented either in EPC mode or PPP mode depending on overall project viability.  
Further Recommendation/Observation 
15.3 The Committee would like to know about these stand alone projects which are being implemented on 
EPC mode and the present status thereof. 
Recommendation/Observation 
16. The Committee also suggests that the Ministries should establish transparent and competitive 
procurement processes to attract capable private entities. They should also implement a fair and competitive 
bidding process that encourages multiple private sector players to participate.  
(Para 186) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1     Procurement of contractor and c onsultant are taken up using Standard RFP document and through e -tender 
procurement mode (Central Public Procurement Portal - CPPP). 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
16.2 The Committee would like to know how these modes are impartial enough to provide a fair and 
competitive bidding process. 
 
Sustainable and environment-friendly roads 
Recommendation/Observation 
17. The Committee appreciates the innovative efforts made in the direction of construction of environmentally 
sustainable roads. However, it feels that given the national aspirations to gradually move towards a zero -waste 
circular economy, more measures should be taken in this regard. The Committee suggests that the Ministries should 
adopt features like rain gardens, bioswales, and permeable pavement s to manage stormwater runoff and improve 
water quality. Green infrastructure can help recharge groundwater, reduce the load on drainage systems and help 
enhance biodiversity in roadside areas. 
(Para 192) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 Rain Water Harvesting St ructures are constructed as part of Highway Development Project. Ministry has 
issued policy guide lines for use of municipal waste, industrial waste, recycling of road reclaimed materials etc. 
Further Recommendation/Observation 

54 
 
17.2 The Committee feels tha t there is an urgent need to explore more viable options other than Rain 
Water Harvesting Structures  alone. The Committee reiterated that the Ministries should adopt features like 
rain gardens, bioswales, and permeable pavements to manage stormwater runoff  and improve water quality. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
18. The Ministries should also implement Sustainable Drainage Systems (SuDS) to manage surface water runoff 
from roads. SuDS techniques include infiltration basins, constructed wetlands, and detention  ponds that mimic 
natural hydrological processes. SuDS can reduce the risk of flooding, promote groundwater recharge, and improve 
water quality by removing pollutants. 
(Para 193) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 Adequate drainage measures as per hydrological ana lysis/site requirements are provided. For the efficient 
design of drainage system, the  RFP document for preparation of DPR, Consultancy  Service has been 
recently strengthened.  
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
18.2 The Committee enquires that even after adequate drainage measures are provided, there are problems 
of water logging at many places. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should focus on SuDS to 
manage surface water runoff from roads. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
19. The Committee also recommends that the Ministries can explore opportunities to integrate renewable energy 
sources into road infrastructure. This can include incorporating solar panels into noise barriers or utilizing solar -
powered lighting along roads. Renewable energy integrati on can help reduce dependence on fossil fuels and 
contribute to a more sustainable transportation network. 
(Para 195) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 At some NH sections (particularly rural areas), solar energy is being used for lighting. 
 
Further Recommendation/Observation 
19.2 The Committee recommends that the Ministry should make all efforts to utilise solar energy for 
lighting purposes all across NH stretches in the country.  
 
**** 

55 
 
 
 
CHAPTER-IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Absent Shoulders 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry may re -examine the existing 
guidelines/criteria relating to paved and unpaved sections of the road.  If needed, 
the Ministry should come out with revised guid elines/criteria to ensure that bridge 
sections are designed with shoulders so that they can be used for emergency 
stopping of vehicles.  Further, these guidelines must be strictly followed during the 
construction of the roads. 
(Para 94) 
 
**** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

56 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/ OBSERVATIONS AT A GLANCE 
CHAPTER-III 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF THE 
MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
Construction of Service Roads 
The Committee, in this regard, would like to know the cu rrent status and the details of the 
steps that have been taken by the Ministry. 
                             (Para 1.2)  
Present Road Survey Guidelines 
The Committee would like to know the number of instances, when agencies/individuals have 
sought such information from the Ministry either through RTI or any other medium. 
                             (Para 2.2)  
Analysis of existing road survey guidelines 
The Committee would like to know whether any meetings with local community 
leaders/representatives are h eld before finalisation of DPR. The Committee also would like 
to know whether decisions/suggestions in the meetings are factored in the finalisation of 
DPR. 
                             (Para 3.4)  
Flooding/ water logging issues 
The Committee recommends th at the drainage pipes and outlets must be properly cleaned 
before the onset of the Monsoon. The survey must be conducted to identify such locations 
where water logging is a constant phenomenon. The Ministry must ensure that  these 
locations are free from water logging during Monsoon.  The Committee also recommends 
that the drainage design and construction needs to be further improved.  
                             (Para 4.2)  
 
  

57 
 
 
The Committee would like to know the measures taken by the Ministry, in this regard, during 
the last two years. 
                             (Para 5.2)  
Shortage of manpower 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should expedite the recruitment process and 
fill up the vacancies for smooth working and expansion of road infrastructu re. Further, the 
cadre review with provision for capacity building should be taken undertaken as early as 
possible keeping in mind the five R’s recommended by the Committee. 
                             (Para 6.9)  
Budgetary Allocation 
The Committee recomm ends that a separate allocation must be provided to States for 
construction of RoBs/RuBs so that the process is expedited and there are no delays in the 
construction. 
                             (Para 7.2)  
(ii) Road Safety related issues 
The Committee re iterates that the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways should 
persuade State Governments to frame such rules under Section 210D of the MVAA Act to 
create adequate accountability framework to ensure that road -owning agencies, 
contractors and concessionai res are held accountable for faulty road design and 
construction. 
                             (Para 8.4)  
Absent Pedestrian and Cyclist Facilities 
The Committee notes that there are many roads where pedestrian and cycling facilities are 
not available. The  Ministry should identify such roads and provide pedestrian and cycling 
facilities at the earliest. 
                             (Para 9.2)  
The Committee would like to know how frequently the Group of Infrastructure Committee 
meets. The Committee also sug gests to include Public Representatives in this Group of 
Infrastructure Committee for better communication and functioning.  
                             (Para 10.2)  

58 
 
The Committee recommends that removal of encroachments must be a priority for improving 
the accessibility and safety of road users. The details of steps taken till now to remove 
encroachment must be shared with the Committee. 
                             (Para 11.5)  
 
Fund allocation and support to IRC 
The Committee feels that the Ministry sho uld evolve some alternative to provide a reasonable 
amount of corpus seed fund to the IRC to manage the function s of its Secretariat, the 
modalities of which may be worked out in consultation with the IRC. 
                             (Para 12.2)  
The Committee recommends that the Intelligent Transport System must also be launched in 
National and other State Highways to enhance road safety and better traffic management. 
                             (Para 13.2)  
 
The Committee is of the view that the Ministr y should identify the bridges showing signs of 
deterioration and thereafter structural health monitoring should be done of all those bridges 
on a regular basis. 
                             (Para 14.2)  
Private Sector Participation 
The Committee would like  to know about these stand alone projects which are being 
implemented on EPC mode and the present status thereof. 
                             (Para 15.3)  
 
The Committee would like to know how these modes are impartial enough to provide a fair 
and competitive bidding process. 
                             (Para 16.2)  
 
 
Sustainable and environment-friendly roads 
The Committee feels that there is an urgent need to explore more viable options other than 
Rain Water Harvesting Structures  alone. The Committee re iterated that the Ministries 

59 
 
should adopt features like rain gardens, bioswales, and permeable pavements to manage 
stormwater runoff and improve water quality. 
 
 (Para 17.2) 
The Committee enquires that even after adequate drainage measures are provided, there are 
problems of water logging at many places. The Committee recommends that the Ministry 
should focus on SuDS to manage surface water runoff from roads. 
                             (Para 18.2)  
 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should make all efforts to utilise solar energy 
for lighting purposes all across NH stretches in the country.  
                             (Para 19.2)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

60 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 

61 
 
Annexure-A 
Sl
. 
N
o. 
Sta
te 
Na
me 
RO 
Na
me 
Project 
Name 
NH 
No  
(Ne
w) 
Tota
l 
Len
gth  
(km
) 
Appoi
nted 
Date 
Schedu
led 
Compl
etion 
Date 
Likely 
Compl
etion 
Date 
Cumul
ative 
Length 
Compl
eted 
(km) 
till 
date 
Cumul
ative 
Physic
al 
Progre
ss in % 
Cumula
tive  
Financi
al  
Progres
s in % 
Current 
Project 
stage 
Main 
reason 
for delay 
1 Bih
ar 
Pat
na 
2L PS of 
Majhauli to 
Charout 
section from 
km. 0.00 to 
km. 63.655 
527
C 
58.6
55 
05-
Nov-
19 
04-
Nov-21 
30.06.2
024 
51.900 80.33
% 
71.01% Under 
Constru
ction 
Due to 
Land 
Acquisiti
on, 
Corona 
Pandemic
, 
Flood.C
OS etc. 
2 Bih
ar 
Pat
na 
4L/2L 
Chhapra-
Hajipur 
section of 
NH-19 from 
Km. 143.200 
to 
Km. 209.940 
in the state of 
Bihar under 
NHDP-III on 
Design, 
Build, 
Finance, 
Operate and 
Transfer 
(DBFOT) 
Annuity 
Basis.Hajipu
r to Chhapra 
19 66.7
4 
27.07.
2011 
24.07.2
023 
30.06.2
024 
53.66 87.98 92.35 Under 
Constru
ction 
Due to 
Land 
Acquisiti
on, 
Corona 
Pandemic
, slow 
progress 
of 
Concessi
onaire 
due to 
liquidity 
crunches. 
3 Bih
ar 
Pat
na 
Upgradation 
of Hajipur –
 Muzaffarpur
 section of 
the existing 
NH-77 to 4 -
77 63.1
7 
12.03.
2010 
06.02.2
013 
31.03.2
024 
60.23 93.62 94.06 Under 
Constru
ction 
Due to 
Land 
Acquisiti
on issue 
for want 
of higher 

62 
 
lane dual 
carriageway 
configuration 
in the state of 
Bihar on 
BOT 
(Annuity) 
basis under 
NHDP 
Phase-III 
compens
ation by 
Raiyats. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

63 
 
Annexure-B 
1. Status of Hajipur to Sonpur section of NH-19: 
Status of Highway Work   from Hajipur (Ch. 209+940) to Sonpur (Ch. 200+500) -Likely 
date of completion of Bituminous Concrete is 31.03.2024  
Sr. 
no. Item 
Total 
length 
(Km.) 
Completed 
Length (Km.) 
Balance 
Length 
(Km.) 
Status of 
work     
1 BC 9.44 0.935 8.505 Work i s in 
progress     
2 DBM 9.116 6.987 2.129 Work is in 
progress     
3 WMM 9.116 7.694 1.422 Work is in 
progress     
4 GSB 9.116 7.984 1.132 Work is in 
progress     
5 Sub-grade 9.116 8.012 1.104 Work is in 
progress     
6 Embankment 9.116 9.116 0 Work is in 
progress     
Status of Structure work from Hajipur(Ch. 209+940)  to Sonpur (Ch. 200+500) 
Sr. 
no. Description Total 
Structure Completed Balance Status 
Likely 
completion 
date 
  
1 
Major 
Bridge @ 
Ch. 206+436  
(Gandak 
Bridge) 
1 
5 nos. of 
Span have 
been 
launched out 
of total 15 
nos. of Span. 
  
stressing 
work in 05th 
no. of span is 
in progress. 
30.06.2024   
2 
Flyover (i) 
207+768 
(Anjaanpeer)  
1  2 lane 
Completed 
2 lane is 
balance due 
to shifting of 
Transmission 
tower. 
Work of 
shifting of 
Transmission 
tower  work 
is under 
progress.  
30.06.2024   
(ii) 209+530  
(Ramashish 
Chowk,  
1 Completed         

64 
 
2 lane ) 
(2)(a) 
Existing 
Flyover at 
Ch. 209+530 
(Ramashish 
Chowk 2 -
lane) 
1 
Rehabilitation 
work is in 
progress. 
5 nos. of   
Bearing and   
Expansion 
joint has been 
completed. 
  
  In Progress   
3 
ROB @ Ch. 
209+318 
(Ramashish 
Chowk) 
1 Completed         
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

65 
 
Annexure-C 
2. Construction status of Muzaffarpur Bypass section of NH -77:Likely date of completion May 
2024 
Status of Highway Work  in Muzaffarpur Bypass section of NH-77 
Highway  
Work 
Total length (in 
Km) Completed length (in Km) 
1. Subgrade  16.87 Completed  
2.GSB  16.87 15.87 
3.WMM 16.87 14.87 
4.DBM 16.87 13.93 
5. BC 16.87 10.85 
  
  
Status of Structural workin  Muzaffarpur Bypass section of NH-77- 
Description Status of work Balance Work 
Minor 
Bridge  
Ch.0+310 
Substructure 
Work 
completed  Superstructure Work is in Progress 
Minor 
Bridge  
Ch.0+467 
Substructure 
Work 
completed  SuperstructureWork is in Progress 
Flyover 
@8+531 
Substructure 
Work 
completed  SuperstructureWork is in Progress 
Minor Bridge 
@14+177 
Sub Structrure 
and 
Superstructure 
work 
completed  
Misc Work  
ROB 3 
@15+429 
Sub Structure 
Work 
completed  SuperstructureWork is in Progress 
VUP @ 
0+220 
Structure Work 
completed  RE wall work in Progress  
vup @1+393 Structure Work RE wall work in Progress  

66 
 
completed  
VUP@ 
3+393 
Structure Work 
completed  RE wall work in Progress  
VUP@3+362 
Structure Work 
completed  RE wall work in Progress  
VUP@7+790 
Structure Work 
completed  RE wall work in Progress  
  
  
Annexure D 
Sr. No. Name of Project Name of Consultant Money spent on 
these surveys ( in 
Rs) 
1 4/6 laning Delhi/Haryana 
Border to Rohtak section of old 
NH-10 ( New NH-9) 
M/s L. N. Malviya 
Infra Projects Pvt. 
1206310 
2 4 laning of Hisar -Dabwali 
section of old NH -10 ( New 
NH-9) 
M/s CEMOSA 1604729 
M/s Mahamarg 675285 
3 4 laning of Rohtak - Hisar 
section of old NH -10 ( New 
NH-9) 
M/s LN Malviya 7816857 
4 4 laning of Kaithal -Rajasthan 
Borer section of NH -152/52 on 
BOT mode 
M/s LN Malviya 3227590 
ANNEXURE-E 
  
Details of Under Implementation projects in NH-66 in the State of Kerala 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Project Length (km) Appointed Date Scheduled / Likely date  
of completion 
Physical 
Progress 
% 
  
1 
4 laning of Thalassery -Mahe 
Bypass Section of NH-
17(New NH -66) from Km. 
170.600(Design Chainage 
Km.170.600) to Km. 
188.000(Design Chainage 
18.6   
04.12.2017 
  
31.05.2020/ 
29.02.2024[Substantially 
completed] 
  
98.30% 

67 
 
Km. 189.200 on EPC Mode 
  
2 
Construction of six lane 
minor bridge at km 
203.160 and m ajor bridge at 
km 204.895 of NH - 66 on 
EPC Mode 
  
2.1 
  
09.12.2020 
11.06.2022/ 
31.03.2024 
  
86.89 % 
  
3 
Six laning of Existing 
Kozhikode Bypass (i.e. 
Vengalam Jn. to 
Ramanattukara Jn.) from km 
230.400 to km 258.800 
(Design Chainage) of NH-66 
on HAM mode 
  
28.4 
  
22.02.2021 
  
21.02.2023/ 
17.09.2024 
  
57.50 % 
4 6-laning of Chengala to 
Neeleshwaram on NH - 66 
(Old NH-17) on HAM Mode 
37.268 15.10.2021 11.04.2024/ 
11.04.2024 
45.75 % 
  
5 
6-laning of Neeleshwaram to 
Thalipparamba on NH -66 
(Old NH-17) on HAM Mode 
  
40.11 
  
15.10.2021 
11.04.2024/ 
11.04.2024 
  
33.4 % 
  
6 
6-laning of Thalappady to 
Chengala on NH -66 (Old 
NH-17) on HAM Mode 
  
39 
  
18.11.2021 
15.05.2024/ 
15.05.2024 
  
58.10 % 
7 6-laning of Azhiyur to 
Vengalam on NH-66 (Old 
NH-17) on HAM Mode 
40.8 30.10.2021 26.04.2024/ 
31.05.2025 
34.90 % 
  
8 
6-laning of Thalipparamba to 
Muzhapilangadu on NH -66 
(Old NH-17) on HAM Mode 
  
29.948 
  
29.11.2021 
26.05.2024/ 
26.05.2024 
  
41.31 % 
  
9 
6-laning of Ramanattukara 
to Valanchery on NH -66 
(Old NH-17) on HAM Mode 
  
39.68 
  
21.01.2022 
19.07.2024/ 
19.07.2024 
  
48.12 % 
  
10. 
6-laning of Valanchery to 
Kappirikkad on NH -66 (Old 
NH-17) on HAM Mode 
  
37.35 
  
21.01.2022 
19.07.2024/ 
19.07.2024 
  
55.30 % 
  
11 
6 Laning of Thuravoor 
Thekku – Paravoor section 
of NH -66(Old NH -47) on 
  
37.9 
  
17.03.2022 
12.09.2024/ 
12.09.2024 
  
18.60% 

68 
 
EPC Mode 
  
12 
6 Laning of Kottukulangara 
– Start of Kollam Bypass of 
NH-66(Old NH -47) on 
HAM Mode 
  
31.5 
  
12.04.2022 
08.10.2024/ 
08.10.2024 
  
30.10 % 
  
13 
Six Laning of 
Kadambattukonam to 
Kazhakuttom of NH -66(Old 
NH-47) on EPC Mode 
  
29.83 
  
23.07.2022 
18.01.2025/ 
18.01.2025 
  
19.98 % 
14 Six Laning of Paravoor to 
Kottukulangara section of 
NH-66(Old NH-47) on EPC 
mode 
37.5 29.08.2022 24.02.2025/ 
24.02.2025 
19.50 % 
  
15 4/6-laning of Kappirikkad-Thalikulam 
of NH-17 (New NH -66) on HAM 
Mode 
33.17 01.09.2022 27.02.2025/ 
27.02.2025 
30.05 % 
16 4/6-laning of Thalikulam -Kodungallur 
of NH -17 (New NH -66) on HAM 
Mode 
28.84 17.09.2022 15.03.2025/ 
15.03.2025 
26.94 % 
  
17. 
Six Laning of Start of Kollam Bypass 
to Kadambattukonam of NH -66 (Old 
NH-47) on HAM Mode 
  
31.25 
  
01.10.2022 
29.03.2025/ 
29.03.2025 
  
27.04 % 
  
18. 
6-laning of   Kodungallur- Edapally of 
NH-66 (Old NH-17) on HAM mode 
  
26.03 
  
25.10.2022 
22.04.2025/ 
22.04.2025 
  
26.27 % 
  
19. 
  
6-lane elevated highway between 
Aroor– Thuravoor section of NH -66 
on EPC Mode 
  
12.75 
  
01.02.2023 
  
31.01.2026/ 
31.01.2026 
  
11.36 % 
  GRAND TOTAL 582.05Km       
DETAILS OF COMPLETED PROJECT STRETCHES IN NH-66 IN THE STATE OF KERALA 
Sr. 
No. 
Name of Project Length (Km) 

69 
 
1. Edappally-Vytilla-Aroor section on NH-66 
Contractor: M/s. RDS CVCC (JV) 
IE/SC: Dhruv Consultancy Services in association with Varad 
Associates. 
16.75 
2. Four laning of Kazhakkoottam  to Mukkola  Section from  
Km.0+000 to Km.26+500 of NH -47 in the State of Kerala 
under NHDP Phase III on EPC mode 
Contractor- M/s KLR Constructions Ltd. 
Supervision Consultant: M/s. LN Malviya Infra Projects Pvt 
Ltd in association with M/Infratech Civil Solutions and 
Consultant 
24.998 
3. Construction of New 4 -Lane Elevated Highway (2x10.5m 
wide twin two lane structures) including approaches & service 
roads connecting Kazhakuttam Junction and Technopark 
Junction from Km.547+080 to Km.549+801 on EPC mode 
Contractor- M/s RDS-CVCC JV 
Supervision Consultant: M/s. LN  Malviya Infra Projects Pvt 
Ltd in association with M/s.Infratech Civil Solutions and 
Consultant. 
2.721 
4 4 Laning of Thiruvananthapuram Bypass from Mukkola to 
Kerala / Tamala Border (Km. 26.500 to Km. 43.000) on NH -
66 on EPC Mode Contractor- M/s. L&T Construction 
Supervision Consultant: M/s. L.N.Malviya Infra Projects Pvt 
Ltd in association with M/s.Infratech Civil Solutions and 
Consultant. 
16.202 
5. Construction of 4 -lane ROB near Neeleshwaram Town 
(Pallikara RailwayGate) from Km. 93.468 (Existing Km. 
95.650)to Km. 94.248 (Existing Km. 96.450) on NH-66 
0.78 
  Total Length Completed by NHAI 61.451Km 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
 
MINUTES 
  

71 
 
 
MINUTES OF THE MEETING OF THE DEPARTMENT -RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TR ANSPORT, 
TOURISM & CULTURE (2024-25) 
VI 
SIXTH  MEETING 
  
The Committee met at  10:00 A.M. on  Monday, the 16th December, 2024 
in Committee Room-“B”, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe Building, New 
Delhi. 
  
  
1. Shri Sanjay Kumar Jha   -  Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla 
3. Shri Mohammed Nadimul Haque 
4. Shri Jaggesh 
5. Shri Kesridevsinh Jhala  
6. Shrimati S. Phangnon Konyak  
7. Shri Neeraj Dangi 
 
Lok Sabha  
8. Shri R. K. Chaudhary 
9. Shri Vishweshwar Hegde Kageri  
10. Shrimati June Maliah  
11. Shri Ajay Kumar Mandal  
12. Shri K. E. Prakash  
13. Shri Amarsing Tisso 
14. Shri Manoj Tiwari  
  
SECRETARIAT 
Smt. Monica Baa,  Director  
Shri T. Kennedy, Deputy Secretary 
Shri N. Romesh Singh, Under Secretary 
  

72 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman extended a warm welcome to the Members of 
the Committee and informed  that the agenda for the meeting is to consider and 
adopt the following draft Action Taken Reports of the Committee: - 
(i)     XXXXXi 
 
(ii)   Action Taken by the Government on the 
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained 
in its Three Hundred Fifty Fourth (354th ) Report on 
‘Construction Of Road -Over Bridges (ROBs), Road -Under 
Bridges (RUBs), Service Roads And Review Of Road Survey 
Guidelines, Etc.; 
(iii)    XXXXX 
(iv)  XXXXX 
(v)     XXXXX 
3. The Committee took up for consideratio n the draft Action Taken Reports, 
one by one. After a brief discussion, the Committee adopted the aforesaid five 
draft Action Taken Reports and authorized the Chairman and in his absence 
Shri Neeraj  Dangi, MP  or Shri M. Mohamed Abdulla  to present the aforesaid 
Reports in Rajya Sabha on 19 th December, 2024. Additionally, the Committee 
authorized Shri Vishweshwar  Hegde Kageri, MP and in his absence Shri Rajiv 
Pratap Rudy, MP to lay the Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha on the same 
date. 
4. XXXXX 
5. XXXXX 
The meeting adjourned at 10:40 A.M. 
 
Monica Baa 
Director 
New Delhi, 
16th December, 2024 
 
                                                             
i  Relates to other matters 