 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
March, 2021/ Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 
REPORT NO. 
 
291 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FIRST REPORT 
 
Demands for Grants (2021-22) of Ministry of Civil Aviation 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th March, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th March, 2021) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website : https://rajyasabha.nic.in 
E-mail : rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 

 
 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, 
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED NINETY FIRST REPORT 
 
 
Demands for Grants (2021-22) of Ministry of Civil Aviation 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on 17th March, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on 17th March, 2021) 
 
 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
March, 2021/ Phalguna, 1942 (Saka) 


C O N T E N T S 
 
PAG  E S 
 
1 COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (i) 
2 INTRODUCTION (ii) 
3 ACRONYMS (iii)-(viii) 
4 REPORT 1-68 
5 RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE 69-91 
6 MINUTES        92-99 
7 ANNEXURE        100-102 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
(2020-21) 
(Constituted on 13th September, 2020) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh - Chairman 
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
4. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
5. Shri Derek O‟Brien 
6. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
7. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
8. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
9. Shri K.C.Venugopal 
10. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
11. Shri Anto Antony 
12. Shri Margani Bharat 
13. Shri Tapir Gao 
14. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
15. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
16. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
17. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
19. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
20. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
21. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
22. Shri Prince Raj 
23. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
24. Shrimati Mala Roy 
25. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
26. Shri Dushyant Singh 
27. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
28. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
29. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
30. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
31. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
 
(i) 

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do  
hereby present this Two Hundred Ninety First Report on Demands for Grants (2021 -22) of 
Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
 
2. The Committee, at its meeting held on 16 th February, 2021 considered the subject and 
heard the Secretary and other officials of Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
 
3. The Committee wishes  to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of  Civil 
Aviation for placing before the Committee, the material and information desired in 
connection with the subject and for clarifying the points raised by the Members. 
 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the 
15th March, 2021. 
 
 
 
(T.G. Venkatesh) 
NEW DELHI; Chairman, 
 March 15 , 2021 Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
24 Phalguna , 1942 (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(ii) 

Acronyms 
 
 
 
 
AAI Airports Authority of India 
AAIB Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau 
AAICLAS AAI Cargo Logistics and Allied Services 
AASSC Aerospace & Aviation Sector Skill Council 
ACA Airport Carbon Accreditation 
ACI Aero Club of India 
ACSA Allied Communications Security Agency 
AERA Airports Economic Regulatory Authority 
AIAHL Air India Asset Holding Ltd. 
AIC Aeronautical Information Circular 
AIESL Air India Engineering Services Limited 
AIL Air India Limited 
AME Aircraft Maintenance Engineering 
AMP Ampere 
AMT ADS Mediterranean Trials 
APEDA Agricultural and Processed food products Export Development Authority 
ATCOs Air Traffic Control Officers 
ATF Aviation Turbine Fuel 
ATS Air Traffic Services 
AVSEC Aviation Security 
BAPL Bengal Aerotropolis Project Limited 
BCAS Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
BCBP Bar Coded Boarding Pass 
BIAL Bengaluru International Airport Ltd. 
 
 
(iii) 

BRICS Brazil, Russia, India, China and South Africa 
BVLOS Beyond Visual Line of Sight 
C&AG Comptroller & Auditor General 
CAGR Compound Annual Growth Rate 
CAR Civil Aviation Requirements 
CCRS Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety 
CDR Conditional Route 
CEO Chief Executive Officer 
CGST Central Goods and Services Tax 
CHIAL Chandigarh International Airport Ltd. 
CIDCO City & Industries Development Corporation of Maharashtra 
CORSIA Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation 
CPL Commercial Pilot Licence 
CRS Commission of Railway Safety 
CUTE Common Use Terminal Equipment 
D/o AC&FW Department of Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers‟ Welfare 
DAN Drone Acknowledgement Number 
DAP2020 Directorate of Airspace Policy 2020 
DEPwD Department of Empowerment of Persons with Disabilities 
DGCA Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
DoNER Department of North Eastern Region 
DoPT Department of Personnel and Training 
DoT Department of Telecommunications 
DSP Digital Sky Platform 
EESL Energy Efficiency Services Limited 
EGoS Empowered Group of Secretaries 
FAI Fédération Aéronautique Internationale 
 
 
(iv) 

FAQS Frequently Asked Questions 
FRTOL Flight Radio Telephoney Licence 
FTOs Flying Training Organizations 
FUA Flexible Use of Airspace 
GAIL Gas Authority of India Limited 
GGIAL GMR Goa International Airport Limited 
GHG Green House Gases 
GIA Grant In Aid 
GMR Gandhi Mallikarjuna Rao 
GR General Remittances 
GST Goods and Services Tax 
GVK Gunupati Venkata Krishna 
HAL Hindustan Aeronautics Limited 
HEMS Helicopter Emergency Medical Services 
HLL Hindustan Latex Limited 
I&EBR Internal & Extra Budgetary Resources 
IAF Indian Armed Forces 
ICAO International Civil Aviation Organization 
ICG Indian Coast Guard 
ICMR Indian Council of Medical Research 
IDERA Irrevocable Deregistration and Export Request Authorization 
IEC International Electrotechnical Commission/Committee 
IFRS International Financial Reporting Standards 
IFSC International Financial Services Centre 
IGIA Indira Gandhi International Airport 
IGRUA Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi 
ILS Instrument Landing System 
 
 
(v) 

IMD India Meteorological Department 
iOS iPhone Operating System 
ITC Input Tax Credit 
ITU International Telecommunication Union 
JVC Joint Venture Company 
KIAL Kannur International Airport Limited 
KINFRA Kerala Industrial Infrastructure Development Corporation 
LED Light Emitting Diode 
MADC Maharashtra Airport Development Company Limited 
MAFI Modernization of Air Field Infrastructure 
MAT Maintenance Access Terminal 
MIAL Mumbai International Airport Ltd. 
MIHAN Multi-modal International Hub Airport at Nagpur 
MIL MIHAN India Limited 
MIS Management Information System 
MoHFW Ministry of Health and Family Welfare 
MoPR Ministry of Panchayati Raj 
MoU Memorandum of Understanding 
MRO Maintenance, Repair and Overhauling 
MRV Monitoring, Reporting and Verification 
MTOs Maintenance Training Organizations 
MTOW Maximum Take-Off Weight 
MWP Meteorological Weather Processor 
NAPCC National Action Plan for Climate Change 
NASP National Aero Sports Policy 
NDRF National Disaster Response Force 
 
 
(vi) 

NER North-Eastern Region 
NHAI National Highways Authority of India 
NMIAL Navi Mumbai International Airport Ltd. 
NSCBIA Netaji Subhash Chandra Bose International Airport 
NSOPs Non-Scheduled Operators Permits 
NTPC National Thermal Power Corporation 
NVVN NTPC Vidhyut Vyapar Nigam 
OLS Obstacle Limitation Survey 
ONGC Oil and Natural Gas Corporation 
PAPI Precision Approach Path Indicator 
PED Principal Executive Director 
PHL Pawan Hans Limited 
PMIC Project Monitoring and Implementation Committee 
PPEs Personal Protective Equipment 
PPL Private Pilot Licence 
PPP Public Private Partnership 
PSU Passenger Service Unit 
RCC Rescue Coordination Centre 
RCS Regional Connectivity Scheme 
RESA Runway End Safety Area 
RFP Request For Proposal 
RGNAU Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University 
RPwD Act Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act 
RTPCR Reverse Transcription Polymerase Chain Reaction 
RTR (A) Radio Telephone operators Restricted certificate - Aeromobiles 
Rwy Runway 
 
 
(vii) 

SAOs Selected Airline Operators 
SARPs Standard & Recommended Practices 
SESF Special Extra Section Flight 
SOI Survey of India 
SOP Standard Operating Procedures 
SOPs Scheduled Operators Permits 
SPV Special Purpose Vehicle 
STP Standard Temperature and Pressure 
SVAMITVA Survey of Villages and Mapping with Improvised Technology in Village 
Areas 
UAS Unmanned Aircraft System 
UDAN Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik 
UJALA Unnat Jyoti by Affordable LEDs for All 
UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change 
UT Union Territory 
UTM Unmanned Aircraft System Traffic Management 
VAT Value Added Tax 
VBM Vande Bharat Mission 
VFR Visual Flight Rules 
VGF Viability Gap Funding 
WPC Wireless Planning and Coordination 
YEIDA Yamuna Expressway Industrial Development Authority 
YIAPL Yamuna International Airport Private Limited 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(viii) 

1  
REPORT 
 
The Ministry of Civil Aviation is responsible for the formulation of national policies and 
programmes for the development and regulation of the Civil Aviation sector in the country. It  
also looks after the administration of the Aircraf t Act, 1934, Aircraft Rules, 1937 and various  
other legislations pertaining to the aviation sector in the country. 
 
2. In addition to primary functions of framing of policies, the Ministry provides guidance to  
the organizations in the implementation of policy guidelines, monitors and evaluates their 
activities and also provides their interface with Parliament. It also supervises implementation by  
the organizations of special programmes of the Government, particularly those intended for the  
weaker sections of society. 
 
3. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has the following organizations under its administrative 
control:- 
(i) Attached Offices /Organizations 
 Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) 
 Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) 
 Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) 
 Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) 
(ii) Autonomous Bodies 
 Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) 
 Airports Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) 
 Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University (RGNAU) 
(iii) Public Sector Undertakings 
 Airports Authority of India (AAI) 
 Air India Limited (AIL) 
 Pawan Hans Limited (PHL) 
 
4. The Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and  
Culture considered Demand No.8 containing the details of budget allocations of the Ministry of  
Civil Aviation,  for the financial year 2021 -22, at its meeting held on the 16 th February, 2021. 
During the meeting, the Committee heard the views of the Secretary and other senior officers of  
the Ministry of Civil Aviation, as well as the Heads of the organizations under  its purview, on  
budgetary and other aspects. 

2  
Assessment of the Demands for Grants (2021-22) of the Ministry 
 
 
 


3  
 


4  
 
 
 


5  
 
 
 


6  
 
 
 
 
 


7  
 
 


8  
 
 
 
 
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, while making a presentation before the 
Committee, on Demands for Gran ts (2021-22) of the Ministry, gave the following overview of  
the Budget (2021-22):- 
(₹ in crores) 
 
 
Year 
 
2021-22 
% of 
total 
allocation 
Allocation as per Budget Estimates 3,224.67 100.00 
Allocation to AIAHL (SPV) 2,268.99 70.36 
Allocation to Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) 600.00 18.60 
Salary & Estt, DigiSKY, etc. (Ministry, DGCA, BCAS & CRS) 283.59 8.79 
Capital Expenditure : DGCA, BCAS & AAIB 40.52 1.26 
Balance : GIA to Autonomous Bodies & AERA 31.57 0.98 


9  
5.1. The Secretary further stated that 70% of budget allocation is towards Air India Asset  
Holding Limited; about 19% of bud get allocation for development of RCS airports and NER air  
connectivity; remaining 11% is distributed among Ministry (Main) and its attached & 
autonomous bodies for their salary, Capital and Revenue expenditure. 
 
Demand made by the Ministry vs. Actual allocation 
 
6. The Ministry has furnished the following data, regarding the projection made by the 
Ministry for 2021-22 and the actual allocation made for the Ministry:- 
 
(₹ in crores) 
Sl. No. Scheme Projection 
2021-22 
BE 2021-22 
A. Revenue Section 
1. (i) Ministry of Civil Aviation – 
Secretariat. 
(ii) Directorate General of Civil 
Aviation 
(iii) Bureau of Civil Aviation 
Security 
(iv) Commission of Railway 
Safety 
66.13 
225.37 
59.79 
17.44 
44.83 
180.00 
43.76 
15.00 
2. Purchase of new aircraft for 
SESF Operation 
0.01 0.01 
3. Air India Asset Holding 
Ltd.(SPV) 
2269.22 2268.99 
4. Airports Economic Regulatory 
Authority of India 
23.50 10.00 
5. IGRUA 
National Aviation University 
0.01 
16.50 
0.01 
7.32 
6. Airports Authority of India – 
For Hollongi Project 
144.01 13.18 
7. Regional Connectivity Scheme 
(including RCS-NER Rs.70.00 
crore) 
806.05 600.00 
8. Skill Development 0.05 0.05 
9. Skill Development for 
Promotion / Development of 
Aero Sports 
0.00 1.00 
Total – Revenue 3628.07 3184.15 
 
A. Capital Section Projection 
2021-22 
BE 2021-22 
Sl. No. Name of Organization 
1. Directorate General of Civil 
Aviation 
88.08 24.00 

10  
2. Bureau of Civil Aviation 
Security 
24.91 11.50 
3. Aircraft Accident 
Investigation Bureau (AAIB) 
17.64 5.01 
4. Rohini Heliport Ltd. 0.01 0.01 
5. Turnaround Plan for AI 0.01 0.01 
Total 130.65 40.52 
 
Against the projected demand of ₹3758.72 crore for the FY 2021 -22, Ministry of Finance has  
allocated ₹3224.67 crore. Ministry of Finance while conveying the Budget allocation for FY  
2021-22 have also fixed the allocation for the 6 Centrally Sponsored Schemes. 
Ministry of Civil Aviation has adjusted the allocated Budget for projects and programmes as per  
priority for their execution. While the reasons for reduced allocation is not available as of now,  
requirement of additional funds will be taken up at the Revised Estimates stage. 
6.1. The Committee observes that excluding the budgetary allocation for Air India Asset  
Holding Limited (SPV) in 2021 -22, the projected requirement of the Ministry for all the  
other Schemes under Revenue Section is ₹1358.85 crore, against which BE allocation of 
₹915.16 crore only has been made. The Committee, therefore, is apprehensive that the  
budgetary allocation made to the Ministry is not in sync with the actual budgetary 
requirements of the Ministry. T he Civil Aviation sector has been dealt a huge blow by the  
Coronavirus pandemic and there is a need for huge intervention to save this sector, in this  
hour of crisis. The Committee notes that it is unreasonable that instead of giving an 
enhanced budgetary allocation, there has been a significant shortfall in the BE 2021 -22 
allocation of the Ministry. This surely is a matter of grave concern. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that a higher fund allocation should be provided at the RE 2021 -22 
stage, to the Ministry, so that the Ministry can fulfill its mandate and bolster the growth of  
Civil Aviation sector in the right direction. 
 
6.2. The Committee was also apprised by the Secretary that new budget  Head has been  
created for Development  of Aero Sports in B E 2021-22, for which ₹1 crore has been allocated  
for 2021-22. 
 
6.2.1. The Committee is disappointed to note that a mere token allocation of ₹1 crore has  
been made for ‘Development of Aero Sports’. While the creation of a new budget Head for  
Development of Aero Sports is a welcome move and a step in the right direction, the  
Committee feels that the amount allocated under the same, i.e., ₹1 crore is not sufficient  to 
fund the development of Aero Sports in the country. Therefore, the Committee 

11  
recommends that the Ministry may examine the different projects it can take up under this  
Head and come up with revised projections and request the Ministry of Finance to  
grant      additional funds under this head at the R.E. 2021-22 stage. 
 
6.3. The Annual Plan for Expenditure through Budgetary support during 2021-22 (BE) is as 
given below:- 
(₹ in crores) 
S. No. Name of Organization Budgetary 
Support 
1. Air India Asset Holding Ltd.(AIAHL) SPV 2268.99 
3. Purchase of two new aircrafts for SESF operation 0.01 
4. Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) 24.00 
5. Bureau of Civil Aviation Security (BCAS) 11.50 
6. IGRUA & National Aviation University 7.33 
7. Aeronautical Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA) 10.00 
8. Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS)* 600.00 
9. Airport Authority of India (AA)-Hollongi Project 13.18 
10. Rohini Heliport Ltd. 0.01 
 Total 2935.02 
*Includes ₹70.00 crore towards subsidy for RCS-NER (VGF). 
 
6.3.1. The Ministry has informed the Committee, in its written reply, inter alia, that the 
requirement projected for BE 2021 -22 was Rs.144.01 crore and that the budgetary allocation is  
for Rs.13.18 crore for  BE (2021 -22) for „ Construction of Greenfield Airport at Hollongi in  
Arunachal Pradesh‟. Depending on the pace of expenditure, the Ministry of Civil Aviation will  
take up with the Ministry of Finance, for additional allocation at RE 2021-22 stage. 
 
6.3.2. The Committee notes that ₹ 13.18 crore, ₹ 10 crore and ₹ 7.33 crore have been  
allocated in BE 2021 -22 for ‘Airports Authority of India – for Hollongi Project’, ‘Airports  
Economic Regulatory Authority of India’ and ‘IGRUA & National Aviation University’  
against projected requirement of ₹ 144.01 crore, ₹ 23.50 crore and ₹ 16.51 crore 
respectively. These allocations are less than even half of the amount projected for these  
Heads. The Committee is constrained to observe that either the projections of the Minist ry 
were unrealistic, or the Ministry failed to justify its projections before the Ministry of  
Finance. The Committee would like the Ministry to share its roadmap for the 
implementation of these projects. 
6.3.3. The Committee underlines the importance of th e Hollongi airport, for its proximity  
with a hostile neighbour. Allocation of not even 10% of the amount projected by the 

12  
Ministry is not fair, for such a project of strategic importance. The clarification of the  
Ministry that depending on the pace of exp enditure, the matter of additional allocation will 
be taken up with the Ministry of Finance, at RE 2021-22 stage, appears to be a very routine 
one. The Committee expects the Ministry to strive hard to expedite the construction of the  
Hollongi airport. 
 
7. The Capital Outlay in respect of Ministry of Civil Aviation for 2021-22 is ₹5180.22 
crore, with a budgetary support component of ₹ 40.52 crore and I&EBR of ₹ 5139.70 crore. 
 7.1. The budgetary support component as reflected in the Demands for Grants of the 
Ministry is as under: 
(₹ in crores) 
 
A. Capital  
Sl. No. Name of Organization Budgetary 
Support 
1. Directorate General of Civil Aviation 24.00 
2. Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 11.50 
3. Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) 5.01 
4. Rohini Heliport Ltd. 0.01 
 Total 40.52 
 
7.2. The Annual Plan for Expenditure through Internal & Extra Budgetary Resources 
(I&EBR) during 2021-22 is given in the table below:- 
(₹ in crores) 
S. No Name of Organization Internal & Extra Budgetary Resources 
1. Airports Authority of India 5139.70 
7.3. On the Revenue side, approved outlay of Ministry of Civil Aviation for 2021-22 is 
₹3184.15 crore which is earmarked for establishment related expenditure of various 
organizations  under the Ministry as well as Regional Connectivity Scheme (₹600.00 crore) and 
Servicing of interest/loan debt transferred from Air India Ltd. to newly created Air India Asset 
Holding Ltd. (SPV) (₹2268.99 crore). The details in this regard,  as furnished by  the Ministry, 
are as under:- 
(₹ in crores) 
 
Sl. No. Scheme BE 2021-2022 

13  
B. Revenue  
1. (i) Ministry of Civil Aviation – Secretariat. 44.83 
(ii) Directorate General of Civil Aviation 180.00 
(iii) Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 43.76 
(iv) Commission of Railway Safety 15.00 
2. Purchase of new aircraft for SESF Operation 0.01 
3. Air India Asset Holding Ltd.(SPV) 2268.99 
4. Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India 10.00 
5. IGRUA 0.01 
National Aviation University 7.32 
6. Airports Authority of India – For Hollongi Project 13.18 
7. Regional Connectivity Scheme (includingRCS-NER 
₹70.00 crore) 
600.00 
8. Skill Development 0.05 
9. Skill Development for Promotion / 
Development of Aero Sports 
1.00 
 Total – Revenue 3184.15 
 
 
Capital 
(₹ in crores) 
S. No. Name of Organization Major 
Head 
Budget 
Estimates 
1. Directorate General of Civil Aviation 5053 24.00 
2. Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 5053 11.50 
3. Investment in Air India Limited 5053 0.00 
4. Rohini Heliport Limited 5053 0.01 
5. Ministry (Main) 4059 5.01 
 Total  40.52 
 
7.4.  Details of the provisions made in the budget of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, 
during 2020-21, Revised Estimates for the year 2020-21 and provisions approved for 2021-

14  
22 in respect of all constituent units have been summarized by the Ministry, as under: 
(₹ in crores) 
 Capital Revenue Total 
Budget Estimates 2020-21 25.97 3771.74 3797.71 
Revised Estimates 2020-21 53.97 4077.66 4131.63 
Budget Estimates 2021-2022 40.52 3184.15 3224.67 
 
7.5. As regards the pattern of overall allocation and expenditure in the Ministry during the 
last five financial years, the Ministry has furnished the following information:- 
 
(₹ in crores) 
Year Projection of 
Budget 
Budget 
Allocation 
Actual 
Expenditure 
% of Allocated budget
 on 
projected Demand 
2016-17 3468.54 3452.33 3405.80 99.53 
2017-18 4809.01 2710.31 2663.99 56.36 
2018-19* 16389.01 9700.00 9599.00 59.19 
2019-20 10639.47 3700.00 3646.72 34.78 
2020-21 4918.85 4131.63 2680.85 (till 
31.01.2021) 
84.00 
*Higher allocatio n in 2018 -19 was on account of „ Turnaround Plan of Ai r India‟ which was allocated  
Rs.3975.00 crore. Due to decision regarding strategic disinvestment of Air India, there was no allocation for 
this budget head during 2019-20. 
 
8. The Secretary, during his presentation apprised that the actual expenditure for 202 0-21 
was ₹3646.72 crores and that ₹2680.85 crores have been spent till 31st January, 2021. 
8.1. The Committee is distressed to note that the Ministry has been able to spend only  
64.9% of the enhanced RE allocation of ₹4131.63 crores, which means that the M inistry 
has to spend ₹1450.78 crore in the remaining two months of the Financial Year 2020 -21. 
The Committee apprehends significant underutilization of the budgetary funds available  
with the Ministry. At a time when the Government was facing major financia l troubles on 
account of the Coronavirus pandemic, the Ministry received a considerable boost of 8.8% 
at RE 2020 -21, as compared to BE 2020 -21. Poor utilization of the funds would lead to  
idling of funds which should have been avoided. The Committee would like the Ministry to 
take stock of the reasons which caused the slow pace of utilization of funds and  take 
corrective measures to ensure optimum utilization of the allocated funds, during the 
Financial Year 2021-22. 
 
Outstanding C&AG Audit Paras 

15  
9. The Committee notes that the ATN of the Ministry on  some of the C&AG Audit Paras  
are pending, even for the financial year 2012-13. 
9.1. The Committee strongly urges the Ministry to scrutinize the reasons behind the  
delay in the submission of ATN and take necessary steps to ensure that such delays are not  
repeated. 
 
Savings and Delays 
10.1. The Committee takes note of the Savings of ₹37.01 crores, as furnished by the  
Ministry, which has been resulted under the Head ‘RCS’ for 2018 -19 (Revenue), due to  
requirement of less funds towards subsidy to airlines for providing air connectivity in the  
North Eastern Region. 
 10.1.1. The Committee desires that it may be informed about the reasons therefor. 
 
10.2. Further, the Committee takes note of the delay in the Digital Sky Platform Project, due to  
which Actual Expenditure for the year 2018 -19 (Revenue), was less in comparison to Revised  
Estimates (2018-19). 
10.2.1. The Committee may be apprised, in detail, of the reasons for the delay in the Digital  
Sky Platform Project. 
Major Schemes and Initiatives of the Ministry 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) – Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik (UDAN) 
11. It has been stated in the Annual Report (2020 -21) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, that  
the Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) - Ude Desh Ka Aam Naagrik (UDAN) was launched  
on 21.10.2016. The first RCS -UDAN flight was inaugu rated by Hon‟ble Prime Minister on 27 th 
April, 2017. 303 routes connecting airports across the length and breadth of the country have  
commenced. Within 3 years, 53 airports including 5 heliports and 2 water aerodromes have been  
developed and operationalized under UDAN as compared to 76 airports that have been 
developed in 70 years since independence. Over five million passengers have travelled  on 
UDAN flights, as of the end of November 2020. Newer modes of air transportation have been  
introduced under UDAN including seaplanes, helicopters, flights via smaller aircrafts. 
11.1.  The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, while deposing before the Committee, clarified  
that RCS is a market driven Scheme. He stated that BE (2021 -22) allocation of ₹600 crores has  
been made for this Scheme, which is an increase of 24% over previous year‟s BE. He pointed out 
that the non-availability of land and wrong estimates made by the b idders are some of the issues  
faced by this Scheme. 

16  
11.2. In the written reply furnished by the Ministry, the following details regarding routes  
awarded and operationalized under RCS, round wise, have been given:- 
Scheme Valid RCS Route/ Awarded RCS routes operationalized 
UDAN-1 56 56 
UDAN-2 297 128 
UDAN-3 (including 3.1) 335 127 
UDAN – 4 80 6 
UDAN (Total) 768 317 
 
 11.3. The Ministry has also stated that as per the Scheme document, the Selected Airline  
Operators (SAOs) are obligated to commence RCS flight operations on a RCS -route, as part of  
individual route proposal or a network proposal within a period of 180 days from the issuance of  
Letter of Award or within two months from the readiness of airport, whichever is later, unless 
any extension is granted b y the Implementing Agency. As stated, the airports are taken for  
development only when a bid is received to connect the same. Sometimes, there is a delay in  
operationalizing some routes/discontinuation of the routes, due to reasons which include:- 
i. Non-readiness of civil airports/heliports, which may be related to availability of land,  
creation of regional infrastructure, complying to the regulations by the airport operators. 
ii. Delay in obtaining Scheduled Commuter Operators Permit by new entrant Airlines. 
 
iii. Introducing the Heliport and Water aerodrome operations for first time in the country 
with robust regulatory framework. 
iv. It is relevant to mention here that, in India, airlines generally operate in a very 
challenging environment with low yield and high operat ing cost (partly due to high tax  
incidences on ATF and other services). These challenges have been further aggravated by  
the COVID-19 pandemic which necessitated suspension of airlines operations for more  
than two months. 
v. Other constraints in operation of RCS flights include, closure of airport for maintenance  
work, bad weather conditions during rainy & winter seasons, lack of Night Landing  
Facilities, lack of re-fueling facilities etc. 
11.3.1. The Committee appreciates the positive impact that the RCS  Scheme has had, on  
the growth of the Civil Aviation sector in the country. The Scheme has not only made air  
travel affordable and extensive, it has given a massive boost to the development of airports 

17  
and infrastructure development in the Civil Aviation arena . The Committee notes that  
UDAN has helped airline operators in developing sustainable business models and in 
providing start -up and scale -up opportunities to small regional airlines. UDAN has also  
provided the much needed impetus to the economic developme nt of remote regions and  
contributed to a more inclusive growth in the economic activity across the country. It has  
also contributed majorly to job growth and economic development in the country. 
11.3.2. The Committee takes note of the hurdles and problems faced by the various 
stakeholders, under this Scheme. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should  
take strategic steps on a war footing, to ensure that such hitches/glitches are sorted out, to  
ensure the success and viability of the Scheme. The Comm ittee, further, underscores the  
importance of this Scheme and desires that the Ministry should, pro -actively, espouse the  
required measures, to make certain, that the UDAN scheme is given the necessary fillip, for  
the development and operationalization of potential airports. 
11.4. In the written reply furnished by the Ministry, it ha s been stated that operationalization of 
unserved/underserved airports under Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) – UDAN – Ude Desh 
ka Aam Nagrik, has extended the aviation infras tructure and services to the remotest part of the  
nation. However, the duties/functions of Air Traffic Services Wing/ATCOs have increased on  
account of the operationalization of these airports. Presently, operations at unserved/ 
underserved airports are be ing managed by deputing Air Traffic Control Officers (ATCOs) on  
tour/posting. Considering the expansion of civil aviation in domestic sector, including 
operationalization of unserved/ underserved airport as well as established and new regulatory  
requirements, AAI has  formed a Committee to look into the current and future manpower  
requirement of ATCOs in India. 
11.4.1. The Committee appreciates the timely action taken by the Ministry in forming a  
Committee to look into the current and future manpower requirement of ATCOs. 
However, merely forming a Committee will not suffice. This should be supplemented with a 
time bound, result oriented approach, to ensure that the operationalization of new airports  
and air travel security do not suffer for want of adequate number of ATCOs. The 
Committee so constituted, should meet at regular intervals and expedite its 
recommendations to enable AAI meet the shortage of ATCOs. 
11.5. In reply to a query regarding the validity of subsidy under the UDAN Scheme after the  
withdrawal of su bsidy, the Ministry has clarified that as per provisions, VGF support will be  
provided for RCS Flights for a period of three years from the date of commencement of RCS  
Flight operations on any RCS Route under a Selected Airline Operator Agreement. After three 

18  
years, it is expected that the route is developed and would be commercially viable. 
11.5.1. Taking cognizance of the reply furnished by the Ministry, the Committee desires the 
Ministry to closely and meticulously, monitor the implementation and impact  of the UDAN 
Scheme and formulate plans and guidelines  to ensure that the benefits of the  Scheme 
actually reach the passengers, as per the spirit of the Scheme. 
11.6. In reply to a query about proposal from the Ministry of Tourism/ Culture, for 
connectivity, for their destinations or sites under RCS, the Ministry informed that 46 RCS  
routes have been awarded to the Selected Airline Operators (SAOs). 
11.6.1. The Committee recognizes the need for co -ordination between/ among the Ministry  
of Civil Aviation, with th e Ministries of Tourism and Culture, in matters regarding air  
connectivity to important tourist destinations and cultural sites in the country. Hence, the  
Committee recommends the Ministry of Civil Aviation, to work in tandem with the 
Ministries of Culture and Tourism, in order to ensure greater harmony among the 
concerned Ministries who are vital stakeholders in this regard. 
11.7. The Committee has been given to understand that out of the 778 valid routes awarded  
under the UDAN Scheme, only 315 routes have been commenced so far, which is less than 40%  
of what were awarded. 
11.7.1. The  Committee would like the Ministry, to examine the reasons for non- 
commencement of routes that have already been awarded under the UDAN Scheme; to  
identify the bottlenecks in this r egard; and to chalk out strategic steps to address the issues  
involved. 
Lifeline UDAN 
12. The Ministry has informed that 'Lifeline UDAN' was launched during pandemic COVID - 
19, after the scheduled domestic flight operations were suspended from 25th March, 2020. Lifeline 
UDAN was an initiative to ensure a steady supply of essentials as well as medical  supplies, PPEs 
(Personal Protective Equipment), test kits etc. to all parts of the country. The  Ministry facilitated 
Lifeline UDAN mechanism to match the requirements/consignments of  States /UTs/MoHFW 
(HLL & ICMR)/other Ministries with special flight plans. 588 flights were  operated under 
Lifeline Udan operations by Air India, Alliance Air, Pawan Hans  Limited and  some private 
airlines till 28 th May, 2020 to transpor t approximately 1000 ton of cargo by the  Lifeline UDAN 
flights covering an aerial distance of 5,45,000 Kms. The focus  of the Lifeline  UDAN was on 
North Eastern region, the Islands and the hilly terrains. Lifeline UDAN  flights ensured quick 
movement of medical supplies, medical teams, setting up of COVID labs and 

19  
RTPCR machines across the country. These flights were also used to fly specialists, chemicals and 
equipment to Vishakapatnam after gas leak tragedy. 
 
12.1. The Committee applauds this timely and valuable, life saving initiative of the 
Ministry. The Committee wishes to place on record, its appreciation for the role of air  
carriers involved in the Lifeline UDAN operations, under the hub and spoke model, with  
seamless co-ordination between various agencies. 
 
Vande Bharat Mission (VBM) 
13. The Vande Bharat Mission (VBM) is the name given to the mission aimed at repatriation  
of lakhs of Indian nationals who were stranded and distressed in various parts of the world due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic. The Mission in volves repatriation of Indian nationals by air, sea and land  
routes. The VBM also enables individuals of various nationalities stuck in India to return to their  
respective countries and continues to do so. The State Governments have also played a crucial  
role in this exercise in as much as to ensure necessary quarantine and other arrangements. 
13.1. The Committee places on record its deep appreciation for this massive repatriation 
operation carried out by the Ministry. 
Unmanned Aircraft System (Drone) 
14. The Ministry has taken the following steps to regulate the operations of Drones and to  
promote the manufacturing of Drones in India under Atma Nirbhar Bharat and to facilitate  
training of Drone operators:- 
a) Draft Unmanned Aircraft System (UAS) Rules prepared. 
b) Draft Unmanned Aircraft System Traffic Management (UTM) Policy prepared. 
c) Digital Sky Platform (DSP) initiated to cover the entire range of activities like online  
registration, approval of flight path, post flight analysis etc. 
d) With a view to broadbase the training structure, permissions granted to various 
organisations such as Central/ State Governments, Universities, manufacturers, FTOs,  
Non- Scheduled Operators Permit holders (NSOPs), Scheduled Operators Permit holders  
(SOPs), Maintenance Training Organisations (MTOs) to undertake drone training. 
e) 15 DGCA approved FTOs have been permitted to undertake drone training. 
f) Online enlisting of Drone operating in India started in Jan 2020. Till 31st December, 2020, 
22,863 Drone Acknowledgement Number (DAN) have been issued. 
14.1. The Committee takes  note of  the steps taken  to establish  an UTM Ecosystem in  
India and hopes that the formulation of UTM Policy would facilitate Drone Traffic 

20  
Management Services for operation of Drones within the air traffic environment, in our air 
space, and that the UAS Rules would provide the requisite regulatory framework for 
Beyond Visual Line of Sight (BVLOS) operations, in the country. 
Drone Directorate 
15. The Secretary, during his powerpoint presentation before the Committee, stated that  a 
separate Drone Directorate, headed by a Deputy Director General along with a team of 12  
(twelve) other technical officers, has been set up in DGCA on 21st October, 2020. 
15.1. According to the Annual Report (2020-21) of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, 
SVAMITVA Scheme, a Central Sector Scheme has been launched by Hon‟ble Prime Minister 
of India on National Panchayat Day, i.e., 24th April, 2020 with the Ministry of Panchayati Raj  
(MoPR) as the nodal Ministry for implementation of the scheme. In the States, the R evenue 
Department/ Land Records Department will be the Nodal Department and shall carry out the  
scheme with the support of State Panchayati Raj Department. Survey of India shall work as the  
technology partner for implementation SOI -Survey of India (Technol ogy Partner of 
SVAMITVA Scheme) who is responsible for mapping using Drone Technology. Joint Inspection 
team of  DGCA headed by Drone Directorate submitted its report on 25.11.2020 to remove 
roadblock in  the SVAMITVA Scheme, using drone Technology for mappi ng land records 
(Village abadi) and issuing property card under SVAMITVA Scheme of Government of India. 
15.2.  The Committee opines that the setting up of Drone Directorate is a step forward in  
strengthening the Drone ecosystem of India, by way of addressi ng the delays in rolling out  
permission, managing Drone Training Schools and fast tracking Drone certifications. The  
Committee desires the Ministry to take necessary steps for the proper functioning of the  
Drone Directorate, which will help transform India to be a major global player in the arena 
of Drones. 
Digital Sky Platform 
16. The Digital Sky Platform project is aimed to develop an IT platform to enable the Drone  
ecosystem in India by enforcement of the DGCA CAR 1.0 digitally. The platform would provide 
features to bring different agencies on the same platform to enable the registration of Drones,  
flight planning, real time tracking, conflict management and flight log analysis to check for  
deviation from the approved flight plans. The system is envisaged to  divide the Indian airspace 
in red, yellow and green colour zones with respect to the no permission to fly drone, controlled  
permission to fly drones and approved zones for drone flying respectively. System would 
allow to add/ update the zones as per the requirements to address the dynamic need to permit 

21  
or deny the drone flying in a specific air space. It is also planned that the system would be able to capture 
the real time telemetry information from drones and also provide the inputs for the conflict  management 
of the Drone flights. 
16.1. The Committee takes note of the features of the Digital Sky Platform and would 
like to impress upon the Ministry, to take necessary steps to ensure that the project 
achieves its objectives, in an unhindered manner. 
Krishi Udan 
17. The Krishi Udan Scheme has been approved on 10 th September, 2020 to grow domestic  
and international air freight of agri-produce and to enhance share of Indian carriers in 
international movement of all types of cargo. It would help improve value realizatio n, especially 
in North-East and tribal districts through better integration and optimization  of agri-harvesting 
and air transportation and contributing to agri-value chain sustainability and resilience under  
different and dynamic conditions. 
17.1. The Secretary, while elaborating upon the Krishi Udan Scheme, stated that the Scheme  
stands converged with Operation Greens, through air freight subsidy of 50% for agri -perishables 
of NER States and 4 Himalayan States/UTs. The expansion of products covered, will boost 
Krishi Udan Scheme and improve air cargo transportation from  these States. The products 
covered under Operation Greens have been enlarged to include 22 perishables. 
17.2. The Committee notes that this Scheme would provide the much needed quick cargo  
services to cater to the huge demand in the domestic and international markets, for the  
farm products of the North -Eastern region and other remote areas of the country. The  
Committee is happy to note that the Scheme would ensure that perishable products fi nd 
good markets and market value, in and outside the country, which would otherwise have  
gone wasted, owing to lack of storage and connectivity. 
Sub-Group on Krishi Udan and Krishi Rail 
18. The Ministry has furnished the following details about the Sub-Groups:- 
(i) Para 23  (8) of Union Budget 2020-21 Speech of Hon‟ble Finance Minister  had 
announced as follows: “Krishi Udan will be launched by the Ministry of Civil Aviation on 
international and national routes. This will immensely help improve value realization  
especially in North-East and tribal districts”. 
(ii) In pursuance thereof, Secretaries in the Ministries of Agriculture & Farmers‟ Welfare  
and Civil Aviation and Chairman, Railway Board, had constituted an inter-agency 
Committee under the Chairpersonship of Additional Secretary, D/o Agriculture, 

22  
Cooperation & F armers‟ Welfare (AC&FW) on 6 th February, 2020 with the mandate to  
prepare their preliminary Concept  Note on the Budget announcements on Krishi Udan 
and Krishi Rail within three weeks of its constitution. This Committee constituted a Sub - 
Group each on Krishi Udan and Krishi Rail, to draw up  the broad  contours of the  
Concept Note. 
(iii) The two Sub-Groups, held a series of meetings besides holding stakeholder 
consultations, and drew up the respective draft Concept Notes. The Sub -Committee of  
D/o Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers‟ Welfare (AC&FW) reviewed the draft Concept 
Note on Krishi Rail on 26th February, 2020 and on Krishi Udan on 27th February, 2020. 
(iv) Further, these were reviewed by the inter -agency Committee of Secretaries on 3 rd 
March, 2020. With regard to Krishi Udan, 3 pilot projects were launched by the 
Committee, and these were  further fine-tuned in  the meeting of  the Sub-Committee of 
D/o Agriculture, Cooperation & Farmers‟ Welfare (AC&FW) on 12 th March, 2020, to  
cover (a) Guwahati and Agartala to rest o f India, Middle and Far East for Mushroom,  
Flowering plants and Cut-Flowers, Honey, Pineapple, Orange, Kiwi, Ginger, Honey, etc.; 
(b) Sikkim via Bagdogra/ Guwahati/ Delhi/ Kolkata to the rest of India for Organic  
Produce; and (c) Patna to Pune/ Mumbai/ Bengaluru for Litchis. 
(v) Coordination is ensured through VC meetings held by Senior Economic Adviser,  
MoCA/ CEO of AAICLAS with participation of D/o AC&FW, APEDA, airport cargo  
terminal operators, airlines, freight forwarders, etc., to draw up strategies for the 
movement of agri-perishables Krishi Udan Scheme across the country as well as abroad 
to (a) fast -track the implementation and facilitation of the pilot projects, and (b) resolve  
problems faced by various supply chains due to Covid -19 conditions, besides facilitating 
creation of new ones, especially in NER and tribal districts… ..................A unique 2-tier 
inter-Ministerial institutional mechanism has been set up for continuous policy direction  
and implementation of policies comprising of (i) Apex Group on Convergences  jointly 
chaired by Secretary (Civil Aviation) and Secretary (Agriculture) with  Secretaries of  
other Ministries/ Departments concerned for decisions on policy and regulatory aspects,  
and (ii) Focus Group on Operationalization and Implementation chaired by Senior 
Economic Adviser (MoCA) with membership at Joint Secretary level from Ministries/  
Departments concerned, has been constituted. 
18.1. The Committee appreciates the constitution of the Sub Groups and hopes that these  
Sub Groups would help address the bottle necks/ problems faced in the implementation of  
Krishi Udan and Krishi Rail, and ensure the success of the Schemes. 

23  
Public Private Partnership of Airports 
19. The Ministry shared the following details on the subject:- 
a) The Union Cabinet, on 08.11.2018, had accorded „In-principle‟ approval for 
leasing out six airports of Airports  Authority of India (AAI) viz., Ahmedabad, 
Lucknow, Mangaluru, Guwahati, Jaipur and Trivandrum for operation, management  
and development through PPP. 
b) Further, AAI Board has recommended for leasing out 06 more airports viz., 
Amritsar, Varanasi, Bhubaneswar, Indore, Raipur and Trichy for Operation, 
Management and Development under PPP. A decision has been taken to club each of  
the 6 airports with a nearby smaller airport for PPP. This  would require amendment 
of Airports Economic Regulatory Authority Act as the present Act provides for tariff  
determination for single airport and not for group of airports. AAI has been asked to  
proceed accordingly. 
19.1. In his presentation before the Committee, the Secretary apprised the Committee that six  
airports have been awarded and that AAI is working on the next round of leasing out of airports  
in Tier-II and Tier-III cities. 
19.2. On the concern being raised regarding transparency in the decision taken to privatize six 
airports, the Ministry clarified that the terms and conditions of the transaction of Public Private  
Partnership (PPP) of six airports were decided by the Empowered Group of Secretaries (EGoS)  
chaired by CEO, Niti Aayog and represented by the Secretaries of Ministry of Finance 
(Department of Economic Affairs, and Department of Expenditure) also. The Ministry of 
Finance and Niti Aayog have  finalized the contours of the bidding process for PPP of six  
airports. In order to ensure more competition and to give more flexibility to bidders, the 
following conditions, among others were stipulated:- 
i. No prior airport experience 
ii. No cap on number of airports 
iii. Per Passenger Fee as bidding parameter instead of revenue sharing. 
19.3. The Committee underlines the need for a comprehensive negotiation and guidelines, 
in the award of airports under PPP model. The Committee urges the Ministry to take note  
of the management model of Kochi International Airport at Nedumbassery, and 
analyze the advantages and liabilities of  such a model . The Ministry,  may, after such 
analysis, adopt such a concept, if the advantages outweigh the liabilities. The Committee, 
further, stresses upon the need to make sure that the guidelines regarding 

24  
operationalizing the new airports are unbiased, so that all parts of India are benefitted by 
the same.  
Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation 
20. The Ministry, in its written note, mentioned that TERI studied the Carbon Offsetting and 
Reduction Scheme for International Aviation (CORSIA) scheme and provided the first 
Inception Report. As per the Report, the scheme is likely to pose a huge challenge to the airlines 
in countries like India where the aviation market is still growing and the resources as well   as 
options for national actions are limited. The CORSIA involves significant additional 
obligations and costs for the airline operators and may put them at a competitive disadvantage  
vis-à-vis international airlines in other countries. In view of serious implications of CORSIA for 
the Indian airlines in the long term, it is useful to evaluate the impact of the scheme and analyse  
possible options, including administrative and  economic measures, that the Indian aviation 
industry and the Indian airline authorities should adopt to cope with the challenge of CORSIA. 
20.1. The Group of Secretaries recommended the following, with regard to change in Baseline  
and country-wise offsetting obligations and promotion of Bio-fuels:- 
i. For the calculation of offsetting requirement, CORSIA  requires the baseline val ue to be 
fixed based on the average emissions of 2019 and 2020. Postponing the baseline to two years  
preceding the mandatory phase (i.e. 2025 & 2026)for States who have opted not to participate in  
the pilot phase and the first phase, would make the Scheme fairer to airline operators of such  
States. 
ii. Responsibility of emission reduction should be borne by the States rather than the  
airlines. This may have several positive implications like the case where a Member state can  
allocate emissions amongst airlines according to national priorities as well as can use the 
economy wide market based trading mechanisms for offsets. During discussions in the Group, the 
Secretary (CA) highlighted the point that airline companies are corporate bodies which are fluid 
entities where unfavourable situations like bankruptcy or closure may take place. So, offsetting 
obligations being borne by the States would be more logical. The baseline emissions should be  
based on „Principle of Nationality‟ i.e., the nationals of India travelling abroad should be the 
basis of India‟s baseline rather than passengers travelling an Indian designated carrier. This is also 
consistent with the UNFCCC principles under which each country is held responsible for the  
production and regulation of greenhouse gases produced within its boundary. On  the same lines, 
each country should be held responsible for controlling the emissions  generated due to the  
international travel from its territory irrespective of the airlines used  by the travelers. The airline 

25  
based system stipulated under CORSIA is far removed from reality in this regard as there are 
a large number of airlines that carry more traffic from other countries than from their own country. 
iii. As regards bio-fuels, it was agreed that efforts should continue f or production of bio- 
fuels and making it available to airlines at a viable cost. The ICAO requirements for CORSIA  
eligible bio-fuels should also be kept in view. Ministry of Civil Aviation will keep in touch with  
the Ministry of Petroleum & Natural Gas an d the Ministry of New & Renewable Energy on this  
issue. 
iv. Vintage of Programmes for Eligible Carbon Units: It was agreed that India‟s member 
at TAB will continue to make efforts for ensuring that India‟s interests are protected with regard  
to the recognition of programmes and the vintage, and also with regard to MRV requirements. 
20.2. The Secretary, while flagging the concerns raised by various  quarters regarding 
CORSIA, apprised the Committee, that India has filed reservations with ICAO on the following  
issues [ICAO Assembly (2019)]:- 
 Opposed the present nature of the scheme and suggested that baseline should be fixed 
closer to when India and a number of other countries join in 2027. 
 Proposed Member State driven principle of stabilizing aviation emissions and attribute 
responsibility of emission reduction to Member States instead of airline operators. 
 Proposed that CORSIA Emissions unit eligibility criteria developed by ICAO should be 
consistent with the principles developed by UNFCCC. 
He further stated that a Working Group, with M/o Environment, Forest & Climate 
Change, M/o External Affairs and M/o Petroleum and Natural Gases, is exploring 
diplomatic ways to take up the concerns of the developing nations with regard to 
CORSIA and that the issue of CORSIA was discussed in the 11th BRICS Summit to build 
consensus. 
20.3. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, while deposing before the Committee, stated  
thus:- 
“It is a concern of  the international community that airlines are emitting greenhouse gases  
which need to be cont rolled. It is a good preposition but how do they control.  They say that we  
would restrict the pollution levels to what airlines have been permitting in the year 2019.  They 
say that this quota would be fixed for  airlines and only for  international travel. Our argument 
has been that a large number of Indians are travelling. Because Indians are travelling, airlines  
are making use of it.  So, in the international arena, our carriers account for only 15 per cent to  

26  
20 per cent and 80 per cent is carried by foreign carriers. So, Indians travelling abroad, this 
quota is going to foreign airlines.  As a result, what would happen is that after six years or eight  
years, they would say that if our airlines want to fly more -- because our polluting capacity has  
been restricted to 2019 -- we would have to buy carbon credits. It means our airlines would have  
to pay more money than other airlines, say, Emirates.  It is very surprising that the maximum  
credits are coming to airlines of the Gulf, whereas the maximum people are t ravelling from our 
country and we travel not only to Gulf, Indians travel long haul, USA and Europe.  That is what 
we have been trying to argue with them.  We say that it cannot be given to airlines.  It should be 
the national credit. If Indians are flying, t he credit should come to Indians. That is one point we  
have made.” 
20.4. The Committee recommends that urgent, substantive steps should be taken to allay  
the widespread concern/fear regarding serious adverse implications of CORSIA on the  
airlines in India. The C ommittee recommends the Ministry to ensure that India’s interests  
are protected at any cost, keeping in view the vital role played by the Civil Aviation sector  
in the development and growth of our economy.  The Committee desires that the concerns  
of India in this regard, should be raised at the diplomatic level effectively. 
Flying Training Organizations 
21. As per the Annual Report (2020-21) of the Ministry, the following steps have been taken, 
as part of fiscal, monetary and procedural reforms, with a view to l everage the idle capacity in  
Indian airports and create a congenial atmosphere for Flying Training Organizations (FTOs):- 
a. To begin with, 6 airports (Lilabari, Khajuraho, Belagavi, Kalaburgi, Jalgaon and Salem)  
have been permitted to allow the FTOs to opera te at their premises on the basis of  
payment of substantially rationalised concession fee by the FTOs. 
b. India‟s largest flying school IGRUA (Amethi, UP), has been permitted to start pilot training 
in Gondia and Gulbarga. 
c. IGRUA‟s operation and management is proposed to be handed over to a private operator 
on    a PPP basis for 30 years. 
21.1. The Secretary, during his deposition before the Committee, while elucidating upon the  
liberalized FTO Policy at six AAI airports, stated that minimum concession fee has been 
reduced from several crores to ₹15 lakhs per annum; actual fee is to be arrived at by competitive 
bidding; land and infrastructure will come back to AAI after the prescribed lease period of 25 
years; and that 15 DGCA approved FTOs have been permitted to undertake drone training. 
21.2. In reply to a query about Ministry‟s plans to make use of the non -operational airports for 

27  
Pilot Training Institutes, the Ministry has furnished the following details:- 
i. With a view to optimally utilize the unused infrastructure at AAI airpo rts and enhance 
the number of license pilots in the country, 6 airports (Lilabari, Khajuraho, Belagavi, 
Kalaburgi, Jalgaon and Salem) have been permitted to allow the FTOs to operate at their  
premises on the basis of payment of substantially rationalized c oncession fee by the  
FTOs. The concept of royalty (payment of revenue share by FTOs to AAI) has been  
abolished. 
ii. The Request For Proposal (RFP) for leasing of 06 airstrips has already been floated by  
AAI to invite bidders. Based on the outcome of this initi ative, it might be replicated at  
other airports. 
iii. As stated above, AAI has drastically reduced its minimum concession fee from several  
crores to INR 15 lakhs. AAI has also removed the payment of royalty. The concessions  
will help improve the financial sustainability of the FTOs. 
iv. India‟s largest flying school IGRUA (Amethi, UP), has been permitted to start pilot  
training in Gondia and Gulbarga to enhance flying hours which gets affected during  
winter months. 
v. These initiatives will provide the necessary training facilities for commercial pilot 
licensing within the country. This will result in generation of employment opportunities  
within the country and help in reversing the outflow of foreign exchange. 
21.3. On the issue of support extended to State Governments to o pen new FTOs, the 
following facts were placed before the Committee:- 
a. The Ministry does not provide any financial assistance or any other kind of assistance to  
the State Government to open FTOs. 
b. AAI has recently improvised its policy to promote FTOs. With a view to optimally utilise 
the unused infrastructure at AAI airports and enhance the number of license pilots in the  
country, 6 airports (Lilabari, Khajuraho, Belagavi, Kalaburgi, Jalgaon and Salem) have  
been permitted to allow the FTOs to operate at their  premises on the basis of payment of  
substantially rationalised concession fee by the FTOs. The concept of royalty (payment 
of revenue share by FTOs to AAI) has been abolished. 
c. The Request For Proposal (RFP) for leasing of 06 airstrips  has already been flo ated by 
AAI to invite bidders. Based on the outcome of this initiative, it might be replicated at  
other airports. 

28  
d. AAI has drastically reduced its minimum concession fee from several crores to INR 15  
lakhs. AAI has also removed the payment of royalty. The concessions will help improve  
the financial sustainability of the FTOs. 
21.3.1. In order to meet the training requirements for the future growth of aviation sector 
in the country, particularly with reference to the huge demand for trained pilots,  the 
Ministry should explore the possibility of creating a funding mechanism for promoting new  
FTOs. 
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) 
22. The Secretary apprised the Committee of the following steps taken/ proposed to be taken 
with regard to IGRUA:- 
 Capacity of IGRUA is being enhanced to produce 100 cadets per year. 
 An AME School is to be started. 1st batch is planned to commence in August, 2021. 
 1st  batch of the Drone training school has commenced from 11th February, 2021. 
 Private O&M operator at IGRUA through the PPP route. 
 
22.1. The Ministry has shared the following roadmap for IGRUA:- 
i. IGRUA‟s operation and management is proposed to be handed over to a private operator  
on a PPP basis for 30 years. This will help replace its ageing aircraft fleet, hire more  
instructors at market salaries, improve the simulator facilities and enhance the number of  
pilots passing out every year. 
ii. The matter is currently under process in consultation with IGRUA and M/s Deloitte, the  
Consultants cum Transaction Adviser. A note for Cabinet in this regard is to be moved 
for consideration and approval. 
iii. India‟s largest flying school IGRUA (Amethi, UP), has been permitted to start pilot  
training in Gondia and Gulbarga to enhance flying hours which get severely affected  
during winter months due to visibility issues. 
22.2. Further, the Ministry, in its written reply, informed that interactions with FTOs have 
been held. Draft Cabinet note in this regard is to be circulated shortly. IGRUA is in the process 
of acquiring two single engine trainer aircraf t. Further, there is requirement of 8 single engine 
and 2 multi-engine trainer aircraft. This may be brought in by the new operator to be selected 
through the PPP bidding process. 
22.3. The Committee appreciates the roadmap for IGRUA and earnestly hopes that the  
roadmap would be implemented at the earliest. 

29  
Aero Club of India (ACI) 
 
23. On the issue of eviction notice issued by AAI, to Aero Club of India, the Ministry  
informed that the Aero Club of India, a company incorporated under the Companies Act, 1956, 
is governed by the conditions and provisions contained in its Memorandum of Association and  
Article of Association. The Aero Club of India is not enlisted as an organization under the  
Government of India (Allocation of Business) Rules, 1961.There is no Government shareholding 
in the Aero Club of India. 
The budgetary allocation to ACI was made against the object head „Grants-in-aid to Aero  Club 
of India for development of Aero Sports ‟ under „Grants for creation of Capital Assets( Plan) ‟ 
under the Demands for Grants of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
Aero Club of India, in the past, has been provided grants in aid for development of aerosports.  
The grants were sanctioned to ACI for procurement of various aerosports equipment and 
activities. The sanction providing grants in aid to ACI for procurement of these 
equipment/related services was subject to certain specific conditions laid down in the sanctions  
issued in this regard. 
A proposal from ACI for the FY 2021 -22 seeking a total budgetary support of Rs 198 crore  had 
been received for the procurement of aircraft (for skydiving) and gliders & winches for 
aerosports, establishment of additional Flying Training Organisations and infrastructure, 
establishment of national aviation museum and procurement of trainer aircraft for flying training 
& simulators. In order to enable the Ministry to examine the proposal for budgetary support,  
certain information/clarification has been sought from ACI on 05.01.2021. The reply from ACI  
is still awaited. However, in order to meet the Ae ro sports activities in the country, a new  
budgetary head  (GIA to Institutions in Civil Aviation sector for Promotion / Development of  
Aero Sports) has been created for the FY 2021-22, with the allocation of Rs. 1.00 crore. 
23.1. The Committee would like the Min istry to follow up with ACI, their much awaited  
proposal for budgetary support. The Ministry may apprise the Committee about the 
response of ACI on this issue, at the earliest. 
23.2. The Committee takes note of the fact that training aircrafts and adventure spor ts 
equipment which were provided by the Aero Club of India to several State Governments  
including the State of Rajasthan, Bangalore Flying Club and IIT Kanpur, have been lying  
unutilized for several years, while the Aero Club of India has  been making effor ts to  
retrieve such aircrafts that are under-utilized or un-utilized by the State 

30  
Governments. The Committee recommends that ACI should be supported by the 
Government in retrieval of all such underutilized or unutilized aero sports assets provided 
by it for FTOs and development of aero sports, since they are Government property. 
23.3. The Committee takes note of the fact that Aero Club of India has worked under the  
purview of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. ACI has also figured prominently in the 
Outcome Budget a nd the Annual Report of MoCA. Over the years, the annual audited  
accounts of ACI, both in English and in Hindi, are placed in both Houses of Parliament. It  
also has a deemed status as an autonomous body under the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The  
Aero Club of India, which has a legacy and was responsible for licensing, even during the  
pre-independence days, has been  the primary organization promoting Flying Training  
Organizations (FTOs) across the country, by providing them infrastructural support by  
means of aircrafts and equipment provided  by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The 
Committee takes note of the update that the Aero Club of India had its official location and 
headquarters at the Safdarjung Airport for over thirty years. The ACI building was 
constructed on the leased land given to them by the Ministry of Tourism. It has been  
observed that on the expiry of the lease  period, despite performing semi -Government 
function of promoting the FTOs across the country, the Aero Club of India was served an  
eviction notice by imposing a penalty of non -extension of lease and thereafter, through a  
Court order, the eviction was initiated, claiming penalties. The Committee feels that since  
ACI is a body with the support of the Ministry of Civil Aviation itself, it dese rves that the 
official building be restored to it in recognition of  performing its role as a support and 
semi- autonomous body under the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Committee desires that 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation may review the matter and issue a ppropriate instructions to 
the AAI Board for re-allotment of the said premises to Aero Club of India. 
Maintenance Engineering Training School 
24. The Ministry has informed that it intends to impart basic aircraft maintenance training on  
Aircraft, Power plant a nd its system. Total number of DGCA approved Aircraft Maintenance  
Engineering (AME) schools at present is 48 with a total capacity of 3,255 trainees. The AME  
schools are being strengthened, with a view to meet the increasing demand of aircraft 
maintenance personnel. Several initiatives including the modifications in the examination 
pattern, standardization of syllabus, initiation of graduation programme for aircraft maintenance  
personnel, revising of granting of licenses are being taken. Upgradation of AME schools 
will also be undertaken, by affiliating them with Rajiv Gandhi National Aviation University 

31  
(RGNAU). The AME school is expected to commence at IGRUA in August 2021, to develop  
competent/ skilled manpower for maintenance of aircraft , thus enhancing  the competency and  
employability of students in the aviation industry. In this arrangement, part of practical training 
is to be imparted by the Aircraft Maintenance Organization (AMO). 
24.1. The Committee takes note of the policy initiatives made by the Ministr y for Pilot  
Training Institutes, Flying Training Organizations and Maintenance Engineering Training 
Schools in the country. The Committee hopes that these initiatives would positively address 
the noticeable shortage of pilots and type rated commanders; and  other technical 
personnel for the Civil Aviation sector in the country. The Committee calls upon the 
Ministry to  facilitate the Pilot Training Institutes, Flying Training Organizations and 
Maintenance Engineering Training Schools, in executing the onerous responsibility of 
tapping the manpower potential and skilled workforce available in the country. 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhauling (MRO) facilities in India 
25. In the written reply furnished by the Ministry, it has been stated that several reforms have 
been undertaken to reduce the tax incidence on Indian MROs, ease  the compliance burden and  
make them competitive vis-à-vis global MRO players. Some of these include: 
i.  Under the Atmanirbhar Bharat Abhiyan, AAI has come up with an MRO policy with  
highly liberalized land rentals. Royalty (revenue share payment to AAI by MRO) has been 
abolished. This may lead to enhanced business for Indian MROs and help reverse the  
outflow of business, employment and foreign exchange to foreign MROs. 
ii. Custom duty waiver applicable to airlines extended to MROs including waiver of 
customs duty on tools, toolkits and spares imported by MROs. 
iii. Input Tax Credit has been permitted for discharging GST on inter -state stock transfersof  
aircraft engines, parts and spares. 
iv. GST on direct MRO co ntracts has been reduced from 18% to 5% with full Input Tax  
Credit from 1 April 2020. 
v. Transactions sub -contracted by foreign OEMs/MRO to domestic MRO are treated as  
„exports‟ with zero-rated GST from 1 April 2020. 
vi. Relaxed restriction on utilization of duty-free parts from one year to three years,; 
 
vii. Extended stay in India of foreign aircraft for entire duration of MRO work or 6 months,  
whichever is lesser,; 

32  
viii. Revised the Notification to enable export of serviceable parts,; 
 
ix. 100% Foreign Direct Investment permitted via automatic route for MRO; 
 
x. Liberalised policy for borrowing and lending in Foreign Currency and Rupees on 
competitive terms for MROs. 
This would attract MRO business to India which would result in savings for airlines in 
maintenance and also promote India as an aircraft maintenance hub. 
25.1. In response to a vital query raised by a Member of the Committee, as to how much time 
it will take for the Ministry to get MRO in the country, the Ministry has, inter alia, stated that:- 
Boeing India‟s has collaborated with Air Works for making India a Repair Development  
and Sustainment hub. The hub aims to grow capabilities in India in the areas of heavy  
maintenance, component repairs, training and skilling of IAF and IN maintainers. 
 Airbus has signed a Memorandum o f Understanding (MoU) with GMR Group to  
explore collaboration opportunities across aviation services, technologies and 
innovation. 
 Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) has signed MoU with Air India 
Engineering Services Limited (AIESL) for carrying out MRO a ctivities for civil  
aircrafts and defence aircrafts as a part of civil-defence convergence in MRO. 
 New investment seen in hangar-based maintenance facilities at Kochi and 
Hyderabad airports (02 hangars each) to commence operations by Feb -March 
2021. This includes the first set of two inflatable hangers which have been 
contracted by Indian MRO thus swiftly adding to the airframe MRO capacity. 
 New Business Aviation Terminal developed at IGI, Delhi Airport with common - 
user MRO facilities. 
 SAFRAN is expected to start engine repairs in India by 2022. 
 Pratt & Whitney has started engine repair in association with Air India 
Engineering Services Limited (AIESL). 
25.2. The Committee takes cognizance of the immense potential that India has, in 
offering MRO facilities in its  soil. However, the country has not yet been able to fully 
exploit the opportunities available in this sector. It would be a huge loss for the country, if 
we do not  tap the vast technical and skill base, at hand, in the country. There is urgent 
need for th e creation of a congenial environment in the country to cater to the 
requirements of the sector, which provides benefits  in terms of jobs, prosperity and boost 

33  
to the economy. The  Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry should 
give requisite focus on the issues presently faced in the MRO sector and chalk out effective 
as well as strategic  steps, to ensure that India evolves into a key international player  in 
offering MRO facilities. 
25.3. The Committee also  deliberated on  the provision  of a Fl ight Training School  and an 
MRO Centre in Rajasthan. The matter regarding availability of pre -Independence air strips was  
deliberated upon. 
25.3.1. The Committee would like to urge the Ministry to analyze the prospects and take  
necessary favourable action thereon. The Committee realizes the huge potential of such air  
strips and recommends that the Ministry should examine the feasibility of making 
available, such air strips, to FTOs who are willing to open their schools in those areas. 
Rationalization of FTO and MRO charges 
26. As per the Annual Report of the Ministry, the charges were rationalized to encourage  
setting up of FTOs and MROs at AAI Airports i n line with NCAP – 2016 and Hon‟ble PM‟s 
self- reliant India. India has lot of potential to become global  hub for FTOs and MROs and has 
the required resources to address the ever growing domestic and global demand. The 
rationalization of charges will give impetus to provision of the required infrastructure for setting 
up of state-of- the- art FTOs and MROs. The proposal for setting up of FTOs at AAI Airport has 
already been invited and has drawn lot of interest from the Industry. The Committee welcomes 
this initiative of the Ministry. 
Domestic Aircraft Manufacturing 
27. The Secretary, in his deposition before the Committee, stated that Customs Duty on  
parts/engines for manufacture of aircraft by PSUs of Ministry of Defence has been reduced from  
2.5% to 0%,  in order  to promote Aatmanirbharta and  to help  grow aviation eco -system in 
domestic aircraft manufacturing. 
27.1.   The Committee is gratified to note the timely action taken by the Ministry to 
promote domestic aircraft manufacturing. 
Aircraft financing/ leasing 
28.  The Secretary, while making a presentation before the Committee, submitted that four  
crucial tax incentives viz., tax holiday for capital gains incomes of aircraft leasing company; tax  
exemptions for aircraft lease rental paid to foreign lessor; tax incentive for re -location of foreign 
funds in Indian Financial System Code (IFSC); and tax exemptions to investment division 

34  
of foreign banks located in IFSC, have been provided to make India a hub for aircraft financing/leasing. 
He added that the following are the Tax Reforms completed so far and work in  progress, in respect of  
aircraft leasing:- 
(i) 10 out of 15 consecutive years tax holiday to IFSC based leasing units. 
(ii) Income on disposal of aircraft by aircraft leasing unit in IFSC is not taxable. (Finance 
Bill, 2021) – provided commencement of operation is before 31st March, 2024. 
(iii) Income earned by Non-Resident lessor on leasing aircraft to IFSC based lessee is not 
taxable. (Finance Bill, 2021) 
(iv) Payment of interest by IFSC-based lessor to Non-Residents is exempt. 
(v) Non-applicability of MAT provision under the Income Tax. 
(vi) Stamp duty exemption by Government of Gujarat. 
28.1. He also furnished the below mentioned Regulatory and Non -Tax Reforms, that have 
been completed so far and the work in progress:- 
(i) IEC waived 
(ii) GR Waiver for IDERA and all other termination of lease agreement 
(iii) GR Waiver on end-of-lease re-export of aircraft in fully or partly knocked down 
condition 
(iv) DAP2020 (envisages inclusion of leasing as a category of acquisition) 
(v) Insurance / Pension Funds participation on aircraft leasing. 
28.2. The Committee hopes that the steps taken by the Ministry will give the much 
needed impetus to aircraft financing/leasing in the country. 
Airspace Control 
29. As regards the ownership of the domain for controlling air space, the Ministry informed  
that the Airspace is a national asset under domain of Government of India. Ai rports Authority of 
India (AAI) is responsible for provision of Air Traffic Services (ATS) in civil airspace in India.  
In addition, Military is responsible for provision of services in notified airspace under military  
control. In the past, about 40% of the  airspace was unavailable for civilian use. This resulted in  
aircraft taking circuitous routes to reach their destinations – leading to inefficient use of fuel and 
time along with avoidable  extra expenditure. As part of „Atma Nirbhar Bharat‟, IAF has agree d 
to release these portions of airspace for civilian use. This has led to significant savings in flight  
time, fuel usage and reduction in carbon emission. The potential savings to the airlines will be 

35  
to the tune of Rs.1000 crores per annum. The overall benefit to the aviation ecosystem will be potentially 
much higher. 
29.1. The Ministry has informed that a Coordination Committee was accordingly set up 
between AAI and IAF to enhance the airspace availability and optimize the use of  airspace 
without compromising the air security. 
This resulted into: 
i. Significant savings in flight time, fuel usage and reduction in carbon emissions. 
ii. Potential savings to the airlines to the tune of Rs.1000 crores per annum. 
iii. The benefit of reduced cost and flight time to the passengers. 
iv. Overall benefit to the aviation ecosystem. 
29.2.  The Committee hopes that the Flexible Use of Airspace (FUA) strategy between civil  
and military users, will render an array of benefits and sustainability to airlines, by saving 
flight time and reducing airline operational costs. 
30.  The Ministry has  further informed that the Airspace Review Committee,  constituted 
under the Chairpersonship of Joint Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, aims to review the  
existing restricted/danger/prohibited airspace and serves as a platform of coordination among the 
representatives of Airports Authority of India, Indian Air Force, Indian Army, Indian Navy,  
Indian Coast Guard, HAL and DGCA. As a consequence of the efforts of the Committee, 32  
Conditional Routes (CDR) have been activated on daily basis as per the agreement between AAI 
and IAF. The proposal of AAI to activate another 36 CDRs is also under consideration of IAF.  
Moreover, AAI has planned to propose 50 more CDRs by March, 2021. Further, upper airspace  
of 46 out of 48 IAF  Restricted Areas converted as Temporary Reserved Areas. The Committee 
appreciates this initiative of the Ministry. 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) 
31. According to the Ministry, the Airports Authority of India (AAI) is consistently 
endeavouring with all the required programs & SOPs in line with the Gove rnment‟s Directive & 
ICAO initiatives to meet the commitment to conserve environment/resources and to reduce the  
adverse impact on society, community and ecosystem, thus contributing to National Action Plan 
for Climate Change (NAPCC). 
AAI is focusing on energy conservation by  exploring alternative solutions for generating green  
energy by installing and operating roof top & ground mounted solar power plants. Around 44.37  
MWP capacity Solar Power Plants have been installed at its various Airports and 12 MWp Solar  
Energy is being procured through open access. Work is in progress for around 16.26 MWp  
capacity Solar Power Plants. AAI has generated 480 lakh units and sourced 2.26 lakh units 

36  
through open access, translating to benefit of ₹ 29 crore in the year 2020. This has also resulted 
into reduction in Carbon Emission of 57,900 tCO2 per annum. Further, the AAI has signed MoU 
with NVVN (NTPC Vidhyut Vyapar Nigam), a subsidiary of NTPC Ltd, to esta blish solar power 
plants and purchase solar power through open access to make 100% green powered airports in  
phased manner. AAI and NVVN will also jointly work  towards supporting Govt.  of India 
initiatives for adoption of electric vehicles by creation of p ublic charging infrastructure and  
promoting usage of electric vehicles at airports. A Plan will be developed for adoption of electric  
vehicles on city side and airside at various airports and provision of Electric Vehicle Charging  
Stations. 
As per Energy Conservation Act, various energy saving measures have been taken up 
consistently under identified short term and long term measures through regular Energy Audits by 
specialized agencies. The review audits mandated to be carried out after three years to assess the  
effectiveness of implementation measures of previous audits have already been completed for 33  
airports and review audit of 11 airports was completed in 2020. 
AAI has already completed replacement of conventional light fixtures with LED fittings, in phase 
I in 23 airports, with expenditure of ₹ 16 crores approximately. In phase II, the work at 62  
airports with an expenditure of ₹ 24.41 crores, has been taken up by M/s E ESL. While the work  
at six airports are completed in the year 2020, the replacement at 52 airports has already been  
completed and work is in progress at four airports. 
31.1. The Committee is pleased to note that AAI has set a new benchmark in its 
endeavour to reduce carbon footprint. The Committee exhorts AAI to continue its 
efforts to conserve environment, to the extent possible, and to reduce the adverse impact of 
carbon emissions on the global ecosystem, in line with the national as well as global climate 
change initiatives. 
32. The Committee, during its deliberations, took cognizance of various ranges of facilities 
available at airports, including the Facial Recognition Technology (FRT) employed. The 
Committee desires the Ministry to ensure that FRT employed at th e airports is infallible.  
The Committee also urges upon the Ministry to provide all facilities of international 
standards, in its airports. 
Adequate connectivity of airports with roads and railways 
33. The Committee has, time and again, been pointing towards p oor connectivity of airports  
with roads and railways. This inadequacy has proved to be a stumbling block in the connectivity  
domain of the logistics, created for hassle free and seamless movement of man and 
materials, 

37  
across the length and breadth of the country. 
33.1. The Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure that requisite synergy is 
achieved between/amongst the concerned Ministries/Departments, so that airports are well  
connected with other means of transport and tourists/flyers reach their destinations , from 
the airports, in a smooth and safe manner. 
Implementation of SKYBOOKS360 System 
34. The Airports Authority of India (AAI) has signed an agreement with Chandigarh 
International Airport (CHIAL)  for providing SKYBOOKS360 - a comprehensive e-business 
solution for invoicing and accounting. Skybooks360 is a flagship  product of  AAI (Airports 
Authority of India) for Management of Airports operations that improve service, reduce cost,  
manage security & increase efficiency at airports. SkyBooks360 is a unique system to provide 
an Integrated E-Business Solution to Airport Operators. It serves as a comprehensive end to end  
solution for invoicing, financial management, accounting services and reporting, with interactive 
dash board reporting, combining all aviation  related complex processes, on a single platform.  
Furthermore, this sophisticated service can be web -based, meaning no heavy IT implementation  
with zero down time, ensuring prompt and accurate accounting and reporting of diverse business  
and financial management needs, on real time basis. SkyBooks360 is an International Financial  
Reporting Standards (IFRS) compliant tool. 
34.1. The Committee recognizes the utility of SKYBOOKS360 System as a unique 
customized enterprise resource planning solution to provide an integrated e -business to  
airport operators and air navigation service providers and hopes that it would provide  
seamless and integral management of core business processes. 
AIR SEWA 
35. The Committee has been given to understand that Air Sewa is an initiative of Ministry of 
Civil Aviation, launched in 2016, to offer passengers a convenient and hassle-free air travel 
experience. Air Sewa platform brings various aviation stakeholders, like airports, airlines, 
DGCA, BCAS etc., on a common platform for  redressal of air traveller‟ s grievances. It works 
through an  interactive web portal (airsewa.gov.in) and mobile app for both Android and iOS 
platforms that  include a mechanism for grievance redressal, checking flight status/schedule 
information, airport information and FAQS. Air Sewa is planned to have additional features like 
escalation of the grievances, transfer of the grievances amongst stakeholders, mobile app for the 
nodal officer, maps for select airports and dashboards in future release. 
35.1. While appreciating the initiative of the Ministry, the Committee recommends that 

38  
the grievances of passengers should be addressed in a time bound manner. The Committee 
desires that the Air Sewa Platform should be upgraded periodically, so that it fulfills the  
dynamic requirements of the air passengers. The Committee underlines the need for 
formulating the desired SOP for the purpose. 
Digi Yatra 
36. In the Annual Report of the Ministry, it has been stated that c onsidering the growth 
projections, its direct impact on the passen ger journey, the cost of  Infrastructure and the impact 
on the speed and efficiency of passenger processes, Ministry of  Civil Aviation has taken up a 
key initiative to re -imagine domestic air travel in India by looking  beyond the conventional 
„build a bigger Airport to manage more Passengers‟, to look for Innovation and technology for 
better and cost-effective solutions. One of the key initiatives in this direction is „ Digi Yatra‟ 
for a seamless, hassle -free and paperless journey experience to  every domestic air traveller in 
India. Using cutting edge Identity Management and „Face recognition‟ technologies, it aims to 
simplify the passenger processes at various check points in  the airport right from the terminal 
entry gate, check -in/ bag drop, security check a nd boarding gates. With Digi Yatra, passengers 
will no longer need to show their tickets/ boarding passes and  their physical Identity cards at 
many of the check points at the airport. This will lead to reduced  waiting time in queues, faster 
processing times and simpler processes. 
36.1. The Ministry has informed that the cost of establishing and operating Digi Yatra Central  
platform for 7 years is about ₹ 60/- crores. Due to the financial constraints faced by all operators, 
the proposal is under revision for an App based ID management to reduce the cost as well 
as allay the issues of data privacy and data protection in case o f centralized storage of data. 
Mumbai International Airport Limited (MIAL) had reservations to join the Digi Yatra 
Foundation JVC. However, after repeated consultation at different levels, MIAL has agreed to 
join the platform,  with their reservation about consideration of the points they have raised with 
regard to identity  verification at entry gate. There are still issues like reluctance on the part of 
Airlines; budget  constraints on account  of Covid-19; and  delay in implementation  due to 
lockdown. 
36.2. The Com mittee, while appreciating the initiative of the Ministry, accentuates the  
need to ensure data privacy and data protection, in the process of implementation of Digi  
Yatra. 
Seaplane Operations in India 
37. The Ministry has  informed about  introduction of a new m ode of transportation  i.e., 
seaplane operations from water aerodromes under UDAN (Ude Desh ka Aam Nagrik), under  

39  
which the interested Airlines, based on their assessment and commercial viability, participate 
in the bidding under the Scheme. Under the Schem e, water bodies identified through transparent bidding 
process are developed under „Revival of unserved and underserved airports/water aerodromes etc. ‟ 
scheme for sea plane operations. This will also help connecting remote/tourist  areas and reduces travel 
time. To promote viability of RCS operation, VGF and other concessions/incentives are extended to 
SAOs by State Govt./ Central Govt. and Airport Operators. Airports Authority of India (AAI) has 
awarded 28 seaplane routes connecting 12  Water Aerodromes acro ss the country. RCS route between 
Sabarmati River Front & Statue of  Unity has commenced on 31 st October, 2020. AAI requested several 
States to identify potential  water bodies for conduct of Pre -Feasibility Study for seaplane  operations. A 
Multi-Disciplinary Team with officials from AAI, DGCA and Spicejet was formed to conduct the Study. 
Since 2018, based on State Govt./ UT request Pre-Feasibility Study for development of Water 
Aerodromes has been conducted across 10 nos. States/UT for a total of 31 nos. loc ations. Out of  these 
prefeasibility studies conducted, presently, 12 nos. Water Aerodromes are being developed  under RCS 
UDAN by 2021 -22 as routes have been awarded to & from these aerodromes under  UDAN 3.0, 3.1 & 
4.0. The development of these Water Aerodr omes will be done by State Govt.  in consultation with AAI 
and Capital Expenditure will be borne under UDAN Scheme. The first  Seaplane Operations under thi s 
scheme was inaugurated by Hon ‟ble Prime Minister of India on  31st October, 2020 for Sabarmati 
Riverfront - Statue of Unity route. Airports Authority of India, the implementing agency, has awarded 12 
Water Aerodromes under RCS -UDAN. Ministry of  Civil Aviation has seized with the issue and have 
been holding regular meeting with the stakeholders for expeditious development of infrastructure of 
Water Aerodromes under revival of airports/heliports/water aerodromes scheme for Seaplane Operations 
under the UDAN  Scheme. Seaplane Operations under the UDAN scheme have already been 
operationalized from 02 Water Aerodromes namely Statue of Unity, Kevadia to Sabarmati River Front. 
37.1. The Committee takes note of the innovative initiatives taken  by the Ministry to  
promote Seaplane operations in the country. Needless to say, the Seaplane services will  
revolutionize the nation’s regional connectivity. The Committee desires that the Ministry  
should ensure that the necessary amenities, matching up to  international standards for  
Seaplane operations, such as terminal buildings, facilitation counters, check -in counters,  
modern ticketing methods, food counters, motels, shopping facilities etc. are provided, for  
the smooth operations of Seaplanes. 
37.2. The Comm ittee also underlines the urgent need to formulate a ‘Seaplane Policy’.  
The Committee desires the Ministry to conduct a feasibility study for landing sea planes in  
Rajasthan and furnish the same to the Committee, including the action taken thereon. 

40  
Skill Development/ Training 
38. The Ministry has furnished in its reply, the following key issue of skill training 
partnership with the private sector:- 
a. Aerospace & Aviation Sector Skill Council (AASSC) is the apex skill development body 
in the Aerospace and Aviation sector. AASSC is responsible for bridging the gap 
between supply and demand of skilled manpower in the Aerospace and Aviation domain.  
It achieves this through an ever -expanding network of accredited private skill training  
partners and assessment agencies. 
b. There are currently more than 80 accredited Private Skill Training Centres and 3 Private  
Assessment Agencies which are providing aviation and aerospace skill training to 
aspiring youth across various districts in India. 
c. There are 32 Flying Training Organisations (FTOs) and 48 Aircraft Maintenance 
Engineering (AME) schools in India. Majority of them are owned by private entities. 
d. The Government does not establish any skill centre but provide full support and 
facilitation to AASSC. 
38.1. The Secretary, during his  deposition before the Committee, while elaborating upon the  
creation of more avenues in the aviation sector, highlighted the following efforts made regarding  
Skill Development:- 
(i) Standardization of syllabus and other structural reforms in Aircraft. 
(ii) Maintenance Engineering School is underway to ensure the employability of the  
students. 
(iii) Reforms in Flying training Organisations are being undertaken with a view to  
double pilots trained in India from 350 to about 700 pilots a year. 
(iv) Faster clearances by DGCA without compromising on safety. 
38.2. The Committee recognizes the fact that the Indian aviation industry is one of the  
fastest growing markets in the world and that India has a vast talent pool of skilled 
manpower. Initiatives such as ‘Make in India’ campaign and ‘ Atmanirbhar’ campaign 
have given a  huge boost to industry players. The focus on indigenization in the Civil 
Aviation sector has created a high demand for good technical talent and skill development. 
The Committee,  therefore, underlines the need for better interventions for skill 
development/training in the  country, to augment the skills of available manpower. The 
Committee recommends the Ministry to formulate futuristic plans for devising tailor-made 
technical courses for skill  development, training  and res earch, in  consultation with the 

41  
private sector. The  Committee is of the considered opinion that the Ministry should 
endeavour to incorporate international best practices, in the area of skill development. 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) 
39. Members of the Committe e have, repeatedly, been raising serious concerns about the  
high cost of ATF prevailing in the country and the resultant exorbitant ticket prices prevailing in  
various sectors of air travel. In its written reply on the above stated concern, the Ministry ha s 
furnished the following status about the cost of ATF:- 
(a) M/o Civil Aviation has requested M/o Finance  to include Aviation Turbine Fuel  
(ATF) in the ambit of Goods and Service tax (GST) with full input tax credit at the  
earliest. It has been proposed that t he GST rate may be no higher than @ 18% on  
larger aircraft (on par with AvGas and Bunker Fuel) and @ 5 % on smaller aircraft  
and freighters (weight less than 40 tonnes), while keeping GST rates on air transport  
services unchanged. Support of various State Governments for this proposal has also  
been sought. 
(b) In the interregnum, it has been proposed to provide Central Excise relief by reversing  
the duty rate hike of March 2016, i.e. now reducing it from 11% to 8% for larger  
aircraft, including freighter aircra ft, with Maximum Take -off Weight (MTOW) of 40  
tonnes and more. For aircraft with MTOW of less than 40 tonnes, 5% of Central  
Excise/ VAT rate in the pre-GST regime has been proposed to be restored. 
(c) It has also been proposed to remove the import restrictions  on ATF and making it  
freely importable by Indian airlines in order to promote ease of doing business and  
providing flexibility to domestic carriers. 
(d) In order to uphold affordability of air passenger and sustainability of air cargo 
transportation as per th e National Civil Aviation Policy, 2016 and to rationalise the  
billing mechanism of Fuel Throughput (Airport Operator) Charge levied by Airport  
Operators on ATF, it has been decided to discontinue levy of this charge in any  
manifestation at all airports, airstrips and heliports across India with immediate effect. 
AERA or M/o Civil Aviation as the case may be have been desired to take into  
account the amount in this revenue stream and duty compensate the airport 
operators/AAI by suitably recalibrating other t ariffs during their determinations of  
airport tariffs. Most State Governments have reduced VAT on ATF for aircraft 
operated in accordance with the requirements of RCS -UDAN scheme. In some cases, 
VAT on scheduled and non-scheduled aircraft of MTOW of 40 tons and less or even 

42  
of MTOW of more than 40 tonnes has been reduced. 
 
The Ministry has added that the State Governments have reduced VAT/Sales Tax on ATF drawn  
on RCS  airports to 1% or less for a period of 10 years. On non -RCS-UDAN operations also,  
various State Governments have reduced VAT/Sales Tax on ATF to within 5% {e.g., Andhra  
Pradesh, Assam, Chandigarh, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat (at some airports),Haryana, Jharkhand,  
Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, T elangana, 
Uttar Pradesh (at some airports), and West Bengal}. 
In so far as building consensus among States to bring ATF under the ambit of GST is concerned,  
M/o Civil Aviation has already requested all States and UT Administrations to support the  
proposal to bring ATF under the ambit of GST as a matter of extreme urgency whenever the  
matter is placed by the M/o Finance on the agenda of the GST Council meeting. 
39.1. The Ministry has shared its approach, through the following measures, for reduction in  
taxes and airport charges:- 
(a) Fuel Throughput (Airport Operator) Charge levied by Airport Operators on ATF was 
eliminated w.e.f. 15th January, 2020 at all airports across India. 
(b) Central Excise on ATF was reduced from 14% to 11% w.e.f. 11th October, 2018. 
(c) Central Excise  duty at a reduced rate of 2% is leviable on ATF drawn by passenger 
operators as well as cargo operators from Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) airports 
for an initial period of three years from the date of notification. 
(d) State Governments have reduced VAT /Sales Tax on ATF drawn on RCS airports to 1% 
or less for a period of 10 years. 
(e)  On non -RCS-UDAN operations also, various State Governments have reduced 
VAT/Sales Tax on ATF to within 5% {e.g., Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Chandigarh, 
Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat (at some airports), Haryana, Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, 
Maharashtra, Nagaland, Odisha, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Uttar 
Pradesh (at some airports), and West Bengal}. 
The Ministry has  added that open access  fuel farm infrastructure develop ment at airports has 
been encouraged for enhancing competitive delivery of fuel supplies to air transport operations  
from Indian airports. 
In order to ensure the overall cost -competitiveness of air transport operations of India -registered 
air carriers vari ous cost elements other than ATF are also  being addressed simultaneously,  
besides providing avenues for enhancing their revenue streams from passenger and air cargo  
operations by connecting unserved and underserved regions. This is amply borne out by the 

43  
unprecedented and continuous growth and development of India‟s aviation sector during the last  
five years coupled with the resilience and rebound to near normalization seen in the last one year  
in domestic and air cargo operations after the unforeseen global Covid-19 pandemic. 
Further, in order to bring coherence and simplicity in  tax regime, M/o Civil Aviation has 
requested the M/o Finance to bring ATF under the ambit of GST with the following proposal:- 
(a) Applicable GST rate of no more than 12% on ATF with full ITC. 
(b) Output tax on sale of tickets both on business and economy air passenger transport  
services may be levied uniformly @ 12%. 
(c) Output tax on other services (viz. air cargo and ancillary services including catering, add - 
ons, etc.) may be levied @12%. 
(d) Airlines may be allowed full ITC for GST paid on all goods and services. 
M/o Finance has informed that as per Article 279A (5) of the Constitution, the GST Council 
shall recommend the date on which the GST be levied on ATF, besides petroleum crude, high  
speed diesel, petrol, and natural  gas. As per section 9(2) of CGST Act, inclusion of these  
products in GST will require recommendation of the GST Council. 
39.2. The Committee takes serious note of the high ATF prices prevailing in the country.  
The Committee welco mes the steps taken by State Governments in reducing the VAT on  
ATF for the flights operated under UDAN Scheme. The Committee is concerned to note  
that the State Governments have shown reluctance to reduce the VAT on ATF for other  
flights. The Ministry may  follow up and deliberate  this issue with the State Governments,  
in order to bring much needed relief and help, to the air passengers, and the Aviation  
Sector. 
40. The Ministry has conceded that it strongly supports bringing ATF under the ambit of  
Goods and Services Tax (GST) at the earliest at GST rates which are comparable globally, with  
full input tax credit (ITC). This measure would address the high tax incidence of ATF and  
provide immediate relief to airlines whose finances are under severe stress due to the curtailment 
of international and domestic passenger movements resulting from the Covid-19 pandemic. 
M/o Civil Aviation has already requested M/o Finance to bring ATF under the ambit of GST.  
M/o Finance, in its reply dated 8th August 2020, stated that as per Article 279A (5) of the 
Constitution, the GST Council shall recommend the date on which the GST be levied on ATF, 
besides petroleum crude, high speed diesel, petrol, and natural gas. As per section 9(2) of CGST 
Act, inclusion of these products in GST will require recommendation of the GST Council. The 

44  
GST Council, so far, has not made any recommendation for inclusion of ATF under GST. M/o  
Finance has also noted that the issue has wider ramifications for States. 
40.1. The Committee is of the considered view that the issue of inclusion of ATF under  
GST should be pursued vigorously, by the Ministry, with the GST Council. The Committee 
hopes that the GST Council will consider the proposal favourably. 
Development of airport infrastructure 
 
41. The Secretary submitted the following facts regarding the growth of Indian civil aviation  
sector:- 
 Indian aviation sector has consistently clocked double-digit growth in last few years 
 
 India‟s domestic passenger traffic has more than doubled from around 61 million in FY 
2013-14 to around 137 million in 2019-20, registering a growth of over 14% per annum 
 International passenger traffic has grown from 47 million in FY 2013-14 to around 67 
million in FY 2019-20, registering a growth of over 6% per annum 
 India is currently the third largest domestic passenger market and is expected to become 
the third largest overall (including domestic and international pax) by the year 2024 
41.1. The Committee desires the Ministry to develop a comprehensive, strategic and 
futuristic Master Plan for the d evelopment and expansion of airports in the country, to  
meet the ever growing demand for brand new and better airports. The Committee  urges 
the Ministry to ensure that adequate parking space and slots are available at the airports.  
The Committee would like the Ministry to formulate necessary policies, schemes and 
guidelines, to attract much needed investment for airport projects. 
41.2. The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its 276th Report, for ensuring 
sufficient space for commercial shops, while granting approval for new airports. Further, 5 
Star/3 Star hotels and multiplexes should be constructed near the new airports. The 
Committee also desires that extra land, if any, should not be sold and should be kept for  
future developmental activities. 
Development of Airports 
42. The Ministry in its written reply, has stated that the land for development of an airport is  
handed over to AAI by the respective State Government  free of cost and free from all 
encumbrances. Generally, issues like repulsion from locals for compensation, various 
clearances/NOC, litigations related to land ownership etc. are faced by the State Governments 

45  
in acquiring the land for development of the airport. 
42.1. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should co-ordinate with the 
concerned stakeholders/ entities and sort out issues concerning compensation, clearances  
and litigation, at the earliest. The Committee expects the Ministry to furnish the details of  
the specific action taken in this regard. 
Necessary Navigation Aids at all Airports 
43. The Ministry has apprised the Committee that upgradation of infrastructure at an airport 
is a continuous process and AAI undertakes upgradation from time to time, depending on the  
availability of land, commercial viability, traffic demand etc. AAI has also taken steps to 
upgrade Instrument Landing System (ILS) from CAT-I to CAT -II/III(B) to sustain flight 
operations at major airports which are affected by low visibility for prolonged period due to fog.  
So far, CAT - II/III(B) ILS has been made operational at Delhi (IGIA 03 Runways), Bengaluru  
(BIAL 02 Runways), Kolkata (NSCBIA 01 Runway), Jaipur, Amritsar and Lucknow Airports.  
CAT-II ILS has been made operational at Kolkata (NSCBIA 01 Runway). 
43.1. The Committee emphasizes the imminent need to employ modern tech nologically 
advanced navigation aids and facilities at all airports in the country. The Ministry should  
urgently chalk out an Action Plan to operate CAT -II/III(B) ILS in all airports, in a fixed  
time bound period. 
Providing Passenger Processing System at the Airports 
44. The Ministry has informed that a Technical Committee has deliberated for identifying viable 
solutions for the reduction in Common Use Terminal Equipment (CUTE) &  other charges 
relating to Airport IT System and submitted its Report on 13.11.20 20. Subsequently, the 
Ministry discussed the extant issues with CEOs of Airport Operator & Airlines and Technical 
Committee members. Consultations with airlines and airport operators are being undertaken  to 
improve efficiency of the services with rationalization of charges. The Committee appreciates 
the efforts made by the Ministry, to proactively monitor and address the issues faced by 
the Civil Aviation sector, including the provision for Passenger Processing System at the 
Airports. 
Making Airports Accessible to all under the ‘Accessible India Campaign’ 
45. According to  the Ministry,  the general guidelines, formulated by Ministry of  Social 
Justice and Empowerment, on the 10 features of accessibility, have been shared with all AAI  
airports for making the airports accessible, which include:- 
1. Accessible Route/Approach 

46  
2. Accessible Parking 
3. Accessible Entrance to the Building 
4. Accessible Reception (Helpdesk) 
5. Accessible Corridor/Tactile Flooring 
6. Accessible lift 
7. Staircase with Handrails (Main passenger movement zone) 
8. Accessible toilets 
9. Accessible Drinking Water Facility 
10. Signage 
 Accessibility features are being incorporated in all the AAI airports 
 Data for 54 airports has already been uploaded on the MIS portal of AIC and data of 
other airports is being uploaded. 
 Presently 07 AAI Airports namely Ahmedabad, Jaipur, Calicut, Kolkata, Trivandrum,  
Trichyand Chennai are having Ambulift facility through Ground Handling agencies.35  
Airports of AAI already have aerobridge facility. 
 AAI has initiated the procurement process of Ambu lifts at 20 Airports having Code C or  
above Aircraft Operation and doesn‟t have aerobridge facility to ensure seamless transfer  
of Divyang passengers. Tender has been invited for procurement of 20 Nos Ambulift and  
the technical bid was opened on 10 th Nov, 2020. Tender shall be finalized by January,  
2021and expected date of completion of project in December 2021. 
 AAI is conducting regular sensitization workshops with Airport Directors and other staff  
of AAI explaining the 10 points guidelines and standards requirements. 
 AAI also  trains employees at Indian Aviation Academy on  the special standardized 
training package created under ICAO Trainair Plus program on ICAO STP: Passengers  
with reduced mobility. 
 Personnel on help desk are being given training to commun icate efficiently with all  
Divyangjans including training on sign language for hearing impaired and mute (deaf and  
dumb) persons. 
 As per RPwD act 2016, accessibility standards/guidelines are required to be notified by  
Ministry of Civil Aviation. In this re gard, „Guidelines for Accessible Airports in India‟  
containing all the details on Accessible Airport Infrastructure including the above 10  
features of accessibility has been prepared by AAI and forwarded to MoCA. Further, 

47  
MoCA advised  that the points rela ted to airlines and BCAS to also be incorporated to  
make comprehensive guidelines of Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
 This comprehensive handbook incorporating all the accessibility features of 
infrastructure, security services and airlines would be forwarded by MOCA to DEPwD 
for vetting, post which it will be published. 
45.1. The Committee applauds the sensitivity and empathy shown by the Ministry, 
towards the genuine needs and concerns of the differently abled people. The Committee  
hopes that the Ministry will be ab le to  fulfill the objective of the campaign to  make a  
barrier free and conducive travel environment for differently abled people. 
Srinagar airport 
46. Some Members of the Committee faced a harrowing experience, during the recent Study  
Visit of the Committee to Srinagar, as they were stranded at the Srinagar airport, due to 
cancellation of flights amidst adverse foggy conditions.  Availability of  CAT-II or CAT-III 
landing facility at the Srinagar airport could have facilitated the landing of aircrafts in those  
circumstances. 
46.1. The Ministry has clarified that AAI maintains a Civil Enclave at Srinagar airport, while  
airfield installations/airside operations at the airports, are maintained by Indian Air Force (IAF).  
At present, ILS Category I is operational and maintai ned by AAI at RWY 31 of the Srinagar  
airport. In a meeting chaired by Secretary (Civil Aviation), it was decided that the work of  
installation of CAT II landing system at Srinagar airport will be undertaken by IAF under  
Modernization of Airfield Infrastructure (MAFI)-II. The facility is scheduled to commence from  
December 2021. 
46.2. The Committee is  dismayed to note that  regular delay  in flight operations  and 
cancellation of flights occur at Srinagar airport, due to non-availability of CAT-II or CAT- 
III facility. The Committee fails to understand the reason behind non -installation of CAT- 
II/ CAT-III facilities in Srinagar airport, in the present age of technology and that too, at 
one of the strategic locations of J&K. The Committee takes serious note of the 
inconvenience and delays faced by the flyers, especially Members of Parliament, 
international & domestic  tourists, due to such deficiencies at the Srinagar airport. The 
Committee hopes that Modernization of Military Airfields (MAFI) project which is a turn 
key project, would  enhance the operational capability, by facilitating air operations of 
civilian aircrafts, even in poor visibility and adverse weather conditions, while  enhancing 
aerospace safety. 

48  
46.3. The Committee feels that in view of the fact that Srinagar, being one of the most 
attractive tourist places in India, visited by a large number of tourists, the absence of CAT -
II or CAT -III facility at the Srinagar airport hampers the flow of tourists to the Kashmir 
valley, which in turn affects its economy badly.  Therefore, the Ministry should impress 
upon IAF to install such facility at the airport, at the earliest. 
46.3.1. While  taking note of the above mentioned recommendations and facts, the 
Committee observes that MAFI project of the Indian Air Force should d ecide and cull out  
those activities which are primarily navigational equipment  including approach landing 
systems, PAPI runway lights,  threshold lights,  instruments and equipment etc., where 
AAI/ATS have a unique advantage, as they have been handling these  systems across the  
country, for over seven decades. Domestic civil aviation safety is the primary responsibility  
of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, DGCA and AAI. The utilization of these navigational  
aids/approach landing systems/equipment etc., which have been installed across the 
country, is primarily done by the AAI, which has domain knowledge. They are also 
familiar with the quality procurement processes, maintenance and operational 
requirements of these instruments which they have been using for Civil  operations for over 
fifty years. The Committee recommends that a High Level Committee may be created with  
the Indian Air Force to cull out those activities related to navigation and landing facilities  
which are, pri marily, in the domain knowledge  with the  AAI, for Civil operations. The  
Committee recommends that apart from this, the development of the rest of the 
infrastructure planned under the MAFI scheme may continue as envisaged, for a 
greater synergy between civil aviation requirements and operational requirements of 
Indian Air Force. 
46.4. The Srinagar Airport, spread in an area of 67.1 acres, is jointly operated by IAF and AAI.  
The existing runway (13/31) has a dimension of 3658 m x  45 m and is suitable for code „C‟ type 
of Aircraft (A321 -200) and present t erminal building has an area of 16900 sq.m., which can  
handle 950 passengers at peak hour. During its Study Visit, the Committee was given to 
understand that the extension of the runway by 396m on RWY 18 side, along with 
construction of RCC boundary wall a nd allied safety and security infrastructure work, have been 
taken up at a  cost of Rs 77 crores and that it is  expected to be  completed by March,  2021.The 
Committee noted certain bottlenecks being faced while widening the approach road; and issues 
related to the relocation of market complex & brick kilns near the Srinagar Airport. 
46.5. While deliberating on the logistics for Srinagar Airport, the Committee desired the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation to make serious efforts to modernize the infrastructure facilities 

49  
at both the Jammu and Srinagar Airports. The Chairman also directed the officials of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation for affordable flight fares and increased frequency of flights between 
Srinagar- Jammu- Leh and Srinagar- Delhi- Jammu, to increase tourist footfall in the region. 
46.6. The Committee strongly recommends the adoption of best international safety 
practices, in the Civil Aviation sector, particularly at airports, as well as landing of 
airplanes in difficult terrains of Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee underlines the need 
for coordinated efforts, for providing competitively priced mechanism, adequate and 
convenient transport, advanced infrastructure facilities and tourist safety, to cater to the  
needs of domestic and foreign tourists arriving in the region. 
Kannur airport 
47. The Committee has been given to understand that the developer M/s. Kannur 
International Airport Limited (KIAL) has conveyed expansion plan for Kannur International  
Airport. The proposed expansion will consist of the following: 
a) Extension of runway from 3050 meters to 4000 meters with parallel taxi track and  
CAT-1 approach lighting. 
b) Completion of CAT-1 approach lighting for 25 runway. 
c)   Expansion of Apron capacity from the existing capacity of 20 Code -C aircrafts / 14 
(8 Code-C plus 6 Code -E) in a phased manner. In the next phase capacity will be  
doubled. 
d) Completion of international cargo complex with an area of 5800 sq. meter in addition 
to the current cargo complex with an area of 1200 sq. meter 
e)   Construction of solar power plant 
f)    Completion of admin block 
g) Construction of hydrant refuelling facilities 
47.1. The Committee takes note of the steps taken/ proposed to be taken for the expansion 
of Kannur Airport. 
Kushinagar airport 
48. The Ministry has informed the Committee that the work of Developme nt of Kushinagar  
Airport was taken up by the Government of Uttar  Pradesh (GoUP) through M/s RITES, and  
subsequently, the work of modification of existing  terminal building and construction of Interim  
Terminal Building was taken up by AAI. 
The present status of works is as follows: 
 
 The work of 3200m x 45m Runway, Taxi Track, Apron having 4 Power in/Power out 

50  
Bays & Isolation Bay has been completed by M/s RITES. 
 The work of Fire Station, Boundary Wall & Provision of PAPI has been  completedby 
M/s RITES. 
 The work of ATC building block & Electric Sub -Station building and one Police Station  
Building is under progress and proposed to be completed by M/s RITES on 28.02.21. 
 The work of Modification & Alteration of Existing Terminal Building as Departure &  
Guest House as Arrival has been completed by AAI. 
 The work of Interim Terminal Building including Air-Conditioning and other packages at 
an estimated cost of ₹ 27.20 Cr. is under progress & proposed to be completed in all  
respect by 28.02.2021. 
 The work of Provision of 90m x 240 m RESA for Rwy 29 & Rwy 11 amounting to ₹4.65  
Cr. is in progress and proposed to be completed by 28.02.21. 
 Work of 2.35 Km Approach Road from  City to Airport within Airport premises is 
planned to be executed through State Govt. as deposit work at an estimated cost of ₹ 
33.20 Cr. 
 
Kushinagar airport is identified as an RCS airport under RCS - UDAN to connect Gaya and  
Lucknow. Accordingly, the airport is being developed/upgraded for operation of ATR - 72 type 
aircraft under revival of airports/heliports/water aerodromes scheme. Airports Authority of India  
had submitted applications for grant of Aerodrome License to Kushi nagar Airport in Day VFR  
conditions. The licensing inspection of airport was carried out by DGCA and inspection finding / 
open observations were communicated on 29.01.2021 to AAI for compliance and submission of  
updated ATR. The observations made are being  complied with , for issue of license for VFR  
Operations for which obstruction removal has been completed. Upgradation work of Kushinagar  
airport is likely to be completed in 2020-21. 
48.1. The Committee takes note of the upgradation work carried out at the Kushinagar 
Airport and desires that the work should be completed within the stipulated time frame.  
Kolhapur airport 
49. The upgradation of Kolhapur for IFR and Airbus 320 operations has been undertaken by  
AAI. The projected Date of completion for pavement works is 31.12.2021 and that for Terminal 
building work is 30.06.2022. A total of ₹100 Cr. (approx.) have been spent against sanctioned  
amount of ₹ 274 Cr and 40% of work has been completed. The request for upgradation of  
Kolhapur Airport from VFR to all weather operations was made by AAI; but same is under 

51  
process for pending action on the removal and lighting of obstacles in and around the airport. 
49.1. The Committee takes note of the upgradation work undertaken at the Kolhapur  
airport and desires that the outstanding issues be sorted out with the concerned 
authorities, without any further delay. 
Pakyong airport 
50. The Airports Authority of India has awarded RCS routes connecting  Pakyong to Delhi,  
Guwahati, Kolkata to the Selected Airline Operators under RCS -UDAN. While Pakyong to 
Kolkata route recommenced on 01.02.2021, Pakyong to Delhi route recommenced on 
23.01.2021. 
50.1. The Committee, during its visit in October, 2018 to Pakyong Airport, observed that  
flight operations were stopped due to poor visibility. The Committee may be apprised, of  
the current status of flight operations from Pakyong Airport. 
Thanjavur airport 
51. The Ministry has informed the Committee that the issues concerning exchange of land  
between AAI & IAF and the working permission on the IAF land, for developmen t of a civil  
enclave at Thanjavur airport for RCS operations is being taken up by AAI with IAF. 
51.1. The Committee urges upon the Ministry to sort out both issues, in order to facilitate  
the smooth exchange of land between AAI and IAF. 
Keshod airport 
52. The AAI is in the process of handing over Keshod Airport to Indian Coast Guard (ICG).  
However, the execution of MoU between AAI and ICG with respect to leasing of land could not  
be progressed, for the matter is pending with MoD. Airports Authority of India applied f or grant 
of Aerodrome License of Keshod Airport and pre-licensing inspection was carried out by DGCA 
from 17.12.2020 to 19.12.2020 and issued observations/ inspection Report to AAI. AAI, on  
27.01.2021, has submitted compliance on the observations, which is under examination at 
DGCA. Keshod Airport is being developed under revival of airports/heliports/water aerodromes  
scheme for operation of RCS flights. Airports Authority of India, the implementing agency has  
awarded Keshod airport under UDAN to connect Ah medabad and Mumbai. RCS flights from  
Keshod are likely to commence in 2021. 
52.1. The Committee takes note of the recent developments that have taken place, in  
respect of Keshod Airport, and desires that the matter relating to leasing of land which is  
pending with the Ministry of Defence, be pursued vigorously, so that the process of 
handing over the airport to the Indian Coast Guard, is completed. 

52  
Nagpur Airport 
53. Nagpur Airport is licensed airport for Public Use Category. The MIHAN India Limited  
(MIL) is a joint venture of Maharashtra Airport Development Company Limited (MADC) and  
Airports Authority of  India (AAI), proposes to develop „Multi-modal International Passenger  
and Cargo Hub‟ at Nagpur (MIHAN) through PPP mode. In May 2016,  MIL had initiated steps 
for the selection of Strategic Partner (PPP Partner) for the same. However, pursuant to certain  
observations by Ministry of Civil Aviation, GoI, the same was annulled in March, 2020, as per 
the directions of Project Monitoring and Implementation Committee (PMIC), which is headed by 
Hon‟ble Chief Secretary, Govt. of Maharashtra. The MIL has now initiated the process of re - 
inviting the tender for selection of PPP Partner, which is expected to be completed in FY  2021 – 
2022. Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar International Air port, Nagpur, is equipped with all the basic  
amenities, including sufficient seating area with social distancing norms, lounge, eatable and  
daily needs stores, well maintained toilets, well maintained passenger trolleys, provision of hand  
sanitizers at various locations, dustbins, contactless boarding pass facility (CUTE facility 
which is installed by  M/s. SITA), use of Braille signage‟s in lifts & washrooms for the 
convenience of passengers, etc., to name a few. 
53.1. The Committee takes note of the upgradation of amenities available at Nagpur  
Airport. The Committee desires that the selection of Strategic Partner (PPP Partner) may  
be done at the earliest. 
Airport at Bihar 
54. One Member of the Committee was critical about the proposed airport at Bihta, Bihar,  
which, in his opinion, would add zero percent operational advantage. 
54.1. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the existing Patna airport is  
under further development, with a stipulated investment of around ₹1200 crores. However, 
while this investment is on, it has also been observed that despite provisioning a spend 
of ₹1200 crores on this project, no additional operational advantage would accrue on the  
operations side. The limitations of non-installation of approach lighting system, CAT- 
II/CAT-III ILS and other Navigational aid facilities, which could have enhanced the 
operational capacity, will be there. More so, the load penalty would always be there, since  
there would be inherent restrictions on operations during peak summer season. Also, the  
same limitations would accrue during winters and foggy seasons. The fact that the AAI 
was fully aware of the expenditure being incurred, without any added operational 
advantage, is a matter of deep concern regarding the process of decision -making. However, 
since the project is already under implementation, the Committee desires that a project for 

53  
the city- side, at Patna, with additional terminal parking capacity and creation of parallel 
taxi track, should be taken up on priority, to justify the investment made so far. 
54.2. The Committee understands that there is a proposal to develop the Bihta Civil Enclave  
presently administered by the Indian Air Force, with an estimated expenditure of 
approximately ₹ 1000 crores. The Committee observes that if the Bihta airport is 
constructed as a Civil  Enclave, it would still have the same limitations and constraints 
faced by the Patna airport.  It would be a sheer replication of Patna airport, without any 
distinct operational advantage, except for landing A321 category of aircraft. 
54.3. The Committee notes that AAI has asked for additional 191.5 acres of land. The  
Committee observes that if AAI would proceed with the planned expansion of Bihta 
airport, even without having  a clear possession of additional 191.5 acres of land, it would  
result in an unsound investment. The Committee, therefore, observes that the proposed  
Bihta airport  has still several limitations  than any Greenfield project which may be  
considered for the State of Bihar. 
54.4. The Committee notes that there is a proposal for a new Greenfield project in Bihar,  
at Sonpur in Saran, almost 10 kms away from Patna, with easy four -lane road which is 
under construction and would be the first Greenfield project in the State of Bihar, catering 
to the civil aviation requirement of the region for the next 50 to 100 years. The Committee 
would like to know the status of  this project and whether the Government of India 
approached the State Government of Bihar to indicate the advan tages/disadvantages of a 
Greenfield project vis-a-vis a brown field defence project with reference to operations, 
utilization, future expansion, etc. 
54.5. The Committee understands that the proposal for the new Sonpur Greenfield project has  
been vetted by the Airports Authority of India and AAI has submitted the proposal, for 
acceptance by the Government of Bihar. Knowing the capacity enhancement and the future  
requirement of aviation in Bihar, the Committee recommends that the AAI should 
consider acquiring the land on its own, which is at a very nominal price compared to  city 
areas, for the creation of a Greenfield project in Bihar as a part of the Prime 
Minister’s package and to plan the expansion requirement of Eastern India, particularly  
the State of Bihar, which has a population of approximately 12 crores. Notably, the State of 
Bihar is one of the few large States, which does  not have an international  Greenfield 
airport, yet. The Committee would also like the AAI to carry forward the proposal of the  
new Greenfield airport project to cater to the future growth of  civil aviation sector in  
Bihar, in particular, and in the nation, in general. 

54  
Greenfield Airports 
55. The Ministry has  furnished the following status of Greenfield Airports at Durgapur, 
Kannur, Jewar, Navi Mumbai and Mopa, Goa:- 
Durgapur International Airport, West Bengal 
 
On 11 th December, 200 8, Government of India granted „in -principle‟ approval to M/s  
Bengal Aerotropolis Project Ltd (BAPL) for  setting up of a domestic Greenfield  airport at 
Durgapur. The construction work has been completed. Aerodrome License to Durgapur Airport  
has been issued by DGCA on 24th April, 2015 and the commercial operations have 
commenced on 18th May, 2015, with Air India ATR-42 flight connecting this Airport to Kolkata. 
Kannur International Airport, Kerala 
 
Government of India granted „in principle‟  approval to Government of Kerala on 19 th 
February, 2008. Government of Kerala has appointed M/s Kerala Industrial Infrastructure 
Development Corporation (KINFRA) as nodal agen cy for development of the airport. A Special  
Purpose Vehicle (SPV) namely M/s Kannur International  Airport Limited (KIAL) has been  
formed for the implementation of the project. The construction work has been completed. 
Aerodrome License to Kannur Airport h as been issued by DGCA on 03.10.2018 and the airport  
was operationalized on 9th December, 2018. 
Noida International Greenfield Airport, Jewar 
„In principle‟ approval has been given for setting up of a Noida International Greenfield  
Airport vide certificate dated 08.05.2018. GoUP appointed Yamuna Expressway Industrial 
Development Authority (YEIDA) as the implementing agency for the project under PPP mode.  
State Government has awarded the project to M/s Zurich Airports International for development 
of the airport under PPP and the Concession Agreement  has been signed for this on 7 th October, 
2020. M/s. Zurich Airport International AG has formed an SPV - Yamuna International Airport  
Private Limited (YIAPL). YIAPL is  now the concessionaire  of the project.  In accordance with 
the provisions of the Concession Agreement, YIAPL has submitted the Master Plan to the State  
Government in December, 2020. GoUP forwarded the Master Plan to M/o Civil Aviation for  
seeking comments/suggestions. The Master Plan w as circulated to MHA. M/o Defenc e, D/o  
Revenue, IMD, M/o Health and Family Welfare, BCAS, AERA, AAI and Agreement Section of  
MoCA for furnishing their views with respect to Noida International Airport. Further, the AAI,  
DGCA and M/o Defenc e have found the Master Plan in or der and the same has been forwarded 
to  the State Government of U.P. 

55  
NMIAL- Navi Mumbai International Airport 
After the  'in-principle' approval of the  Government, State Govt.  of Maharashtra has  
awarded the project of Navi Mumbai Airport to Mumbai Internat ional Airport Ltd. (MIAL) for  
development and operation under Public Private Partnership (PPP) basis. City &  Industries 
Development Corporation of Maharashtra (CIDCO) is the nodal agency for the project and the  
tendering process was completed in February, 2017 where MIAL emerged as the successful  
bidder. The Letter of Award was issued in October, 2017 and Concession Agreement was signed  
by CIDCO with Navi Mumbai International Airport Ltd. (NMIAL) on 08.01.2018. The private  
parties viz., GVK, ACSA and Bidvest have now decided to sell their equity to Adani Group. 
State Government has completed key pre -development works and most  of the R&R work. 
Secretary (CA) reviewed the project in a meeting held on 20.11.2020 with the officers of State  
Government, CIDCO and NMIAL. 
The major issues in the project are:- 
 
• Financial Closure process is ongoing, once new promoters complete the process of 
acquiring 23.5 % shares of MIAL, ACSA (10%) and Bidvest (13.5%). 
• There are obstacles in the Obstacle Limitation Survey (OLS) of the project. These 
obstacles are required to be removed by the concerned Authorities under whose 
jurisdiction the obstacle falls. 
In the meeting held on 20.11.2020, State Government has assured that a detailed Action  Plan on 
removal of the obstacles will be  prepared and submitted to AAI. The Project is  being reviewed 
on monthly basis under the Chairmanship of Secretary (CA). A meeting was taken by Secretary  
(CA) on 14.01.2021 to review the status of Navi  Mumbai project. The airport operator along  
with the State Government of Maharashtra have been directed to finalize the instrumental 
approach for removing the obstacles in diversified categories such as Category I/II/III.  The 
airport developer and the State Government are yet to submit the SOP for removing the identified 
obstacles. Upon receipt of SOP, a proper survey shall be done before proceeding and Airports  
Authority of India (AAI) together with the airport operators will coordinately work it out. 
Greenfield International Airport at Mopa in Goa 
„In-principle‟ approval was granted for the project in March, 2000. Concession 
Agreement between Govt. of Goa and GGIAL has been signed on 8 th November, 2016. 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) was signed  between Government of India and M/s. 
GMR Goa International Airport Limited (GGIAL) on 31st March, 2017. The construction work 

56  
was stopped w.e.f. 19-01-2019 due to „status- quo‟ order of Hon‟ble SC dated 18.01.2019. 
 The project faced restraints from the Courts leading to time overrun of 634 days. 
 The Supreme Court has a llowed resuming the construction works vide judgment dated  
16.01.2020 and Work has resumed from 17th January, 2020. 
 A meeting was taken by Secretary, Civil Aviation on 28.08.2020 with Secretary MoRTH,  
State Government of Goa and NHAI regarding expressway c onnectivity to Mopa airport. 
The issue has been resolved and MoRTH has notified the expressway under National  
Highway Act. The construction work is going -on in full swing and is expected to be  
completed by August 2022. 
55.1. The Committee recommends that during the entire process of commissioning, 
planning, construction and execution of Greenfield Airports, the environmental and 
developmental aspects should be thoroughly deliberated upon, examined and duly 
implemented. Furthermore, various issues which might crop  up during the process, should 
be tackled by the Ministry, without delay and efficiently. 
55.2. The Committee notes the inconvenience of passengers, who are dropped by the Taxi  
operators at the airport approach point, from where passengers, including the elderly , 
have to walk up to more than 400 -500 steps with their luggage, to reach the departure gate 
of the  Goa Dabolim Airport. An immediate solution should be found by the Airports 
Authority of India for ease of transportation of those passengers who are dropped  at the 
toll entry point of the existing airport at Goa-Dabolim. 
55.3. The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by the Airports Authority of India  
to improve amenities and city side terminal area as well. As Mopa airport is likely to  
commence operations  in the next couple of years, it would be a challenge for Dabolim  
airport to retain its traffic. Hence, it is very important that AAI, in order to maintain 
traffic growth and utilization of newly created assets  and extended facilities, gears up for 
the challenge that they are going to face, by the potential growth of other airports viz., 
Mopa and Sindhudurg. 
Operationalization of Defence airports for Civil Aviation 
56. On a query as  to how the airports which are under the control of Defence can be 
operationalized for civil aviation, the Ministry has stated that Airports Authority of India (AAI)  
maintains 27 Civil Enclaves at various Defence airports in the country for operating civil flights  
from these airports. AAI establishes a Civil Enclave at an airport on r equest of the concerned  
State Government af ter signing a mutually agreed Mo U with the State Government, subject to  
availability of land by the Defence Authorities. 

57  
56.1. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry and feels  
that the reply is quite evasive. Therefore, the Committee desires that a detailed reply may  
be furnished by the Ministry in this regard. 
57. The Committee desires that the Ministry may submit a detailed note, after due  
study, on the difference between a Greenfield proj ect, a brownfield project and a defence  
brownfield project (civil enclave). All  advantages and disadvantages of each category of  
project should be spelt out comprehensively so that State Governments which  are willing 
to undertake expansion of civil aviation activities  may avail the note for sound decision 
making. 
57.1. A complete and comprehensive report should be obtained from Airline Operators,  
Airports Authority of India, Air Traffic Control and cargo operators including the DGCA,  
State administration and BCAS , to specify the challenges/shortcomings as far as use of 
Civil Enclaves across the country is concerned. 
Karipur Flight Accident 
 
58. The Committee also took cognizance of the Karipur flight accident which occurred on 7 th 
August, 2020. Director General, A ircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) informed the  
Committee, that a few  components of the flight  which was involved in the Karipur accident,  
have been sent to the National Transportation Safety Board and that every aspect of the accident  
is being i nvestigated into. The investigation to ascertain the probable cause(s) of accident is in  
progress and due to very strict COVID -19 Protocol issued by CDC, USA, there is a delay in  the 
availability of the defect investigation report of a few components. 
58.1. The Committee desires speedy investigation into the mishap. 
 
Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) 
59. AAIB was formed to investigate the accidents and serious incidents in accordance with  
SARPs (Standard & Recommended Practices) issued by ICAO s eparating investigative function 
from the regulatory function. AAIB functions under the administrative purview of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
59.1. The Committee feels that the administrative jurisdiction of AAIB under the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation go  against the tenets of impartiality and equality, since it may  
raise the genuine question of conflict of interest. The principle of good governance expects  
the placement of AAIB under a Ministry other than the Ministry of Civil Aviation, just like 
CCRS functions under the administrative purview of MoCA, though it looks after 

58  
railway accidents. The Committee may also be apprised of the steps taken for shifting the 
jurisdiction of AAIB and also to empower AAIB. 
National Aero Sports Policy 
60. The Committee learnt that Ministry of Civil Aviation has constituted a Committee on 4 th 
January, 2021 to prepare the Draft National Aero Sports Policy (NASP) 2021. The Committee  
includes representatives from Ministry of Tourism, Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports, 
BCAS, DGCA, ACI and Aero  sports industry. Till 24 th February, 2021 two meetings have been 
held with the Committee members to discuss the global best practices for drafting NASP. The 
Committee may submit the Draft NASP 2021 by May, 2021 which will be uploaded on  the 
websites of the  Ministry and DGCA for feedback from the public. The policy will, inter-alia, 
address the objectives of growth, investments, employment generation, safety and national 
security in respect of aero sports. A growth-oriented National Aero-Sports Policy (NASP) may 
help attract investments in latest aero sports technology, infrastructure and best practices. 
60.1. The Committee is of the view that aero sports have a huge potential for growth, in  
terms of tourism and employment generation, in t he country. However, the infrastructure  
needed, to realize such potential, is missing at present. The Committee calls upon the  
Ministry to formulate  a National Aero-Sports Policy to help attract investments,  both 
foreign and domestic, in the field of aeros ports. The Committee underlines the need for  
bringing in the latest technology, equipments, infrastructure and international best 
practices, to promote aero sports in the country. The Committee also notes that in the  
process of the formulation of the National Aero Sports Policy, wider consultation 
should be held with the stakeholders, which should also include Aerosports Wing of the 
NCC in the  Ministry of  Defence, State Governments, the Ministry of Youth  Affairs & 
Sports and  Ministry of Tourism, along with the Aero Club of India, which is the nodal 
body for FTOs and aero sports in India. 
Flight Radio Telephoney Licence (FRTOL) exams 
60.A. In reply to a clarification sought by a Member of the Committee, during the meeting held  
on 16th February, 2021, as to why FRTOL exam should not be with the Department of 
Telecommunications and that it should be with the Ministry of Civil Aviation or the DGCA, the  
Ministry has stated as follows:- 
The International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) Annex 1 mandates the satis factory 
establishment of knowledge and skill of an applicant and issuance of Radio Telephone 
operator‟s Restricted certificate - Aeromobiles (RTR (A)) as specified in the general 
radio r egulations annexed to the International Telecommunication Convention, for 

59  
operation of the radio telephone on board an aircraft. Thus, holding of a RTR (A) issued by 
the Safety Regulator is mandatory for operation of the radio telephone on board an aircraft. 
In case of India, this license has to be issued by DGCA. 
However in India, Wireless Planning and Coordination (WPC) Wing of the Department of  
Telecommunications (DoT) is the nodal agency to implement International 
Telecommunication Union (ITU) Regulations being signatory to international convention  
who are also responsibl e for issuance of RTR (A). As such RTR(A) is issued by DoT.  
However, to comply with ICAO guidelines, based on RTR(A) issued by Department  of 
Telecommunications (DoT) and class I medical certificate, Flight Radio Telephone 
Operators License (FRTOL) is issued by DGCA . 
This issue was taken up earlier in 2009 through a D .O. from the then Hon'ble Minister of 
State for Civil Aviation requesting Ministry of  Communication & Information Technology 
to empower DGCA under rule 3 of the Indian Wireless Telegraphy (Commercial Radio 
Operators Certificate of Proficiency and License to Operate Wireless Telegraphy) Rules  
1954. The Ministry of Communication & Information Technology, after examining the 
proposal, had informed that RTR (A) examination which is the qualifying exam ination for 
the Flight Radio Telephony Operator's License (FRTOL) issued by DGCA would have to 
be continued to be conducted and certificate issued by the Ministry of Communication & 
Information Technology. 
Further, an O.M. dated 25.02.2021 has been sent to  Department of Telecommunication to  
allow DGCA to conduct RTR(A) examination along with the CPL examination that is 
already being conducted by DGCA. 
60.A.1. The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. The  Ministry 
may update the Committee about the response of  the Department of Telecommunication,  
to the communication of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, requesting the former, to allow  
DGCA to conduct RTR(A) examination, along with the CPL examination, that is already  
being conducted by DG CA. The Committee feels that since this is an inter -Ministerial 
matter at a policy level, the Cabinet Secretary should convene a meeting and decide on  
merits, the issue of RTR(A) licenses by DGCA, along with CPL examination, as mandated  
under ICAO guidelin es. This will streamline the process of issue of licenses from a single  
window and also at the same time, create ease of training for pilots in the aviation sector, 
to meet the huge shortfall of trained pilots in the aviation sector in India. 

60  
All Women Cockpit Crew in Air India 
61. The Committee takes note of the first non -stop flight from San Francisco to Bengaluru,  
flown by four women pilots, on 11 th January, 2021, flying over the North Pole and covering a  
distance of about 16,000 kilometers. 
61.1. The Committee is pleased to note such a historical event and applauds the Ministry  
for such an exciting and novel initiative. 
Enhanced share of Indian carriers in the international traffic 
62. The Ministry has taken the following measures to ensure positive dis crimination towards 
Indian carriers in order to enhance their share in the international traffic:- 
i. India has adopted Open Sky policy (unlimited frequencies to/from 6 metro cities in 
India) for passenger traffic on reciprocal basis with countries beyond 500 0 kms. 
This would encourage our carriers to undertake long-haul operations. 
ii. Negotiate for/ga infully utiliz e 5 th freedom traffic rights to enable one -stop long - 
haul operations by Indian carriers. 
iii. Review of certain Air Service Agreements with a view to ensu re balance of 
benefits and principles of reciprocity. 
iv. Over 90% of the air cargo to/from India is at present carried by foreign carriers. To  
promote increased carriage of cargo by Indian carriers, non -scheduled cargo  
operations by foreign carriers have been restricted to 6 metro cities only. 
v. Further scheduled cargo operations by foreign carriers will now be permitted only as 
per the reciprocal provisions in the bilateral Air Services Agreements. 
vi. Presently regular schedules international flights have been restricted. a) India has 
however, entered into air bubble arrangements with 15 countries (viz. UAE, Qatar, 
Maldives, Afghanistan, Bahrain, Bhutan, Iraq, Kenya, Oman, Ukraine, Bangladesh, 
Ethiopia, Nepal, Kuwait and Russia) within 5000 kms from Delhi. Generall y, 
traffic destined for the country concerned only has been permitted with a view to 
restrict 6th  freedom movement of passengers (except UAE and Qatar - where the 
designated carriers  have been permitted to carry traffic destined for countries of  
Africa and South America as  well). b) India has also entered into air bubble 
arrangements with 10 countries (USA,  Canada, UK, France, Germany, Nigeria, 
Japan, Netherlands, Tanzania and Rwanda) beyond 5000 km from Delhi and Indian 
carriers are being encouraged to mount more and more flights to these destinations. 

61  
62.1. The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken by the Ministry to enhance the share 
of Indian carriers in the international traffic. 
Mobile Air Dispensary and Air Ambulance 
63. In its written submission, the Ministry mentioned that a series of Inter-Ministerial 
meetings were conducted for providing air dispensary services in North Eastern Region, 
pursuant to which, the Ministry proposed to provide Budgetary Support for Transport part for 
Air Ambulance in NER. Initially, it was proposed to involve PHL for operationalization of 
Air Ambulance services in Manipur. However, Budgetary provisions could not be done as the 
scheme requires ownership by anyone out of M/oH&FW/ DoNER / State Govt. for its 
implementation but which could not be finalized. Moreover, the Pawan Hans Limited (PHL) 
is under Strategic Disinves tment and therefore MoCA couldn‟ t pursue the proposal anymore.  
Directorate General of Civil Aviation has already put in place regulatory framework by 
issuing Civil Aviation Requirements (CAR) on Operation of Aero Medical Transportation 
(AMT). Provisions of this CAR are also applicable to HEMS operations, for which DGCA 
has issued Operations Circular on 11th February, 2016. 
With the repeal of Air Corporation Act in March 1994, the Indian domestic aviation was 
deregulated. Airlines are now free to induct capacity with any aircraft type and free to select  
whatever markets and network they wish to service and operate. However, Government has laid  
down Route Dispersal Guidelines to achieve better regulation of air transport services taking into  
account the need for air transport service of different regions of the country. It is, however, up to  
the airlines to provide air services to specific places depending upon the traffic demand and  
commercial viability. As such, the airlines are free to operate anywhere in the country subject to  
compliance of route dispersal guidelines issued by Government. 
63.1. The Committee recognizes the importance of Mobile Air Dispensary and Air 
Ambulance, which are life saving. The Committee desires the Ministry to ensure that the  
issue regarding ownership of the scheme for providing air dispensary services in North  
Eastern region, is sorted out at the earliest. The Committee further desi res that in the 
event of lack of clarity regarding the disinvestment of Pawan Hans Ltd., the Ministry 
should take  necessary action to identify stakeholders other than  PHL, for the fruitful 
implementation of the scheme. 
Helicopter Services 

62  
64. The Committe e takes note of the crucial need for airplane and helicopter connectivity in  
remote and hilly regions of the country, to harness the huge tourism potential  of such areas  
which remained untapped, due to inadequate air connectivity. 
64.1. The Secretary, while elaborating upon the proposed Helicopter landing facilities, informed 
the Committee that the marking of helipads on the Map of the Country is being  undertaken by 
DGCA for which details have been sought from all the stakeholders. The Chairman, M/o 
Railways has been requested to develop helicopter landing facilities at important  Railway 
Stations. 
64.2. The Ministry, in its reply,  has stated that the Airports Authority of India has awarded 33 
Helicopter routes under RCS-UDAN. The Ministry of Civil Aviation was seized with the issue 
and have been  holding regular meeting with the stakeholders for expeditious Helicopter 
Operations under the UDAN Scheme. The Ministry has  scaled down infrastructure requirement 
for Helicopter operations depending upon the existing  volume of operations and requested the 
concerned State Govt. for speedy development/upgradation under revival of 
airports/heliports/water aerodromes scheme. Helicopter Operations under the UDAN scheme 
have already been operationalized from 05 Heliports. 
64.3. The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Ministry to enhance helicopter  
connectivity in the country. The Committee recommends the Ministry to adopt a futuristic  
approach in connecting important tourist destinations in the country, through he licopter 
services, in a planned manner. The Committee emphasizes the need to ensure adequate  
infrastructure, amenities and facilities at the heliports. 
Air Travel Safety Concerns 
65. A number of incidents were reported in the media, raising serious concern s about flight  
safety. The incidents related to landing without deploying gear, aircraft veering off runways, tail  
strikes etc. 
65.1. The Committee strongly feels that the Ministry should accord due priority to the  
safety and security of air travelers, in the light of increasing incidents and examine the  
reasons behind such incidents and take remedial action. 
Aircraft (Amendment) Act, 2020 
66. The Committee takes note of media reports about the proposal to enhance the maximum  
limit of fine from the existing ₹10 lakh to ₹1 crore, on airports and airport operators for lapses in 
air travel safety under the Aircraft (Amendment) Act, 2020. It also enlarges the scope of 

63  
the existing Aircraft Act, 1937 to include regulation of all areas of air navigation. 
66.1. The Committee appreciates the statutory provisions for ensuring zero tolerance in the 
matter of air safety. The Committee is of the view that such an amendment would fulfill  the 
requirements of ICAO. The Committee expects that such an amendment will lead to  
improvement in the level of safety and security of aircraft operations in the country. 
Air Cargo 
67. The Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation informed the Committee that India‟s domestic air 
cargo handling grew by 8.24% (CAGR) between FY 2013 -14 and FY 20 19-20, whereas  
international air cargo grew by about 6% per annum. He mentioned that strong resilience was  
shown by India‟s air cargo sector despite severe challenges posed by the pandemic and that an 
increase in dedicated freight aircraft was registered f rom 6 ( as on September, 2018 ) to 25. Air  
freight capacity also added with 150 passenger aircrafts deployed on the basis of passenger to  
cargo conversion and the focus has been on medical/ pharma cargo; and agri -produce since  
March, 2020. He shared the following data:- 
 
67.1. The Committee is of the considered view that India has a huge untapped market  
potential in terms of air cargo. The Committee strongly feels that the Ministry should  
undertake dynamic policy and structural changes in the air cargo sector , in order to 
ensure that there is a much desired boom in this sector. The Ministry should also aim 
towards transparency and paperless trade environment in this sector. 


64  
Emergency landing and cancellation of flights 
 
68. The Committee has taken note of med ia reported instances of emergency landings and  
cancellation of flights, causing thereby, anxiety, confusion and inconvenience to the air 
travelers, especially the elderly and children. The Committee is given to understand that the 
flyers have been, often, not even provided the basic courtesies/protocols such as alternative hotel 
accommodation, appropriate information regarding other possible flights, water, medicine, food,  
toilet facilities etc., in case of such contingencies. 
68.1. The Committee is disturbed to note that the air travelers get a raw deal, many times, 
in cases of emergency landings and cancellation of flights by airlines. The Committee  is of 
the considered view that it is incumbent upon the airlines, as well as the AAI, to ensure  the 
safety, comfort and health of the passengers, especially women, children and patients. It is a 
matter of concern to the Committee that there are guidelines in this regard; but they  are 
not complied with. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to ensure that the 
guidelines are scrupulously adhered to and that stringent, punitive action should be  taken 
in case of violation of the said guidelines. 
Cancellation charges 
 
69. Time and again, the Committee ‟s attention has been drawn towards the high cancellation  
charges levied by the private airlines operating in the country. 
69.1. The Committee expresses its anguish that there is no uniformity in the cancellation  
charges levied by the airlines. The Committee underlines the need for rationalizing the  
cancellation charges and prescribing an upper limit of cancellation charges that can be  
collected from the passengers. The Committee reiterates its recommendation in this 
regard, made in its 276th Report, requiring the airlines to restrict not more than 50% of the 
base fare as cancellation charges. The tax and fuel surcharge collected should be refunded 
to the passengers on cancellation of tickets. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would 
be able to persuade the airlines for such rationalization in the interest of the passengers. 
Core Group on Safety and Security 
70.  On recommendations of the Committee, a Core Group has been constituted under  
the Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation to address the safety and 
security aspects. In pursuance thereof, th e Committee would like to make the following  
suggestions/recommendations, for inclusion in the mandate of the Core Group:- 

65  
(i) Adequate arrangements of proper lights and other landing instruments should be  
made at all airports, particularly to cater to flight  operations during foggy days. Periodic 
upgradation of such equipments should also be made. An action plan, with feasible 
timelines, should be prepared, and steps should be taken to strictly adhere to the 
timelines. The Competent Authority should give detailed reasons in case of delays, if any. 
(ii) Runways which were created during the pre -independence period and are lying idle  
as on date, should be identified and be developed in such a way that they can be used for  
flight operations in case of emergency situations, such as natural calamities and war. 
(iii) The Core Group should ensure necessary coordination between NHAI/Ministry of  
Road Transport & Highways and Ministry of Railways in order to identify 
stretches/pockets of land, along National Highways and Railway tracks, to facilitate 
emergency landing of helicopter ambulance in the event of accidents/natural calamities. 
(iv) It should be ensured that international best practices and guidelines are adopted 
and implemented in the operations of helicopter ambulances. 
(v) In ord er to further strengthen the Core Group, a Sub -Committee, headed by an  
officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary may be formed, comprising the Ministries 
of 
(i) Railways; (ii) Road Transport & Highways; (iii) Ports, Shipping & Waterways; and 
(iv) Civil Aviation. 
 
(vi) The Sub -Committees may consider engaging  the services of consultants, who are  
experts in the respective fields, with requisite global exposure and good reputation for 
the services rendered by them. 
(vii) The Sub-Committees should mandatorily report t o the Core Group on Safety and  
Security, on a monthly basis , to enable the Core Group to review and monitor the 
activities of these Sub-Committees. 
(viii) Similar Sub-Committees may be formed in the Ministry of Defence & Home 
Affairs; and ONGC & GAIL. Since these Ministries/Organisations are not under the 
purview of the Standing Committee, it is suggested that in case of any 
bottlenecks/logjams in this  regard, the Standing Committee should be  informed 
accordingly, at the earliest. 
(ix) The review of the activities and progress made by the Core Group should be done  

66  
monthly and after the matters are streamlined and teething problems are sorted out, 
the review meetings may be held on quarterly basis. If need is felt, a fresh legislation may 
be piloted by the Ministry of Civil Aviation in this regard, at the earliest. 
(x) The recent glacier burst at Uttarakhand led to loss of precious lives. Provision for  
helicopter landing facilities at ecologically sensitive areas may be considered, to ensure  
effective disaster management oper ations. For such facilitation, the Core Group should  
actively engage with NDRF also regularly. There is a need for close monitoring of 
ecological changes using the latest technology available, in order to prevent such natural  
disasters. In conclusion, the Committee accentuates the doubtless necessity for very close  
and effective coordination among all the related Ministries/ Departments/ Organizations  
and entities. 
Hotline number among the Ministries for effective co- ordination in case of emergency 
71. The issue regarding provision of hotline number among the Ministries for effective co - 
ordination in case of emergency was discussed in detail , in the Meeting of the Core Group held  
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Civil Aviation on 07.12.2020. During the meeting, 
the PED (Safety)/Railway Board informed that Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) has recently 
started a portal, where contact number of each and every District Magistrate or nominated 
person has been put up . In case of any accident or mis -happening, all the data/information  may 
be passed through that  portal i.e., www.112.gov.in & 112 app.  Accordingly, the portal  maybe 
utilized and all departments should get linked to this portal. Further, MHA has a 24x7 manned  
control room that can also be used for such communications. The Committee welcomes this  
initiative of the Ministry. 
Commission of Railway Safety 
 
72. During their deposition before the Committee, the representatives of the Ministry of Civil  
Aviation, informed that the Commission of Railway Safety needs to be restructured as a 
complete organization, having its own resources and infrastructure such as technical manpower  
support, test lab, logistic and data bank etc. and that induction of officers should be at 
lower level, on permanent absorption basis , instead of deputation basis from Railway s. The 
Ministry has endorsed the recommendation made by the Committee in its 188 th Report that the 
status of CCRS   and Commissioners to the Apex level and Special Secretary respectively, may 
be upgraded. The proposal initiated by the Ministry of Civil Aviation for the upgradation of the 
Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety & Commissioners and consent had been received from 
the Ministry of Railways in September, 2018.The Committee noted that although the Ministry of 

67  
Railways agreed to include  officers of the Commission in  relevant training courses, CRS  and 
Dy. CCRS are not being included in regular or specialized training program like AMP, high speed  
etc. 
72.1. The Committee d esires that timely action be taken by the Ministry to address the  
above stated concerns/issues. 
72.2. During the Study Visit of the Committee to Goa in January, 2020 the Committee was  
apprised by the Commissioner of Railway Safety that in order to utilize the expertise available in 
other Ministries such as  Shipping, Petroleum,  Civil Aviation and Railways  regarding various  
type of Accident Investigation, the Commission has written a letter to DGCA, Oil  Industry 
Safety Directorate, Railways and DG Shipping for formation of a core knowledge sharing group. 
He mentioned that all the Departments have been requested to nominate nodal officers dealing  
with investigation of accidents and that regular meeting and knowledge sharing has been 
planned. Further, modalities to help each other during investigation of any type of accidents will  
also be formalized shortly. 
72.3. The Committee takes note of the above stated line of action and desires that the 
Ministry may furnish periodical information to this Committee, regardi ng the progress 
made in regard to the same. 
Huge losses incurred by private airlines 
73. The Committee finds that huge losses have been incurred by private airlines operating in  the 
country, during the pre-Covid-19 pandemic as well as before the pandemic. 
73.1. The Committee recognizes the fact that the aviation sector has been hit hard by  
global economic slowdown and the Covid -19 pandemic. The Committee understands that  
the adverse effect of the Covid -19 pandemic, on the airlines operating in the country, 
which were already reeling under heavy losses, was unprecedented. While acknowledging 
the resilience shown by the civil aviation sector in the country during such trying times, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry should turn this situation to its ad vantage, by 
bringing in immediate and long term measures, to strengthen the civil aviation sector in 
the country and to enable its resurgence. 
Miscellaneous 
74.  Section 5A of the A ircrafts Act, 1934 states that “Power to issue directions -“(1) The 
Director-General of Civil Aviation or any other officer specially empowered in this behalf by  
the Central Government may, from time to time, by order, issue directions, consistent with the  
provisions of this Act and rules made thereunder .” 
Clause 3A of Aircrafts Rules 1937 states that “(1)Delegation of powers  - “Any power or duty  

68  
conferred or imposed by these rules on the Central Government may be exercised or discharged 
by the Central Government or by any person authorized by it in that behalf. 
(2) Any power or d uty conferred or imposed by these rules  on the Director General may be  
exercised or discharged by the Director -General or any other person authorized by the Central  
Government in that behalf.” 
74.1. The Committee notes that Aero Club of India has played a pivotal role in 
promoting flying training through its 20 affiliated Flying Training Organizations across  
the country ever since independence and  giving more than 4000 trained pilots to the  
nation. The Committee desires that DGCA may consider delegating cer tain promotional 
and audit responsibilities  under the Aircrafts  Act, 1934  to share the responsibility  of 
maintaining checks and fulfilling the mandatory requirements of CPL/PPL at various  
FTOs. 
74.2. The Committee notes that regulatory authorities across the world allow the 
organizations that are  affiliated to Fédération Aéronautique Internationale (FAI) to regulate 
aero sports in the respective nations. However in India, no such authorization has been 
extended. In this regard, the Committee is of the view that DGCA may recognize an 
organization, preferably Aero Club of India,  as the regulatory body for aero sports and 
may also consider recognizing the Aero Club of India, which is affiliated to FAI, as the 
nodal body  to regulate and issue certificates of per mit for aero sport activities in the 
country, under a regulatory framework prepared by the DGCA. 
Shortage of availability of slots for turboprop aircrafts 
75.  The Committee notes that there is shortage of availability of slots for smaller 
turboprop aircrafts operations from metros like Delhi and Mumbai, to match the 
requirements of the RCS across the country. The Committee expresses its concern on this  
issue and desires that the Ministry should take urgent timely action to address this 
concern. 
 
*** 

69  
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS – AT A GLANCE 
 
 
Demand made by the Ministry vs. Actual allocation 
The Committee observes that excluding the budgetary allocation for Air India Asset 
Holding Limited (SPV) in 2021 -22, the projected requirement of the Ministry for all  the 
other Schemes under Revenue Section is ₹1358.85 crore, against which BE allocation of 
₹915.16 crore only has been made. The Committee, therefore, is apprehensive that the  
budgetary allocation made to the Ministry is not in sync with the actual budgetary 
requirements of the Ministry. The Civil Aviation sector has been dealt a huge blow by the  
Coronavirus pandemic and there is a need for huge intervention to save this sector, in this  
hour of crisis. The Committee notes that it is unreasonable that instead of giving an 
enhanced budgetary allocation, there has been a significant shortfall in the BE 2021 -22 
allocation of the Ministry. This surely is a matter of grave concern. The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that a higher fund allocation should be provid ed at the RE 2021-22 
stage, to the Ministry, so that the Ministry can fulfill its mandate and bolster the growth of  
Civil Aviation sector in the right direction. 
(Para 6.1) 
The Committee is disappointed to note that a mere token allocation of ₹1 crore has been 
made for ‘Development of Aero Sports’. While the creation of a new budget Head for  
Development of Aero Sports is a welcome move and a step in the right direction, the  
Committee feels that the amount allocated under the same, i.e., ₹1 crore is not suff icient to 
fund the development of Aero Sports in the country. Therefore, the Committee 
recommends that the Ministry may examine the different projects it can take up under this  
Head and come up with revised projections and request the Ministry of Finance to 
grant additional funds under this head at the R.E. 2021-22 stage. 
(Para 6.2.1) 
The Committee notes that ₹ 13.18 crore, ₹ 10 crore and ₹ 7.33 crore have been allocated in  
BE 2021 -22 for ‘Airports Authority of India – for Hollongi Project’, ‘Airports Econo mic 
Regulatory Authority of India’ and ‘IGRUA & National Aviation University’ against 
projected requirement of ₹ 144.01 crore, ₹ 23.50 crore and ₹ 16.51 crore respectively. These 
allocations are less than even half of the amount projected for these Heads. The Committee 
is constrained to observe that either the projections of the Ministry were unrealistic, or the  
Ministry failed to justify its projections before the Ministry of Finance. The Committee  
would like the Ministry to share its roadmap for the implementation of these projects. 

70  
(Para 6.3.2) 
The Committee underlines the importance of the Hollongi airport, for its proximity with a  
hostile neighbour. Allocation of not even 10% of the amount projected by the Ministry is  
not fair  for such a project of str ategic importance. The clarification of the Ministry that  
depending on the pace of expenditure, the matter of additional allocation will be taken up  
with the Ministry of Finance, at RE 2021 -22 stage, appears to be a very routine one. The  
Committee expects the Ministry to strive hard to expedite the construction of the Hollongi  
airport. 
 
(Para 6.3.3) 
The Committee is distressed to note that the Ministry has been able to spend only 64.9% of  
the enhanced RE allocation of ₹4131.63 crores, which means that the Ministry has to spend 
₹1450.78 crore in the remaining two months of the Financial Year 2020 -21. The Committee 
apprehends significant underutilization of the budgetary funds available with the Ministry.  
At a time when t he Government was facing major financial troubles on account of the  
Coronavirus pandemic, the Ministry received a considerable boost of 8.8% at RE 2020 -21, 
as compared to BE 2020 -21. Poor utilization of the funds would lead to idling of funds  
which should have been avoided. The Committee would like the Ministry to take stock of  
the reasons which caused the slow pace of utilization of funds and take corrective measures  
to ensure optimum utilization of the allocated funds, during the Financial Year 2021-22. 
(Para 8.1) 
Outstanding C&AG Audit Paras 
The Committee strongly urges the Ministry to scrutinize the reasons behind the delay in 
the submission of ATN and take necessary steps to ensure that such delays are not 
repeated. 
(Para 9.1) 
Savings and Delays 
The Com mittee takes note of the Savings of ₹37.01 crores, as furnished by the Ministry,  
which has been resulted under the Head ‘RCS’ for 2018 -19 (Revenue), due to requirement  
of less funds towards subsidy to airlines for providing air connectivity in the North Ea stern 
Region. 
(Para 10.1) 
The Committee desires that it may be informed about the reasons therefor. 
 
(Para 10.1.1) 

71  
The Committee may be apprised, in detail, of the reasons for the delay in the Digital Sky  
Platform Project. 
(Para 10.2.1) 
 
Regional Connectivity Scheme (RCS) – Ude Desh Ka Aam Nagrik (UDAN) 
The Committee appreciates the positive impact that the RCS Scheme has had, on the  
growth of the Civil Aviation sector in the country. The Scheme has not only made air travel 
affordable and extensive, it has  given a massive boost to the development of airports and  
infrastructure development in the Civil Aviation arena. The Committee notes that UDAN  
has helped airline operators in developing sustainable business models and in providing  
start-up and scale-up opportunities to small regional airlines. UDAN has also provided the  
much needed impetus to the economic development of remote regions and contributed to a  
more inclusive growth in the economic activity across the country. It has also contributed  
majorly to job growth and economic development in the country. 
(Para 11.3.1) 
The Committee takes note of the hurdles and problems faced by the various stakeholders,  
under this Scheme. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take strategic  
steps on a war foo ting, to ensure that such hitches/glitches are sorted out, to ensure the  
success and viability of the Scheme.  The Committee, further, underscores the importance  
of this Scheme and desires that the Ministry should, pro -actively, espouse the required  
measures, to make certain, that the UDAN scheme is given the necessary fillip, for the  
development and operationalization of potential airports. 
(Para 11.3.2) 
The Committee appreciates the timely action taken by the Ministry in forming a 
Committee to look into the current and future manpower requirement of ATCOs. 
However, merely forming a Committee will not suffice. This should be supplemented with a 
time bound, result oriented approach, to ensure that the operationalization of new airports  
and air travel security do not suffer for want of adequate number of ATCOs. The 
Committee so constituted, should meet at regular intervals and expedite its 
recommendations to enable AAI meet the shortage of ATCOs. 
(Para 11.4.1) 
Taking cognizance of the reply furnished by the Ministry, the Committee desires the 
Ministry to closely and meticulously, monitor the implementation and impact of the UDAN  
Scheme and formulate plans and guidelines to ensure that the benefits of the Scheme 

72  
actually reach the passengers, as per the spirit of the Scheme. 
(Para 11.5.1) 
The Committee recognizes the need for co-ordination between/ among the Ministry of Civil 
Aviation, with the Ministries of Tourism and Culture, in matters regarding air connectivity  
to important tourist destinations and cultural sites in the country. Hence, the Committee  
recommends the Ministry of Civil Aviation, to work in tandem with the Ministries of  
Culture and Tourism, in order to ensure greater harmony among the concerned Ministries  
who are vital stakeholders in this regard. 
(Para 11.6.1) 
 
The Committee would like the Ministry, to examine the reasons for non -commencement of 
routes that have already been awarded under the UDAN Scheme; to identify the 
bottlenecks in this regard; and to chalk out strategic steps to address the issues involved. 
(Para 11.7.1) 
Lifeline UDAN 
The Committee applauds this timely and valuable, life saving initiative of the Ministry. The  
Committee wishes to place on record, its appreciation for the role of air carriers involved in 
the Lifeline UDAN operations, under the hub and spoke model, with seamless co- 
ordination between various agencies. 
(Para 12.1) 
Vande Bharat Mission (VBM) 
The Committee places on record its deep appreciation for this massive repatriation 
operation carried out by the Ministry. 
(Para 13.1) 
Unmanned Aircraft System (Drone) 
The Committee takes note of the steps taken to establish an UTM Ecosystem in India and  
hopes that the formulation of UTM Policy would facilitate Drone Traffic Management  
Services for operation of Drones within the air traffic environment, in our air space, and  
that the UAS Rules would provide the requisite regulatory framework for Beyond Visual 
Line of Sight (BVLOS) operations, in the country. 
(Para 14.1) 
Drone Directorate 
The Committee opines that the setting up of Drone Directorate is a step forward in 

73  
strengthening the Drone ecosystem of India, by way of addressing the delays in rolling out  
permission, managing Drone Training Schools and fast tracking Drone certifications. The  
Committee desires the Ministry to ta ke necessary steps for the proper functioning of the  
Drone Directorate, which will help transform India to be a major global player in the arena 
of Drones. 
(Para 15.2) 
Digital Sky Platform 
The Committee takes note of the features of the Digital Sky Platfor m and would like to  
impress upon the Ministry, to take necessary steps to ensure that the project achieves its  
objectives, in an unhindered manner. 
(Para 16.1) 
Krishi Udan 
The Committee notes that this Scheme would provide the much needed quick cargo 
services to cater to the huge demand in the domestic and international markets, for the  
farm products of the North -Eastern region and other remote areas of the country. The  
Committee is happy to note that the Scheme would ensure that perishable products find  
good markets and market value, in and outside the country, which would otherwise have  
gone wasted, owing to lack of storage and connectivity. 
(Para 17.2) 
Sub-Group on Krishi Udan and Krishi Rail 
 
The Committee appreciates the constitution of the Sub Groups a nd hopes that these Sub  
Groups would help address the bottlenecks/ problems faced in the implementation of 
Krishi Udan and Krishi Rail, and ensure the success of the Schemes. 
(Para 18.1) 
Public Private Partnership of Airports 
The Committee underlines the n eed for a comprehensive negotiation and guidelines, in the  
award of airports under PPP model. The Committee urges the Ministry to take note of the  
management model of Kochi International Airport at Nedumbassery, and analyze the  
advantages and liabilities o f such a model. The Ministry, may, after such analysis, adopt  
such a concept, if the advantages outweigh the liabilities. The Committee, further, stresses  
upon the need to make sure that the guidelines regarding operationalizing the new airports  
are unbiased, so that all parts of India are benefitted by the same. 
(Para 19.3) 

74  
Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for International Aviation 
The Committee recommends that urgent, substantive steps should be taken to allay the  
widespread concern/fear regarding serious adverse implications of CORSIA on the airlines  
in India. The Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure that India’s interests are  
protected at any cost, keeping in view the vital role played by the Civil Aviation sector in  
the development and gr owth of our economy. The Committee desires that the concerns of  
India in this regard, should be raised at the diplomatic level effectively. 
(Para 20.4) 
 
Flying Training Organizations 
In order to meet the training requirements for the future growth of aviat ion sector in the  
country, particularly with reference to the huge demand for trained pilots, the Ministry  
should explore the possibility of creating a funding mechanism for promoting new FTOs. 
(Para 21.3.1) 
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi (IGRUA) 
The Committee appreciates the roadmap for IGRUA and earnestly hopes that the roadmap 
would  implemented at the earliest. 
(Para 22.3) 
Aero Club of India (ACI) 
The Committee would like the Ministry to follow up with ACI, their much awaited 
proposal for budgetary support. The Ministry may apprise the Committee about the 
response of ACI on this issue, at the earliest. 
(Para 23.1) 
 
The Committee takes note of the fact that training aircrafts and adventure sports 
equipment which were provided by the Aero Club of Ind ia to several State Governments  
including the State of Rajasthan, Bangalore Flying Club and IIT Kanpur, have been lying  
unutilized for several years,  while the Aero Club of India has  been making efforts to  
retrieve such aircrafts that are under -utilized or un-utilized by the State  Governments. 
The Committee recommends that ACI should be supported by the Government in retrieval  
of all such underutilized or unutilized aero sports assets provided by it for FTOs and  
development of aero sports, since they are Government property. 
(Para 23.2) 
 
The Committee takes note of the fact that Aero Club of India has worked under the 

75  
purview of the Ministry of Civil Aviation. ACI has also figured prominently in the 
Outcome Budget and the Annual Report of MoCA. Over the yea rs, the annual audited  
accounts of ACI, both in English and in Hindi, are placed in both Houses of Parliament. It  
also has a deemed status as an autonomous body under the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The  
Aero Club of India, which has a legacy and was respon sible for licensing, even during the  
pre-independence days, has been  the primary organization promoting Flying Training  
Organizations (FTOs) across the country, by providing them infrastructural support by  
means of aircrafts and equipment provided  by the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The 
Committee takes note of the update that the Aero Club of India had its official location and  
headquarters at the Safdarjung Airport for over thirty years. The ACI building was 
constructed on the leased land given to them by t he Ministry of Tourism. It has  been 
observed that on the expiry of the lease  period, despite performing semi -Government 
function of promoting the FTOs across the country, the Aero Club of India was served an  
eviction notice by imposing a penalty of non -extension of lease and thereafter, through a  
Court order, the eviction was initiated, claiming penalties. The Committee feels that since  
ACI is a body with the support of the Ministry of Civil Aviation itself, it deserves that the  
official building be restore d to it in recognition of  performing its role as a support and 
semi- autonomous body under the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The Committee desires that 
the Ministry of Civil Aviation may review the matter and issue appropriate instructions to 
the AAI Board for re-allotment of the said premises to Aero Club of India. 
(Para 23.3) 
Maintenance Engineering Training School 
The Committee takes note of the policy initiatives made by the Ministry for Pilot Training  
Institutes, Flying Training Organizations and Mainten ance Engineering Training Schools  
in the country. The Committee hopes that these initiatives would positively address the  
noticeable shortage of pilots and type rated commanders; and other technical personnel for  
the Civil Aviation sector in the country. The Committee calls upon the Ministry to facilitate 
the Pilot Training Institutes, Flying Training Organizations and Maintenance Engineering  
Training Schools, in executing the onerous responsibility of tapping the manpower 
potential and skilled workforce available in the country. 
(Para 24.1) 
 
Maintenance, Repair and Overhauling (MRO) facilities in India 

76  
The Committee takes cognizance of the immense potential that India has, in offering MRO  
facilities in its soil. However, the country has not yet been able to fully exploit the 
opportunities available in this sector. It would be a huge loss for the country, if we do not  
tap the vast technical and skill base, at hand, in the country. There is urgent need for the  
creation of a congenial environment in the countr y to cater to the requirements of the  
sector, which provides benefits  in terms of jobs, prosperity and boost to the economy. The  
Committee, therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry should give  requisite focus 
on the issues presently faced in the MR O sector and chalk out effective as well as strategic  
steps, to ensure that India evolves into a key international player in offering MRO facilities. 
(Para 25.2) 
The Committee would like to urge the Ministry to analyze the prospects and take necessary  
favourable action thereon. The Committee realizes the huge potential of such air strips and  
recommends that the Ministry should examine the feasibility of making available, such air  
strips, to FTOs who are willing to open their schools in those areas. 
(Para 25.3.1) 
 
Rationalization of FTO and MRO charges 
The Committee welcomes this initiative of the Ministry. 
 
(Para 26) 
 
Domestic Aircraft Manufacturing 
The Committee is gratified to note the timely action taken by the Ministry to promote 
domestic aircraft manufacturing. 
(Para 27.1) 
Aircraft financing/ leasing 
The Committee hopes that the steps taken by the Ministry will give the much needed  
impetus to aircraft financing/leasing in the country. 
(Para 28.2) 
 
Airspace Control 
The Committee hopes that the Flexible Us e of Airspace (FUA) strategy between civil and  
military users, will render an  array of benefits and sustainability to airlines,  by saving 
flight time and reducing airline operational costs. 
(Para 29.2) 

77  
The Committee appreciates this initiative of the Ministry. 
(Para 30) 
 
 
 
 
Airports Authority of India (AAI) 
The Committee is pleased to note that AAI has set a new benchmark in its endeavour to  
reduce carbon footprint. The Committee exhorts AAI to continue its efforts to conserve  
environment, to the extent po ssible, and to reduce the adverse impact of carbon emissions  
on the global ecosystem, in line with the national as well as global climate change 
initiatives. 
(Para 31.1) 
The Committee desires t he Ministry to ensure that FRT  employed at the airports is  
infallible. The Committee also urges upon the Ministry to provide all facilities of 
international standards, in its airports. 
(Para 32) 
Adequate connectivity of airports with roads and railways 
The Committee recommends the Ministry to ensure that requisite syn ergy is achieved  
between/amongst the concerned Ministries/Departments, so that airports are well 
connected with other means of transport and tourists/flyers reach their destinations, from  
the airports, in a smooth and safe manner. 
(Para 33.1) 
 
Implementation of SKYBOOKS360 System 
The Committee recognizes the utility of SKYBOOKS360 System as a unique customized  
enterprise resource planning solution to provide an integrated e-business to airport 
operators and air navigation service providers and hopes that it  would provide seamless  
and integral management of core business processes. 
(Para 34.1) 
AIR SEWA 
While appreciating the initiative of the Ministry, the Committee recommends that  the 
grievances of passenger s should be addressed in a time bound manner. The C ommittee 
desires that the Air Sewa Platform should be upgraded periodically, so that it fulfills the  
dynamic requirements of the air passengers. The Committee underlines the need for 
formulating the desired SOP for the purpose. 

78  
(Para 35.1) 
Digi Yatra 
The Committee, while appreciating the initiative of the Ministry, accentuates the need to 
ensure data privacy and data protection, in the process of implementation of Digi Yatra. 
(Para 36.2) 
Seaplane Operations in India 
The Committee takes note of the innovati ve initiatives taken by the Ministry to promote  
Seaplane operations in the country. Needless to say, the Seaplane services will revolutionize  
the nation’s regional connectivity. The Committee desires that the Ministry should ensure  
that the necessary amenities, matching up to international standards for Seaplane 
operations, such as terminal buildings, facilitation counters, check -in counters, modern  
ticketing methods, food counters, motels, shopping facilities etc. are provided, for the 
smooth operations of Seaplanes. 
(Para 37.1) 
The Committee also underlines the urgent need to formulate a  ‘Seaplane Policy’. The  
Committee desires the Ministry to conduct a feasibility study for landing sea planes in  
Rajasthan and furnish the same to the Committee, including the action taken thereon. 
(Para 37.2) 
Skill Development/ Training 
The Committee recog nizes the fact that the Indian a viation industry is one of the fastest  
growing markets in the world and that India has a vast talent pool of skilled manpower. 
Initiatives s uch as ‘Make in India’ campaign and ‘Atmanirbhar’ campaign have given a  
huge boost to industry players. The focus on indigenization in the Civil Aviation sector has  
created a high demand for good technical talent and skill development. The Committee,  
therefore, underlines the need for better interventions for skill development/training in the  
country, to augment the skills of available manpower. The Committee recommends the  
Ministry to formulate futuristic plans for devising tailor -made technical courses fo r skill  
development, training and research, in consultation with the private sector. The Committee 
is of the considered opinion that the Ministry should endeavour to incorporate 
international best practices, in the area of skill development. 
(Para 38.2) 
Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) 
The Committee takes serious note of the high ATF prices prevailing in the country. The 

79  
Committee welcomes the steps taken by State Governments in reducing the VAT on ATF  
for the flights operated under UDAN Scheme. The Committee i s concerned to note that the  
State Governments have shown reluctance to reduce the VAT on ATF for other flights. The 
Ministry may follow up and deliberate this issue with the State Governments, in order to  
bring much needed relief and help, to the air passengers, and the Aviation Sector. 
(Para 39.2) 
 
The Committee is of the considered view that the issue of inclusion of ATF under GST  
should be pursued vigorously, by the Ministry, with the GST Council. The Committee  
hopes that the GST Council will consider the proposal favourably. 
(Para 40.1) 
 
Development of airport infrastructure 
The Committee desires the Ministry to develop a comprehensive, strategic and futuristic  
Master Plan for the development and expansion of airports in the country, to meet the ever  
growing demand for brand new and better airports. The Committee urges the Ministry to  
ensure that adequate parking space and slots are available at the airports. The Committee  
would like the Ministry to formulate necessary policies, schemes and guidelines, t o attract 
much needed investment for airport projects. 
(Para 41.1) 
 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation made in its 276th Report, for ensuring 
sufficient space for commercial shops, while granting approval for new airports. Further, 5  
Star/3 Star hotels and multiplexes should be constructed near the new airports. The 
Committee also desires that extra land, if any, should not be sold and should be kept for  
future developmental activities. 
(Para 41.2) 
 
Development of Airports 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should co-ordinate with the concerned 
stakeholders/ entities and sort out issues concerning compensation, clearances and 
litigation, at the earliest. The Committee expects the Ministry to furnish the details of the  
specific action taken in this regard. 
(Para 42.1) 
Necessary Navigation Aids at all Airports 
The Committee emphasizes the imminent need to employ modern technologically advanced 

80  
navigation aids and facilities at all airports in the country. The Ministry should urgently  
chalk out an Action Plan to operate CAT-II/III(B) ILS in all airports, in a fixed time bound 
period. 
(Para 43.1) 
Providing Passenger Processing System at the Airports 
 
The Committee appreciates the efforts made by the Ministry, to proactively monitor and  
address the issues faced by the Civil Aviation sector, including the provision for Passenger  
Processing System at the Airports. 
(Para 44) 
Making Airports Accessible to all under the ‘Accessible India Campaign’ 
 
The Committee applauds the sensitivity and empathy show n by the Ministry, towards the  
genuine needs and concerns of the differently abled people. The Committee hopes that the  
Ministry will be able to fulfill the objective of the campaign to make a barrier free and  
conducive travel environment for differently abled people. 
(Para 45.1) 
Srinagar airport 
The Committee is dismayed to note that regular delay in flight operations and cancellation  
of flights occur at Srinagar airport, due to non -availability of CAT -II or CAT -III facility. 
The Committee fails to underst and the reason behind non -installation of CAT II/ CAT  III 
facilities in Srinagar airport, in the present age of technology and that too, at one of the  
strategic locations of J&K. The Committee takes serious note of the inconvenience and  
delays faced by the  flyers, especially Members of Parliament, international & domestic  
tourists, due to such deficiencies at the Srinagar airport. The Committee hopes that 
Modernization of Military Airfields (MAFI) project which is a turn key project, would  
enhance the operational capability, by facilitating air operations of civilian aircrafts, even 
in poor visibility and adverse weather conditions, while enhancing aerospace safety. 
(Para 46.2) 
 
 
The Committee feels that in view of the fact that  Srinagar, being one of the mo st attractive 
tourist places in India,  visited by a large number of tourists, the absence of CAT -II or 
CAT-III facility at the  Srinagar airport hampers the flow of tourists to the Kashmir 
valley, which in turn affects its economy badly. Therefore, the Mini stry should impress 
upon IAF to install such facility at the airport, at the earliest. 

81  
(Para 46.3) 
While taking note of the above mentioned recommendations and facts, the Committee  
observes that MAFI project of the Indian Air Force should decide and cull  out those  
activities which are primarily navigational  equipment including approach landing systems,  
PAPI runway lights, threshold lights, instruments and equipment  etc., where AAI/ATS  
have a unique advantage, as they have been handling these systems across the country, for 
over seven decades. Domestic civil aviation safety is the primary responsibility of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation, DGCA and AAI. The utilization of these navigational 
aids/approach landing systems/equipment etc., which have been installed across the 
country, is primarily done by the AAI, which has domain knowledge. They are also 
familiar with the quality procurement processes, maintenance and operational 
requirements of these instruments which they have been using for Civil operations for over 
fifty years. The Committee recommends that a High Level Committee may be created with  
the Indian Air Force to cull out those activities related to navigation and landing facilities  
which are, pri marily, in the domain knowledge  with the AAI , for Civil operations. The  
Committee recommends that apart from this, the development of the rest of the 
infrastructure planned under the MAFI scheme may continue as envisaged, for a 
greater synergy between civil aviation requirements and operational requirements of 
Indian Air Force. 
(Para 46.3.1) 
 
The Committee strongly recommends the adoption of best international safety practices, in  
the Civil Aviation sector, particularly at airports, as well as landing of airplanes in difficult  
terrains of Jammu and Kashmir. The Committee underlines the need for coordinated  
efforts, for providing competitively priced mechanism, adequate and convenient transport,  
advanced infrastructure facilities and tourist safety, to cater to the needs of domestic and  
foreign tourists arriving in the region. 
(Para 46.6) 
Kannur airport 
The Committee takes note of the steps taken/ proposed to be taken for the expansion of 
Kannur Airport. 
(Para 47.1) 
Kushinagar airport 
The Committee takes note of the upgradation work carried out at the Kushinagar Airport 

82  
and desires that the work should be completed within the stipulated time frame. 
 
(Para 48.1) 
Kolhapur airport 
The Committee takes note of the upgradation work undertaken at the Kolhapur airport  
and desires that the outstanding issues be sorted out with the concerned authorities, 
without any further delay. 
(Para 49.1) 
 
Pakyong airport 
The Committee, during its visit in October, 2018 to Pakyong Airport, observed that flight  
operations were stopped due to poor visibility. The Committee may be apprised, of the  
current status of flight operations from Pakyong Airport. 
(Para 50.1) 
Thanjavur airport 
The Committee urges upon the Ministry to sort out both issues, in order to facilitate the 
smooth exchange of land between AAI and IAF. 
(Para 51.1) 
Keshod airport 
The Committee takes note of the recent developments that have taken place, in respect of  
Keshod Airport, and desires that the matter relating to leasing of land which is pending  
with the Ministry of Defence, be pursued vigorously, so that the process of handing over 
the airport to the Indian Coast Guard, is completed. 
(Para 52.1) 
 
Nagpur Airport 
The Committee takes note of the upgradation of amenities available at  Nagpur Airport.  
The Committee desires that the selection of Strategic  Partner (PPP Partner) m ay be done  
at the earliest. 
(Para 53.1) 
Airport at Bihar 
It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that the existing Patna airport is under  
further development, with a stipulated investment of around ₹1200 crores. However, while  
this investment is on, it has also been observed that despite provisioning a spend of ₹1200  
crores on this project, no additional operational advantage would accrue on the operations 

83  
side. The limitations of non-installation of approach lighting system, CAT -II/CAT-III ILS 
and other Navigational aid facilities, which could have enhanced the operational capacity,  
will be there. More so,  the load  penalty would  always be there, since there would  be 
inherent restrictions on operations during peak summer season. Also, the same limitations  
would accrue during winters and foggy seasons. The fact that the AAI was fully aware of  
the expenditure being incurred, without any added operational advantage, is a matter of  
deep concern regarding the process of decision-making. However, since the project is 
already under implementation, the Committee desires that a project for the city -side, at  
Patna, with additional terminal parking capacity and creation of parallel taxi track , should 
be taken up on priority, to justify the investment made so far. 
(Para 54.1) 
The Committee observes that if the Bihta airport is constructed as a Civil Enclave, it would  
still have the same limitations and constraints faced by the Patna airport. It  would be a  
sheer replication of Patna airport, without any distinct operational advantage, except for  
landing A321 category of aircraft. 
(Para 54.2) 
The Committee notes that AAI has asked for additional 191.5 acres of land. The Committee 
observes that if AAI would proceed with the planned expansion of Bihta airport, even  
without having a clear possession of additional 191.5 acres of land, it would result in an  
unsound investment. The Committee, therefore, observes that the proposed Bihta airport  
has still several limitations than any Greenfield project which may be considered for the  
State of Bihar. 
(Para 54.3) 
The Committee notes that there is a proposal for a new Greenfield project in Bihar,  at 
Sonpur in Saran, almost 10 kms away from Patna,  with easy four-lane road which is under 
construction and would be the first Greenfield project in the State of Bihar, catering to the  
civil aviation requirement of the region for the next 50 to 100 years. The Committee would  
like to know the status of  this project and whether the Government of India approached  
the State Government of Bihar to indicate the advantages/disadvantages of a Greenfield  
project vis-a-vis a brown field defence project with reference to operations, utilization,  
future expansion, etc. 
(Para 54.4) 

84  
Knowing the capacity enhancement and the future requirement of aviation in Bihar, the  
Committee recommends that the AAI should consider acquiring   the  land on its own,  
which is at a very nominal price compared to city areas, for the creation of a 
Greenfield project in Bihar as a part of the Prime Minister’s package and to plan the  
expansion requirement of Eastern India, particularly the State of Bihar, which has a 
population of approximately 12 crores. Notably, the State of Bihar is one of the few large  
States, which does not have an international Greenfield airport, yet. The Committee would  
also like the AAI to carry forward the proposal of the new Greenfield airport project to  
cater to the future growth of civil aviation sector in Bihar, in particular, a nd in the nation,  
in general. 
(Para 54.5) 
 
Greenfield Airports 
The Committee recommends that during the entire process of commissioning, planning,  
construction and execution of Greenfield Airports, the environmental and developmental  
aspects should be thoroughly deliberated upon, examined and duly implemented. 
Furthermore, various issues which might crop up during the process, should be tackled by  
the Ministry, without delay and efficiently. 
(Para 55.1) 
The Committee notes the inconvenience of passengers, who are dropped by the Taxi 
operators at the airport approach point, from where passengers, including the elderly, have 
to walk up to more than 400-500 steps with their luggage, to reach the departure gate of the 
Goa Dabolim Airport. An immediate solution should be found by the Airports Authority of 
India for ease of transportation of those passengers who are dropped at the toll entry point  
of the existing airport at Goa-Dabolim. 
(Para 55.2) 
The Committee takes note of the initiatives taken by the Airports A uthority of India to  
improve amenities and city side terminal area as well. As Mopa airport is likely to 
commence operations in the next couple of years, it would be a challenge for Dabolim  
airport to retain its traffic. Hence, it is very important that AA I, in order to maintain  
traffic growth and utilization of newly created assets  and extended facilities, gears up for 
the challenge that they are going to face, by the potential growth of other airports viz., 
Mopa and Sindhudurg. 
(Para 55.3) 

85  
Operationalization of Defence airports for Civil Aviation 
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry and feels that the  
reply is quite evasive. Therefore, the Committee desires that a detailed reply may be 
furnished by the Ministry in this regard. 
(Para 56.1) 
The Committee desires  that the Ministry  may submit a detailed  note, after due study, on  
the difference between a Greenfield project, a brownfield project and a defence brownfield  
project (civil enclave). All advantages and disadvantages of each category of project should 
be spelt out comprehensively so that State Governments which are willing to undertake  
expansion of civil aviation activities may avail the note for sound decision making. 
(Para 57) 
A complete and comprehensive report should be obtained from Airline Operators, 
Airports Authority of India, Air Traffic Control and cargo operators including the DGCA,  
State administration and BCAS , to specify the challenges/shortcomings as far as use of 
Civil Enclaves across the country is concerned. 
 
 
Karipur Flight Accident 
The Committee desires speedy investigation into the mishap. 
(Para 57.1) 
 
 
 
(Para 58.1) 
 
Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB) 
The Committee feels that the administrative jurisdiction of AAIB under the Ministry of  
Civil Aviation go against the tenets of impartiality and equality, since it may raise the  
genuine question of conflict of interest. The principle of good governance expects the 
placement of AAIB under a Ministry other than the Ministry of Civil Aviation, just like 
CCRS functions under the administrative purview of MoCA, though it looks after railway  
accidents. The Committee may also be apprised of the steps taken for shifting the 
jurisdiction of AAIB and also to empower AAIB. 
(Para 59.1) 
 
National Aero Sports Policy 
The Committee is of the view that aero sports have a huge potential for growth, in terms of  
tourism and employment generation, in  the country. However, the infrastructure needed,  
to realize such potential, is missing at present. The Committee calls upon the Ministry to 

86  
formulate a  National Aero -Sports Policy to help attract investments, both foreign and  
domestic, in the field of aerosports. The Committee underlines the need for bringing in the  
latest technology, equipments, infrastructure and in ternational best practices, to promote  
aero sports into the country. The Committee also notes that in the process of the 
formulation of the National Aero Sports Policy, wider consultation should be held with the 
stakeholders, which should also include Aero sports Wing of the NCC in the Ministry of 
Defence, State  Governments, the Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports and Ministry of 
Tourism, along with  the Aero Club of India, which is the nodal body for FTOs and aero 
sports in India. 
(Para 60.1) 
Flight Radio Telephoney Licence (FRTOL) exams 
The Committee takes note of the reply furnished by the Ministry. The Ministry may update 
the Committee about the response of the Department of Telecommunication, to the 
communication of the Ministry of Civil Aviation, requesti ng the former, to allow DGCA to  
conduct RTR(A) examination, along with the CPL examination, that is already being 
conducted by DGCA. The Committee feels that since this is an inter -Ministerial matter at a 
policy level, the Cabinet Secretary should convene a meeting and decide on merits, the issue 
of RTR(A) licenses by DGCA, along with CPL examination, as mandated under ICAO  
guidelines. This will streamline the process of issue of licenses from a single window and  
also at the same time, create ease of traini ng for pilots in the aviation sector, to meet the  
huge shortfall of trained pilots in the aviation sector in India. 
(Para 60.A.1) 
All Women Cockpit Crew in Air India 
The Committee is pleased to note such a historical event and applauds the Ministry for 
such an exciting and novel initiative. 
(Para 61.1) 
Enhanced share of Indian carriers in the international traffic 
The Committee welcomes the initiatives taken by the Ministry to enhance the share of 
Indian carriers in the international traffic. 
(Para 62.1) 
Mobile Air Dispensary and Air Ambulance 
The Committee recognizes the importance of Mobile Air Dispensary and Air Ambulance,  
which are life saving. The Committee desires the Ministry to ensure that the issue 
regarding ownership of the scheme for providing air  dispensary services in North Eastern  

87  
region, is sorted out at the earliest. The Committee further desires that in the event of lack 
of clarity regarding the disinvestment of Pawan Hans Ltd., the Ministry should take 
necessary action to identify stakeholde rs other than  PHL, for the fruitful  implementation 
of the scheme. 
(Para 63.1) 
Helicopter Services 
The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Ministry to enhance helicopter 
connectivity in the country. The Committee recommends the Ministry to adopt  a futuristic 
approach in connecting important tourist destinations in the country, through helicopter  
services, in a planned manner. The Committee emphasizes the need to ensure adequate  
infrastructure, amenities and facilities at the heliports. 
(Para 64.3) 
Air Travel Safety Concerns 
The Committee strongly feels that the Ministry should accord due priority to the safety and 
security of air travelers, in the light of increasing incidents and examine the reasons behind  
such incidents and take remedial action. 
(Para 65.1) 
Aircraft (Amendment) Act, 2020 
The Committee appreciates the statutory provisions for ensuring zero tolerance in the  
matter of air safety. The Committee is of the view that such an amendment would fulfill the 
requirements of ICAO. The Committee expects that such an amendment will lead to 
improvement in the level of safety and security of aircraft operations in the country. 
(Para 66.1) 
Air Cargo 
The Committee is of the considered view that India has a huge untapped market potential  
in terms of a ir cargo. The Committee strongly feels that the Ministry should undertake  
dynamic policy and structural changes in the air cargo sector, in order to ensure that there  
is a much desired boom in this sector. The Ministry should also aim towards transparency  
and paperless trade environment in this sector. 
(Para 67.1) 
Emergency landing and cancellation of flights 
The Committee is disturbed to note that the air travelers get a raw deal, many times, in  
cases of emergency landings and cancellation of flights by ai rlines. The Committee is of the  

88  
considered view that it is incumbent upon the airlines, as well as the AAI, to ensure the 
safety, comfort and health of the passengers, especially women, children and patients.  It is 
a matter of concern to the Committee that  there are guidelines in this regard; but they are  
not complied with. The Committee strongly recommends the Ministry to ensure that the  
guidelines are scrupulously adhered to and that stringent, punitive action should be taken  
in case of violation of the said guidelines. 
(Para 68.1) 
 
Cancellation charges 
The Committee expresses its anguish that there is no uniformity in the cancellation charges  
levied by the airlines. The Committee underlines the need for rationalizing the cancellation  
charges and prescribi ng an upper limit of cancellation charges that can be collected from  
the passengers. The Committee reiterates its recommendation in this regard, made in its  
276th Report, requiring the airlines to restrict not more than 50% of the base fare as  
cancellation charges. The tax and fuel surcharge collected should be refunded to the 
passengers on cancellation of tickets. The Committee hopes that the Ministry would be able  
to persuade the airlines for such rationalization in the interest of the passengers. 
(Para 69.1) 
Core Group on Safety and Security 
On recommendations of the Committee, a Core Group has been constituted under the  
Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation to address the safety and security  
aspects. In pursuance thereof, the Committee would like to make the following 
suggestions/recommendations, for inclusion in the mandate of the Core Group:- 
(i) Adequate arrangements of proper lights and other landing instruments should be  
made at all airports, particularly to cater to flight operations du ring foggy days. Periodic  
upgradation of such equipments should also be made. An action plan, with feasible 
timelines, should be prepared, and steps should be taken to strictly adhere to the timelines.  
The Competent Authority should give detailed reasons in case of delays, if any. 
(ii) Runways which were created during the pre -independence period and are lying idle  
as on date, should be identified and be developed in such a way that they can be used for  
flight operations in case of emergency situations, such as natural calamities and war. 
(iii) The Core Group should ensure necessary coordination between NHAI/Ministry of  
Road Transport & Highways and Ministry of Railways in order to identify

89  
stretches/ pockets of land, along National Highways and Railway tracks, to facilitate 
emergency landing of helicopter ambulance in the event of accidents/natural calamities. 
(iv) It should be ensured that international best practices and guidelines are adopted 
and implemented in the operations of helicopter ambulances. 
(v) In order to further strengthen the Core Group, a Sub-Committee, headed by an 
officer not below the rank of Joint Secretary may be formed, comprising the Ministries of 
(i) Railways; (ii) Road Transport & Highways; (iii) Ports, Shipping & Waterways; and (iv) 
Civil Aviation. 
 
(vi) The Sub -Committees may consider engaging  the services of consultants, who are  
experts in the respective fields, with requisite global exposure and good reputation for the  
services rendered by them. 
(vii) The Sub-Committees should mandatorily report to the Core Gr oup on Safety and  
Security, on a monthly basis, to enable the Core Group to review and monitor the activities  
of these Sub-Committees. 
(viii) Similar Sub-Committees may be formed in the Ministry of Defence & Home 
Affairs; and ONGC & GAIL. Since these Ministries/Organisations are not under the 
purview of the Standing Committee, it is suggested that in case of any bottlenecks/logjams  
in this regard, the Standing Committee should be informed accordingly, at the earliest. 
(ix) The review of the activities and progress made  by the Core Group should be done  
monthly and after the matters are streamlined and teething problems are sorted out, the  
review meetings may be held on quarterly basis. If need is felt, a fresh legislation may be  
piloted by the Ministry of Civil Aviation in this regard, at the earliest. 
(x) The recent glacier burst at Uttarakhand led to loss of precious lives. Provision for  
helicopter landing facilities at ecologically sensitive areas may be considered, to ensure  
effective disaster management operations. For s uch facilitation, the Core Group should  
actively engage with NDRF also regularly. There is a need for close monitoring of 
ecological changes using the latest technology available, in order to prevent such natural  
disasters. In conclusion, the Committee acc entuates the doubtless necessity for very close  
and effective coordination among all the related Ministries/ Departments/ Organizations  
and entities. 
(Para 70) 

90  
Hotline number among the Ministries for effective co- ordination in case of emergency 
The Committee welcomes this initiative of the Ministry. 
(Para 71) 
Commission of Railway Safety 
The Committee desires that timely action be taken by the Ministry to address the above 
stated concerns/issues. 
(Para 72.1) 
The Committee takes note of the above stated li ne of action and desires  that the Ministry 
may furnish periodical information to this Committee, regarding the progress made in 
regard to the same. 
(Para 72.3) 
Huge losses incurred by private airlines 
The Committee recognizes the fact that the aviation sec tor has been hit hard by global  
economic slowdown and the Covid -19 pandemic. The Committee understands that  the 
adverse effect of the Covid -19 pandemic, on the airlines operating in the country, which  
were already reeling under heavy losses, was unpreceden ted. While acknowledging the  
resilience shown by the civil  aviation sector in the country  during such trying times, the  
Committee recommends that the Ministry should turn this situation to its advantage, by  
bringing in immediate and long term measures, to strengthen the civil aviation sector in the 
country and to enable its resurgence. 
(Para 73.1) 
Miscellaneous 
The Committee notes that Aero Club of  India has played a pivotal role in promoting  
flying training through its 20 affiliated Flying Training Organiz ations across the country  
ever since independence and  giving more than 4000 trained pilots to the nation.  The 
Committee desires that DGCA may consider delegating certain promotional and audit  
responsibilities under the Aircrafts Act, 1934 to share the resp onsibility of maintaining  
checks and fulfilling the mandatory requirements of CPL/PPL at various FTOs. 
(Para 74.1) 
In this regard, the Committee is of the view that DGCA may recognize an organization,  
preferably Aero Club of India, as the regulatory body for aero sports and may also 
consider recognizing the Aero Club of India, which is affiliated to FAI, as the nodal body to  
regulate and issue certificates of permit for aero sport activities in the country, under a  
regulatory framework prepared by the DGCA. 

91  
(Para 74.2) 
Shortage of availability of slots for turboprop aircrafts 
The Committee notes that there is shortage of availability of slots for smaller turboprop  
aircrafts operations from metros like Delhi and Mumbai, to match the requirements of the  
RCS across the country. The Committee expresses its concern on this issue and desires that  
the Ministry should take urgent timely action to address this concern. 
(Para 75) 
  

92  
 
 
 
MINUTES 
  

93  
XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11:00 A.M. on Tuesday, the 16 th February, 2021 in Room No. 63, 
Parliament House, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
 
1. Shri T. G. Venkatesh                        - Chairman 
  
Rajya Sabha 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
5. Shri K. C. Venugopal 
6. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
  
Lok Sabha 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
10. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
11. Shri Dushyant Singh 
  
Secretariat 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary   
  
I. Witnesses 
 *  *   * 
II. Witnesses 
 Ministry of Civil Aviation 
1. Shri Pradeep Singh Kharola                Secretary 
2. Smt. Vandana Aggarwal                    Senior Economic Advisor       
3. Shri Vimalendra Anand Patwardhan  Joint Secretary & Advisor Financial 
                                                                                                     
4. Smt. Usha Padhee                               Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Satyendra Kumar Mishra            Joint Secretary 

94  
6. Smt. Rubina Ali                                  Joint Secretary 
7.  Shri Angshumali Rastogi                   Joint Secretary 
8.  Shri Amber Dubey                             Joint Secretary 
9.  Smt. Bhawna Singh                           Deputy Director General, ER 
10.  Shri Pranjol Chandra                          Director 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
11. Smt. Puja Singh Mandol                     Joint Director General 
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
12.  Shri M. Ganapathy                             Director General 
Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India 
13.  Col. Manu Sooden                             Secretary 
Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau 
14.  Gp. Capt. Aurobindo Handa             Director General 
Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) 
15.  Shri Shailesh Kumar Pathak              Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety 
16.  Shri Rajmal Khoiwal                         CSTE 
17.  Shri Rajiv Kumar                               Deputy CRS (G) 
18.  Shri Shalabh Tyagi                             Deputy CRS 
Airports Authority of India 
19.  Shri Anuj Aggarwal                           Chairman 
20.  Shri I.N. Murthy                                Member (Ops.) 
21.  Shri A.K. Pathak                                Member (Planning) 
22.  Shri K. Vinayak Rao                          Member (Finance) 
Air India 
23.  Shri Rajiv Bansal                               Chairman & Managing Director 
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi 
24.  Shri Krishnendu Gupta                      Director 
AAI Cargo Logistics & Allied Service Co. Ltd. 
25.  Shri Keku Bomi Gazder                    Chief Executive Officer 

95  
2. *             *                    *. 
3.         *             *                   *. 
4.          *             *                   *. 
5.          *             *                   *. 
6.          *             *                   *. 
7.          *             *                   *. 
8.         *             *                   *. 
9.         *             *                   *. 
II. Oral Evidence of Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation 
10.       At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation and other 
senior officials to the meeting. The Chairman,  inter alia,  requested the Secretary to make a 
presentation on the Demands for Grants (2021 -22) with respect to the performance of the 
Ministry in 2020 -21 and the budget ary allocations made to the Ministry in Budget Estimates 
2021-22. 
11.       The Secretary made a detailed presentation about the Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
of Civil Aviation for the year 2021 -22. He stated t hat an amount of ₹3,224.67/ - crores has been 
earmarked as Budget Estimates for the F.Y. 2021 -22. He further informed the Committee that 
the Ministry was allocated ₹ 4,131.63/ - crores as Revised Estimates (2020-21), out of which, the 
actual expenditure stands at ₹ 2,680.85/- crores (till January, 2021). 
 
 
____________________________ 
*relates to other matters 

96  
12.       The Secretary explained that the aviation sector has been adversely impacted due to the 
onset of COVID-19 pandemic and that the Ministry has taken various initiatives, to curb the after 
effects of the pandemic in different segments such as Passenger Traffic; Cargo Transportation; 
and Drone Operations. He stated that under the „Vande Bharat Mission‟, a major repatriation 
operation was undertaken by the Government, wherein, around 43.23 lakh stranded Indians were 
brought from different parts of the World, and that around 13.93 lakh passengers were facilitated 
out of India, till 14 th February, 2021. He also clarified that exclusive air -links or „Air Bubbles‟ 
have been established with 25 countries, in order to facilitate emergency passage of people. 
13.       The Secretary explained that apart from Passenger Traffic, the Ministry has focused on 
the revival of Air Cargo operations by giving priority to medical/ pharma cargo; agri-produce; & 
essential imports and by operating the cargo terminals on 24*7 basis. He highlighted the fact that 
near normalization of 91% of air cargo handled in India was achieved in December, 2020 as 
compared to December, 2019. 
14.       The Secretary deposed that under „Vaccine Maitri‟, around 334.44 lakh doses of Covid -
19 vaccine were distributed to domestic consignees and 268.81 lakh doses to 24 countries across 
the world, till 15 th February, 2021. He also informed the Comm ittee that draft Unmanned 
Aircraft Systems (UAS) Rules 2020 are now with the Legislative Department for vetting and that 
it is likely to be notified shortly. He stated that a separate Drone Directorate, headed by a Deputy 
Director General, has been set up in Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA) on 
21st October, 2020; and that the first batch of the Drone training school has commenced from 
11th February, 2021. 
15.       The Secretary informed the Committee that the Civil Aviation sector is going to f ace 
several challenges such as constrained infrastructure; viability of airlines being under pressure; 
sub-optimal leasing; increasing fuel cost; high taxation burden; sub -optimal skill development 
facilities etc. in the near future. He elucidated upon the  area of Skill Development, wherein the 
Ministry is in the process of creating more avenues in the aviation sector by bringing in reforms 
in Flying Training Organizations with a view to double the number of pilots trained in India in a 
year; commencement o f Aircraft Maintenance Engineering (AME) School; and increasing the 

97  
capacity of IGRUA to produce 100 cadets per year. 
16.       The Secretary stated that in respect of Carbon Offsetting and Reduction Scheme for 
International Aviation (CORSIA), India has fi led its reservation with the International Civil 
Aviation Organization (ICAO) on certain issues  viz., the change of baseline year; attributing 
responsibility of emission reduction to Member States instead of airline operators; and 
consistency of eligibilit y criteria developed by ICAO with the principles of United Nations 
Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC). 
17.       Further, in response to a query raised by one of the Members, the Director General of 
Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau (AAIB ) deposed that no preliminary finding has been 
published yet, regarding the crash of Air India Express Flight 1344 which happened on 
7th August, 2020. 
18.       Members of the Committee raised more queries which were replied by the Secretary. The 
Chairman directed that written replies to the points not answered, may be sent to the Secretariat 
within a week. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
19.       A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
20.       The meeting adjourned at 4:22 P.M. 
 
 
 

98  
XVII 
SEVENTEENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Monday, the 15 th March, 2021 in Committee Room - 
A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
  
LOK SABHA 
  
4. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
5. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
6. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
7. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
8. Shri Prince Raj 
9. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
10. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
11. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
SECRETARIAT 
      Shri  J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
      Shri  P. Narayanan, Director 
      Shri  Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
      Ms.  Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
2.  At the outset, the Chairman extended a very warm welcome to the Members of the 
Committee and sought their views on the draft Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants 
(2021-22) of Ministry of Civil Aviation. 
3.  The Committee, thereafter, considered the draft Report and after a brief deliberation, adopted 
the same with some changes. 
4.  The Committee th en decided to present/lay the Report to both the Houses of Parliament on 
15th March, 2021. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri T.G. Venkatesh, Chairman and 
in his absence, Shri Tiruchi Siva, M.P. to present the Report in Rajya Sabha.  Shri Sunil Kumar 

99  
Pintu, M.P. and in his absence, Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe, M.P. were authorized to lay the 
above mentioned Report on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
5.   The meeting adjourned at 3:55 P.M. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

100  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ANNEXURE 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

101  
16th February, 2021 
 
LIST OF WITNESSES APPEARING BEFORE THE DEPARTMENT- RELATED 
PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND 
CULTURE 
 
2:00 P.M. 
 
Ministry of Civil Aviation 
1. Shri Pradeep Singh Kharola  Secretary 
2. Smt. Vandana Aggarwal   Senior Economic Advisor  
3. Shri Vimalendra Anand Patwardhan Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor 
4. Smt. Usha Padhee    Joint Secretary 
5. Shri Satyendra Kumar Mishra  Joint Secretary 
6. Smt. Rubina Ali    Joint Secretary 
7.  Shri Angshumali Rastogi  Joint Secretary 
8.  Shri Amber Dubey   Joint Secretary 
9.  Smt. Bhawna Singh   Deputy Director General, ER  
10.  Shri Pranjol Chandra   Director 
 
Directorate General of Civil Aviation 
11. Smt. Puja Singh Mandol   Joint Director General 
 
Bureau of Civil Aviation Security 
12.  Shri M. Ganapathy   Director General 
 
Airports Economic Regulatory Authority of India 
13.  Col. Manu Sooden   Secretary 
 
Aircraft Accident Investigation Bureau 
14.  Gp. Capt. Aurobindo Handa  Director General 
 
Commission of Railway Safety (CRS) 
15.  Shri Shailesh Kumar Pathak  Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety 
16.  Shri Rajmal Khoiwal   CSTE 
17.  Shri Rajiv Kumar    Deputy CRS (G) 
18.  Shri Shalabh Tyagi   Deputy CRS 
 
Airports Authority of India 

102  
19.  Shri Anuj Aggarwal   Chairman 
20.  Shri I.N. Murthy    Member (Ops.) 
21.  Shri A.K. Pathak    Member (Planning) 
22.  Shri K. Vinayak Rao   Member (Finance) 
 
Air India 
 
23.  Shri Rajiv Bansal     Chairman & Managing Director 
 
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi 
24.  Shri Krishnendu Gupta   Director 
 
AAI Cargo Logistics & Allied Service Co. Ltd. 
25.  Shri Keku Bomi Gazder   Chief Executive Officer  
 
 
 