REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/48threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
 YEARS
 1997 1998 1999 2000 98/97 99/98 2000/99
Foreign Tourist
 Arrivals
 
2374094
 
2358629
 
2481928
 
2641157
 
-0.7
 
5.2
 
6.4
Foreign Exchange
 Earnings
(Rs. In crores)
 
10511.00
 
12150.00
 
12951.00
 
14475.43
 
15.6
 
6.6
 
11.8
REPORT
 
            Tourism has emerged as one of the world’s most important activities.  It is the world’s largest export industry. 
 According to the World Tourism Organisation, about 663 million tourists travelled internationally in 1999 and spent
 about US$ 453 billion.  The figures indicate that tourism has certainly become a major social phenomenon of the
 modern society with enormous economic consequences.  Its importance as an instrument for economic development
 and employment generation, particularly in remote and backward areas, has been now well recognized the world over. 
2.         Travel and tourism related jobs/employment are not only generated at a relatively low cost and concentrated in
 small business and local community but also provide significant opportunities for women and young people, offer
 educational training and skill development and protect and revitalize traditional arts and crafts. 
3.         India is a country of continental dimensions with a fascinating kaleidoscope of diverse races, languages,
 religions, customs and traditions.  The tourist attractions of India include historical monuments, places of religious
 importance, mountain and beach resorts, wildlife and interesting eco-systems etc.  Tourism is presently India’s third
 largest export industry-after readymade garments and gem and jewellery.  The international tourist traffic to the country
 during 1951 was just 16,829. Over a period of about 50 years, the arrivals increased to 264 million in 2000 and
 registered a compounded annual rate of growth of about 11 percent.  The foreign tourist arrivals to India and the
 estimated foreign exchange earnings through tourism along with growth rate for the year 1997 to 2000 are as under: -
Growth Rate (%)
It is, therefore, evident that the rate of growth in foreign exchange earning from tourism is exceptionally high and is
 expected to become even higher in the coming years.
 
4.         The Ministry of Tourism has been declared as Ministry of Tourism and Culture, Department of Tourism w.e.f.
 27
th May 2000.  The Department of Tourism is the nodal agency for the formulation of national policies and
 programmes and for the coordination of activities of various Central Government Agencies, State Governments/UTs
 and the Private Sector for the development and promotion of tourism in the country.  The role of the Department of
 Tourism has been to coordinate and supplement the efforts of the State/U.T. Governments in development of tourism
 through Central financial assistance, to catalyze private investment, strengthen promotional and marketing efforts and
 to provide trained manpower resources.  The administrative head of the Department is the Secretary (Tourism).  The
 Department is assisted by an attached office headed by the Director General.  The office of the Director General of
 Tourism provides executive directions for the implementation of various policies and programmes.  Directorate General
 of Tourism has a field formation of 21 offices within the country and 18 offices abroad.  The overseas offices are
 primarily responsible for tourism promotion and marketing in their respective areas and the field offices in India are
 responsible for providing information service to tourists and to monitor the progress of field projects. 
5.         The Department of Tourism has the following public sector undertaking/autonomous institutions under its
 administrative control:-  
India Tourism Development Corporation Limited (ITDC);
National Council for Hotel Management and Catering Technology and the Institutes under its control (NCHMCT)
Indian Institute of Tourism & Travel Management (IITTM);
Indian Institute of Skiing & Mountaineering (IISM);
National Institute of Water Sports (NIWS).
 
6.         As per the Department of Tourism, the basic strategy during the Ninth Plan was to establish effective
 coordination with all the relevant agencies so as to achieve synergy in the development of tourism.  The development
 activities during the Plan would give necessary emphasis to environment protection and cultural preservation.  The
 thrust areas during Ninth Plan period are:- 
Infrastructure development

REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/48threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
Product development and diversification including development of mega tourism resort
Entrepreneurship development and promotion of self employment opportunities
Enhancement of tourist facilitation
Human resource development
Promotion and marketing
Environmental protection and cultural preservation
Provision of incentives
Monitoring and Evolution
Strengthening of Organisation
 
7.         The details of the budget allocations of the Department of Tourism for the financial year 2001-2002, contained
 in the Demand No.77, was considered by the Department-Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport &
 Tourism at its meeting held on the 29
th March 2001. 
8.         For the Ninth Plan period, the Planning Commission had approved an outlay of Rs.465.75 crores for the
 Ministry of Tourism.  The Annual Plan outlays approved by the Planning commission, Revised Estimates and
 Expenditure incurred thereon since 1997-98 are as under:-
(Rs. in Crores)
YEAR OUTLAY REVISED ESTIMATES EXPENDITURE
1997-98 100.35 100.00 98.13
1998-99 160.50 110.00 110.46
1999-2000 160.50 110.00 109.32
2000-2001 135.00 125.00 125.00 (Anticipated)
2001-2002 150.00 -- --
 
9.         From a perusal of the Demands for Grants 2001-2002, the Committee observed that the plan allocation of the
 Department of Tourism for the year 2000-2001 was brought down from a BE of Rs.135.00 crores to a RE of Rs.125.00
 crores.  However, for the year 2001-2002, the plan outlay of the Department is Rs.150.00 crores which is Rs.15.00
 crores more in comparison to the BE for the year 2000-2001. 
10.            Although the Committee welcomes and is happy to note that the plan allocation of the Department of
 Tourism for the year 2001-2002 has been increased by Rs.15.00 crores as compared to the BE 2000-2001 yet the
 Committee feels that the requirements of the Department of Tourism are much more than the allocation made.  
11.       The Committee hopes that the Department of Tourism would make best of the increased allocation.  The
 Committee recommends that the Department should prioritise the projects to be undertaken under the various schemes
 and ensure early utilization of the funds earmarked so that the department could make effort for an improved RE
 allocation. 
COORDINATION BETWEEN THE DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM AND DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE
 
12.       The Committee enquired from the representatives of Department of Tourism the nature of coordination between
 the Department of Tourism & Department of Culture and whether any institutional mechanism has been developed for
 achieving the same.  The Committee was informed that the institutional arrangements between the two departments
 existed at the Committee of Secretaries & Group of Ministers level.  Apart from these, there is informal interaction
 between the two departments.  Department of Tourism also informed that they have advised the Department of Culture
 to take up certain projects such as refurbishing all the monuments, interpretation at the historical sites, providing toilet
 facilities at the monuments, beautification of monuments etc. and that Department of Tourism is also helping
 Department of Culture in taking up these projects. 
13.       The Committee feels that one of the important aspects of Indian tourism is the cultural tourism around the
 magnificent monuments and heritage centres located in different parts of the country.  Both foreign and domestic
 tourists visit these monuments and derive intense pleasure by experiencing the journey back to the ages. 
14.       The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Tourism and the Department of Culture should
 develop some institutional mechanism with regard to the formulation of their policies and execution of projects.  The
 coordination between the two departments will certainly have a positive impact on the development of tourism in the
 country. 
 

REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/48threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
DOMESTIC TOURISM
 
15.       The potential of domestic tourism has grown substantially during the last few years.  As per the figures reported
 by the State Governments, the domestic tourist visits in the accommodation establishments during 1999 are roughly
 estimated to be 176 million.  An important feature of the domestic tourism sector is its contribution to national
 integration and creation of a harmonious social and cultural environment. 
16.       The allocation made to Advertisement & Publicity under Domestic Campaign during 1999-2000, 2000-2001 and
 2001-2002 is as under:-
(Rs. In crores)
BE
1999-2000
RE
1999-2000
BE
2000-2001
RE
2000-2001
BE
2001-2002
 
4.50
 
3.50
 
3.00
 
2.00
 
3.00
 
17.       The Committee notes that plan allocation for Domestic campaign during 1999-2000 and 2000-2001 were
 decreased from Rs.4.50 crores to Rs.3.50 crores and from Rs.3.00 crores to Rs.2.00 crores respectively at the RE stage. 
 Now during 2001-2002 (BE), Rs.3.00 crores have been allocated for Domestic Campaign (including fairs and festivals
 and craft Melas). 
18.       When asked for the reasons for reduction of funds for domestic tourism at the RE stage, the Department of
 Tourism stated that the same was reduced on account of the additional expenditure envisaged for the Pacific Asia
 Travel Association (PATA) conference 2001.  When asked why proper attention has not been by paid to the domestic
 campaign, the Department of Tourism have replied that the Department is paying due attention to the Domestic
 Campaign within the available resources also through release of advertisements in the local media, celebration of local
 festivals in different states and special exhibitions, etc. The amount allocated during        2000-2001 was allocated for
 launching of campaigns in Print Media on important decisions and release of advertisements.  The Department was to
 launch promotional campaigns on important events such as Sindhu Darshan, World Tourism Day, Baudh Mahotsav,
 etc.  In addition to the above, advertisements will also be released in local travel media and tourism supplements of
 newspapers, journals.  It has also been stated that advertising within the country for attracting domestic tourists is
 mainly done by the States.
 19.       The Committee feels that domestic tourism is the mainstay of Indian Tourism. The Committee has been
 constrained to note that the Department of Tourism has not been giving proper attention to the Domestic Campaign.
 The reason stated by the Department of Tourism for reduction for allocation at the RE stage during 2000-2001 is also
 not convincing.  The Committee recommends that greater attention be paid to the Domestic Tourism because it creates
 more jobs than any other sector for every rupee invested.  It also creates the jobs at the local level, dispensing with the
 need of migration to distant places for earning of livelihood.  In fact, tourism plays a major role in promoting large-
scale employment opportunities. Also, the vast number of domestic tourists visiting different parts of the country every
 year return with a better understanding of the people living in the different regions of the country and the geographical,
 biological and cultural diversity of India. 
 
20.            Multifarious fairs and festivals occur throughout the year and are an amalgam of India’s rich cultural
 heritage.  They have added a new dimension to the Department of Tourism’s promotional efforts.  Financial assistance
 is given to various State Governments to promote specific fairs, financial assistance is extended in the form of publicity
 support, particularly for releasing advertisements, printing publicity material relating to the fairs/festivals and also for
 creating semi/permanent assets.  A small proportion of the outlay is proposed for special campaigns.  These are
 launched from time to time based on actual needs and requirements of the market and would mostly be in the nature of
 release of advertisements in trade journals as well as in general newspapers and magazines. 
21.       The Committee enquired as to what was the criteria/policy regarding distribution of amount earmarked for
 domestic publicity between English and the regional/vernacular print media.  The Committee was informed that at the
 moment there is no policy in this regard.  
22.       The Committee is surprised to know that at present there is no laid down policy with regard to the distribution of
 amount earmarked for domestic publicity between English and the regional/vernacular print media.  The Committee
 feels that there must be some criteria regarding placement of advertisement in the print media.  The Committee
 observes that India is a country of continental dimensions that includes diverse races, languages and religions.  The
 Committee recommends that allocation for funds for domestic campaign should be adequately distributed between the

REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/48threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
 English/regional print media so that people belonging to the various languages and the different sections/segments of
 the society become aware of the campaign launched by the Department of Tourism.
 
IMPACT OF SUSPENSION OF LTC ON DOMESTIC TOURISM 
23.       The attention of the Department of Tourism was brought to the recent decision of the Central Government to
 suspend LTC facility for 2 years for the Central Government employees.  When asked about the likely impact of this
 decision on the domestic tourism, the Department of Tourism admitted that the decision is likely to have an adverse
 affect on the domestic tourism in the country.  The Department of Tourism were asked whether the department have
 carried out any assessment of the adverse impact of the Government’s decision. The Committee was informed that they
 have not done any such study as yet. However, the Department of Tourism intends to convene a meeting on the subject
 with the State Tourism Secretaries and the tour operators after the Budget Session of the Parliament. The Department of
 Tourism also informed that the Ministry of Finance took the decision regarding suspension of LTC for 2 years without
 consulting the Department of Tourism.  After making an objective assessment of the impact of the suspension of LTC
 facility in consultation with the State Governments, Department of Tourism intend to take up the matter with the
 Ministry of Finance and Department of Personnel & Training. 
24.       The Committee is of the view that the Government’s decision to suspend LTC for 2 years for the Government
 employees will definitely have an adverse impact on the domestic tourism in the country whereas the exchequer may
 not be benefited since the LTC involves simply the transfer of money from one head to the other.  The Committee is
 constrained to note the slow pace of the Department of Tourism in making any realistic assessment of the negative
 impact of the decision on domestic tourism or take up the issue with the Ministries concerned.   The Committee feels
 that international tourism, by its very nature, is rather unpredictable and that the foreign tourist traffic is affected by the
 events in the country.  In such a scenario, domestic tourism, which has increased with improved economy and
 encouragement by various establishments by way of paid holidays and leave travel concessions, has been gaining
 popularity.   The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry of Finance should have consulted the Department of
 Tourism before taking any decision on such an important matter. The Committee recommends that after making early
 assessment of the adverse impact of the suspension of LTC facility, the Department of Tourism should take up the
 matter with the Ministry of Finance and Department of Personnel and Training.  The Committee hopes that the
 Department of Tourism would be able to convince the Government of its stand and the LTC facility to the Government
 employees will be restored to sustain the growth of domestic tourism in the country.
 
SINGLE WINDOW CLEARANCE SYSTEM
 
25.       The Committee had, in its 41
st report on Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the Ministry of Tourism, observed
 that in order to encourage the involvement of private sector in the development of tourism, the Ministry of Tourism
 should take steps to remove the infrastructural and procedural hurdles which the private sector has to face and ensure
 the availability of land, electricity, water supply, sewerage system and do away with the multiplicity of permits and
 approvals.  Department of Tourism have informed in this Action Taken Replies that the Department of Tourism’s role
 in basically catalytic in nature as it is not in control of land, electricity, water supply etc. which are with the State
 Governments/Union Territories.  The Department of Tourism has written to all the State Governments/Union
 Territories for identifying suitable hotel sites.  In order to provide faster room availability the Department of Tourism
 has also suggested to the State Governments/Union Territories to adopt a Single Window clearance System in order to
 facilitate the private investor who at present is required to obtain several clearances.  When asked about the response of
 the State Governments/Union Territories to adopting a Single Window Clearance System in order to facilitate the
 private investors, the Department of Tourism have stated that they have taken up the matter with the State/UT
 Governments to provide necessary support facilities and incentives to encourage private sector investment in tourism
 by introducing Singe Window Clearance mechanism in respect of hotel projects.  During the last State/UT Tourism
 Secretaries meeting held in September 2000, the issue regarding Single Window Clearance of hotel projects was one of
 the Agenda items. 
26.       The Committee was also informed that the Task Forces set up by the Ministry of Tourism regarding Action Plan
 for Development of Tourism also laid emphasis on identification development of zones for hotels and other tourism
 establishments in major tourist centers and ensure Single Window Clearance of projects in such zones.  These
 recommendations by the Task Forces have been circulated to the State/UT Governments.  The general view presented
 by the State Tourism Secretaries was that as a large number of agencies/departments in their respective State/UTs were

REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/48threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
 involved, the matter regarding Single Window Clearance is needed to be examined by each State/UT.  The Department
 of Tourism has not received any response from them subsequently.            However, certain States like Gujarat,
 Haryana and Rajasthan have set up administrative mechanisms to expedite clearances of such projects. 
27.       The Committee understands that the Government, through its own limited resources, has not able to provide the
 requisite funds for the development of tourist infrastructure in the country.  The participation of the private sector can
 go a long way in supplementing the efforts of the Government in this regard.  The Committee therefore, recommends
 that to encourage private participation in this field, the Government must try to remove the obstacles faced by them and
 ensure early implementation of the Single Window Clearance System for the private investors.   The Committee also
 appreciates the efforts made by the Governments of Gujarat, Haryana and Rajasthan, which have set up administrative
 mechanism to expedite the clearance of tourism projects.
 
NORMAL FUNDING SCHEME
 
28.       The Department of Tourism extends financial assistance to States/UTs for augmentation of tourist infrastructure
 facilities.  Assistance is provided every year on the basis of specific proposals received from State/UT Governments in
 respect of projects, which are short-listed for consideration.  Financial assistance is provided either under normal
 funding pattern or under equity scheme.  Under Normal Funding Scheme, the State Government generally meets the
 cost of land and its development while the Central Department meets the cost of construction etc.  The following chart
 gives the actual expenditure/allocations made under this scheme since 1998:-
(Rs.in crores)
 1998-99
Actual
1999-
2000
BE
1999-2000
RE
1999-
2000
Actual
2000-2001
BE
2000-
2001
RE
2001-2002
BE
Normal
 Funding
 
9.51
 
 
32.20
 
6.50
 
6.57
 
17.00
 
13.63
 
9.00
 
29.       The Committee had, in its 41
st report on the Demands for Grants (2000-2001) of the Ministry of Tourism,
 observed that the performance under the Normal Funding Scheme has not been satisfactory.  The Committee had also
 recommended that the Department of Tourism should take up the matter relating to the condition of transfer of land
 from State Government to the Government of India with the State Government and Ministry of Finance to arrive at an
 amicable solution so that the funds earmarked for implementation of various projects under the scheme are fully
 utilized.  In response, the Committee has been informed by the Department of Tourism that the matter was referred to
 the Ministry of Finance.  However, no decision has been taken in this regard. 
30.       The Committee feels that Normal Funding Scheme can be a very useful tool in achieving a coordinated
 development of tourist facilities, particularly for the domestic and budget tourists and opening up remote areas with
 tourism potential.  The Committee, therefore, reiterates the recommendation made in the 41
st report that an early
 solution may be arrived at with regard to the condition of transfer of land so that funds allocated under the scheme are
 optimally utilised.
 
VISA ON ARRIVAL
 
31.       One of the major constraints in the arrival of the foreign tourists in the country has been the lack of visa-on-
arrival at the airports scheme in India.  The Committee had also highlighted this issue in its 37
th report on Demands for
 Grants (1999-2000) of the Ministry of Tourism.  When asked about the progress made with regard to granting visa-on-
arrival at the airports to the foreign tourists, the Committee has been informed by the Department of Tourism that they
 had prepared a proposal in this respect and it was to be considered by the Committee of Secretaries on the 17
th
 November 2000.  However, in view of the objection of the Ministry of Home Affairs to the effect that visa-on-arrival
 was not found feasible due to local, administrative, infrastructural and security constraints, the meeting of the
 Committee of Secretaries to consider this issue was dropped.  However, Hon’ble Minister of Tourism and Culture has
 now requested the Hon’ble Home Minister to look into the matter again and has also personally discussed the issue
 with him.  The Hon’ble Home Minister proposes to have a meeting shortly with the Minister of Tourism and Culture to
 discuss this matter further.  The matter has been further taken up by the Officers of the Department of Tourism with the

REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/48threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
 Ministry of Home Affairs. 
32.       The Committee feels that granting visa-on-arrival at the airports to the foreign tourists can really help the arrival
 of foreign tourists in India, thereby leading to the development of tourism in the Country.  The Committee is of the
 opinion that a number of non-residents Indian (NRIs), spread over the various corners of the world, visit/intend to visit
 India every year.  The Committee recommends that a decision regarding granting visa-on-arrival to the foreign tourists
 should be taken at the earliest.  However, till a final decision is taken on the subject, at least the Non-Resident Indians
 (NRIs) should be granted this facility.
 
ADVENTURE TOURISM
 
33.            Adventure tourism is a niche market and is an important segment of the tourism industry.  It is a recent
 phenomenon, which has been undertaken for the diversification of the tourist product of India and to attract the
 domestic and international tourists interest.  To accelerate the development of adventure tourism, Central financial
 Assistance is given to States/UTs to enable them to put up infrastructural facilities and procurement of equipment for
 activities such as trekking, rock climbing, mountaineering, winter-water and adventure related sports, tents,
 anglers/rafters huts, wildlife viewing facilities, development of Inland waterways, procurement of high value innovative
 watercrafts etc. 
34.       An amount of Rs.1.50 crores was allocated during 2000-2001 for development of sports and adventure tourism. 
 The Department of Tourism has informed that during 2000-2001, some of the projects for which the funds were
 released under this head during 2000-2001 are construction of Jetty at Necklace Road, Hussain Sagar Lake
 (Hyderabad), Jetty at Nagarjunasagar Modular Kabana for water sports center at Dudhani, Houseboats in Malabar,
 Watersports facilities (Madhya Pradesh), Trekking equipment (Sikkim) etc.  Regular heliskiing operation took place in
 Manali region and the  Government of Himachal Pradesh and the organizers were extended the required assistance. 
 Similarly, Department of Tourism extended support for successful organisation of Himalayan Run and Trek, an annual
 event in Darjeeling (West Bengal) during November 2000. 
35.       The Department of Tourism is continuing to provide financial assistance to State/Union Territory Governments
 to put up infrastructural facilities for trekking, rock climbing mountaineering, aero-sports, winter/water related sports,
 trekker huts, wildlife viewing facilities, etc.  An amount of Rs.3.00 crores has been allocated under this head for the
 financial year 2001-2002.  The Department intends to complete the ongoing schemes and take up new projects in
 consultation with State/UT Governments. 
36.       During the meeting, the Committee expressed its concern about the safety and security of the tourists visiting
 India, particularly in the context of adventure tourism.  As regards the safety aspect involved in the adventure tourism,
 the Committee was informed that the Department of Tourism has formulated a set of guidelines on safety and quality
 norms on aquatic tourism. The Committee was also informed that the Ninth Himalayan Tourism Advisory Board
 (HIMTAB) meet was organized at Darjeeling (West Bengal).  One of the major decisions taken at the HIMTAB meet
 was the constitution of a Sub-Committee to frame operational guidelines for eco-tourism promotion and guidelines on
 safety, rescue measures and insurance of tourists and All India slogans for popularizing eco-tourism as well.  The
 Department of Tourism have also called a meeting of the National Institute of Water Sports (NIWS) and Adventure
 Tourist Operators Association of India (ATOAI) to discuss the aspect of safety in adventure tourism in the first week of
 April 2001. 
37.       The Committee was also informed that discussion have taken place at various fora with the representatives of the
 State Governments to introduce suitable legislation and deploy Special Police Force which could provide security for
 the tourists in the destination they prefer to visit. This Special Tourism Police Force is meant to provide service in a
 spirit of courtesy and hospitality.  The State Governments of J&K, Goa, Kerala, Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan have
 already created a Special Tourism Force in their States. Hon’ble Minister of Tourism and Culture has requested the
 other State Governments also to enact a suitable legislation in their respective State to curb the cheating and other mal-
practices related to tourists and to develop a sense of safety and security by deployment of the Special Tourism Police
 Force.  
38.       The Committee feels that considering the vast potential of the extensive forest cover mountain ranges, river
 system/water bodies such as lakes, canals, reservoirs in the entire country, the major thrust need to be provided for
 development of adventure tourism including water sports tourism activities.  This will provide new tourism product
 different from conventional tourism activities.  Development of adventure tourism will help in the promotion of
 domestic and recreational tourism in the country.  The Committee also feels that safety (Suraksha) being one of the
 concepts coined by the Department of Tourism to boost Indian tourism and to promote India’s image abroad, the safety

REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/48threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
 & security of the tourists must be one of the primary concerns of the Department of Tourism while promoting
 adventure tourism. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all necessary steps should be taken to ensure the safety
 & security of the tourists and should be accorded the highest priority both from the point of view of tourism
 development and the national pride. 
39.       The Committee also recommends that more and more State Governments be persuaded to have Tourist Police
 Force.  The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Governments of J&K, Goa, Kerala, Himachal Pradesh and
 Rajasthan who have established Tourist Police Force in their States and have been able to install confidence amongst
 the tourists, particularly foreign tourists.
 
GULMARG WINTER SPORTS PROJECT
 
40.       The Gulmarg Winter Sports Projects (GWSP) was established in 1968 to popularise Kashmir as a tourist
 destination and develop winter sports with a view to attracting tourists during the lean winter season and to provide
 gainful employment to the local people.  It was set up to impart training to selected candidates to work as Ski
 Instructors and Mountaineering guides.  Later Indian Institute of Skiing & Mountaineering (IIS&M) was added on to
 conduct courses on Mountaineering, Ski Courses and training etc.  The Committee enquired from the Department of
 Tourism about the current status the GWSP/IIS&M.  The Committee was informed that in the post-militancy situation,
 the Department of Tourism explored the possibility of transferring the project to Jawahar Institute of Mountaineering
 (JIM), Batot under the control of Ministry of Defence as well as Indo Tibetan Border Police (ITBP) under Ministry of
 Home Affairs.  Both the organisations have expressed their inability to take over the project.  The Department of
 Tourism has now taken a decision to wind up the WSP/IIS&M and transfer the project with assets and staff to the
 Government of Jammu and Kashmir for effectively utilizing the facilities so created. 
The Committee does not agree with the decision of the Department of Tourism to wind up Gulmarg Winter Sports
 Projects/Indian Institute of Skiing & Mountaineering.  On the one hand the Government is taking about the promotion
 of adventure and sport tourism and on the other hand it is thinking in terms of winding up a sports institute.  The
 Committee is of the view that the Government must take steps towards the revival of the GWSP/IIS&M.
 
OVERSEAS CAMPAIGN
 
42.            Publicity and marketing of Indian tourism is being achieved through the 18 field offices of Department of
 Tourism located in major tourist generating countries.  Their efforts are being coordinated and supplemented by the
 Marketing Division at the headquarters.  The Air-India and its sales offices abroad also supplement efforts of the
 Department of Tourism by making financial contributions and organizing joint promotional events.  The publicity
 efforts of the overseas field offices are also supplemented and integrated with the efforts of Indian Missions and other
 agencies abroad, travel, trade and media agencies.  The funds provided for overseas publicity during the Ninth Plan
 Period are as under:-
                        -----------------------------------------------------------------
                          Year                                      Funds Released
                        -----------------------------------------------------------------
                        1997-98                                       57.00,53.00,52.99
                     2000-2001 (BE)                               49.75
                     2000-2001 (RE)                              50.75
                     2001-2002 (BE)                              51.00
                        -----------------------------------------------------------------
                        Total during the IX
th Plan                             264.74
                        -----------------------------------------------------------------
 
43.       When asked about the steps taken to improve the functioning and efficiency of the tourist offices abroad, the
 Committee was informed that on the advice of the Planning Commission, the Department of Tourism had constituted
 an Inter-Ministerial Committee, consisting of the representatives of the Planning Commission, Ministry of External
 Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Civil Aviation and their own Department, to study the cost-effectiveness of
 the publicity and overseas marketing campaign. This committee has finalised its recommendations.  The Department of
 Tourism is in the process of examining these suggestions and initiating action where necessary.  The Committee was

REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/48threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
 assured that the Department of Tourism would take a decision regarding the implementation of these recommendations
 within three months.  The Committee also took note of the high amount of rent being paid for accommodation of the
 tourist offices abroad.
 
44.       The Committee observes that a lot of funds have been allocated for carrying out Overseas Campaign during the
 last few years, which constitute a major part of the annual plan allocation of the Department of Tourism.  Out of the
 total budgetary allocation of Rs.595.00 crores to the Department of Tourism during the Ninth Plan period, plan
 allocation for Overseas Publicity has been to the tune of Rs.264.74 crores, which is about 44.50% of the total plan
 allocation.  The Committee observes that the huge allocations in this sector have not been able to increase the number
 of foreign tourists arrival in the country to the desired extent.  Infact the number of foreign tourists is very meagre when
 compared to the investment made in this sector.  The Committee hopes that the Department of Tourism would take
 steps to improve the functioning and efficiency of these tourist offices so as to make the overseas campaign more
 effective and result oriented in the context of foreign tourists arrival in the country.  The Committee also recommends
 that the Department of Tourism should coordinate with the Air India and find out if they could offer them some space
 in their offices to accommodate tourist offices.  This will certainly help the Department of Tourism in reducing its
 overhead costs.
 
TOURISM DEVELOPMENT IN NORTH EASTERN REGION
 
45.       The seven sister States of North East and Sikkim are endowed with diverse tourist attractions.  However, the
 flow of incoming tourists has been marginal for the reasons of lack of infrastructural and other related facilities in the
 various tourist spots, which have been included in the identified circuits.
 
46.       During the evidence, the attention of the Department of Tourism was invited to the declared policy of the
 Government to earmark 10% of the budget allocation to the developmental projects in the North East Region.  During
 2000-2001, 10% of the budgetary allocation i.e. Rs.13.5 crores was set apart for the North East region.  However, the
 various documents/papers submitted by the Department of Tourism did not indicate anything about the amount spent on
 the developmental activities undertaken in the North East Region.  The Committee was informed that at the Budget
 Estimate Stage, the amount earmarked is shown as lump sum because at that stage, the Department does not know
 which particular scheme will be allocated funds.  However, the money is allocated subsequently depending upon the
 proposals received from these States.  The amount allocated for North East region is then distributed in different
 development projects in the North East region such as infrastructure developmental schemes, tourism schemes etc.  It
 was also submitted to the Committee that the Government attaches great importance to the development of tourist
 infrastructure in the North East region in view of immense tourist potential of the region.  Accordingly, Department of
 Tourism has focused on utilization of budget allocation of Rs.13.50 crores to complete the ongoing projects and
 upgradation of various tourist facilities namely Tourist Accommodation, Wayside amenities, Budget Accommodation,
 Refurbishment of monuments etc. and advice the State Government to fully utilise the funds allocated to them for
 various projects and to complete the ongoing projects expeditiously.  In order to develop and promote tourism in the
 region the Department of Tourism has taken following steps:-
 
A chapter of Indian Institute of Tourism and Travel Management has been opened at Guwahati.
In pursuance of PM’s initiatives for North East, a full-fledged Institute of Hotel Management and Catering Technology
 has been set up at Shillong.
North Eastern States are given a free booth in the world’s largest tourism fair ITB-Berlin.
Financial assistance for promotion of fairs and festivals is also provided.
 
47.       During the meeting the Committee enquired about the RAP whereby even the domestic tourists are restricted
 from entering the North Eastern States.  The Department of Tourism informed the Committee that they have taken up
 the matter with the Ministry of Home Affairs and the Hon’ble Home Minister has announced that the restrictions
 imposed for the Indian citizens would be reviewed.
 
48.       The Committee is not convinced with the arguments advanced by the Department of Tourism for not making
 available the information regarding projects actually taken up last year or proposed to be taken up this year for
 development of tourism in the North East region.  In absence of any such information, the Committee is unable to make

REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/48threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
 an assessment of the progress made in the tourism projects taken up in the North East Region.  The Committee agrees
 that at the time of BE allocation, a lump sum allocation is made for the North East region. But the Committee feels that
 this 10% allocation for North East is over and above the other budgetary allocations. The Committee feels the tourist
 developmental work undertaken in the North East region should be given the highest priority and recommends that the
 funds allocated for the North East region should be optimally utilised in that region only.  The Committee also
 recommends that the Government should withdraw the restriction of RAP for domestic tourists in order to enable these
 tourists to visit these places without any problem.
 
INDIA TOURISM DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (ITDC)
 
49.       The Disinvestment Commission had identified ITDC as a non-core business and recommended restructuring of
 its operations for the purpose of disinvestment.  The restructuring proposed by the Commission provided that the hotels
 situated in prime locations like Delhi and Bangalore may be handed over to the established hotel chains through a
 competitive bidding process to run on long term structured contract on lease-cum-management basis.  Other hotels are
 to be merged into separate corporate identities. Disinvestment in such companies will be through the sale of 100%
 Government shareholdings in them.  The recommendations of the Disinvestment Commission have been accepted by
 the Government. The Department of Disinvestment has appointed M/s. Lazard Credit Capital Ltd. (Lazard India Ltd.)
 as the Advisor to assist in the disinvestment process.  The Government also approved the disinvestment of ITDC’s
 equity shareholding in its two subsidiary companies viz. Utkal Ashok Hotel Corporation Ltd. and Ranchi Ashok Bihar
 Hotel Corporation Ltd.
 
50.            Department of Tourism have informed that advertisement inviting expression of interest in respect of the 17
 hotel properties of ITDC have been released in the months of December 2000 and February 2001.  Out of the 17 hotel
 properties, 3 have been offered on lease-cum-management basis and 14 hotel properties have been offered for sale.  It
 has also been informed that there has been a very good response from the interested parties.
 
51.       The Committee notes that while the turnover of ITDC during 1999-2000 decreased by 2.9% to Rs.288.50 crores
 compared to Rs.297.10 crores in 1998-99, there was operating loss of Rs.17.05 crores during 1999-2000 as against
 profit of Rs.18.48 crores during 1998-1999.  Also for the first time, ITDC posted net loss of Rs.24.04 crores during
 1999-2000 as against profit of Rs.10.81 crores during 1998-99.  The performance of ITDC upto August 2000 has also
 been lower as compared to the corresponding period of the last year.
 
52.       The actual expenditure during 1998-1999 and 1999-2000 and the allocations during 2000-2001 and 2001-2002
 under the major heads are indicated below:-
                                                                                                                               (Rs. in crores)
S.No.            Major
           Head
Actual
Expenditure
1998-99
Actual
Expenditure
1999-2000
Approved
 Plan Outlay
2000-2001
Revised
Outlay
2000-2001
(Estd.)
Proposed
Outlay
2001-2002
(Estd.)
A. Expansion   Schemes/
     New   Schemes 
 
B.    Joint Venture
       
 Schemes/Development
        Schemes.
 
C.    Renovation/Improve
        -ment to existing
        Hotels/Units
 
D.    Transport
 
E.     Misc. Schemes
0.79
 
 
 
0.58
 
 
 
25.70
 
 
 
--
 
1.23
3.41
 
 
 
0.52
 
 
 
12.50
 
 
 
0.12
 
0.96
15.50
 
 
 
4.25
 
 
 
30.00
 
 
 
1.25
 
9.00
3.00
 
 
 
1.00
 
 
 
19.00
 
 
 
1.00
 
6.00
15.00
 
 
 
3.50
 
 
 
12.00
 
 
 
1.00
 
8.50

REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/48threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
     
           TOTAL
 
28.30
 
17.51
 
60.00
 
30.00
 
40.00
 
53.       The Committee observed that the actual expenditure of ITDC decreased from Rs.28.30 crores in 1998-99 to
 Rs.17.51 crores in 1999-2000. The outlay for 2000-2001 was also brought down from Rs.60.00 crores to Rs.30.00
 crores.  Now Rs.40.00 crores have been proposed for 2001-2002.  The Committee has also been informed that ITDC
 has not been seeking/getting budgetary support from the Government since 1994 in financing its plan programmes.
 
54.       It was submitted to the Committee during the evidence that due to the disinvestment scenario, there is a lot of
 uncertainty about how to even plan ITDC’s budget.  Even the time frame in which the hotels are going to be disinvested
 is not known.  The ITDC had planned and taken up the renovation/upgradation of the existing hotels in their last year’s
 budget.  But now these construction works are at a total standstill.
 
55.       The Committee expresses its serious concern at the way the uncertain disinvestment scenario has affected the
 financial performance of ITDC.  For the first time, the ITDC posted net loss of Rs.24.04 crores during 1999-2000 and
 during 2000-2001, its performance is likely to be even more dismal.  ITDC is in a fix even about the renovation/up-
gradation of its properties.  The proposal for appointing a regular Chairman of ITDC has also been hanging since the
 last three and a half years.  The Committee recommends that a decision with respect to the disinvestment of ITDC and
 the time frame in which it is to be achieved should be taken at the earliest to put on end to this uncertainty.  The
 Committee also recommends that the Hotel properties of ITDC should not be allowed to decay and that necessary
 renovation work should be carried out at the earliest so that the commercial value of these properties does not go down. 
 Sufficient funds may also be earmarked for the purpose in the budget of the Department.
 
56.       The Committee then took stock of the various tourism development projects launched by the Department of
 Tourism during the last few years.  The Committee was informed that the Department of Tourism had not been able to
 push through the National Tourism Development fund since the Planning Commission has been of the view that it is a
 new scheme in the Ninth Plan.  Similar has been the fate of Bharat Paryatan Bhawan and Tourism Education Grid
 Projects, which had been announced with so much fanfare but are yet to be cleared by the Ministry of Finance/Planning
 Commission.  The setting up of the Pilgrim Tourism Development Board is still under consideration of the
 Government.  The Mega Tourism Projects were coined in the 8
th Plan period under which intensive development of
 five special tourism areas was envisaged in coordination with the concerned State Governments and the private sector. 
 However, neither the Department of Tourism nor the concerned State Governments have taken any initiative in this
 regard.
 
57.       The Committee, after going through the budget performance of the Department of Tourism for the last five
 years, has come to the conclusion that so many schemes are announced, guidelines are issued and budget allocations are
 made but everything remains on paper only.  When the actual implementation part of all the schemes comes, the
 Department of Tourism gives all sorts of explanations.  The Committee feels that most of the schemes mooted by the
 Department are still pending due to the lack of pro-active approach on the part of the Department of Tourism.  This is
 despite the fact that the Committee has been repeatedly recommending in its earlier reports that, in order to avoid delay
 in the implementation of the various schemes, all related problems should be sorted out in advance.   As intimated by
 the Department of Tourism, many of the proposals based on the recommendations of the Committee are pending with
 the Ministry of Finance, Planning Commission & Ministry of Home Affairs etc. who are paying little attention
 thereon.   The Committee is of the view that development of the tourism sector is of great significance for the Indian
 economy and hence all the concerned agencies should make concerted efforts to ensure that the decisions taken in this
 direction are expedited.
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT
A GLANCE
 
 
The Committee hopes that the Department of Tourism would make best of the increased allocation.  The Committee
 recommends that the Department should prioritise the projects to be undertaken under the various schemes and ensure

REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/48threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
 early utilization of the funds earmarked so that the department could make effort for an improved RE allocation.
(Para 11)
 
COORDINATION BETWEEN THE DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM AND DEPARTMENT OF CULTURE
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Department of Tourism and the Department of Culture should develop
 some institutional mechanism with regard to the formulation of their policies and execution of projects.  The
 coordination between the two departments will certainly have a positive impact on the development of tourism in the
 country. 
(Para 14)
DOMESTIC TOURISM
The Committee feels that domestic tourism is the mainstay of Indian Tourism. The Committee has been constrained to
 note that the Department of Tourism has not been giving proper attention to the Domestic Campaign. The reason stated
 by the Department of Tourism for reduction for allocation at the RE stage during 2000-2001 is also not convincing. 
 The Committee recommends that greater attention be paid to the Domestic Tourism because it creates more jobs than
 any other sector for every rupee invested.  It also creates the jobs at the local level, dispensing with the need of
 migration to distant places for earning of livelihood.  In fact, tourism plays a major role in promoting large-scale
 employment opportunities. Also, the vast number of domestic tourists visiting different parts of the country every year
 return with a better understanding of the people living in the different regions of the country and the geographical,
 biological and cultural diversity of India.  
The Committee is surprised to know that at present there is no laid down policy with regard to the distribution of
 amount earmarked for domestic publicity between English and the regional/vernacular print media.  The Committee
 feels that there must be some criteria regarding placement of advertisement in the print media.  The Committee
 observes that India is a country of continental dimensions that includes diverse races, languages and religions.  The
 Committee recommends that allocation for funds for domestic campaign should be adequately distributed between the
 English/regional print media so that people belonging to the various languages and the different sections/segments of
 the society become aware of the campaign launched by the Department of Tourism.
(Paras 19 & 22)
IMPACT OF SUSPENSION OF LTC ON DOMESTIC TOURISM
The Committee is of the view that the Government’s decision to suspend LTC for 2 years for the Government
 employees will definitely have an adverse impact on the domestic tourism in the country whereas the exchequer may
 not be benefited since the LTC involves simply the transfer of money from one head to the other.  The Committee is
 constrained to note the slow pace of the Department of Tourism in making any realistic assessment of the negative
 impact of the decision on domestic tourism or take up the issue with the Ministries concerned.   The Committee feels
 that international tourism, by its very nature, is rather unpredictable and that the foreign tourist traffic is affected by the
 events in the country.  In such a scenario, domestic tourism, which has increased with improved economy and
 encouragement by various establishments by way of paid holidays and leave travel concessions, has been gaining
 popularity.   The Committee is of the opinion that the Ministry of Finance should have consulted the Department of
 Tourism before taking any decision on such an important matter. The Committee recommends that after making early
 assessment of the adverse impact of the suspension of LTC facility, the Department of Tourism should take up the
 matter with the Ministry of Finance and Department of Personnel and Training.  The Committee hopes that the
 Department of Tourism would be able to convince the Government of its stand and the LTC facility to the Government
 employees will be restored to sustain the growth of domestic tourism in the country.
(Para 24)
SINGLE WINDOW CLEARANCE SYSTEM
The Committee understands that the Government, through its own limited resources, has not able to provide the
 requisite funds for the development of tourist infrastructure in the country.  The participation of the private sector can
 go a long way in supplementing the efforts of the Government in this regard.  The Committee therefore, recommends
 that to encourage private participation in this field, the Government must try to remove the obstacles faced by them and
 ensure early implementation of the Single Window Clearance System for the private investors.   The Committee also
 appreciates the efforts made by the Governments of Gujarat, Haryana and Rajasthan, which have set up administrative
 mechanism to expedite the clearance of tourism projects.
(Para 27)
NORMAL FUNDING SCHEME
The Committee feels that Normal Funding Scheme can be a very useful tool in achieving a coordinated development of

REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/48threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
 tourist facilities, particularly for the domestic and budget tourists and opening up remote areas with tourism potential. 
 The Committee, therefore, reiterates the recommendation made in the 41st report that an early solution may be arrived
 at with regard to the condition of transfer of land so that funds allocated under the scheme are optimally utilised.
(Para 30)
VISA ON ARRIVAL
The Committee feels that granting visa-on-arrival at the airports to the foreign tourists can really help the arrival of
 foreign tourists in India, thereby leading to the development of tourism in the Country.  The Committee is of the
 opinion that a number of non-residents Indian (NRIs), spread over the various corners of the world, visit/intend to visit
 India every year.  The Committee recommends that a decision regarding granting visa-on-arrival to the foreign tourists
 should be taken at the earliest.  However, till a final decision is taken on the subject, at least the Non-Resident Indians
 (NRIs) should be granted this facility.
(Para 32)
 
ADVENTURE TOURISM
The Committee feels that considering the vast potential of the extensive forest cover mountain ranges, river
 system/water bodies such as lakes, canals, reservoirs in the entire country, the major thrust need to be provided for
 development of adventure tourism including water sports tourism activities.  This will provide new tourism product
 different from conventional tourism activities.  Development of adventure tourism will help in the promotion of
 domestic and recreational tourism in the country.  The Committee also feels that safety (Suraksha) being one of the
 concepts coined by the Department of Tourism to boost Indian tourism and to promote India’s image abroad, the safety
 & security of the tourists must be one of the primary concerns of the Department of Tourism while promoting
 adventure tourism. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all necessary steps should be taken to ensure the safety
 & security of the tourists and should be accorded the highest priority both from the point of view of tourism
 development and the national pride.
The Committee also recommends that more and more State Governments be persuaded to have Tourist Police Force. 
 The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Governments of J&K, Goa, Kerala, Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan who
 have established Tourist Police Force in their States and have been able to install confidence amongst the tourists,
 particularly foreign tourists.
(Paras 38 & 39)
GULMARG WINTER SPORTS PROJECT
The Committee does not agree with the decision of the Department of Tourism to wind up Gulmarg Winter Sports
 Projects/Indian Institute of Skiing & Mountaineering.  On the one hand the Government is taking about the promotion
 of adventure and sport tourism and on the other hand it is thinking in terms of winding up a sports institute.  The
 Committee is of the view that the Government must take steps towards the revival of the GWSP/IIS&M.
(Para 41)
OVERSEAS CAMPAIGN
The Committee observes that a lot of funds have been allocated for carrying out Overseas Campaign during the last few
 years, which constitute a major part of the annual plan allocation of the Department of Tourism.  Out of the total
 budgetary allocation of Rs.595.00 crores to the Department of Tourism during the Ninth Plan period, plan allocation for
 Overseas Publicity has been to the tune of Rs.264.74 crores, which is about 44.50% of the total plan allocation.  The
 Committee observes that the huge allocations in this sector have not been able to increase the number of foreign tourists
 arrival in the country to the desired extent.  Infact the number of foreign tourists is very meagre when compared to the
 investment made in this sector.  The Committee hopes that the Department of Tourism would take steps to improve the
 functioning and efficiency of these tourist offices so as to make the overseas campaign more effective and result
 oriented in the context of foreign tourists arrival in the country.  The Committee also recommends that the Department
 of Tourism should coordinate with the Air India and find out if they could offer them some space in their offices to
 accommodate tourist offices.  This will certainly help the Department of Tourism in reducing its overhead costs.
(Para 44)
TOURISM DEVELOPMENT IN NORTH EASTERN REGION
The Committee is not convinced with the arguments advanced by the Department of Tourism for not making available
 the information regarding projects actually taken up last year or proposed to be taken up this year for development of
 tourism in the North East region.  In absence of any such information, the Committee is unable to make an assessment
 of the progress made in the tourism projects taken up in the North East Region.  The Committee agrees that at the time

REPORT ON DEPARTMENT OF TOURISM
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/48threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:52:09]
 of BE allocation, a lump sum allocation is made for the North East region. But the Committee feels that this 10%
 allocation for North East is over and above the other budgetary allocations. The Committee feels the tourist
 developmental work undertaken in the North East region should be given the highest priority and recommends that the
 funds allocated for the North East region should be optimally utilised in that region only.  The Committee also
 recommends that the Government should withdraw the restriction of RAP for domestic tourists in order to enable these
 tourists to visit these places without any problem.
(Para 48)
INDIA TOURISM DEVELOPMENT CORPORATION (ITDC)
The Committee expresses its serious concern at the way the uncertain disinvestment scenario has affected the financial
 performance of ITDC.  For the first time, the ITDC posted net loss of Rs.24.04 crores during 1999-2000 and during
 2000-2001, its performance is likely to be even more dismal.  ITDC is in a fix even about the renovation/up-gradation
 of its properties.  The proposal for appointing a regular Chairman of ITDC has also been hanging since the last three
 and a half years.  The Committee recommends that a decision with respect to the disinvestment of ITDC and the time
 frame in which it is to be achieved should be taken at the earliest to put on end to this uncertainty.  The Committee also
 recommends that the Hotel properties of ITDC should not be allowed to decay and that necessary renovation work
 should be carried out at the earliest so that the commercial value of these properties does not go down.  Sufficient funds
 may also be earmarked for the purpose in the budget of the Department.
(Para 55)
GENERAL OBSERVATION
The Committee, after going through the budget performance of the Department of Tourism for the last five years, has
 come to the conclusion that so many schemes are announced, guidelines are issued and budget allocations are made but
 everything remains on paper only.  When the actual implementation part of all the schemes comes, the Department of
 Tourism gives all sorts of explanations.  The Committee feels that most of the schemes mooted by the Department are
 still pending due to the lack of pro-active approach on the part of the Department of Tourism.  This is despite the fact
 that the Committee has been repeatedly recommending in its earlier reports that, in order to avoid delay in the
 implementation of the various schemes, all related problems should be sorted out in advance.   As intimated by the
 Department of Tourism, many of the proposals based on the recommendations of the Committee are pending with the
 Ministry of Finance, Planning Commission & Ministry of Home Affairs etc. who are paying little attention thereon.  
 The Committee is of the view that development of the tourism sector is of great significance for the Indian economy
 and hence all the concerned agencies should make concerted efforts to ensure that the decisions taken in this direction
 are expedited.
(Para 57)
 
 