--
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND TOURISM 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1995 
. (PRESENTED ON 26TH MAY, 1995) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
MAY, 1995/ JYAISTHA , 1917 (SAKA) 
j 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND TOURISM 
SEVENTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS (AMENDMENT) BILL, 1995 
(Presented on 26.5.1995) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELli! 
May, 1995/Jynistha, 1917 (Saka) 
r 
• 

CONTENTS 
p ACiFS 
1. Compo~ition of the Commiltcc ...... ..... ...... . , ..... ...... ... .... . , ........ .... .............. . . ( i) 
2. Report of the Commiuee .... .. ..... ..... ..... ... ... .... ... .... ..... .... .. .. .. ... .... ...... ... ... . . 1-~ 
3. Bill as repo rted by the Commince .. ...... .. .... .. .. .. ....... ... ... .... ... .. ...... .......... ... . 
4. Note of Dissent ............... , ............ ......... ......................... ........................ . 
5. Appendix 
6. Minutes ...... ............... .......... ....... .... ... ......... ......... ........ ........ ........ ........ . . 1~-Ul 
-

-
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE 
( 1995-96) 
I. Shri Pramnd Mahajan_Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri S. Auslin 
3. Shri Ghufrnn A~m 
4. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
5. Shri John. F. Fernandes 
6. Shri Bhadrcswar Gohain 
7. Shri Nnrain Prasad Gupla 
8. Shri Ram Jclhmalani 
9. Shri Snrya Prakash Malaviya 
10. Shri Raghuvji 
II. Shri Rarna Bahadur Rai 
12. Shrimali Basanti Sarma 
13. Shri Iqbal Singh 
14. Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
15. Shri Naresh Yadav 
LOK SABRA 
16. Shri Vilasrao Nagnatbrao Gundcwar 
17. Shri K. Muralccdharan 
18. Shri Shivcndra Bahadur Singh 
19. Shri A. Charles 
20. Shri L. Adaikalaraj 
21. Shri Gurchran Singh Dadhaboor 
22. Shri K. M. Marhew 
23. Shri Perer G. Maibaniang 
24. Shri Swnrup Upadbayay 
25. Shri C. K Kuppuswamy 
26. Shri R Surcnder Reddy 
27. Shri lmchalcmba 
28. Shri Manphool Singh 
29. Shri K. D. Sullanpuri 
30. Shri Jangbir Singh 
31. Shri Samosh Kumar Gangwar 
32. Prof. Prcm DhumaJ 
33. Shri Chaurapal Singh 
34. Shri Kalka Das 
35. Shri Arvind Trivedi 
36. Shri Vishwanarh Das Shastri 
37. Shri Sivaji Pntnaik 
38. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
39. Shri Loknnarh Choudhury 
40. Shri Ram Narcsh Singh 
41. Shri Ram Sunder Das 
42 Shri Anadi Charao Das 
43. Shri S. M. Lal Jan Basba 
44. Shri Krishna Marandi 
45. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sarish Kumar, Joint Sccrelary 
2. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Syed Ausaf Husain, Under Sccrclary 
4. Shri K. P. Singh, Commiltee Officer 
(i) 

REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
1, the Chairman of the Department Related Purlhtmcntary Standing Comm ittee on 
Transport and Tourism, having been authorised hy rhe Comm ittee to present the Report nn 
their behalf, present this their Seventeenth Report. 
2. The Chairman, in consultation with the Speaker, Lok Sabha, referred the National 
Highways (Amendment ) BiU, 1995° as introduced in Lok Sabha on the 25th April. 1995 and 
pending in that House, to the Committee on 28th April. 1995 for examination and Report. •• 
3. The Committee at its meeting held on the 4th May, 1995 had decided to issue a Pre" 
Communique inviting memoranda from various indtviduais, organisations :md instituttons 
interested In the subject mutter of the Bill. A press communique was accordingly '"ucd on 
4th May, 1995. (Appendix) 
4. The Committee discussed the provisions of the Dill and heard the views nf the 
Secretary, Ministry of Surface Transport on the 15th M:ty. 1995. A record of the dt<cu'>ions 
held has been included in the Evidence. 
5. The Committee decided that the evidence recorded by the Committee shou ld he l:ud 
on the Table of both the Houses. 
6. ·me Committee took up clause -by-clause consideration of the Bill on the 24th M:t}. 
1995 and thereafter the Committee considered and adopted the draft Report. 
7. The National Highways (Amendme nt) Bill. 1995 ~eeks to enab le the Central 
Government:-
(i) to enter into agreement with any person in relation to the development and 
maintenance of the whole or any pan of u nutionul highway; 
(ii) to levy fees and authorise the person who has undertaken to develop the wh(>le or 
any part of a national highway to collect >uch fee: 
(iii) to empower such person to regulate traffic on su~h national highwuy; :md 
(iv) to provide for punishment for mischief by injury to such national highways. 
8. The Ministry of Surface Tnmsport in thcfr note submitced to the Committee explained 
the need for introduction of the Bill as under: 
"The question as to whether any amendment to the National Highways Act , 1956 i' 
necessary to allow private participation in road sector wa> examined in conwltation 
with the Ministry of Law and Justice (Department of Legal Affairs) 
The Ministry of Law hns opined that the existing provi,ions of National Highw;~y' Acr. 
1956 do not permit assigning the responsibility of development and maintenance of 
National Highways to the Private Sector Section 4 llf the 'aid Act provides that :Ill 
National Highways shall vest in the Union. 
Section 5 of the Act casts responsibility for development and maintenance o'r twrional 
highways on the Central Government. The present proposal ts to enable the Central 
Government to assign the above responsibility to private persons for a specified period 
'Published in tbe Gazette of India, Extraordinary Part·ll. Section 2 dated the 25th April. 199~. 
''Rajya Sobba Parliamentary Bulletin Part II dated the 28th April. 1995. 
1 

2 
and under an agreement. Such persons would be pem1itted 10 develop and main1:1in 1hc 
highways and also would develop assets on l:mds appuncnanl 10 highw ays fr~)m their 
own re~ources. A suitable provision authorising the Central Government 10 en1er into 
agreement with any private person or a company/firm for assignment of the work of 
development and maintenance or highways for a specified period on such terms ami 
conditions as m3y be agreed upon is Lherefore proposed to be made in the Act. Further 
a provision to the effec t would also be required to be made lh ~t under the ugreernent. 
the entrepreneur will be entit led 10 collect ~uch fee for dl'vclopment and maintenance 
of highways as may be prescribed for the purpose. 
When a private person is authorised to develop and mmntain a facility. it·is alsn 
necessary that the private person is authorised to regulate traffic on the road in a 
manner provided in the agreement. Further, 10 effectively prevent encroachments and 
misuse of the National Highways, it is necessary 10 make a provision in the Act to 
make such :1ction by any person ;1 punio,h:•ble offence ." 
9. The Commillee took note of the views expressed by Shri Sivaji Patnaik and Shri 
Sukhendu KhtHl vide thejr letter dated 24.5.95 opposing the 13111. The Committee deci<kd II' 
append their views us a Note of Dissent to its Report. 
10. The Commillee is in agreement with the provi.,iom. of the Bill with >Omc 
modifications . Changes or otherwi'e in the Bill have hcc:n \Cl out in the ·succeedin¥ 
paragraphs: 
C/auu 2 
Sub section SA (I) 
Adopted without any change. 
Sub section SA (2) 
The Existing provision does not provide components 10 cons litute fees which the person 
refercd to in Sub-section SA(!) will be entitled 10 collect and retam for services or henefih 
rendered by him in relation 10 National Highways. The Comminee desires that the same 
may be provided so as 10 avoid any ambiguity in the maner. 
After the word 'speci fy' following may be added: 
"having regard to Lhe expenditure involved m building. maintenance. management and 
operation of the whole or part of 'uch national highwuy. interest on the capital 
invested, reasonable return, the volume of troffic and 1he period of such agreement." 
Sub section 8A (3) 
The Committee notes that the Motor Vchides Act. 1988 confers the power to regulate 
traffic exclusively upon the CentraVState Governments. whereas new 'sub section 8A(3) 
empowers the person referred 10 in sub section SA(!) to regulate traffic on the nation:~ I 
highways. The Committee apprehends that thi~ provi sion if enacted, would crea te seriou' 
anomaly besides setting a dangerous tren d as such agreements would have lega l sanc tion to 
override the Motor Vehicles Act. There would be hundreds of such agreements having 
different terms and conditions and lhey would be more effective than the Motor Vehicles 
Act. The Comminee Lherefore feels that the agreement proposed to be entered into must 
conform 10 the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act. 
0 ' 

.-
3 
For the sub sect ion 8A(3) following may be substituted: 
"(3) A person referred to in ~ub-section (I) sha ll have powers to regubte and ~-ontrnl 
the traffic in accordance with the provisinns comaincd in Chapter Vlll of the Mntnr 
Vehicles Act, 1988 on the n;ttional highw:iy fo rming subj..:~·t - mauer of such agrct'menl. 
for proper management thereof." 
Sub section HB 
Adopted withou t any change. 
lL Clause 1, the Enac~ing Formula and the Title were :t<lnpted without any change . 
12. The Committee recommends that the Bill . <ts rcp<>rtcd. be passed . 
NEw DELHI; 
May, 24, 1995 
Jyaistlla 3, !917 (Saka) 
PRAMOD MAIIA.JAN 
Ch:1irtmm. 
Commilf('<' 011 Trotrsport and l i-rllr.rport 

48 of 1956 
59 of t988 
THE NATIONAL HIGHWAYS 
(AMENDMENT) BILL, 1995 
(As tu " t'ORTED ~v Tilt CoMM11 1 EE) 
(The words underlined or sidelined indicuce amcuduwnts 
suggcsred by rite Commilfec) 
A 
BlLL 
furthu ro amend the Narional llighways Act. /956. 
6 ~;; it enacted by Parliament in the Forty-sixth Year of the 
Republic of India as follows:-
1. This Act may be called the National Highw;•ys 
(Amendm ent) Act, 1995. 
s 2. After section 8 of the National l lighw:tys Act, 1956. the 
following sections shall be insened. namcly:-
"8A. (I) Nothwithstanding anything contained in this Act. 
the Central Government may enter into an agreement with any 
person in relation to the development and maintenance of the 
tO whole or uny part of a national highwuy. 
(2) Notwithstanding anything conta ined in Sect ion 7. the 
person referred to in sub-sec tion (I) is entitled to collect and 
retain fees at such rate , for services or benefits rendered by 
him as the Centra l Government may, by notification in the 
IS Official Gazette, specify having regard tO the expenditure 
involved in building, maintenance, management and operation 
of the whole or part of such national highway. interest on the 
capital invested reasonab le return, the volume of trarric und 
the period of such agreement. 
20 (3) A person referred to in sub-section (1) shall have powers to 
regulate and control the traffic in accordance with the 
provision s contai ned in Chapter VIII of the Motor Vehicles 
Act , 1988 on the national highway fonning subject-matter of 
such agreement, for proper management thereof." 
2S 8B. Whoever commits mischief by doing any act which 
rende rs or which be knows to be likely to render any national 
highway referred to in sub -sect ion (I) of section 8A. 
impassable or less safe for travelling or conveying property, 
shali'be punished with imprisonment of eilher description for a 
30 tenn which may exte nd to five years, or with a fine, or with 
both." · 
5 
Short title 
lnsc:rhon or new 
~hOfH• AA and 
80 
Powc:1 of 
Ccr1t1al 
Oovcrnmcm 10 
cRier uno 
a,reements for 
devetopnl<OI 
and mountcrr.anC'C 
of n:nional 
h·~h·:l:~) 
Puni~hn1en1 for 
nusdud by 
1njury 10 
n:uion111 
hlghwoy. 
• •• 

NOTE OF DISSENT 
BY 
Shri Sivaji Patnaik. M.P. 
and 
Shri Shukhcndu Khan. M.P. 
The Nationa l Highways (Amendment) [Jill. 1995 as has been introduced in Lok S:~hha 
on 25.4.95 contains provi sions which will have serious impal·t anu repercuss ions not only on 
the transpon secto r (Highwa ys and Expressw:tys) and our <!conomy hut ulso on the ccOtH>mk 
sovereignty and security of the country. 
The Bill which is aimed at h:tnding over the work to any person for development und 
maintenance of national highways. collection of fees. regulating the traffic and uw:~rding 
punishment: will amount to hand over the lifeline of the nati<>n to private persons mainly Ill 
the mul!in:nionals and monopoly houses. 
The ~hortage of resources for mainten:tnce and upgradation has been shown as the 
major reason for private panicipation in national highways. But if 75% of the income from 
national highways itself can be enrmarked for maintenance and upgmdation work then the 
task that has been charted out for the ye:~r 2001 can he achieved. DU! the Government 
which remained totally callous for the development and maintenance work of nutional 
highways for the last 41 years, has woken up from its deep slumher. and now in the name of 
complet ing the task want to open the rouds secto r 10 monopolists and mu ltina tion al 
companies. 
The Bill not only defeats the very purpose of Nutional Hig.hwuys Act. 1956 which hns a 
self-reliant coment, it puts everything in the hands of priv;~ te owners so far us roads sector is 
concerned. The Bill empowers the private concerns to charge heavily. 11 may so happen that 
the toll-taxes may exceed the cost of fuel in some c:t~es. Transport cost will go up resulting 
in further price rise of the commodities. Further. the Private concerns will have the liberty 
to allow even in our strategic highways any vehicle they like. which may endanger th~ 
security of our country. Again, this control of private concern over our national and expres.• 
highways will open the flood-gates for ~muggling. 
As such the Bill is totally unaccept:thle :md needs to be withdrawn. 
(i 

APPENDIX 

APPENDIX 
(vide para 3 of tbe Report) 
PRESS COMMUNIQUE 
The National Highways (Amendment) Bill, 1995 bus been referred to the Department· 
Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport and Tourism beaded by Shri 
Pramod Mabajan, M.P. 
2. The Bill was introduced in the Lok Sabba on the 25th April. 1995 and it seeks to 
amend tbe National Highways Act. 1956 to enable the Central Government to achieve the 
following objects:-
(i) to enter into agreement with any person in relation to development and maintenanl·e of 
the whole or any part of a national highway; 
(ii) to levy fees and authorise the person who had undertaken to develop the whole or any 
part of a national highway to collect such fee; 
(iii) to empower such person to regulate traffic on such national highway; and 
(iv) to provide for punishment for mischief by injury to such national highways. 
3. The Committee has decided to invite views through memoranda on the provisions of 
the Bill from organisations, institutions and individuuls interested in the subject of the Bill. 
4. The interested individuals/organisations etc. may submit their memoranda to the 
Under Secretary (T&T) Rajya Sabha Secretariat, Parliament House, Room No. 64·F . New 
Delbi-110001 so as to reach him on or before the 12th May. 1\195. A copy of the Billl·an he 
had from the concerned officer on request. 
New Delhi; 
May 4, 1995 
9 

l 
MlNUTES 
-

• 
II 
*SECOND MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.00 a.m. on Thursday, the 4th Muy. I99S ill Comm ittee Room 
A, Ground Floor, Parliament House Anncxe. New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Pramod Mahajan-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri John. F. Fernandes 
3. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
4. Shri Bhadrcswar Gohain 
5. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
6. Sbri Ram J ethmalani 
7. Shri Satya Pr'Jkash Malaviya 
8. Shri Raghavji 
9. Shrimati Basanti Sarma 
10. Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
11. Shri Naresh Yadav 
LOK SADHA 
12. Shri A. Charles 
13. Shri Chaurapal Singh 
14. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
15. Shri Lokanath Choudhury 
16. Shri Ram N aresh Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Syed . Ausaf Husain , Unde r Secretary 
3. Shri K.P. Singh. Committee Officer 
2. • • • 
3. The Chairman informed the Comm ittee that the National Highways (Amendment) 
Bill, 1995 had been referred to the Committee for exumination and report. T he Committee 
then decided to invite the views of individu~JI,;/organilations on the Bill who are i111erested 
in the subject and directed the Secretariat to issue a Press Communique to that effect. 
4. The Committee also decided to take up the Bill for consideratiOIJ. at. its next meeting. 
to be held on 15th May, 1995 and also to hear the Secrewry Ministry of Surface Transport in 
the matter. 
5. • 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 10.45 a.m. 
'Minutes of lsi meeting related to matters not included in this Rcron. 
"'Related 10 rn&llcrs not included in lhis Rcporr. 
13 

m 
THIRD MEET ING 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m . on Monday. the 15th May. 1995 in Room No. li~. First 
Floor. Parliament House , New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Pramod Mahajan-Chairman 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri S. Austin 
3. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
4. Shri Bhadreswar Gohain 
5. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
6. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
7. Shri Raghavji 
8. Shri Ratna Bahadur Rai 
9. Shri Iqbal Singh 
10. Shri Sha nkar Dayal Singh 
11. Shri Naresh Yadav 
LOK SABR A 
12. Shri K. M. Mathew 
13. Shri Imchalemba 
14. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
IS. Shri Ram Naresh Singh 
SECRETARIA T 
1. Shri Satish Kumar , Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Raja Ram , Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Syed Ausaf Husain, Under Secretary 
4. Shri K.P. Singh, Committee Officer 
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs (Legislativt Departme nt) 
1. Shri T.K. Vishwanathan , Joint Secy . & Legislative Counsel 
2. Shri P.B . Singh, Assu. Legislative Counsel 
Mlnlstry or Surface T r anspo rt 
1. Shri C.N. Ramdas, Secretary, (SFT) 
2. Shri S.N. Kakar, Addl. Secy. & Fin. Adviser 
3. Shri Yoge ndra Nara in, Chair (NHA I) 
4. Shri M.V. Sastry, Dir. Genl. (RD) 
5. Shri R. Talwar, P.S . to Minister of State (SFT) 
6. Shri D. Sircar , OS (P&B) 
7. Shri Kamlesh Kumar, SE(R)N. 
8. Sbri R .I. Koul, C.E.(PL) 
2. The Committee took up for consideration. the National Highways (Amendm enr ) 
Bill, 1995. The Committee heard the Secretary, Min istry of Surface T ransport on the 
provisions of the Bill and other relevant issues concerned the Bill. 
14 

15 
3. The Secretary of the Ministry was asked to d;trify "' to whether the agreement 
referred to in the new Sectjon 8-A would have preccdenc:e twcr the provbions of th~ Motor 
Vehicles Act. 1988, and whether the prov"ton~ uf the 'aid Ac:t were con!.idered inadcqu;ue 
to meet the requiremen ts of the person proposed to he empowered to regulute traffic: M the 
National Highway. The views of the Lcg~lwive Counse l were also heard on the e:<i<tin)! 
provisions of the Bill with a .yicw to fintling out us to whether these provision' wen: 
adequate and were in consonance 'with ther Motor Vchides Act and other provision> of the 
Law. The replies of both, the Secretary of the M inistry and the Legislative Counsel could 
not satisfy the Comminee . The Comm ittee, thereufter. aut hori,cd the Chairman to 'eck 
necessary clarifications from the Secrewry. Department of Legal Aff.,ir' in the m:oucr. 
A .verbatim record of the proceeding' of the meeting wa< kept. 
' 4. The Committee then adjourned ;~t 5.00 p.m . 

IV 
FOURTH MEET ING 
The ·Commiuce met at 3.00 p.m. on Wednesd<ty. the 24th May. 1995 in Commiuee Room 
No. 'A' Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe. New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
1. Shri Pramod Mahajan-Chairmarr 
RAJYA SADHA 
2. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
3. Shri John. F. Fe(.llandes 
4. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
5. Sbri Raghavji 
LOK SABRA 
6. Shri Vilusr<~o Nagnatbrao Gundewar 
7. Shri A. Churles 
8. Shri Gurcharan Singh Dadh;ohoor 
9. Shri K. M. Mathew 
10. Shri R. Surender Reddy 
11. Shri lmch;olemba 
12. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangw;tr 
13, Shri Arvind Trivedi 
14. Shri Vishwonoth Das Shastri 
15. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
16. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
17. Sbri Lokanath Choudhury 
18. Shri Ram Naresh Singh 
19. Shri S. M. La! Jan Basha 
SECRETARI AT 
l. Shri Salish Kumar , Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Syed Ausaf Husain, Under Secret:try 
4. Shri K.P . Singh, Commiuec Officer 
Ministry of Law, Justice and Company Affairs (Legislative Department ) 
L Shri T.K. Viswanathan, Joint Secre tary and Legblative Coun$el 
2. Shri P.B. Singh, Asstt. Legislat ive Counsel 
Ministry of Surfa ce Transport 
1. Shri Yogendra Narain, Chairman. National Highw<ty Authority of India . 
2. At the outset, the Chairman informed the Commiuee that in pursuance of 
Committee's decision taken at its meeting held on 15th May . 1995. the Law Secret:try 
alongwith Secretary, Ministry of Surface Transport met the Chairman on 16.5.95 <llld 
explained their position. I t was then agreed- to that Ministry of Surface Transpo rt would. in 
consultation with the Depart ment of Legal Affair~ . submit sugges tions for Committee\ 
consideration before ~lause by Clause consideration of the Bill is taken up. the Chairmnn. 
NHAI vide his letter dated 19th May, 1995 furnished in consultation with the Mini'lr y of 
Law, the following suggestions for consideration: 
16 

L 
17 
ClntLff 2 
Sub-section 8A(l) - No change 
Sub-section 8A(2)- after the word ·~pe~1f1•' following may he added : 
"having regard to be expenditure involved in building. mainten:tnl'C. management :•nd 
operat ion of the whole or p:trt <>! 'urh national highway. interc~t on the capital 
invested. reasonable return , the volume of tr:tffit· :~nd 1hc period of such agreement." 
Sub-section 8A(3)- The Sub-sectio n m:ty be suhst illltt·d hy the following: 
"A person referred to in suh-,cct ion (I) sh:dl IH!vc pnwt-r' to rcgul:ttc und con trol till" 
traffic in accordance with the provi,inns contained in C'haptcr VIII of the Mmnr 
Vehicle' Act, 1988 on the n:~tionul highway fotJHin!! '"hk<"t-m:Hter of such a}!rccment. 
Cor proper management thereof ... 
Sub·>CCtion SB - No change: 
3. Before taking up cl:~u'c by l'I:U"'-' Cllll,i<kr:niun ul the National llighw:l\ '' 
(Amendment) Bill, 1995. the Comnutt<T t·nn,i tkn:'ll till' '••tc of Di,~nt put furth hy 
Shri Sivaji Patnaik and Shri Sukhcmlu Kh:111 un paNng u( the Bill. Thl·r<· wa'. 
however. hroad consensus in '"Pfi<lrl nf the Oill Tfw Cumnuttcc dt~itlcd tO append till' 
Note or Di,sent to its Report . 
4. Afte r elaborate discu~sions on the rrovi'i""' .. r 1 h~ Hill. the Committee look up 
clause ~onsidc r ation of the Uill. 
Clt111.1'e 1 
Suh section HAC I) 
Adorted without any th:tngc. 
Suh ~eclion HA(21 
The Existing provision did not provide components to mnstitute fee~ which the 
person referred to in Sub section SA( I) would he entitled to collect and ret:tin fllr 
services or benefits rendered by him in rc:l:otion tn Natinnal Highway,, The Committee 
desi red that the same be provided '" '" to ;~vllid an~' amhiguity in the m:111er. 
After the world 'specify' the following he ad.Scd: 
"having regard to the expenditure involved in huilding . maintenance, managemem anti 
opera tion of the whole or part !lf ~uch n;Hion<~l highway. interest on the c·apital 
invested. reasonable return, the volume of lraffic :~nd the period of such agreement." 
Sub section 8A(3) 
The Committee noted that the Motor Veh icles Art. 19~8 conferred the power to 
regulate traffic exclusively upon the Cc ntrul/Swte Governments. whereas Sub sect ion 8A(3) 
empowered the person referred to in Suh sect ion 8A(l) to regulme traffic on the national 
highways. The Committee apprehended that the provi>ion if enacted, would create 'erious 
antJmaly besides setting a dangerous trend a~ such agreements wold have. legal sanction to 
override the Motor Vehicles Act. There would be hundred~ of such agreements having 
different terms and conditions and they would be more effective than the Motor Vehicle-. 
Act. The Commiuee, therefore, felt that the agreement proposed to be entered into. must 
confirm to the provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act. 
For the Sub section 8A(3) the following be substituted: 
"(3) A pe~on referred to in Sub-section (1) shall have powers to regulate and control 
the traffic in accordance with the provision~ contained in Chapter VIII of the Motor 
Vehicles Act, 1988 on the national highway forming subject-matter of such agreement. 
for proper management thereor." 

18 
Sub section 8B 
Adopted without any change 
Clause 1, the Enacting Formula and the Title were ;~tlop t ed without any change . 
5. The Committee then considered aml adopted its Rcrort on the National l lighw;ty~ 
(Amendment) Bill, 1995. 
6. The Committee decided tha t the evidence tendered before the Commiuee on the 
Natio nal Highwal' (Ame ndment) Bill, 1995 be laid on the Table of both the IIQuses of 
Parl iament. 
7. The Committee authorised the Chairma n and in his absen ce Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
and Shri Rt•ghavji to present the Report to the Rajya Suhhu, and Shri A. Charles and 
Shri Vishwanath Das Shastri to lay the Report on the Tuhle of Lok Sabha. 
8. .. $ • 
9. The Committee then adjourned at 4.45 p.m. 
•• •Relate to mo:mers not included ln this repOrt. 