PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 147
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON TRANSPOR T, TOURISM  AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
THE RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF 
THE COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED
AND THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR 
GRANTS 2008-09 OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 DECEMBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND FORTY-SEVENTH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV A TIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED
AND THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT ON DEMANDS FOR
GRANTS 2008-09 OF THE MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 19 TH DECEMBER, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 19 TH DECEMBER, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
DECEMBER, 2008/AGRAHAYANA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—16
4. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................... 17—18
5. A NNEXURE ............................................................................................................................... 19—31
6. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 33—36

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2008-09)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
3. Shrimati Jayanthi Natarajan
4. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
5. Shri Shanta Kumar
6. Shrimati Hema Malini
*7. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
8. Shri Naresh Gujral
9. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
10. Shri Biswajit Daimary
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13. Shri Joachim Baxla
14. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18. Shrimati Priya Dutt
19. Shri Dip Gogoi
20. Shri Prahlad Joshi
21. Shri P. Karunakaran
22. Dr. P.P. Koya
23. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24. Shri Samik Lahiri
25. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26. Shri Hemlal Murmu
27. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28. Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29. Shri Dushyant Singh
30. Shri Rakesh Singh
31. Shri Suraj Singh
* Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f.  26.11.2008.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Forty-seventh Report on “Action Taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Thirty-eighth
Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Civil Aviation”.
2. The One Hundred and Thirty-eighth Report of the Department-related Parliamentary
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the
28th April, 2008.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained on its
One Hundred and Thirty-eighth Report were received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation on the
12th December, 2008.
6. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the
18th December, 2008.
SITARAM YECHURY
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
December 18, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Agrahayana 27, 1930  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

1
REPORT
The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation
on the observations/recommendations as contained in its One-Hundred and Thirty-eighth Report on
Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of Civil Aviation, which was presented to both the
Houses of Parliament on 28th April, 2008.
2. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Department on the 12th December, 2008
in respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report, which have been
categorised as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/observations, which have been accepted by the Department:
Para Nos. 6,
 11, 21, 41, 48, 52, 55, 66, 69, 70, 72, 76, 80, 81, 82, 83, 85  Total-17
(ii) Recommendations/observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in view
of the Department replies:
Para No. — NIL
(iii) Recommendations/observations in respect of which replies of the Department have not
been accepted by the Committee:
Para Nos. 30, 62 T otal-2
(iv) Recommendations/observations in respect of which final replies of the Department are
still awaited:
Para No. NIL
Total-19
ANNUAL PLAN 2007-08
(Recommendation at Para 6)
3. The Committee notes that Ministry of Civil Aviation has failed to fully utilize the outlay
approved during 2007-08. This looks something strange at a time when the civil aviation sector is
witnessing an unprecedented growth for past few years. The Ministry anticipates to utilize an
amount of Rs.11211.61 crore only out of the approved allocation of Rs.12347.09 crore during the
year 2007-08, which exemplifies the poor financial management in the Ministry of Civil Aviation.
The Committee feels that there is a lack of proper planning in the various organisations of Ministry
of Civil Aviation, as a result of which the Ministry was unable to utilize optimally the approved
outlays at its disposal. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation
should impress upon the concerned agencies to make a realistic assessment of their financial
requirements so that the allocations made do not remain unutilized.
Reply of the Government
4. The details of approved outlay and actual expenditure is as under:
(Rs. in crores)
Approved Plan Outlay Actual Expenditure % of outlay
(a) – IEBR 12187.09 1 1059.52 90.75
(b) – GBS (Revised) 160.09 152.09 95.05
T
OTAL: 12347.09 11211.61 90.80

2
5. The reasons for less expenditure are as under:
(i) Airports Authority of India
AAI had proposed to incur expenditure of Rs.1961.41 crores during the year 2007-08 which
was revised to Rs.1980.95 crores at RE stage. Against this, AAI had incurred an expenditure of
Rs.1980.23 crores during 2007-08. Further AAI has drawn the full amount of budgetary support
projected in RE 2007-08 amounting to Rs.55 crores. Keeping in view the progress of works and
expected clearances for modernization of Kolkata and Chennai airports, AAI has projected an
expenditure of Rs.3377.10 crores during 2008-09.
(ii) National Aviation Company of India Limited (NACIL)
At the time of formulation of the Annual Plan 2007-08, it was estimated that a total of 15
aircraft shall join the fleet of NACIL (erstwhile IAL : 9 aircraft and erstwhile AI : 6 aircraft). As
against 15 aircraft, 19 aircraft have joined the fleet (erstwhile IAL : II aircraft and erstwhile
AI : 8 aircraft) during 2007-08. However, in spite of the delivery of additional 4 aircraft during
2007-08, reduction in outgo is mainly due to:—
(a) Favourable exchange rate and lower escalation factor in respect of erstwhile Air India
as compared to the escalation estimated in the Plan Projection.
(b) Saving due to delay in delivery schedule of aircraft, resulting in deferment of advance
payment in respect of B-787 - 8 aircraft.
Aircraft acquisition comprises almost 97% of the “total plan outlay allocation” of NACIL. The
remaining outlay is in respect of “Other Capital Project” which mainly caters to the expenditure on
Other Supporting Facilities such as ground support equipment, miscellaneous equipment and assets,
corporate computerization etc. Expenditure under this head is undertaken only when it is essential
and operationally required without compromising operational efficiency.
(iii) Air India Charters Limited (AICL)
As per the Annual Plan for the year 2007-08, 5 B-737-800 aircraft were to be received and
the same have been reeeived during 2007-08. The shortfall of Rs.197.69 crore is on account of:—
(a) Exchange variation due to reduction in exchange rate.
(b) Lower escalation factor as compared to the Plan Projection.
(c) Only essential operational projections are being undertaken without affecting the
operational efficiency of the Company.
As such, the shortfall in expenditure in 2007-08 works in NACIL’s favour.
(iv) Pawan Hans Helicopters Ltd.
The approved plan outlay for 2007-08 of PHHL was Rs.246.50 crores which included
acquisition of 7 new helicopters during the year at an estimated cost of Rs. 190 crores. Board of
Directors of PHHL have decided that acquisition of 20 helicopters projected during Eleventh Five
Year Plan period be processed together at one go instead of the proposed year-wise induction plan
projected earlier, keeping in view the prevailing long delivery schedules of helicopters upto 24
months after advance payments and market demand for helicopters, time required for tender
process and Government approval each time. Accordingly, advance payment of Rs. 91.20 crores
towards acquisition of entire 20 Nos. helicopters is now proposed by PHHL in their Annual Plan
2008-09. Earlier in Eleventh Five Year Plan Projections, an amount of Rs. 160.50 crores was
provided towards payment for acquisition of 6 Nos. helicopters during Financial Year 2008-09.

3
The Annual Plan for the Financial Year 2008-09 of PHHL has been reviewed keeping in view
the above. The approved Plan Outlay of Rs. 123.80 crores includes acquisition of new fleet
(advance payment of Rs. 91.30 cores, towards 20 helicopters) midlife upgradation of Dauphin fleet,
import of capital equipment, creation of Maintenance Centre and Heliport, building and other
projects, IT Plan and other Civil/Electric work etc.
(v) Directorate General of Civil Aviation (DGCA)
A provision of Rs. 87 crore was made in BE 2007-08 and during RE 2007-08 this provision
was reduced to Rs. 56 crores in respect of DGCA. An expenditure of Rs. 52.99 crores was
incurred in 2007-08, which amounts to 95% (approx) w.r.t. RE 2007-08. As for the financial year
2008-09, steps have been initiated to utilise optimally the funds allocated to DGCA.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
6. The Committee notes reply of the Ministry.
BUDGET 2008-09 AND ANNUAL PLAN FOR 2008-09
(Recommendation at Para 11)
7. The Committee feels that reduction in Budgetary support of the Ministry will definitely have
a negative impact on the expansion of aviation sector in North-Eastern region as the approved
budgetary support component does not include the outlay of Rs.45.00 cores proposed to be given
as a grant for the setting up of Greenfield Airport at Pakyong, Sikkim. The Committee recommends
that the Ministry may take this issue with the Finance Ministry at RE stage and prevail upon them
to grant more money to ensure that works for project start well in time. The Committee expects
that the Government will ensure that the targets set for internal and extra budgetary resources as
well as external commercial borrowings from foreign banks/financial institutions for bridging the
gap in budgetary support will materialize. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take
adequate steps during 2008-09 also to ensure optimum utilisation of the enhanced allocations made
to various organisations.
Reply of the Government
8. A greenfield airport at Pakyong, Sikkim is proposed to be constructed by AAI at an
estimated cost of Rs.358.94 crores (on completion costs basis). Eleventh Finance Commission had
awarded an amount of Rs.50 crores to Government of Sikkim for this project, out of which
Rs.13.30 crores were released during the award period. Subsequently, the 12th Finance
Commission has made an award of Rs.1 00 crores to the State Government for the airport project.
An amount of Rs.50 crores has been released to the Government of Sikkim, till now, against the
12th Finance Commission award. State Government has assured that they would transfer this
amount of Rs.113.30 crores to AAI for execution of project. The balance amount of Rs.245.64
crores shall be funded as 90% grant by Central Government ( i.e. Rs.221.08 crores) and 10% from
the internal resources of AAI ( i.e. Rs.24.56 crores). This Ministry had requested for the release
of an amount of Rs.45 crores as Central Grant (out of the total amount of Rs.221.08 crores)
during 2008-09, which was not accepted at BE stage. The demand will be taken up again at the
RE stage depending upon the fund position.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
9. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the Ministry will
impress upon the Planning Commission to release the additional amount of Rs.45 crore for

4
the airport project at Pakyong, Sikkim so that the project is not delayed for want of funds
as with the construction of the new airport in Sikkim, the north-eastern sector will get
boost in tourism and trade sector.
NATIONAL A VIATION COMPANY OF INDIA LIMITED
(Recommendation at Para 21)
10. The Committee notes that profit of both the erstwhile Air India and Indian Airlines has gone
down substantially due to varied price of A TF, rapidly declining passenger revenue yields on
account of intense competition and deployment of excess capacity in the market, etc. The
Committee hopes that merger process of both these carriers will be completed in time and this
process will help the national carrier in long run in consolidating its position in domestic and
international market. The Committee hopes that the synergisation process would help to improve
the operational efficiency of both the carriers. However, the Committee is of the view that NACIL
should adopt an aggressive marketing strategy to face the stiff competition at global level as well
as domestic level in order to have a level playing field with that of competitors. The Committee
appreciates the steps taken by NACIL to increase the market share of Air India with the fleet
strength of around 110. The Committee desires that the number of bilateral agreements which were
signed during the last year should be materialized to the maximum possible extent. The Committee
hopes that with the induction of new aircrafts in its fleet, Air India can regain its glory and
Maharaja status. The Committee desires that the NACIL will soar to new heights by optimally
utilizing its man power and available resources which is not available with any of its competitor.
The Committee hopes to see that NACIL will come out of the red and make profits in near future.
The Committee recommends to the Government that they may commission a study to know how
the private airlines are functioning including the financial freedom they are enjoying, their efficiency
and customer service. The findings of the study may be used for the improvement of NACIL. The
Committee may be apprised about the findings of such a study and the steps taken to improve the
performance of NACIL.
Reply of the Government
11. NACIL has been continuously implementing various marketing initiatives keeping in view the
demand of the market as well as to provide attractive options for its customers. These comprise
of promotional offers and schemes, which provide value addition for the passengers and also enable
the airline to retain its competitiveness in the market as well as assist in increasing the revenues,
capacity utilization and market share. These measures, taken from time to time, comprise of pricing
initiatives, short term and long term schemes. The launch of these schemes depend upon various
market factors like seasonality, market presence and strength of the airline vis-a-vis its competitors,
supply and demand equation etc. These schemes also seek to stimulate the market by creating new
market segments and to provide value-enhanced services to our passengers.
12. Apart from the above, NACIL has placed an order for purchase of 111 new aircraft with
state-of-the-art in-flight entertainment, comfortable seats, mood lighting etc., which will enhance
passenger comfort. The existing owned B747-400 aircraft have also been upgraded. Several
improvements in customer care have been introduced, some of which are e-ticketing, e-check-in,
advance check-in, city check-in, etc. NACIL is in the process of joining the largest airline alliance
in the world, Star Alliance, which will enable Air India to provide seamless connectivity to its
passengers across networks of all Star Alliance airlines. Passengers will also be able to redeem their
FFP mileage points on any of the Star Alliance airlines and will have access to their lounges at
various airports.

5
13. The NACIL has also taken strategic initiatives to improve its revenues, load factor and
profitability.
14. With reference to the recommendation of the Committee that the Government may
commission a study to know how the private airlines are functioning including the financial
freedom they are enjoying, their efficiency and customer services, it is submitted that NACIL keeps
studying and analyzing, functioning and performance of other airlines on a continuous basis and
best practices prevalent in other airlines are adopted in order to improve customer services and
efficiency of the company. Moreover, with a view to strengthen the erstwhile Air India and Indian
Airlines, the merger of two airlines was effected in the year 2007. The integration process of the
two airlines is underway. Commissioning of a study at this stage, when merger and integration
process of two companies is going on, might not be that beneficial. But such study can be
commissioner at a later stage. A number of innovative concepts such as functioning on Strategic
Business Unit model, routes synchronization and entering into ground handling business through
JVs are being introduced in order to improve performance of NACIL.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
15. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and feels that there is still some
space available for the NACIL to improve its performance. The Committee hopes that with
the available fleet strength and market network by the merger of erstwhile AI and lA,
NACIL can spread its wings to all the corners of the globe by utilizing the aircrafts, seat
sharing agreements and also code share agreements signed with other major airlines
optimally.
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF  INDIA (AAI)
(Recommendation at Para 30)
16. The Committee expresses its apprehension over the handing over of Nagpur airport to JVC
for a token sum of Re.l/-. The Committee is not convinced by the reasons given by the Ministry
for this whole episode. The Committee feels that this will set a wrong precedent. After investing
a large amount of public money for development and modernization of this airport, the Committee
sees no logic behind the decision of the Government in handing over the airport to a JVC virtually
free of cost. The Committee further recommends a proper valuation of the assets of the Nagpur
airport including the land may be made and brought into the Books of the JVC so that the
information is available in the public domain. The Committee may be apprised of the further
developments in this front and a copy of MOU signed with the JVC may be sent to the Committee
for perusal.
Reply of the Government
17. Government of Maharashtra have proposed to develop a world class Multi Model
International Passenger and Cargo Hub Airport to Nagpur (MIHAN) integrated with the existing
Nagpur Airport. As per the Techno Economic Feasibility Study (TEFS) got conducted by the State
Government, Nagpur being centrally located in the country, there is a possibility of setting up an
international hub airport. Further, Nagpur is located mid way between Dubai and Bangkok, a five
hour fly zone between which no hub airport is located. Accordingly, State Government have
proposed the extension of existing airport and development of a world class Multi Model
International Passenger and Cargo Hub at Nagpur. Consultants have suggested formation of Special
Purpose Vehicle for implementation of project. The request of Government of Maharashtra was
examined and it was observed that:

6
(i) Nagpur is geographically centrally located and as such best suited for development of
hub airport. Its location on the international flying routes is also conducive to such
development.
(ii) V idarbha is a backward region. Government of India and GoM have been taking
various steps for encouraging industrial and infrastructural development in this region.
Development of MIHAN at Nagpur is expected to impart a greater thrust in achieving
this socio-economic objectives of the two Government.
(iii) AAI has been maintaining and operating Nagpur airport. Despite various efforts to
upgrade infrastructure at the airport, it has not been possible to develop the same as
a hub airport on a stand alone basis. The proposal made to develop the cargo hub
alongwith the Special Economic Zone and other related infrastructure may turn around
this airport.
18. Nagpur airport is a consistently loss making airport. The decision to hand over the airport
to the JV  Company comprising of Airport Authority of India (AAI) and Maharashtra Airport
Development Company Ltd. (MADC) is based upon above considerations. As regards valuation of
assets, it is proposed that the valuation of land and other assets of AAI and MADC shall be done
by an independent valuer State.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
19. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and sees no logic in handing over the
Nagpur airport to the JVC for a token annual lease rent of Re.1/- for a period of 30 years
and also waivering of stamp duty payable for transferring airport from AAI to the JVC. The
Committee is not satisfied with the reasons submitted by the Ministry for the entire
episode. The Committee is surprised to see how an airport having the entire requisite
infrastructure is being handed over to a JVC through backdoor by simply stating the airport
is a loss making one.
(Recommendation at Para 41)
20. The Committee feels that the enhanced annual outlay for Airports Authority of India during
this year will help the Authority to complete its ongoing projects in time and match the aviation
infrastructure at par with international standards and also with that of boom in aviation sector. The
Committee recommends that Airports Authority of India should be given necessary financial
freedom in selecting and executing the aviation infrastructure projects with its potential and
expertise in this field. The Committee hopes that development of non-metro projects will be
completed within the scheduled period as these airports will help in easing the traffic congestion
at metro airports. The Committee feels that while the Airports Authority of India will develop,
maintain and manage the air-side upgradation and terminal modernization, the issue of city side
development of these airports should not become a hurdle in completing these airports. The
Committee hopes that in addition to these metro and non-metro airports, small cities having
adequate tourism potential should also be brought in the aviation map of the country and this could
be only possible by the active role of Airports Authority of India in developing unutilized airstrips
in such cities. The Committee desires that ongoing development works in the North-Eastern sector
should be given priority by the Airports Authority of India so that necessary aviation infrastructure
is developed in this region to give air connectivity to the North-Eastern States.
Reply of the Government
21. The infrastructure at the airports both on the airs side and city side including Terminal

7
Buildings is being upgraded to meet the requirements due to traffic growth in Aviation Sector. 35
Non Metro Airports are being modernized in a time bound manner progressively due for completion
by March, 2010. Special emphasis is given to the airports in NE Region for development.
Guwahati, Agartala, Dimapur and Imphal Airports are already included under the modernization plan
for 35 Non Metro Airports. Works of immediate and operational requirements are being undertaken
periodically at other airports in NE Region (like Dibrugarh and Silchar). Greenfields airports in the
NE Region are under consideration at location like Pakyong in Sikkim, Itanagar in Arunachal
Pradesh and Cheithu in Nagaland. Pre-feasibility study in respect of proposed operationlisation of
airports at Kailashar, Kamalpur, Along, Daparizo and Zero have been conducted. DPR for
operationlisation of Tezu Airport is under preparation. Action has been initiated for appointment of
Consultant to carry out a Feasibility Study in respect of 32 Non Operational Airports of AAI for
revival based on potential. In addition, EOI has been invited for appointment of Consultancy Agency
to carry out a pre feasibility study in respect of operationliation of 327 other airports/airstrips in
the country i.e. other than AAI and belonging to State Government/Defence/Private in the country
other than AAI and belonging to State Government/Defence/Private agencies.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
22. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that modernization of non-
metro and other airports will be completed as per their schedule since these airports play
a vital role in air connectivity to medium and small towns and also in sharing the traffic
burden of metro airports.
PAWAN HANS HELICOPTERS LIMITED
(Recommendation at Para 48)
23. The Committee is unhappy to note that the Board of Directors of Pawan Hans Limited
decided to stop the purchase of seven helicopters in 2007-08. The Committee observes that this
should not happen on the plea that in the coming year a large number of helicopters have to be
purchased and all of it can be purchased at one go. The Committee recommends that the Pawan
Hans should implement its activities in the relevant year itself instead of postponing it year after
year.
Reply of the Government
24. There has been continuous demand of helicopters with positive growth scenario emerging
in the helicopter industry in India due to which delivery of helicopters is now taking longer time
of upto 24 months by the manufacturers. Therefore, PHHL has reviewed the plan schemes for fleet
acquisition and keeping in view the market demand, tender process and approval time required each
time, it has been decided to prepone the acquisition plan for 20 helicopters so that tender process
is initiated at one go instead of year wise acquisition based on annual plan. This will also facilitate
uniformity in the type of helicopters to be acquired. Under this proposal, there can be an option
for deliveries in a phased manner. Accordingly, PHHL  has decided to go for purchase of 20 more
helicopters as projected under Eleventh Plan.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
25. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
(Recommendation at Para 52)
26. The Committee observes that the services of Pawan Hans are still underutilized. The

8
Committee feels that there is tremendous scope of utilizing the helicopter facility to connect the
remote tourist places. The Committee recommends that Pawan Hans Helicopters Limited should
prepare specific plans to diversify/connect to important tourist places as a part of diversification
of its operations. The Committee expects that the approved outlay for new fleet acquisition will be
fully utilised in the current financial year. The Committee notes that entry of Pawan Hans in smaller
aircraft operations will definitely provide air connectivity in North-Eastern region and also to small
cities of tourist and commercial importance. The Committee desires to see that Pawan Hans uses
its resources to the maximum possible extent to make the Year of Helicopters a successful one by
expanding its horizon.
Reply of the Government
27. In order to promote helicopter Services to connect remote tourist places in India, Pawan
Hans has been making continuous efforts. PHHL operates passenger services from Augustmuni to
Kedarnath and Badrinath Dham twice in a year (May-June and Sept.-Oct.). This year also, PHHL
has resumed the services from 9th May, 2008 from Augustmuni. Further, Pawan Hans has also
created a new helipad in a record time at Phata near Augustmuni and has commenced operations
from 23 June, 2008. This would give tremendous boost to the helicopter services for Sri Kedarnath
Dham. PHHL has deployed two helicopters for these services. Apart from this PHHL also plans to
further connect important adjoining tourists/religious places in Uttarakhand such as Ghagharia,
Hemkund Sahib etc., subject to grant of necessary permissions. In this connection construction of
Hangar at Gauchar airfield is in full swing on the land allotted by the State Government on
concessional lease basis for helicopter services and would be ready soon. Gauchar airfield may
become a gateway for connectivity to several tourist destinations in Uttarakhand. PHHL has been
recently awarded the contract by Shri Mata Vaishnodevi Shrine Board for deployment of 2 Bell
helicopters for running passenger services on Katra-Sanjichhat-Katra sector. PHHL has started
regular flights on this sector w.e.f. 3rd April, 2008. This has been running successfully with record
number of flying hours and revenue generation for the Company apart from boost to tourism.
PHHL also offers helicopters to private parties during Amarnath Dham yatra season. PHHL plans
to commence helicopter services for Shirdi from Mumbai/Pune, subject to necessary permission
from the Shrine Board and other statutory agencies.
28. PHHL has provided helicopter services on long term basis to North Eastern States namely
Governments of Meghalaya, Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Tripura, Nagaland and for inter island
services to A&N and Lakshadweep Administration. These services help in promotion of tourism in
remote areas. The regular passenger services are being run under the aegis of the respective State
Governments/Administrations as per their requirements. The Union Government grants subsidy for
carrying out helicopter services for these States. PHHL has also submitted proposal to Government
of Mizoram for lease of helicopter on long term lease basis. The concurrence of the State
Government is awaited.
29. PHHL has planned to connect important tourist destinations in Tamil Nadu—Coimbatore,
Madurai, Kodaikanal, Rameshwaram etc.; in Puducherry-Chennai-Karaikal-Puducherry sector and in
Uttarakhand etc. through lease of helicopter to State Government or the interested parties. PHHL
has been making endeavours to provide the helicopter services connecting major tourist spots/main
cities etc. wherever it is commercially viable and operationally possible by providing helicopter on
long term lease to State Governments that are interested.
30. Regarding entry of PHHL in smaller aircraft operations to provide connectivity in North East
Region and small cities of tourist and commercial importance, PHHL at present does not have
planned allocation under Eleventh Plan Period as there would be huge requirement of funds for
acquisition of small fixed wing aircrafts as also infrastructure and facilities for the same. However,

9
PHHL would explore this avenue and would prefer to have tie up with the operators of small fixed
wing aircrafts for providing air connectivity under hub and spoke arrangement in the North Eastern
Region.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
31. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that with their ambitious
expansion plans, the PHHL will be able to exploit untapped market of helicopter tourism
which has not gained much attention in the country so far.
HOTEL CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED
(Recommendation at Para 55)
32. The Committee expresses its dissatisfaction over the performance of Centaur Hotel, Delhi
which is not noteworthy. The Committee feels that the allocation of meager amount of 6 crores
will not improve its ambience which is very pathetic now. The Committee recommends that
measures should be taken by the Government to improve the performance of the hotel with that
of the other luxurious hotels in Delhi.
Reply of the Government
33. Efforts are being made to improve the ambience of the Centaur Hotel, Delhi airport as well
as to improve the performance of the hotel and bring it on par with that of other luxurious
international hotels in Delhi.
34. Pursuant to a proposal for requirement of funds in respect of the increased tourist inflow
during Commonwealth Games 2010, HCI was advised to work out the requirement of funds to
place a proposal through the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) route before the Ministry of
Finance. The proposal of HCI for renovation at the cost of Rs.35.15 crore approx. is under
examination, particularly in the light of the proposal of DIAL for handing over the hotel by
2011-12 for airport expansion programme. This is over and above the amount of Rs.6.50 crores
already approved by the Board for renovation of all the guest rooms, food and beverage outlets,
public areas, replacement of AC plants, kitchen equipments etc. in the hotel as well as renovation
of building, machinery and Hi-lifts for Chefair Flight Catering which is located in the same
premises of the hotel.
35. During 2007-08, upgradation of Centaur Hotel, Delhi (addition of new lifts, generators, AC
plants) and renovation of 127 rooms with new health club facilities and other related works were
taken up at a total cost of around Rs. 12 crores. Requirement of additional funds, if necessary,
will also be considered in the Ministry. Benefits of the same are expected to accrue in future.
MODERNIZATION OF IGI AIRPORT, NEW DELHI AND RELOCATION OF CENTAUR
HOTEL, DELHI AIRPORT
36. Delhi International Airport (P) Limited indicated that the Centaur Hotel is on the footprint of
the terminal building as per their Master Plan for IGI Airport. As per their Master Plan, the hotel
needs to be demolished by 2016 based on certain traffic triggers. However, the current higher traffic
growth compared to the traffic projections during the master planning stage may necessitate the
removal of hotel earlier than envisaged based on the traffic triggers possibly as early as 2011 or 2012.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
37. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and the Committee wants the

10
Ministry to ensure that any amount of expenditure for the development of Centaur Hotel
at this stage, serve the purpose as the hotel is waiting for its moment to be bulldozed in
view of the Master Plan of IGI airport as planned by the DIAL.
INDIRA GANDHI RASHTRIYA URAN AKADEMI
(Recommendation at Para 62)
38. The Committee finds no merit in handing over the management of IGRUA to a private
organisation. The Committee feels that an institute receiving grants from the Government and also
having a good infrastructure which has been developed on public money has been handed over to
a private organisation with a simple excuse of professionalisation of its management. This year also
an amount of Rs.1.12 crores is proposed to be provided by Government to IGRUA in the form
grants-in-aid. The Committee is of the opinion that simply professionalizing the management of an
institute will not give any positive output immediately. The Committee feels that the existing
management could have been given extra powers to improve the performance of this akademi. The
Committee expresses its displeasure on this issue and recommends that remedial measures should
be taken to ensure that the undertaking being managed by the public money is not handed over
to a private management on a platter. The Committee also notes that after upgradation of
infrastructure of IGRUA, the training period for pilots will be reduced from two years to one year.
The Committee hopes that this decision will not affect the proficiency of pilots.
Reply of the Government
39. It may be clarified that the ownership of IGRUA shall continue to be with the registered
society under the Ministry of Civil Aviation. The decision to enter into a Management Contract
Agreement for a period of 10 years was taken by the Governing Council of IGRUA and later
approved by the Union Cabinet. This was done in the background of acute shortage of pilots in
the country and IGRUA’s inability to pass out more than 30-40 cadets per year and that too with
a subsidy of Rs. 6.78 crores per annum provided by the Government and the national carriers (Air
India/Indian Airlines). As against this, as per the terms of Management Contract, minimum of 100
pilots per year will be passed out from the second year of Management Contract with world-class
standard training and the training period of each cadet will also get reduced to one year from the
present two years. Further as per the financial agreement reached, the amount of subsidy provided
by the Government and the national carrier shall be phased out completely over a period of 3 years.
As per one of the essential components of the agreement, all the employees of IGRUA have to be
retained on the existing terms and conditions by the Management Contract partner. It may,
therefore, be seen that the proposed arrangement is in the overall interest of the civil aviation sector
of the country.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
40. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Ministry of Civil Aviation,
however, have not offered any comments whether the reduction of training period from two
years to one year will have any effect on the efficiency of the pilots.
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL A VIATION
(Recommendation at Para 66)
41. The Committee hopes that DGCA will utilize its annual outlay to the fullest level possible
as it plays a vital role in regulating air traffic and air safety. The Committee is constrained to note
that though civil aviation sector is undergoing a boom in the country, the Government is still in

11
process of identifying the requirement of manpower of DGCA. The Committee recommends that
DGCA should address the issue of shortage of manpower with all seriousness and recruitment of
manpower should be started well in time so that its core activities do not suffer further. There are
media reports that Ministry is finding difficulty to fill up the post of Director-General in DGCA.
The Committee would like that the post is filled up with the person having technical experience
in the field of Civil Aviation sector.
Reply of the Government
42. A proposal regarding restructuring and re-strengthening of DGCA is under consideration. As
far as appointment of Director General is concerned, Department of Personnel and Training has
been approached for seeking approval of ACC for appointment of the candidate recommended by
UPSC.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
43. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and expresses its anguish over the
relaxation of certain rules for the appointment of DGCA for the benefit of individuals and
not for the benefit of aviation security in the country. The Committee feels that the DGCA
plays pivotal role in providing aviation safety and security and the head of such institute
deserves to have high professional and technical qualifications in the field of aviation
security.
BUREAU OF CIVIL A VIATION SECURITY
(Recommendation at Para 69)
44. The setting up of Headquarters building has been under consideration for quite a long time.
The Committee is constrained to note that the matter could not see the light of the day till date
for the one or other reason. Delay in construction of BCAS Headquarters building has in turn
affected the setting up of Training Academy of the BCAS and restructuring and strengthening of
the BCAS. Now the land issue has been settled in respect of BCAS headquarters building at Delhi,
the Committee hopes that the proposal for restructuring and strengthening of BCAS and setting of
Training Academy will be finalized without delay. The Committee recommends to the Ministry that
all out efforts may be made to utilize the entire money for the purposes to which it is allocated.
Reply of the Government
45. For the year 2008-09 BCAS have been allocated Rs.15 crores for various plan projects.
BCAS has proposed to utilise Rs.12.35 crore in construction of new Headquarter building for
which foundation stone has already been laid by the Hon’ble Minister for Civil Aviation. The
building plan has been submitted by AAI to the local municipal authorities for clearance/approval.
Efforts are being made by BCAS to get the construction of the building started at the earliest.
46. All efforts would be made to utilise the entire money for the purposes for which it has been
allocated.
47. Proposal for setting up of an independent Civil Aviation Security Training Academy is under
consideration.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
48. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.

12
AERO CLUB OF INDIA
(Recommendation at Para 70)
49. The Country is in need of a large number of pilots. The Committee recommends that the
Government should adequately strengthen the Aero Club of India to produce and train more pilots.
Reply of the Government
50. A provision of Rs. 15 crore has been made in the budget of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
to be released as grant-in-aid to ACI. ACI plans to procure three single engine trainer aircraft, one
multi-engine aircraft, simulators for single/multi-engine aircraft to be allotted to the eligible member
f1ying clubs.
51. ACI expects to complete the procurement process during the current financial year for
allotment of the above equipment to the eligible member flying clubs for improving their
infrastructure and producing more pilots for the country.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
52. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
NATIONAL CIVIL A VIATION POLICY
(Recommendation at Para 72)
53. The Committee is surprised to note that the much talked National Civil Aviation Policy is
not able to see light of the day even after considered discussions by committees after committees.
This shows a poor and lackadaisical approach of the Government in announcing an important
policy which is so much relevant at the time when aviation sector is witnessing an unimaginable
growth. The Committee feels that issues relating level playing field for stakeholders, FDI in aviation
sector and other air safety issues can be well addressed by the New Civil Aviation Policy only. The
Committee recommends that the Government should come up with the National Civil Aviation
Policy at the earliest as a large number of private players entering the aviation sector in
infrastructure side as well as in air service side.
Reply of the Government
54. After extensive consultation with stakeholders and inter-ministerial consultations, Ministry of
Civil Aviation had proposed a Draft National Civil Aviation Policy for approval of the Union Cabinet,
on 16.05.2007. Cabinet, in its meeting held on 15.06.2007, decided to refer the matter to a Group
of Ministers (GoM) for further consideration. The recommendations of GoM are yet to be finalized.
55. It is further submitted that this Ministry is conscious of the need for early finalization of
National Civil Aviation Policy. However, it is also to be observed that the non-finalization thereof
has not precluded the Government from taking various policy initiatives, which are required for
development of civil aviation sector. Some of the important policy decisions taken/initiated by the
Government, in recent past, are as under:
(i) Revised FDI Policy for airports has been put in place vide which 100% FDI, through
automatic route, has been permitted in Greenfield airports.
(ii) FDI requirements for air transport side of civil aviation has been revised and separate
limits have been prescribed in respect of different sectors such as cargo, airlines, non-
scheduled operators, MRO etc.

13
(iii) Greenfield Airport Policy has been announced, which lays down policy guidelines for
establishment of new airports.
(iv) Relaxed procedure for establishment of private airports for ‘private use’ has been
announced.
(v) Proposal for establishthent of an economic regulator for the airports viz. Airports
Economic Regulatory Authority (AERA). A Bill, in this regard, is presently under
consideration of Lok Sabha.
(vi) Private domestic airlines have been permitted to fly on overseas routes subject to
specified guidelines. Further, bilateral arrangements with other countries have been
gradually liberalized. These initiatives have been enabled considerably, better
international connectivity.
(vii) Air India and Indian Airlines have been merged to create a strong and efficient national
carrier.
(viii) A new Flying Training Institute is being established at Gondia, Maharashtra. Further,
Indira Gandhi Rashtriya Uran Akademi has been restructured. These measures would
help in putting in place better training infrastructure for technical manpower in the
aviation sector.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
56. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
CHENNAI AND KOLKATA AIRPORTS
(Recommendation at Para 76)
57. The Committee is constrained to note the matter of modernisation of Chennai and Kolkata
has been engaging the attention of the Government for considerably long time but the matter is still
under process. The Committee reiterates its earlier recommendation that the modernisation of
Chennai and Kolkata airports should be completed on priority so as to ease the traffic over Delhi
and Mumbai airports. The Committee also desires that both these airports may be developed as
international hubs to cater to the needs of the people in the Eastern and Southern part of the
country. The Committee recommends that Airports Authority of India should be given all the
financial and operational freedoms enjoyed by any private player in the field. The procedural
wrangles and red tapism should never be allowed to crop up in the functioning of Airports
Authority of India. The Committee opines that the modernization and development of Chennai and
Kolkata airports are a golden opportunity to prove the efficiency and mettle of the Airports
Authority of India and its employees. The Committee hopes that they will stand up to the
expectations reposed on them. The Committee hopes that the Airports Authority of India will
complete all the modernisation and developmental works of Kolkata and Chennai airports within a
specified time-frame. The Committee may be apprised about the progress made by Airports
Authority of India in modernizing the airports at Chennai and Kolkata.
Reply of the Government
58. Government have approved the proposal for modernization/expansion of international airports
at Kolkata and Chennai at an estimated cost of Rs.1942.51 crores and Rs.1808 crores, respectively.
Airports Authority of India has been advised to take up these projects in a time bound manner. The
work for Kolkatta and Chennai airports has been awarded on 6.10.2008 and 30.9.2008 respectively.

14
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
59. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee has further dealt
with the matter in its 141st Report. The Committee hopes that Government would send
their reply so that the Committee can take stock of the progress in the matter at the time
of consideration of Demands for Grants for the year 2009-10.
SHORTAGE OF PILOTS AND A TC STAFF
(Recommendation at Para 80)
60. The Committee anxiously notes that the vacancy of 576 ATC is overburdening the existing
staff monitoring the herculeous task. Moreover, the Government has opened Green Field Airports
at Hyderabad and Bangalore. The Committee is surprised to note that the Government has not taken
any action in advance to start the recruitment process to meet the operational requirement of these
airports.
Reply of the Government
61. Adequate number of ATCOs have been posted at the new Greenfield International airport at
Bangalore. To meet the shortfall, recruitment process is in progress and on the last occasion
recruitment examination was held on 11.5.08 to recruit 300 Junior Executives (ATC), who have
joined training in mid August, 08. Further AAI plans to recruit 100 JEs (ATC) every six months
till the shortfall in finished.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
62. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
(Recommendation at Para 81)
63. The Committee has been drawing the attention of the Government towards the likely
shortage of manpower for growing civil aviation sector. The Committee, however, is constrained
to observe that the Government has not been serious at all on this issue. There is now shortage
of trained manpower in every area of civil aviation sector. There is a shortage of pilots and 576
posts of ATC out of sanctioned strength of 2051 are lying vacant. The matter of setting up of
flying training academy at Gondia, establishment of training academy for BCAS, construction of
BCAS headquarters building are still under process. In the name of bringing in professionalisation
in IGRUA, the training period pilots have been reduced from two years to one year. Such situation
could have been avoided had the Government taken note of the recommendations of the Committee
and adopted the proactive approach in the matter. The Committee hopes that in future Government
will give necessary consideration to complete the projects in time in a time bound manner.
Reply of the Government
64. The Ministry has taken various steps to reduce the gap between demand and supply of
trained pilot. Entering of IGRUA into a management contract with M/s CAE inc. was one such
step.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
65. The Committee desires that the recommendation should be taken seriously and
reiterates that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should endeavor to focus all the available

15
options to reduce the gap between demand and supply of trained pilot and not to restrict
themselves by handing over the management of IGRUA to private body.
(Recommendation at Para 82)
66. The Committee hopes that provision of modern equipments at IGRUA and establishment of
new pilot training institute in Gondia will help to meet the shortage of pilots. The Committee
recommends that necessary aid/grant should be given for starting flying institutions so that the
demand of pilots can be adequately taken care of. However, availability of proper infrastructure for
training of pilots and setting up of standards for pilots training should also get proper consideration
before giving licenses to new flying institutes. The Committee hopes that initiatives taken by the
Government will match the demand and supply of pilots and ATCs in due course.
Reply of the Government
67. The provision of modern equipment in IGRUA and establishment of a new Flying Training
Institution at Gondia will help meeting the demand of pilots in the country. Government is also
encouraging setting up of new flying training institutes. DGCA has well laid down guidelines
regarding establishment and operation of flying training institutes. The infrastructure and
functioning of these flying clubs is periodically monitored by DGCA as per laid down norms.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
68. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
(Recommendation at Para 83)
69. The Committee notes that the strength of aerodrome inspectors is much less than the
sanctioned strength. The Committee recommends that Government should take necessary steps on
priority to fill the vacancies as any shortage of trained man power to inspect the aircraft before
its flying will definitely compromise air safety playing with the lives of passengers.
Reply of the Government
70. Aerodromes Standards Directorate of DGCA is being re-organised and proposal for its
strengthening is under consideration.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
71. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry.
UNIFORM TAXATION OF ATF
(Recommendation at Para 85)
72. The Committee while appreciating the steps taken by the State Governments of Kerala and
Andhra Pradesh in reducing the Sales Tax on ATF from 32% to 4% recommends that the Ministry
pursue this long standing issue with other State Governments so that uniformity of tax on ATF can
be maintained. Since the Cost of fuel is an important component of cost structure, reduction in
taxes on A TF will definitely have a positive impact on the airfares. The Committee once again
recommends that Ministry of Finance should sympathetically consider and give approval to the
proposal of Ministry of Civil Aviation regarding notifying ATF as ‘Declared Good’ under Section
14 of Central Sales Tax Act on priority basis to all the aircrafts so that sales tax on ATF could

16
be contained within the maximum rate of 4 per cent. The Committee further recommends that the
Ministry of Finance may also discuss the issue with the State Governments and try to persuade
them to reduce the sales tax on ATF. The Committee is of the opinion that the success of the
concept of low cost carrier mainly depends on the taxation of ATF which is very much on the
higher side. The Committee feels that reduction in airfares will bring more new passengers to the
airports.
Reply of the Government
73. State Government had been requested to consider moderation of the rate of sales tax
imposed on Aviation Turbine Fuel (ATF) and align it with the ‘Declared goods’ rate of 4%. Ministry
had successfully persuaded few States to reduce the sales tax on A TF and lowered it down to 4%.
Government of Andhra Pradesh and Kerala have reduced the sales tax on ATF to 4%. Government
of Rajasthan has also reduced the sales tax rates on ATF to 4% in case of the following:
1. Airlines which establish a ‘HUB’ in the State
2. Registered Flying Clubs for their training flights; and
3. Airlines, which for the first time connect cities of the State having no air service, the
exemption would be limited to such flights only.
74. Government of Maharashtra has also announced reduction of sales tax on ATF from 25%
to 4% for flights from airports other than Pune and Mumbai.
75. The Ministry has also taken up the matter of rationalization of sales tax on ATF with
Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers. In this regard, this Ministry made a presentation
before the Empowered Committee of State Finance Ministers in its meeting held on 05.05.2008 in
Kerala and subsequently on 23rd June, 2008 in Srinagar.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
76. The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the Ministry of Civil
Aviation should impress upon the Ministry of Finance and State Governments to have a
uniform taxation on the prices of ATF across the country and make ATF ‘Declared goods’
so that the tax component of the airfares see some further reduction in the near future.

17
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee notes reply of the Ministry.
(Para 6)
BUDGET 2008-09 AND ANNUAL PLAN FOR 2008-09
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the Ministry will
impress upon the Planning Commission to release the additional amount of Rs.45 crore
for the airport project at Pakyong, Sikkim so that the project is not delayed for want of
funds as with the construction of the new airport in Sikkim, the north-eastern sector will
get boost in tourism and trade sector. (Para 9)
NATIONAL A VIATION COMPANY OF INDIA LIMITED
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and feels that there is still some
space available for the NACIL to improve its performance. The Committee hopes that
with the available fleet strength and market network by the merger of erstwhile AI and
lA, NACIL can spread its wings to all the corners of the globe by utilizing the aircrafts,
seat sharing agreements and also code share agreements signed with other major airlines
optimally. (Para 15)
AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA (AAI)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and sees no logic in handing over
the Nagpur airport to the JVC for a token annual lease rent of Re.1/- for a period of
30 years and also waivering of stamp duty payable for transferring airport from AAI to
the JVC. The Committee is not satisfied with the reasons submitted by the Ministry for
the entire episode. The Committee is surprised to see how an airport having the entire
requisite infrastructure is being handed over to a JVC through backdoor by simply stating
the airport is a loss making one. (Para 19)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that modernization of
non-metro and other airports will be completed as per their schedule since these airports
play a vital role in air connectivity to medium and small towns and also in sharing the
traffic burden of metro airports. (Para 22)
PA WAN HANS HELICOPTERS LIMITED
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 25)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that with their ambitious
expansion plans, the PHHL will be able to exploit untapped market of helicopter tourism
which has not gained much attention in the country so far. (Para 31)
HOTEL CORPORATION OF INDIA LIMITED
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and the Committee wants the
Ministry to ensure that any amount of expenditure for the development of Centaur Hotel
17

18
at this stage, serve the purpose as the hotel is waiting for its moment to be bulldozed
in view of the Master Plan of IGI airport as planned by the DIAL. (Para 37)
INDIRA GANDHI RASHTRIYA URAN AKADEMI
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Ministry of Civil Aviation,
however, have not offered any comments whether the reduction of training period from
two years to one year will have any effect on the efficiency of the pilots. (Para 40)
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF CIVIL A VIATION
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and expresses its anguish over the
relaxation of certain rules for the appointment of DGCA for the benefit of individuals and
not for the benefit of aviation security in the country. The Committee feels that the
DGCA plays pivotal role in providing aviation safety and security and the head of such
institute deserves to have high professional and technical qualifications in the field of
aviation security. (Para 43)
BUREAU OF CIVIL A VIATION SECURITY
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 48)
AERO CLUB OF INDIA
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 52 )
NATIONAL CIVIL A VIATION POLICY
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 56)
CHENNAI AND KOLKATA AIRPORTS
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. The Committee has further dealt
with the matter in its 141st Report. The Committee hopes that Government would send
their reply so that the Committee can take stock of the progress in the matter at the
time of consideration of Demands for Grants for the year 2009-10. (Para 59)
SHORTAGE OF PILOTS AND ATC STAFF
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 62)
The Committee desires that the recommendation should be taken seriously and
reiterates that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should endeavor to focus all the available
options to reduce the gap between demand and supply of trained pilot and not to restrict
themselves by handing over the management of IGRUA to private body. (Para 65)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 68)
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry. (Para 71)
UNIFORM TAXATION OF ATF
The Committee notes the reply of the Ministry and hopes that the Ministry of Civil
Aviation should impress upon the Ministry of Finance and State Governments to have a
uniform taxation on the prices of ATF across the country and make ATF ‘Declared goods’
so that the tax component of the airfares see some further reduction in the near future.
(Para 76)

19
ANNEXURE

ANNEXURE-I
The strategic initiatives taken by Al to improve our revenues, load factors and profitability
are highlighted below.
Schedule/network related initiatives implemented and under implementation to improve
revenue/profitability
Implemented post-merger network restructuring in tandem with Al coded flights, as under:
International operations to/from Kuwait, Singapore, Bangkok, Hong Kong, Tokyo, Oman,
Bangladesh, UK, Saudi Arabla, etc., rationalized/restructured
Replaced existing A310 hub and spoke flights with A320 aircraft.
Changed the pattern of  Hub and Spoke flights resulting in improved on-time performance
and reduced misconnections.
Resultants estimated annual savings of Rs. 311 crores per annum.
Restructurings proposed on AI system will lead to a reduction of 17.8 million ASK per day
which represents about 20% of AI’s total daily capacity. Estimated savings for FY 2008-09 are
Rs. 565 crores. The restructuring is proposed to be implemented effective September, 2008
onwards. Some changes have been deferred to winter 2009 due to availability of aircraft and crew.
Implemented schedule curtailments/restructurings on the IC system, progressively effective
1st week of July, 2008, with the aim of reducing loss making operations. At their peak; these
curtailments will result in a reduction of about 3.8 million ASK per day in the IC system – about
7.5% of IC’s total daily capacity. Estimated savings over the period that the curtailments will be
in place are Rs. 79 crores.
The capacity freed up from the above curtailments proposed to be utilized in the following
manner:
Release of one A310 aircraft and one B747-400 aircraft for Haj operations in 2008-09.
This capacity will be further utilized for additional operations to Saudi Arabia and other Gulf
countries in 2009.
The Delhi-London flights will be operated at more convenient times with night departures
from London and afternoon departures from Delhi.
Create slack at base stations in aircraft rotation plans to improve on-time performance.
Replace A330 operations on Mumbai – Singapore v.v. route with A319 aircraft-implemented
effective 26th July, 2008.
Restructure A320 operations on Calicut – Sharjah v.v. and Cochin – Sharjah v.v. routes to
operate at better, more convenient timings, which is expected to result in improved loads. Propose
to implement effective mid-August, 2008.
Introduce daily flights on Calicut – Riyadh and Cochin – Dammam routes with A320
aircraft effective mid-August 2008, in conjunction with restructuring of A320 operations on
21

22
Calicut–Sharjah v.v. and Cochin – Sharjah v.v. routes. These flights are expected to generate cash
surplus as Saudi Arabia is an underserved market.
The current A310 flights to Riyadh will be operated by B747-400 aircraft enabling Air India
to increase capacity into Saudi Arabia.
The current capacity of COK-DMM A310 flights will be used to increase frequencies of
TRV-DMM and CCJ-DMM flights to 2/wk each from current 1/wk.
International operations to/from Kuwait, Singapore, Bangkok, Hong Kong, Tokyo, Oman,
Bangladesh, UK, Saudi Arabia, etc., rationalized/restructured.
Replaced existing A310 hub and spoke flights with A320 aircraft.
Changed the pattern of Hub and Spoke flights resulting in improved on-time performance
and reduced misconnections.
Resultant estimated annual savings of Rs.311 crores per annum.
Restructurings proposed on AI system will lead to a reduction of 17.8 million ASK per day
which represents about 20% of AI’s total daily capacity. Estimated savings for FY 2008-09 are
Rs.565 crores. The restructuring is proposed to be implemented effective September, 2008
onwards. Some chanages have been deferred to winter 2009 due to availability of aircraft and
crew:–
Implemented schedule curtailments/restructurings on the IC system, progressively effective
1st week of July, 2008, with the aim of reducing loss making operations. At their peak, these
curtailments will result in a reduction of about 3.8 million ASK per day in the IC system – about
7.5% of IC’s total daily capacity. Estimated savings over the period that the curtailments will be
in place are Rs. 79 crores.
The capacity freed up from the above curtailments proposed to be utilized in the following
manner:
Release of one A310 aircraft and one B747-400 aircraft for Haj operations in 2008-09.
This capacity will be further utillized for additional operations to Saudi Arabia and other Gulf
countries in 2009.
The Delhi-London flights will be operated at more convenient times with night departures
from London and afternoon departures from Delhi.
Create slack at base stations in aircraft rotation plans to improve on-time performance.
Replace A330 operations on Mumbai – Singapore v.v. route with A319 aircraft-implemented
effective 26th July, 2008.
Restructure A320 operations on Calicut – Sharjah v.v. and Cochin – Sharjah v.v. routes to
operate at better, more convenient timings, which is expected to result in improved loads. Propose
to implement effective mid-August 2008.
Introduce daily flights on Calicut –Riyadh and Cochin – Dammam routes with A320 aircraft
effective mid-August 2008, in conjunction with restructuring of A320 operations on Calicut –
Sharjah v.v. and Cochin – Sharjah v.v. routes. These flights are expected to generate cash surplus
as Saudi Arabia is an underserved market.

23
The current A310 flights to Riyadh will be operated by B747-400 aircraft enabling Air India
to increase capacity into Saudi Arabia.
The currrnt capacity of COK-DMM A310 flights will be used to increase frequencies of
TRV-DMM and CCJ-DMM flights to 2/wk each from current 1/wk.
Utilise freed up A330 capacity to reintroduce thrice weekly operations on Kolkata – London
route – implemented effective 26th July, 2005.
A320 family Schedule/Network Plans for Winter 2008 and beyond
Introduce daily A320 operations on Chennai – Hyderabad – Dammam and Chennai –
Hyderabad – Riyadh routes:
Progressively reduce utilization of the ageing and maintenance prone A320 aircraft by
increasing utilization of the new and fuel, efficient A321/A319 aircraft to improve public image of
Al’s product, even while reducing cost of operations.
Review parallel operations of IC and IX, with the aim of eliminating overlaps to the best
possible extent. Utilise capacity freed up with IC/IX to increase schedule reliability, commence/
increase operations on profitable routes and rationalize/restructure existing routes.
Replace A310 aircraft that are to be phased out with A320 family aircraft, subject to range.
Examine feasibility/viability of mounting operations with A320 family aircraft from Mumbai/
Delhi to Riyadh/Dammam.
Long/Medium Haul Schedule/Network Plans for Winter 2008 and beyond
Increase frequencies on Trivandrum-Dammam and Calicut-Dammam routes from 1/wk each
to 2/wk.
Reduce the utilization on the old A310 fleet and replace routes operated by A310 with better
equipment wherever feasible.
Withdraw the DEL-LHR-JFK flights and operate Delhi-London daily terminators at more
convenient timings. This will also reduce current overcapacity into New York market.
Introduce Ahmedabad-Mumbai-London-Newark replacing Ahmedabad-Mumbai-Paris-Newark
to achieve better economics on this flight.
Introduce 6 flights per week to Frankfurt from Delhi with B777 aircraft.
Introduce B777 equipment on India-Tokyo route replacing the old B747-300 Combi aircraft
after it is retired in September, 2008.
India-Riyadh flights operated by A310 will be upgraded to B747-400 aircraft.
Marketing/Pricing initiatives implemented and under implementation to improve revenue/
profitability
Air India set to join Star Alliance
Air India has been selected as a future Star Alliance member, which will add value
to passengers patronising member airlines of the alliance. Once Air India becomes a member of

24
the Star Alliancc, passengers will be able to gain from a customer loyalty programme across
now 20 international airlines, book tickets on connecting flights of these airlines for seamless
transfer, have access to the airport lounges around the world, priority bookings including
seat preferenc, etc.
Increases in fuel surcharge already implemented in the current fiscal
Effective 4th May, 2008, Fuel Surcharge increased by Rs.150/- per coupon on sectors with
distance upto 750 Kms. and by Rs. 350/- per coupon for sectors more than 750 Kms.
Effective 3rd June, 2008, Fuel Surcharge increased by Rs. 300/- per coupon on sectores
with distance upto 750 Kms. and Rs. 500/- per coupon for sectors more than 750 Kms. The
effective fuel surcharge on the Domestic Sectors went up to Rs. 2250/- upto 750 Kms and
Rs. 2900/- for sectors more than 750 Kms.
Effective 17th July, 2008, Fuel Surcharge increased by Rs. 100/- per coupon on sectors
with distance upto 750 Kms. and by Rs. 200/- per coupon for sectors more than 750 Kms, taking
the Fuel Surcharge on the Domestic Sectors to their current levels of Rs. 2350/- for sectors upto
750 Kms. and Rs.3100/- for sectors more than 750 Kms.
We have also increased our YQ levels effective 12th May, 2008 by USD 20 on the USA/
UK/Europe/Japan/Dar-es-Salaam and USD 10 on all other international routes.
Fare Increases already implementated in the current fiscal
Effective 25th May, 2008, Normal Fares in Executive Class and Economy Class increased
by 10%.
Effective 20th June, 2008, Easy Fares under NFS, IFS, GFS and XFS and Apex Fares
revised upwards, w.e.f. 20th June, 2008. The lowest fare fixed was Rs. 1000/- for sectors less
than 750 Kms, Rs. 2250/- for sectors with distance between 750 to 1000 Kms. and Rs. 3000/-
for sectors beyond 1000 Kms.
Spot Fares on the domestic sectors revised upwards to bring the same at per with XFS
fare effective 29th June, 2008.
Special Pricing Initiatives
In order to sell Economy Class unsold inventory at the last minute, “Spot Fares” re-
introduced effective 27th May, 2008.
Easy Fare RBDs under Fare Basis NFS, IFS and GFS opened for sale outside India, to
improve sale of domestic sectors in the international markets.
To improve high yield Exective Class carriage, promotional return fares (JRT) introduced on
the network effective 25th July, 2008.
Pricing initiatives proposed to be implemented for travel effective 1st August 2008 and 1st
September, 2008
Fare Increrases effective 1st August, 2008
On sectors over 1000 Kms. the fare to be increased by Rs.300, from the existing minimum
fare of Rs. 3000 to Rs. 3300.

25
On sectors between 750 and 1000 Kms. the fare to be increased by Rs.225, from the
existing minimum fare of Rs. 2250 to Rs. 2475.
On sectors up to 750 Kms. the fare to be increased by Rs. 100, from the existing minimum
fare of Rs.1000 to Rs.1100.
Special Pricing Initiatives
APEX Fares at D-21 level to be introduced at a minimum Fare level of Rs.1850 for sectors
between 750–1000 Kms., effective 1st August, 2008. For routes above 1000 Kms., the minimum
APEX Fare proposed at Rs.2400.
Fare Increases ef fective 1st September , 2008.
On sectors over 1000 Kms. fare to be increased by another Rs.500, taking the minimum
fare from Rs.3300 to Rs.3800.
On sectors between 750 and 1000 Kms. fare to be increased by another Rs.375, taking the
minimum fare from Rs.2475 to Rs.2850.
On sectors up to 750 Kms. fare to be increased by another Rs.150 taking the minimum fare
from Rs.1100 to Rs.1250.
Special Prorate Agreements (SPAs)
AI has begun the process of renegotiating SPAs with other airlines, leveraging IC’s network
to obtain better rates.
Already improved SPAs covering the combined network have been signed with Gulf Air,
Alitalia, Philippine Airlines, Royal Brunei and Bangladesh Biman.
Negotiations have been concluded with Malaysian Airlines, Singapore Airlines and Cathay
Pacific Airlines.
AI – IC merger has resulted in an estimated annual saving of Rs. 30 crores on account
of increased transfers from AI to IC and lesser payout by AI to other, Indian domestic airlines.
Sales and Sales Promotion related initiatives for improving revenues and load factors
Desh Videsh Desh Scheme
A new short-term sales promotion, Desh Videsh Desh (DVD) Offer has been launched,
from 25th July, 2008, under which Air India’s passengers will earn DVD Points for every IC or
AI designated flight they take for any domestic or international sector. Passengers would be able
to redeem these DVD Points for Award Tickets or Upgrades to Executive or Business Class, for
any destination on Air India’s combined domestic and international network.
Each-sector of travel, based on the Group Area and the Class of Travel, has been assigned
DVD points, ranging between 2 (minimum) and 48 (maxmmm) points per flight. Free tickets are
available from a threshold level of 40.DVD points.
The scheme is valid from 25th July to 25th November, 2008
Super Savers
IC has two super saver offers – The Corporate Super Saver which is a bulk purchase offer
to promote corporate travel, and the Super Saver which offers benefit of bulk purchase to
individual travellers.

26
These super savers are available in variants of 12 coupon booklets for the Corporates and
4 and 8 coupon booklets for individuals.
The prices of these super savers have been increased recently, in order to match competitor
offers.
NACTI earned a total revenue of Rs. 35.3 crore during Janunary – April’08 from the super
savers – Rs.21.9 crores from the individual super savers and Rs.13.4 crores from the corporate
super saver.
Air India Holidays
A single window holiday package product through dedicated package website
www.airindiaholidays.in.  with over 400 package options covering 150 cities in 22 Indian States
and 10 international destinations.
Attractive Overseas LTC options launched effective April’08 covering domestic/international
destinations.
Effective 19th Nov.’07 travel on holiday package tickets to SIN, KUL, BKK and DXB
permitted on AI  code flights.
Effective 01st Dec.’07 packages launched to London, Hong Kong including Macau and
Disneyland.
Effective 24th April’08, packages launched to Mainland China covering destinations such as
Shanghai, Beijing, Suzhou and Hangzhou.
Revenues earned from sale of holiday pakages are as under:
Year No. of tkts. No. of Airline Rev
pkgs. (Rs. Cr)
2007-08 13120 30615 48.7
2008-09 28261 65000 90.0
(projected)
Actual revenue April-June, 2008 – Rs. 17.8 crores.
To promote student traffic, we have offered excess baggage facilities to students travelling
to USA, UK, Europe as well as to Singapore, China, New Zea1and and Australia. This facility is
also offered to students travelling on IC operated domestic flights from interior points in India and
connecting to international flights from our gateways.
Corporate House Scheme for the business travellers
Joint Corporate House Scheme – A slab based incentive offer for Corporatess for targeted
volume of yearly business to the airline.
Revamped offer leveraging synergies of merger launched from Jan’08, aiming to serve
smaller corporate base in a better, more focused manner.
AI has signed 450 Corporate Deals between Jan – May 08, for a total targeted business
of Rs. 388 crores as against a projecd target of Rs. 300 crores for 2008.

27
Co-brand Cards
AI has co-branded cards with American Express (Amex) an ABN AMRO Bank
Membership base/spends on AI tickets thru the co-brand cards
Amex Members – 18127 Spends on AI  (Jan – Jun 08) – Rs. 49 crores
ABN AMRO Members – 35453 Spends on AI  (Jan – Jun 08) – Rs. 4 crores
Frequent Flyer Programme
Restructuring of premium clubs  w.e.f.  1st August, 2008
Extension of bonus mileage points to all Al flights for Silver Edge Club and Golden Edge
Club members – AI coded and IC coded flights, in Excursion, Economy, Executive and First Class.
Offering 30% bonus mileage points to The Maharaja Club members, as compared to nil at
present, on all AI flights – AI coded and IC coded flights, in Excursion, Economy, Executive and
First Class.
Double mileage Promotion to promotion the Non-stop flights to the US.
Tie-ups introduced with over 100 restaurants across India with attractive discounts to
Flying returns members.
Revamp of Flying returns website to be more user-friendly and harmonize access for all
members of NACIL (A) and (I) through the website.
Discounted mileage accrual introduced on level 3 and 4 Easy fares on domestic sectors.
Short Term Enhancements proposed to be implemented in the current fiscal
Reduction in threshold limit for award redemption and renewal of membership to 10,000
points.
Mileage points to be awarded for travel by X and G Class also, effective 1st August, 2008.
Free enrolment and Online enrolment for India Programme and Gulf Programme.
Improvement in earn–burn ratios for international sectors.
Change in mileage accrual on select IC fare codes for domestic sectors.
Emailing facility for e-greetings, e-statements and e-newsletters
Redemption discounts and accrual bonusing offers during lean season
Special bonus offers to promote new flights
Additional tie-ups with restaurants, hotels and other travel related agencies.
Upgrade against mileage points.
Agreements with STAR Alliance partners
Measures taken/proposed to be taken by Distribution and Industry Relations section to
increase revenues and improve load factors
IATA Commission reduced from 7% to 5% in India on India – Gulf sectors effective
1st April, 2008.

28
Zero Commission implemented in Kuwait effective 1st April, 2008
Zero Commission under process for Malaysia and Nepal
Zero Commission proposed to be implemented in India effective 1st October, 2008
ORC/Territory Commission payable to GSAs sought to be rationalized for sales done on AI/
IC designated flights.
Flexi Commission Policy introduced effective 1st June, 2008 to increase productivity – top
30 agents of each region short-listed for the scheme. The scheme is being extended to other agents
who have deposited a sum of Rs. 30 – 50 lakhs with IC.
Net fares for promoting sales from corporate network agents, aimed at improving yields and
revenues through increase in high-end business on domestic routes. A beginning has been made
with net fares approved for M/s FCM, a corporate network agent, against committed business
turnover on IC domestic sectors.
Other measures taken/proposed to be taken to intcrease revenues and improve load factors
Strategic agreements proposed with leading international travel portals in US/UK, to gain
IC’s legitimate share of domestic sales in these markets.
Strategic tie-ups/agreements with domestic travel portals to increase IC’s share of sales
done through these portals on full service carriers.
Focus on increasing sales through own website.

29
ANNEXURE-II
MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING
This Memorandum of Understanding (hereinafter for brevity referred to as the “MoU’’) is entered
on the 18th day of December, 2006.
BETWEEN
Government of India (hereinafter for brevity referred to as “GoI’’) through its Secretary, Ministry
of Civil Aviation (hereinafter for brevity referred to as “MoCA’’) and Airports Authority of India,
a Government of India Undertaking incorporated under THE AIRPORTS AUTHORITY OF INDIA
ACT, 1994, as amended by the Airports Authority of India (Amendment) Act, 2003 having its office
at Rajiv Gandhi Bhawan, Safdarjung Airport, New Delhi - 110 003 (hereinafter for brevity referred
to as “AAI”) of the ONE PART .
AND
Government of Maharashtra (hereinafter for brevity referred to as “GoM”) through its Secretary,
Administration Reforms and Special Projects, General Administration Department and Maharashtra
Airport Development Company Ltd., Mumbai, a Company incorporated under the Companies
Act, 1956 having its Registered Office at 12th floor, World Trade Centre – 1, Cuffe Parade,
Mumbai – 400 005 hereinafter for brevity referred to as “MADC” (which expression shall unless
it be repugnant to the context or meaning thereof be deemed to include the Directors, executors,
assigns, etc.) through Vice-Chairman and Managing Director of the OTHER PART .
WHEREAS:
(1) AAI is a Statutory Corporation established by and under the provisions of the Airports
Authority of India Act, 1994 and is under the control and supervision of the Ministry of
Civil Aviation, Government of India (hereinafter called as “MoCA”).
(2) MADC is a Company incorporated and registered under the provisions of the Companies
Act, 1956 and is a wholly owned Company of the Government of Maharashtra (hereinafter
referred to as “GoM”) and its Corporations including City Industrial Development
Corporation (CIDCO), Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation (MIDC) and Nagpur
Improvement Trust (NIT).
(3) AAI has a civil aerodrome at Nagpur, which owns land admeasuring about 1460.05 acres.
Nagpur airport has two terminal buildings one is Old Terminal Building (OTB) and another
is New Terminal Building (NTB). The OTB is presently used for inland cargo import and
export and housing of administrative offices of AAI, whereas new building is used for
passenger traffic. Nagpur airport has a runway and facilities for take-off and landing of
aircrafts together with supporting facilities like radar, control room etc., which are essential
for proper operation of civil airport. Apart from this there are some premises constructed
in OTB and NTB by AAI for various service providers. AAI also have staff quarters within
the airport area, which are mainly used and occupied by the staff located at Nagpur.
29

30
(4) GOM has taken an initiative to develop a “Multi Modal International Passenger and Cargo
Hub Airport at Nagpur” (for brevity’s sake referred to as “MIHAN”) in coordination with
GOI, MoCA, AAI and Indian Air Force/Ministry of Defence. A Techno-Economic Feasibility
Study (hereinafter referred to as “TEFS”) of MIHAN project was done /completed by L&T
Ramboll Consulting Engineers Limited. A report on the study was also submitted by L&T
Ramboll to GOM and GOI.
(5) GOM has appointed MADC as nodal agency for taking further steps for implementation of
MIHAN project. A tentative Master Plan has also been prepared for implementation of
MIHAN project.
(6) MoCA (GOIO) and AAI and GOM and MADC having arrived at the decision for transfer
of the Nagpur civil aerodrome to a Joint Venture Company, comprising of MADC and AAI
with equity participation of 51% and 49% respectively, have also indicated broadly
preliminary terms and conditions governing the transaction and being desirous of reducing
the same into writing, the parties have decided to enter into this Memorandum of
Understanding, being these presents.
NOW THEREFORE, THIS MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING WITNESSETH AND IT IS
HEREBY AGREED BY AND BETWEEN THE PARTIES HERETO AS UNDER:
1. There shall be a Joint V enture Company (hereinafter for brevity referred to as “JVC”)
established for the development and running of Nagpur International Airport. This Company
will have an authorized capital of Rs.20.00 crores or more and initially subscribed capital
of Rs.10.00 crores, 51% i.e. Rs.5.10 crores shall be subscribed by GoM through MADC
and Rs.4.90 crores shall be subscribed by GoI through AAI. Both these contributions will
be by cash. The cost of additional land and infrastructure shall be borne by the JVC in the
same proportion arid in case any party is not in a position to contribute his share, shall go
down proportionately.
2. During this time, MADC shall take necessary steps to prepare Memorandum and
Articles of Association of the JVC and registering the JVC; with initial subscribed capital
of Rs.10 crores.
3. All assets of Nagpur Airport of AAI/MOGA shall be handed over to this JVC except
existing Control Tower, future Technical Block cum Control Tower and other equipments
related to functioning of CNS/ATM. All infrastructure facilities connected with CNS/ATM
operations shall remain with AAI. All revenues from CNS/ATM, RNFC functions shall
accrue to AAI.
4. Security of the Airport will be the responsibility of the GoI.
5. All other staff of AAI working at Nagpur Airport (except CNS-ATM staff) will be
transferred to the JVC and their salaries will be borne by the JVC. The terms and
conditions of their working with the JVC shall be the same as is being done in the case
of Mumbai and Delhi Airports. The arrangement will be for five years and at the end of
this period, the JVC shall absorb 100% of the staff.
6. The management of the Airport shall be by the JVC, who will appoint an Airport Manager
and staff as may be required for management and development of the Airport.
7. Air Force land, which is spread over in 4 blocks totaling 278 hectares, will be taken over
by the JVC and the cost of alternate land for relocation/recreation of IAF facilities will be
borne by the JVC.

31
8. The JVC should be formed expeditiously and best efforts should be made to transfer the
Airport to the JVC within 3 months from the date of signing of the MoU at an annual lease
rent of Re.1/- for a period of 30 years. This period can be extended on mutually agreed
terms and conditions.
9. AAI shall provide the required technical guidance, as and when required, for running of the
Airport.
10. MoCA will ma ke all efforts and provide all support to make this Airport an International
Passenger and Cargo Hub.
11. The GoM will appoint the Chairman as well as Manaing Director of the proposed Company.
Vice-Chairman and Joint Managing Director to be appointed from AAI  by GoI. Other
Directors shall be in proportion to shareholding.
12. The GoM will waive stamp duty payable while transferring the airport from AAI to JVC.
13. Till such time as the JVC is formed and other details decided, Nagpur airport will continue
to be with AAI which will also provide such amenities and proceed with such developments
as required for the growing passenger/cargo traf fic and all revenues shall accrue to AAI.
14. MoCA/AAI shall take necessary steps to transfer the Nagpur Airport along with all its land
and other assets to the JVC within a period of 180 days from the date of signing of this
MoU.
15. A Steering Committee shall be formed under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary, GoM
to implement this MoU. Chairman, AAI; Joint Secretary, MoCA (looking after airports) and
such officers as nominated by MoCA /Chairman, AAI; Secretary, Civil Aviation GoM; Vice-
Chairman, MADC and such officers of the GoM as the Chief Secretary, GoM may
nominate, shall be members of this Steering Committee. The Committee shall exist till the
JVC completely and independently takes over running of Nagpur Airport.
IN WITNESS whereof the Parties hereto have duly executed this Agreement the day and year first
above written.
SIGNED AND DELIVERED by the Government of
India, Minisry of Civil Aviation by the hand of
Its Shri K.N. SHRIV ASTA V A
SIGNED AND DELIVERED by the Airports Authority
of India by the hand of
Its Shri K. RAMALINGAM
SIGNED AND DELIVERED by the Government of
Maharashtra, Secretary, General Administration
Department by the hand of
Its Shri SANJAY UBALE
SIGNED AND DELIVERED by Maharashtra
Airport Development Company Ltd. by the
hand of
Its Shri R.C. SINHA

MINUTES

VIII
EIGHTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday the 18th December, 2008 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Basement, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Shri Birendra Prasad Baishya
LOK SABHA
4. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
5. Shri Joachim Baxla
6. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
7. Shri N.S.V . Chitthan
8. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
9. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
10. Shrimati Priya Dutt
11. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
12. Shri Rakesh Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
2. The Committee considered the draft 143rd, 144th, 145th, 146th and 147th Reports on the
Action Taken by the Government on the recommondations/observations of the Committee
contained in its (i) One Hundred and Thirty Fourth Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of
the Department of Shipping; (ii) One Hundred and Thirty Fifth Report on Demands for Grants
2008-09 of the Department of Road Transport and Highways; (iii) One Hundred and Thirty Sixth
Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Tourism; (iv) One Hundred and
Thirty Seventh Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Culture; and (v) One
Hundred and Thirty Eighth Report on Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the Ministry of Civil
Aviation respectively. After some discussion, the Committee adopted all the reports without any
modifications.
35

36
3. Thereafter, the Committee authorized its Chairman and in his absence Shri Birendra Prasad
Baishya to present the reports to the Rajya Sabha and Shri Adhir Chowdhury and Shrimati Priya
Dutt to lay the reports on the Table of the Lok Sabha on 19th December, 2008.
4. * * *
5. The Committee then adjourned at 3.30 
P.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.