PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 180
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON TRANSPOR T, TOURISM  AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTIETH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE 
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED
AND SEVENTY SECOND REPORT ON DEVELOPMENT
OF TOURISM IN NORTH-EASTERN REGION
ST  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21 MAY, 2012)
ST  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21 MAY, 2012)
ST  
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21 MAY, 2012)
ST  
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21 MAY, 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY, 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)MAY, 2012/VAISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED EIGHTIETH REPORT
ON
ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE
COMMITTEE CONTAINED IN ITS ONE HUNDRED
AND SEVENTY SECOND REPORT ON DEVELOPMENT
OF TOURISM IN NORTH-EASTERN REGION
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 21 ST MAY , 2012)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 21 ST MAY , 2012)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
MAY , 2012/V AISAKHA, 1934 (SAKA)

CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT ................................................................................................................................... 1—27
4. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................... 28—31
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 33—36

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE
(2011-2012)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Prof. Saif-ud-Din Soz
3. Shri Satish Sharma
4. Shri Narendra Kashyap
5. Shri Thomas Sangma
6. Shri Pyarimohan Mohapatra
#7. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
$8. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
%9. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
*10. V acant
LOK SABHA
11. Yogi Adityanath
12. Shri Avtar Singh Bhadana
13. Shrimati Tabassum Hasan
14. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
15. Shri Hassan Khan
16. Dr. Kruparani Killi
17. Shri Jose K. Mani
18. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
19. Shrimati Jaya Prada Nahata
20. Shrimati Ranee Narah
21. Shri Rajaram Pal
22. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
23. Shri Rudramadhab Ray
24. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
25. Shri Dushyant Singh
26. Shrimati Meena Singh
27. Dr. Raghuvansh Prasad Singh
28. Shri Rakesh Singh
29. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
30. Shri Anurag Singh Thakur
@31. Shri Subrata Bakshi
# V acancy caused due to expiry of the term of Shri Shadi Lal Batra w.e.f. 2 nd April, 2012 and renominated on 4 th May, 2012.
$ Nominated on 4 th May, 2012 vice Shri Vikram Verma who ceased to be a Member of the Committee due to expiry of the
term w.e.f.  2 nd April, 2012.
% Nominated on 4 th May, 2012 vice Shri Syed Azeez Pasha who ceased to be a Member of the Committee due to expiry of
the term w.e.f.  2 nd April, 2012.
* Vacancy caused due to expiry of the term of Shri Ramdas Agarwal w.e.f. 3 rd April, 2012.
@ Nominated on 2 nd March, 2012 vice Shri Ajit Singh who ceased to be a Member of the Committee consequent upon his
inclusion in the Council of Ministers w.e.f.  18 th December, 2011.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shri Swarabji B., Joint Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
(ii)

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having authorized by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Eightieth Report on Action Taken by the Government on the
recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred and Seventy Second
Report on Development of Tourism in North-Eastern Region.
2. One Hundred and Seventy Second Report of the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented to the Parliament on the 17
th August,
2011 in Parliament.
3. The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its One
Hundred and Eightieth Report were received from the Ministries of Tourism, Civil Aviation, Road
Transport and Highways, Shipping and North-East Region Development and State Governments on
19
th January, 2012.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report as its meeting held on the 17 th May 2012.
SITARAM YECHURY
NEW D ELHI; Chairman,
May 17, 2012 Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Vaisakha 27, 1934  (Saka) Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture.

1
REPORT
1. The Report of the Committee deals with the Action Taken by the Government on the
observations/recommendations as contained in its One-Hundred and Seventy Second Report on
Development of Tourism in the North Eastern Region of the Ministry of Tourism which was
presented to both the Houses of Parliament on 17
th August, 2011.
2. Action Taken Replies have been received from the Government on the 10 th  January, 2012
in respect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the Report. Further observations
and recommendations of the Committee on these are  given in the succeeding paragraphs.
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those recommendations/
observations which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be
furnished to it at the earliest.
4. On scrutiny of the Action Taken Replies, the Committee has made observations on each
item of Action taken/proposed to be taken by the concerned Ministries. The recommendations of
the Committee contained in the One Hundred and Seventy Second Report, action taken thereon by
the Ministry and recommendations/observations of the Committee on each item of action taken has
been given in the succeeding paragraphs.
5. North-Eastern Region consists of 8 States viz.  Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Sikkim and Tripura. This region is full of bewildering cultural
diversity, magical beauty in terms of nature, wild life, biodiversity, etc. Each State is, in fact, a
travellers’ paradise with immense tourism potential which unfortunately remains unutilized. It has
been, therefore, rightly termed as ‘Paradise Unexplored’. The Committee has, however, noted that
NE States are far behind as compared to other States in terms of tourist arrivals, both domestic
and foreign. State of Assam is shade better than other States in this region leaving lot of scope
for improvement in attracting tourists. (Para 100, of the 172
nd Report)
Reply of the Government
6. The number of Domestic Tourist Visits (DTVs) and Foreign Tourist  Visits (FTVs) in the
North-Eastern region have been increasing overall, although the States of Meghalaya, Nagaland have
seen decline in the arrival of foreign tourists in the year 2010, and Manipur has recorded a decline
in domestic tourists in the same year. A Statement showing the domestic and foreign tourists arrival
in the North-Eastern States is given at Annexure-I.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
7. The Committee notes with concern that the Ministry’s reply does not reflect the
seriousness required to boost tourism in these States. The Committee is not satisfied as the
Ministry has  thrown no light on the reasons for decreasing the tourist arrivals to certain
North Eastern States. The Committee recommends that steps should be taken to attract
more and more tourists to the North Eastern States so that  ‘the paradise unexplored’ did
not remain unexplored for long.
8. The Committee notes with satisfaction that there was no dearth of funds for this purpose.
Union Ministry of Tourism has released amount ranging  from 15% to 19% of the total budget of
the Ministry which is well above the mandatory provision of 10% for the NE States. The
Committee, however, has noted that funds for Centrally sponsored Schemes/State Plans have not

2
been released uniformally amongst all the NE States. The Committee found that no funds were
released under those schemes for Manipur, Meghalaya and Mizoram during the year 2010-11. For
the State of Tripura an amount of Rs.1.19 crore was released for Centrally sponsored scheme
during this period. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism should ensure that proper
proposals, UCs, etc. are received from the States in time so that funds are released to them without
much delay. (Para 101, ibid)
Reply of the Government
9. The Ministry of Tourism extends Central Financial Assistance to the State Governments/
Union Territory Administrations for tourism projects identified in consultation with them. A
statement showing the number of projects and amount sanctioned to the North-Eastern States
during the Eleventh Five Year Plan up to 30
th September, 2011 is at  Annexure–II.
10. It may be mentioned that the States of Manipur, Meghalaya and Mizoram have been
provided Central Financial Assistance to the tune of Rs.39.40 crores, Rs.22.53 crores and Rs.11.51
crores respectively during the year 2010-11 under the various Tourism related Schemes of the
Ministry. All the States Governments are being continuously pursued to complete the projects
sanctioned to them and submit requisite Utilization Certificates/Completion Certificates in a time
bound period.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
11. The Committee observes that compared to 2010-11 the amount sanctioned so far
during 2011-12 to Assam, Meghalaya and Tripura seems to be very less. Also, the number
of projects sanctioned has come down. The State Governments may be sensitized to submit
the projects for allocation and utilize the funds in a time bound manner.
12. The Committee noted that a number of projects have been taken up for developing tourist
circuit and other such projects. However, the Committee finds that some of those projects were
taken up long back and are yet to be completed. Union Ministry of Tourism should be in touch
with the State Governments to help them get the projects completed on priority basis.
(Para 102, ibid)
Reply of the Government
13. Timely completion and implementation of the tourism projects is the responsibility of the
State Government. Ministry of Tourism also monitors implementation of the tourism projects
through field inspection by the officers of the Ministry of Tourism, review meetings with the
officers of the State Governments/UT Administration and regional conferences of Tourism Ministry.
At the instance of Ministry of Tourism, State Level Monitoring Committees (SLMC) have been
constituted by States/UTs for monitoring of projects from time to time basis.
14. Prioritization meetings are held in respect of all the States/Union Territories including the
North-Eastern States at the beginning of each year for finalizing the projects to be implemented
with Central Financial Assistance during the next financial year. These meetings, chaired by
Secretary (Tourism)/Addl. Secretary (Tourism) and attended by the Tourism Secretaries of the
States, also undertake a detailed review of all the ongoing/incomplete projects and prioritization of
projects in next year is done on the basis of utilization of funds.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
15. The Committee is not satisfied with reply given by the Ministry of Tourism which is
of a routine nature. The Committee may be informed about the actual action taken

3
subsequent to the recommendations communicated to the Ministry of Tourism.
16. The Committee during its visit found that Neer Mahal  in Tripura  could be developed as
an attractive tourist spot as it holds immense potential. However, the water levels  in the lake is
very low, particularly during winter just which is the tourist season. It is learnt that Government
of Tripura has taken some action for desilting of Rudra Sagar  lake. The Committee is, however,
of the opinion that efforts of State Government alone may not be sufficient. Therefore, the
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should extend financial help to develop the
lake as one of the tourist destination. This effort will also be able to create employment to a large
number of people inhabiting the area. Tourist guest houses, house boats, water sports, adventure
sports and rowing facilities may be added to attract tourists. Union Government may also prepare
a comprehensive master  plan to develop Neer Mahal , in consultation with the State Government.
(Para 103, ibid)
Reply of the Government
17. Preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPRs)/Master Plans, for development of tourist
destinations, are primarily undertaken by the State Governments/UT Administrations. Ministry of
Tourism, however, provides Central Financial Assistance (CFA) to States/UTs for preparation of
DPRs/Master Plans, under the Plan Scheme ‘Market Research-Professional Services’ on the basis
of project proposals received from them, subject to availability of funds and inter-se-priority .
Government of Tripura has to consider preparation of a DPR for development of “Neer Mahal” and
approach Ministry of Tourism for CFA, if required.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
18. The Committee notes that tourism potential of  ‘Neer Mahal’ as important tourist
destination could not be exploited so far. Reason being that the State Government did not
submit any proposal for financial assistance. The Committee recommends that Government
of India may bring to notice of the Government of Tripura to ask them to submit the
proposal for development of ‘Neer Mahal’ on priority basis.
19. The Committee has observed that most of the states are not geared up for the conventional
tourism in respect of accommodation - affordable hotels and guest houses. They do not have good
and affordable accommodation, both  in terms of numbers as well as quality. This was also evident
from field trips to these States. There is no Five Star Hotel in NER till date. The Committee notes
that Government of India has launched the scheme for capital subsidy of 30% for hotels (not
below 2-star category) with effect from 1
st April, 2008 for a period of five years. However, this
scheme has not been successful in this region in achieving the desired results. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the Ministry should impress upon the State Governments to offer new
initiatives for the creation of quality accommodation to the visiting tourists. Central assistance may
be extended for achieving this goal. (Para 104, ibid)
Reply of the Government
20. The Ministry of Tourism provides funds for construction  of Budget Accommodation under
the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of PIDDC to the North-Eastern States and the State of Jammu
and Kashmir.
21. Ministry of Tourism has advised the State Governments and Union Territories to encourage
construction of hotel accommodation including that in the budget category by following - investor
friendly land policies, single window approach for promoting hotel projects and for allotting sites

4
on revenue sharing basis, granting extra Floor Space Index (FSI)/Floor Area Ratio (FAR) for
Hotels, Creation of Land Banks etc.
22. The following steps have been taken by the Government of India to augment growth of
hotel accommodation in the country:
(i)    Hotel and Tourism related industry declared as high priority industry and Foreign
Direct Investment upto 100%, under the  automatic route is permitted in ‘Hotels and
Tourism Sector’, subject to applicable laws/regulations, security and other
conditionalties.
(ii)   To encourage the growth of hotels, on the request of Ministry of Tourism, a five Year
Tax Holiday was announced in the Budget of 2008-09 for two, three and four star
hotels that are established in specified districts including North East which have
UNESCO declared ‘World Heritage Sites;’ except the revenue districts of Mumbai and
Delhi. The hotel should be constructed and start functioning during the period April
1, 2008 to March 31, 2013.
(iii) The Government has recently announced the extension of Investment Linked Tax
incentive under Section 35 AD of the Income Tax Act to new hotels of 2-Star
Category and above anywhere in India.
(iv)   The Reserve Bank of India (RBI) has also issued revised Guidelines on Classification
of exposures as Commercial Real Estate (CRE) Exposures. Thus, RBI has classified
exposures to hotels outside the CRE Exposure.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
23. The Committee notes the steps taken by the Government in facilitating the growth
of tourism industry. The State Governments may be sensitized to take benefits of the
various schemes for growth of hotel accommodations.
24. The Committee notes the concerns expressed by the stakeholders with regard lower
classification of cities in the NER and they demanded that the cities in the North-Eastern States
to be accredited with a view to encourage the corporate houses to hold meetings, seminars,
functions, etc. The Committee recommends that classification of cities in NE Region may be
reviewed and upgraded appropriately so that, the North-Eastern cities also could be considered for
holding business conventions by corporates and PSUs. Ministry of Tourism should take up the
matter with concerned Ministry and inform the Committee. (Para 105, ibid)
25. The Committee recommends that the North-East may be made a corporate destination and
the facilities accordingly may be planned. However, the ecological fragility of the area and the
strategic importance of the States should not be compromised. (Para 109, ibid)
Reply of the Government
26. With respect to classification of cities, the Ministry of Tourism has taken up the matter with
the Ministry of Urban Development which is the concerned Ministry in this regard. However, to
promote meetings, incentives, conferences and exhibitions (MICE) tourism, Ministry of Tourism is
allowing Central Financial Assistance to the tune of Rs.5 crores per State for setting up a
Convention Centre. So far, for the North-Eastern States, Convention Centres have been sanctioned
for Manipur, Mizoram and Arunachal Pradesh. All other State Governments are being requested to
avail this facility.

5
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
27. The Committee recommends that the Governments of Assam, Meghalaya, Nagaland,
Sikkim and Tripura also may be informed to avail the benefit of Central Financial
Assistance of Rs.5 crore for setting up Convention Centre. The Committee also reiterates
its earlier recommendation for review of classification of cities in NE Region and upgrade
appropriately by taking up the matter again with Ministry of Urban Development as special
case for promoting tourism.
28. The Committee also recommends that tax rebates and other incentives for the development
of various tourism activities like hotels, transportation etc. may be extended to the North-East area.
Tax holidays, as in the case of other industries, may be provided to the hoteliers of the North-
Eastern States. The existing high luxury taxes and pollution charges may be revisited with a view
to making these affordable to attract tourists from all categories. (Para 106, ibid)
Reply of the Government
29. The recent tax incentive extended to the hotel industry in the form of amendment to Section
35 AD provides investment linked tax incentive to new Hotels of 2-star categories and above
anywhere in India and are eligible for a deduction based on the capital expenditure incurred on the
Hotel project except for cost of land, goodwill and financial instruments.
30. Ministry of Tourism has advised the State Governments and Union Territories to encourage
construction of hotel accommodation including that in the budget category by following - investor
friendly land policies, single window approach for promoting hotel projects and for allotting sites
on revenue sharing basis, granting extra Floor Space Index (FSI)/Floor Area Ratio (FAR) for
Hotels, Creation of Land Banks etc.
31. The steps taken by the Government of India to augment growth of hotel accommodation
in the country is already enumerated at Para 104.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
32. The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry for creating Hotel
accommodation infrastructure in the country. However the Committee’s concern of existing
high luxury taxes and pollution charges remain unanswered. The Committee recommends
Ministry of Tourism  to take up the matter with the concerned agencies to review the tax
structure  for making these affordable to tourists of all the categories.
33. NER has a tremendous scope for rural tourism which has largely been remained
unexploited. The Committee is of the view that the scheme for development of rural tourism
prepared by the Ministry of Tourism has not been able to attract much proposals from NE States.
The Committee finds that only Government of Nagaland has submitted some proposal for
development of rural tourism. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism should consult
the NE States and if necessary modify the schemes so that the proposals are received from those
States and funds earmarked therefor are utilized. (Para 107, ibid)
Reply of the Government
34. During the T enth and Eleventh plan period, fifty-five rural tourism projects were
sanctioned to the North-Eastern States for an amount of Rs.33.69 crores (as on 31.12.2011). A
statement showing the number of rural tourism projects along with amount sanctioned for each
State is at Annexure-III .

6
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
35. The Committee notes the amount sanctioned in the Tenth and Eleventh Five Year
Plans. However, the status of work completed so far is not provided to have a comparative
view. The Committee also desires to know further steps taken by Ministry of Tourism to
augment the scheme.
36. The Committee is of the view that there is need to promote helicopter operations in NER
to provide the connectivity to inaccessible areas having tourism potential. The Committee however
notes that no State except Sikkim has so far submitted proposals for heliports with a view to
promote heli tourism there. The Committee wants the Ministry of Tourism may mobilize other
States and also ask them to prepare plan for promotion of heli tourism in their respective states.
The Committee notes with concern that there has been a spurt in helicopter accidents in the NE
region. This may certainly discourage the tourists. The Committee also recommends that Ministry
of Civil Aviation should look into the matter seriously to make helicopter operations in NER safe.
In this connection, the Committee also would like to draw attention to the recommendations
contained in its 169
th Report on ‘Helicopter Operations in India’ which is reproduced below:–
“The Committee recommends that the  entire gamut of helicopter operations in India may
be reviewed and adequate/appropriate steps may be taken to ensure safer helicopter travel.
The Committee recommends that guidelines/regulations for take off/landing of helicopters
during low visibility should not only be strengthened but enforced strictly.”
(Para 108, ibid)
37. The Committee notes that Pawan Hans Limited has conducted a comprehensive study on
air connectivity in NE region and the report has been submitted to the NEC. The Committee is of
the view that helicopter services would facilitate easy access to the destinations where the tourists
are otherwise discouraged due to long and tiring travel through hilly roads. The Committee
therefore recommends that given the constraints of rail/road connectivity and  frequent cancellation
of flights, the proposals submitted by Pawan Hans may be examined and implemented so that
connectivity problem is solved to some extent. (Para 126, ibid)
Reply of the Government
38. Ministry of Tourism is providing Central Financial Assistance for construction of Heliport
as a component for areas which are inaccessible but having tourism potential, with a maximum
ceiling of 75 lakhs under the scheme of product infrastructure development of destination and
circuits. Accordingly, all State Governments/UT Administrations have been requested to submit the
proposal as per the guidelines. For the first time anywhere in the country, the State of Sikkim has
been granted Central Financial Assistance for three destination projects.
39. The security related aspects of Helicopter services in the North-Eastern region, as received
from the Ministry of Civil Aviation are given below:–
40. For connectivity in the North Eastern region presently Pawan Hans Helicopter Ltd. (PHHL)
has deployed helicopters with Governments of Sikkim (Bell 206L4) and Tripura (Dauphin N) for
running regular passenger services under the aegis of the respective States with 75% subsidy from
MHA.
41. Notwithstanding the above, PHHL has also been appointed as nodal agency by North East
Council (NEC), to provide necessary expertise/assistance to finalize/work out the air connectivity
requirements of all the NE States for the next five year period i.e. Twelfth Five Year Plan.
Accordingly, PHHL has prepared a Draft Study Report which has been forwarded to NEC. This
was based on the discussions/interaction PHHL had with NE State Governments of Tripura,

7
Nagaland, Sikkim, Assam, Meghalaya and also based on the experience of PHHL with other NE
States like Government of Arunachal Pradesh, Manipur and Mizoram.
42. The Report submitted to NEC has been incorporated in the Twelfth Five Year Plan of NEC
and Non Lapsable Central Proof of Resources (NLCPR) for the Transport and Communication
sector. NEC has further submitted the Report to Ministry of Dept. of North Eastern region and
other concerned Ministries, including Planning Commission for their consideration. As far as safety
of the helicopter operations are concerned, PHHL has also emphasized the need to create proper
infrastructure facilities such as helipads/heliports etc., in the respective States for smooth and safe
operations.
• PHHL has decided to implement Safety Management System for its operations and
maintenance activities as per International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO)/
Directorate of General Civil Aviation (DGCA) guidelines. The system is to be
implemented in a phased manner during three years and PHHL has already completed
Phase-I of implementation.
• PHHL Board has approved creation of a new Flight Safety department with Head
(Safety) assisted by DGM level officials in the Regions to be responsible for
comprehensive Safety Oversight of PHHL and report directly to CMD. The department
has already started functioning.
• A Confidential V oluntary Reporting System and Compulsory Operations and
Maintenance Hazard Reporting System has been introduced in the company for
reporting of any hazardous activity, occurrence or situation in maintenance and
operations of helicopters to mitigate safety hazards.
• System has been strengthened to monitor compliance with pre-flight medical, pre-flight
briefing, meteorological briefing, standard operating procedures, loading of helicopter
and other safety measures etc.
• Extensive internal audit procedures have been introduced in the company to identify
any non-compliance with rules and rectify the same before they become serious.
• The company has introduced Flight Operation Quality Assurance (FOQA) system in its
operations to analyse and monitor operation of helicopters. FOQA, though applicable only
to scheduled operators, has been introduced for a better and comprehensive safety
oversight of operations. A random Analysis of Cockpit V oice Recorder (CVR) and Flight
Data Recorder (FDR) recording is carried out for ensuring compliance with procedures.
• New procedures for incident reporting, investigations have been established to
investigate every incident and ensure compliance with every recommendation of PIB
investigations.
• PHHL has decided to  install a flight following system on all its helicopters which will
help immediately locate the accident site so that rescue operations can be started.
PHHL is in touch with DGCA, Ministry of Civil Aviation on the subject.
• All Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) in the company have been reviewed and
revised to enhance safety culture in the Company.
• An audit of all PHHL operational basis was carried out by DGCA after recent
accidents. There was no major anomaly reported and PHHL has already taken
corrective measures on almost all observations made by DGCA during the Audit.
• Hazard Reporting System introduced as per SMS Implementation Plan.

8
43. Ministry of DONER has informed that the report on a comprehensive study on Air
connectivity in the NER as prepared by Pawan Hans Helicopter Ltd., has been received in the NEC
Secretariat. The findings and recommendations of the report have been included in the report of
the Working Group on Transport and Communication constituted for the Twelfth Five Year Plan
of the NEC.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
44. The Committee notes that the benefit of central financial assistance for construction
of Helipad has not been availed by other States except Sikkim. The Committee recommends
that the scheme may be reviewed to assess the reasons for non utilization of funds under
this scheme.
45. The Committee notes that various programmes have been launched for promotion and
marketing of tourism in the North-East. The Committee has, however, received complaints from
tour and travel associations that they are not called regularly by the Ministry for participation in
the tourism fairs as a result of which Tourists coming to this area are not well informed of the
ground realities. And if they face any problem, this region earns bad name. In order to develop
a network in the North East Region, the Committee, desires that half yearly meetings of all the
stakeholders in tourism should be held. The committee also felt the need to provide publicity
material in fair and exhibitions in vernacular languages also which will attract more domestic
tourists. The website of the Ministry of Tourism and the State Governments should also give all
the information so that tourists can plan for safe journey. The website should be made interactive
and attractive. (Para 110, ibid)
Reply of the Government
46. So far, the Presidents of various associations depending on the turn-over of their companies
are invited to meetings in the Ministry. However, the recommendation of the Committee has been
noted for future compliance.
47. It may be mentioned here that the Ministry organizes Regional Conference of Tourism
Ministers of all the East and North Eastern States every year, which are also attended by all the
stakeholders of the tourism sector.
48. The Ministry is currently revamping its official website www.incredibleindia.org  which will
contain a special section on North East.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
49. The Committee recommends that measures should be taken to involve more travel
associations in the meetings. The official site should also be made more interactive with the
facility for providing replies to various stakeholders. The Committee also desire to have
details of conference/meeting held and participants who took part therein.
50. The Committee notes that three Institutes of Hotel Management (IHM) are operational at
Guwahati, Gangtok and Shillong and there are proposals to set up five IHM and three Food Craft
Institutes (FCI) in NE States. The Committee hopes that the setting up of the institutes will be
helpful to meet the future requirement of the trained and skilled manpower in the region. The
Committee also hopes that these projects will be operational within the stipulated time schedule.
The Committee also appreciates the training programme launched under the scheme ‘
gquj ls
jkstxkj rd ’ for fresh students and unemployed persons up to the age of 28 years. They also get
the stipend of Rs.2000. The Committee recommends that this Scheme may be given due publicity

9
so that more and more students and unemployed youth are trained and employed in hospitality
sector. (Para 111, ibid)
Reply of the Government
51. It is stated that the 5 Institutes of Hotel management (IHMs) at Aizwal, Dimapur, Itanagar,
Jorhat and Agartala and the 3 Food Craft Institutes (FCIs) at Tura, Namchi and Naogaon have been
sanctioned. Of these, the FCI at Naogaon is operational. All the other IHMs and FCIs are at various
states of completion. In addition, ‘in principle’ approval has also been accorded to the setting up
of an FCI at Imphal, Manipur. The land has been identified but not yet transferred in the name
of the Society. So far as giving publicity to the ‘Hunar se Rozgar’ ‘
gquj ls jkstxkj rd ’
programme is concerned, it is stated that the Ministry is in the process of selecting a creative
agency and drawing up a media plan for advertisement. Once this is done, due publicity would be
given to the ‘Hunar Se Rozgar’ programme.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
52. The Committee recommends that further development on the above scheme may be
communicated in due course.
53. The Committee welcomes that Government of India has relaxed the Restricted and
Protected Area Permits and allowed foreign tourists to visit more areas in Manipur and Nagaland.
The Committee is of the view that these restrictions on foreign tourists may be regularly reviewed
so that more and more foreign tourists visit the NE States. The Committee however notes that
there is lack of adequate publicity about the provisions of restricted and protected area permits.
The Committee feels that there is need for putting all these things together on the website and
inform all our Embassies, Consulates and India tourism offices abroad to ensure that the tourists
are not unnecessarily harassed. There should be clear guidelines as to which places need permit
and how it can be obtained. This will certainly help the tourists from other countries. The
Committee has been informed that some of the Consulates are charging $30 from the foreign
tourists who intend to visit Sikkim, whereas the foreign tourists seeking permits after arrival in
India no such fee is charged. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Tourism should take
up the matter with MEA and do away the confusion in this regard. (Para 112, ibid)
Reply of the Government
54. The information about Restricted Area Permit (RAP) and Protected Area Permit (PAP) is
given to tourists and other stakeholders by all Overseas Indiatourism offices of the Ministry of
Tourism.
55. However, Ministry of External Affairs has requested all missions and posts to disseminate
information on the subject as incorporated in the new, revised guidelines for issuance and
administration of the Restricted and Protected Area Permits. Based on this, all head of missions and
posts have been advised to publicize the same and post them on their websites.
56. So far as charging of $ 30 from the foreign tourists intending to visit Sikkim by some of
the consulates, it is understood that none of the consulates charge this fee at present.  However,
this is being further confirmed.
57. The Ministry of Tourism is presently in the process of revamping its official information
website www.incredibleindia.org  and this website will have a special section on North East with
information like accessibility, accommodation and various destinations in the North Eastern Region
which would invariably also include information pertaining to Restricted and Protected Areas. The

10
Ministry has also published the North East Travel Companion which provides information about this
region.  The North East Travel Companion is being updated with the latest information and the new
edition will be published shortly.
58. Ministry of Home Affairs has informed that for promoting tourism of North Eastern States,
guidelines regarding relaxation of PAP/RAP regime have been issued from time to time by the
Ministry. On receiving numerous requests for removal of PAP/RAP regime for promotion of
tourism from State Governments of Manipur, Mizoram and Nagaland, the matter was examined and
with the approval of competent authority, the entire area of the States of Manipur, Mizoram and
Nagaland was excluded from Protected Area Regime notified under Foreigners (Protected Area)
Order, 1958 initially for a period of one year w.e.f. 1
st January, 2011. It was reviewed again in the
meeting held on 22.12.2011 chaired by Home Secretary and in the meeting it has been decided
inter-alia  that:–
– The decisions pertaining to Protected Area Permit for the States of Manipur, Mizoram
and Nagaland, communicated by circular No.393 dated 30.12.2010 may continue for
another period of one year i.e. upto 31.12.2012.
– The Indian Missions will be advised that Missionary visas to foreigners intending to
visit Manipur, Mizoram and Nagaland should be issued, only after very close scrutiny.
59. Ministry of Home Affairs through its monthly Newsletters give adequate information/
publicity to major decisions taken for North Eastern States. This monthly newsletter has wide
publication in four different languages viz-a-viz English, Assamese, Manipuri and Bengali.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
60. The Committee hopes that with the revamping of the official website, the tourists
will get all the information at one place.
61. The Committee has received complaints that there are not sufficient number of seats
available for Government employees travelling under LTC schemes. The Committee recommends
that Air India may take necessary steps to ensure sufficient seat availability during vacations so that
the LTC passengers could be accommodated hassle free. Introduction of special flights or chartered
flights can be experimented during the vacation time to meet the demand. (Para 113, ibid)
Reply of the Government
62. Ministry of Civil Aviation has informed that all efforts are made to ensure that sufficient
number of seats are available for sale at LTC fare level.  However, during peak demand seasons
like Summer holidays, festivals, Winter holidays, an advance booking pattern is observed over the
network. During these periods, all booking, including for LTC traffic tend to be made upto 4-6
months in advance. This particularly applies to the most preferred tourist destinations.
63. In such situations, efforts are also made by Air India to operate additional flights to facilitate
the travel of passengers.
64. As regards operation of charter/additional flights, it may be mentioned that Air India
routinely monitors market developments and plans additional services or upgrade equipment to meet
demand for additional seats subject to availability of resources and commercial viability of such
operations.
65. Further, w.e.f. Jan. 2011 Air India has restructured its A320 family aircraft schedules on the
5 weekly round robin service connecting Delhi with Guwahati and Bagdogra with 2 weekly services
on Delhi-Guwahati-Imphal v.v. route and Delhi-Bagdogra v.v. (5/wk till 26.3.2011), thus offering

11
increased frequency of services. Moreover, effective January, 2011, Air India also introduced a
daily terminator service on the Imphal-Kolkata v.v.route with A320 family aircraft.
66. The Hon’ble Chief Minister of Nagaland has requested Hon’ble Minister of State for
Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions to allow the Government Servants for
availing the LTC in case they fly by airlines other than Air India.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
67. The Committee may also be informed whether any additional flights have been
proposed during the summer of 2012.
68. Promotion of the North Eastern Region as major tourist destinations would depend on the
air connectivity to these places.  Air connectivity assumes great importance in these areas because
of poor rail/road connectivity. These areas remain cut-off from rest of the country during monsoon
season especially because of the peculiar hilly terrain and climatic conditions. During the
deliberations the Committee was informed by the stakeholders in Guwahati, Aizawal, Shillong and
Agartala that the flights in this region get cancelled frequently and 532 flights were cancelled in
2010 due to either adverse weather conditions, air force operations or lack of adequate landing
facility at the airports in NE States. They emphasized the need for improvement in air connectivity
to the North-Eastern Region and regular direct flights to Delhi. (Para 114, ibid)
Reply of the Government
69. The information regarding air connectivity in the North-Eastern region, as received from the
Ministry of Civil Aviation is given at Annexure-V.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
70. The Committee notes that a major chunk of the flight operation to North East
connecting Delhi are now run by private airlines. At the same time Air India is talking
about traffic demand and commercial viability in these routes. If the two criteria above are
not meeting in these regions, why the private airlines flourish there? The Committee
recommends that the contribution of the national carrier need to be enhanced in the Region
connecting other major cities of the country as the demand is very high after introduction
of the LTC package for the Government employees.
71. The Committee finds that Landing of aircrafts in the comparatively small airfields is the
major constraint for air traffic in the region during the winter and monsoon seasons. The
Committee recommends that the Ministry of Civil Aviation should take steps to ensure that night
landing facilities and difficult weather landing equipments are needed to be installed at the airports
in NE regions to avoid frequent flight diversions and cancellations. (Para 115, ibid)
Reply of the Government
72. The Ministry of Civil Aviation has informed that as regards difficult weather landing
equipment, the ILS (Instruments Landing System) and Doppler, Very High Frequency Omni- Range
(VOR), Distance Measuring Equipment (DME) and Non-Directional Beacon (NDB) are installed in
the North Eastern airports as per the list enclosed as Annexure-VI.  Introduction of ILS at
Barapani and Lilabari shall be considered by Airports Authority of India (AAI) when Jet aircraft
begin operations subject to (i) feasibility for formulating Instrument Approach to Land (IAL)
procedures considering surrounding terrains/hills in the approach path/funnel to the airports and
also (ii) achievability of ILS signals in the converge areas of ILS as per standards prescribed for

12
safety of life applications as per Civil Aviation Requirements. It is planned to install Doppler Very
High Frequency Omni-Range (DVOR) at Tezu.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
73. The Committee notes the reply.
74. The Committee noted that as far as international connectivity to and from north-east is
concerned, an unlimited access has been granted to designated airlines of ASEAN and SAARC
countries—Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia, Myanmar, Cambodia, Vietnam, Sri Lanka,
Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan and Maldives—to operate from Guwahati. Accordingly, the designated
airlines of these countries can operate any number of services from there.
75. The Committee suggests that steps should be taken to attract foreign tourists through
special international packages in consultation with neighbouring countries like Bangladesh,
Bhutan, Nepal, Myanmar and Thailand as the NER has many Monasteries to attract tourists.
(Para 116, 117 ibid)
76. The Committee also recommends that the frequency of flights between Guwahati and
Bangkok needs to be increased and flights between Guwahati and Dhaka, Bhutan, Nepal and
Kunming need to be introduced. At least one more airport in NER, perhaps at Agartala to cover
the southern part of NER has to be developed as an international airport. (Para 118, ibid)
Reply of the Government
77. Ministry of Civil Aviation has informed that as far as International Connectivity from/
to North Eastern Region is concerned, an unlimited access has been granted to the designated
airline(s) of ASEAN and SAARC countries viz. Thailand, Malaysia, Singapore, Indonesia,
Brunei, Myanmar, Cambodia, Vietnam, Sri Lanka, Bangladesh, Nepal, Bhutan and Maldives to
operate to/from Guwahati. Therefore, the designated airlines of these countries can operate any
number of services to/from Guwahati. On the other hand, Indian Carriers are free to mount
services from any point in Indian including Guwahati to foreign destinations as per the
respective bilateral air services arrangement with the concerned country. However, the actual
operation by any airline is always guided by its commercial judgment and Government does not
interfere on this.
78. Formulation of International packages for foreign tourists is done primarily by the private
sector.  However, private stakeholders/organizations are requested to promote North Eastern Region
from time to time.
79. Agartala Airport is a well-developed Airport with modern facilities catering to A-320/A-321
type of aircrafts in all weather conditions and having capability for both day and night operations.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
80. The Committee notes the reply with dismay that the facility to operate international
flights has not been utilized properly.
81. Sometimes, due to lack of coordination between Airlines, Airport Authority of India (AAI)
and Air Force, regular commercial flights are cancelled or diverted/delayed leading to avoidable
inconvenience to the passengers and loss of revenue. The Committee is of the considered view that
under normal circumstances the regular commercial flights should not be disturbed due to Air
Force sorties, unless it is unavoidable to do so. (Para 119, ibid)

13
Reply of the Government
82. As per information received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation, scheduled flights are not
delayed due to IAF (Indian Air Force) flights unless IAF aircraft is proceeding for some urgent
operational assignment or carrying VIP/VVIP.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
83. The Committee notes the reply.
84. The Committee found that many airport projects were being carried out in this region.
While appreciating the development works being carried out by the Airports Authority of India, it
desires that delayed projects at various  airports of the North-Eastern States be expedited and other
ones completed within the scheduled time frame. The Committee also reiterates the need for early
transfer of the Lengpui airport of Mizoram to the Airports Authority of India so that comprehensive
airport development can be carried out. (Para 120, ibid)
85. The Committee finds that delay in the environmental clearance has been one of the major
reasons for the delay in starting as well as completion of airport projects.  For some of the
projects, environmental clearance is still awaited. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of
Civil Aviation should take up the matter with the Ministry of Environment and Forest to expedite
the necessary clearances. (Para 121, ibid)
Reply of the Government
86. Ministry of Civil Aviation have informed as under:
(i) Despite constraints/law and order problem/logistics, AAI has completed the following
major projects in NER.
(a) New Terminal Building (NTB) at Dibrugarh Airport.
(b) New Terminal Building (NTB) at Shillong (Barapani) Airport.
(c) Night Landing facility (NLF) at Imphal Airport.
(d) Extension of runway upto 10,200 ft. and construction of new apron with link
taxiway at Guwahati Airport.
(e) Extension of runway at Silchar Airport.
(f) Strengthening of runway, taxiways, apron and expansion of apron at Agartala
and Dibrugarh Airports.
(g) Expansion of apron and construction of link taxiways at Dimapur and Bagdogra
airports.
(ii) W orks are regularly monitored by a dedicated Project Monitoring Team (PMQA).
Efforts are being made to expedite the projects and complete within the stipulated
time frame.
(iii) Regar ding transfer of Lengpui airport to AAI, the matter needs to be taken up with
Government of Mizoram.
87. Ministry of Civil Aviation has informed that there has been a delay in obtaining
environmental clearance for Tezu project. The public hearing has been held on 13
th January, 2012.
The issue of delay in environmental clearance is being taken up with the Ministry of Environment
and Forests.

14
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
88. The Committee wants to know the steps taken for re-transfer of Lengpui airport to
Airports Authority of India. The Committee hopes that with the completion of the projects
at various airports of the NER and the operationalisation  of runways, night landing will also
start there. The Committee recommends that the latest developments with regard to Tezu
project be informed in due course.
89. The Committee has observed that the North eastern region has early sunrise and sunset.
About two hours early sun rise has an impact on the biological clock of the people in the region
and if this early hours be utilized for early operations of aircrafts to other regions of the country
that would be beneficial for all. The Committee notes that Airports Authority of India has already
undertaken some projects at Guwahati airport in this regard. The Committee recommends that
Airports Authority of India may take steps to ensure that Agartala airport may be provided with
night halt  facilities so that early morning flights could start operation within and out of the Region.
The Committee, therefore, also recommends that  Guwahati and Agartala airports should be
developed as hub by providing hanger for parking of Aircrafts  which  is a pre-eminent requirement
for promoting intra-region connectivity. The airline operators then may be instructed to park their
aircrafts at Guwahati and Agartala so that they can start early morning operations utilizing the early
sunlight conditions. (Para 122, ibid)
Reply of the Government
90. As per information received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation, night landing facilities are
available at Agartala, Guwahati and Imphal airports. So far, no request has been received from any
scheduled airlines to overnight park their aircraft at Agartala Airport. However, in case any request
form scheduled airlines is received regarding night parking of their aircraft at Agartala Airport, the
facility for parking of aircraft will be provided. At Guwahati Airport, only Kingfisher Airlines has
recently requested for parking of their aircraft. The parking permission was granted, however, no
aircraft is positioned till date at Guwahati Airport. At Guwahati, work has been awarded for the
construction of three hangers. In addition, AAI plans to construct one hanger each at Imphal,
Dibrugarh and Agartala. DPR has been sent to NEC for grant in respect of Dibrugarh and Imphal.
Location is being finalized.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
91. The Committee reiterates its recommendations that airlines may be allotted the time
slots in order to make them to start flight operations at early hours.
92. The Committee reiterates its observations and recommendations made in its earlier report on
tourism promotion in Jammu and Kashmir, regarding the shortage of ATR pilots with Air India. Due
to same constraints, the North Eastern region is demanding for ATR types of aircrafts for
augmentation of the air connectivity as  in such kind of an area, this is possible only through ATRs.
The Committee feels that this would not only help promote tourism but also increase economic
activity in the region. The Committee, therefore, recommends strongly that the Air India must take
the necessary steps in this direction and start  more services in this sector as early as possible.
(Para 123, ibid)
Reply of the Government
93. As per information received from the Ministry of Civil Aviation, Air India currently operates
flights to/from Jammu, Leh and Srinagar with the routing and aircraft type as follows:

15
Flight routing Frequency per week & Aircraft
Delhi-Srinagar & VV Daily - A321
Delhi-Jammu-Srinagar & VV Daily - A319
Delhi-Leh &VV 3 - A319
Jammu-Leh & VV 2 - A319
Srinagar-Leh & VV 1 - A319
94. It may be mentioned that Air India routinely monitors market development and plans
additional services or upgrade equipment to meet demand for additional seats subject to availability
of resources and commercial viability of such operations.
95. Operations in domestic sector have been deregulated and flights are being operated by
concerned airlines on the basis of commercial viability subject to adherence to Route Dispersal
Guidelines (RDG).  Government has laid down Route Dispersal Guidelines with a view to achieve
better regulation of air transport services taking into account the need for air transport services of
different regions of the country including North-East region. It is, however, up to the airlines to
provide air services to specific places depending upon the traffic demand and commercial viability
while complying with Route Dispersal Guidelines.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
96. The Committee finds the reply of the Government casual. The Airline Operators will always
look for profit making routes to operate their aircrafts. Therefore, Government’s intervention is
required to provide air connectivity to North-Eastern Region.
97. The Committee finds that one of the major impediments in development of North East
Region as a major tourist destination is the non-availability of direct flights connecting Delhi and
other major cities, except Kolkata. Number of flights therefore to and from this region needs to
be increased with convenient timings as far as possible. The Committee expresses its dismay over
the fact that while private carriers are having more convenient timings than the Air India flights,
Air India does not have much planning to increase services in a user friendly manner. The
Committee is of the view that if 50 seater ATR aircraft are used in this region, the sector will
become more viable for aircraft operations. (Para 124, ibid)
Reply of the Government
98. Ministry of Civil Aviation has informed that the air connectivity in the North-Eastern region
has increased over a period. The number of flights per week in the North-Eastern region have
increased from 269 in the year 2006 to 406 at present.
99. Operations in domestic sector have been deregulated and flights are being operated by
concerned airlines on the basis of commercial viability subject to adherence to Route Dispersal
Guidelines (RDG). Government has laid down Route Dispersal Guidelines with a view to achieve
better regulation of air transport services taking into account the need for air transport services of
different regions of the country including North-East region. It is, however, up to the airlines to
provide air services to specific places depending upon the traffic demand and commercial viability
while complying with Route Dispersal Guidelines.
100. W ith regard to convenient timing of Air India flights, it may be stated that time slots for
operation of all flights are decided by the airlines themselves on the basis of commercial inputs and

16
operational feasibility. The flight schedules are approved after receipts of slot clearance from the
airport operator concerned, who examine the feasibility to handle the flights at that time.
101. On the issue of smaller aircraft operations in the North-Eastern region, the details of flights
approved with ATR type of aircraft are as follows:
Airlines Sector Aircraft Flights/Week
Alliance Air Guwahti-Agartala-Guwahati A TR72 7
Guwahati-Aizwal-Guwahati A TR72 7
Guwahati-Silchar-Guwahati A TR72 4
Guwahati-Dimapur-Imphal &VV A TR72 3
Guwahati-Silchar-Agartala & VV A TR72 3
Guwahati-Jorhat-Tezpur-Guwahati A TR72 2
Guwahti-Lilabari-Tezpur-Guwahati A TR72 1
Kolkata-Agartala-Kolkata A TR72 7
Kolkata-Dimapur-Kolkata A TR72 4
Kolkata-Guwahati-Kolkata A TR72 4
Kolkata-Guwahati-Lilabari & VV A TR72 5
Kolkata-Silchar-Kolkata A TR72 4
Kolkata-Tezpur-Silchar-Kolkata A TR72 3
Kolkata-Shillong-Jorhat-Kolkata A TR72 3
Kolkata-Shillong-Kolkata A TR72 3
Silchar-Imphal-Silchar A TR72 4
Jet Airways Kolkata-Aizwal-Guwahati & VV A TR72 7
Kolkata-Agartala-Kolkata A TR72 7
Kolkata-Silchar-Kolkata A TR72 7
Kolkata-Dimapur-Kolkata A TR72 6
Kolkata-Imphal-Kolkata A TR72 6
Silchar-Guwahati-Imphal & VV A TR72 2
Silchar-Guwahati-Jorhat & VV A TR72 4
Kingfisher Airlines Kolkata-Aizwal-Kolkata ATR72 7
Kolkata-Silchar-Imphal-Kolkata A TR72 4
Kolkata-Imphal-Silchar-Kolkata A TR72 3
Kolkata-Agartala-Kolkata A TR72 7
Kolkata-Guwahati -Kolkata A TR72 7

17
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
102. The Committee is not satisfied with  the reply and points out that the Ministry has
not given proper replies on the recommendations/observations of the Committee. However,
on the basis of reply to para 114, the Committee reiterates its recommendation at para 124
and desires that Ministry of Civil Aviation/Air India may look into the matter and ensure
that route dispersal guideline should be modified so as to ensure that Air India, the national
carrier get the slots judiciously.
103. The Committee takes note of the recommendations of the  Shukla Committee, which was
constituted in 1998, for the promotion of the tourism in NER. The Committee had recommended
the establishment of the Northeast Tourist Development Corporation (NDTC). It also further
recommended that the proposed NTDC in consultation with NEC and the tourist department of the
respective States should work out plans for the developments of tourist sites and related
infrastructure in the region. The Committee recommends that the above proposal of the Shukla
Committee be considered and implemented by the Government. (Para 125, ibid)
Reply of the Government
104. A Private Members Bill was introduced in the Winter Session of Parliament in 2010 for
setting up of the North-Eastern Tourism Promotion Board.  It may be mentioned in this regard that
most of the North East States do have their own Corporation/Trusts/Societies for development of
Tourism. This apart there is a dedicated Ministry of DoNER along with the North East Council
(NEC) to look after all round development of North Eastern States, including their tourism aspects.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
105. The Committee notes the reply.
106. The Committee found that the condition of roads in all the NE States was pitiable. A number
of National Highway projects were running far behind the schedule, delays being from 2 to 4 years.
With this pace, the Committee cannot but apprehend further delays in future. Even the approval
of the cabinet has taken in some cases years after its submissions. The Committee is of the view
that development of roads in the North Eastern region is necessary not only for promotion of
tourism in the region but also is of strategic importance for the nation. (Para 127, ibid)
Reply of the Government
107. Ministry of Road T ransport and Highways (M/o RT&H) is primarily responsible for
development and maintenance of National Highways in the country including NE region from the
normal budget. In addition, M/o RT&H also undertake improvement of selected stretches of State
roads under various schemes of Centrally Sponsored Schemes e.g. Special Accelerated Road
Development Programme for NE Region (SARDP-NE), Central Road Fund (CRF) including Inter-
State Connectivity (ISC) and Economic Importance (EI), which are maintained by the concerned
State Governments before and after implementation of such improvement works. National
Highways in the NE region are maintained in traffic worthy condition within the availability of
about 50% funds under Maintenance and Repairs as per standard norms. Major reasons for delay
of projects in NE region are limited working season of 5-7 months in a year due to prolonged
monsoon season, limited capacity of Border Roads Organisation (BRO) to execute the projects
departmentally because of shortage of manpower, shortages of local resourceful contracting
agencies, unwillingness of resourceful outside contracting agencies because of remoteness and law
and order problems, shortage of construction materials etc. The pace of implementation is now
picking up as outside resourceful contracting agencies are responding now in a big way. BRO have

18
also starting outsourcing selected stretches of roads entrusted to them. From the year 2006-07 till
2009-10, only 1115 km length of roads had been sanctioned under SARDP-NE whereas during
2010-11, a length of 1615 km had been sanctioned and there is target to sanction 1991 km length
during 2011-12 out of which 454 km have already been sanctioned and about 1100 km is in various
stages of sanction. On completion of these works, the condition of roads would further improve
substantially.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
108. The Committee notes the reply.
109. The Committee appreciates the problem encountered in the construction of National
Highways in North Eastern region particularly on account of climatic conditions, topography, hilly
terrain including shortage of manpower. Forced stoppage of work due to climate conditions
naturally results not only delay in completion but also in under-utilization of funds. Unfortunately,
this in turn leads to reduction in plan outlay by the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission.
The Committee, therefore, emphasizes the need for providing special guidelines in respect of North
Eastern region in keeping with these peculiar problems and conditions to ensure that funds are
available in time for the work relating to National Highways in the region. (Para 128, ibid)
Reply of the Government
110. In this connection, Ministry of Road Transport and Highways have informed that in
view of limited working season in NE States, Bank of Sanction (Cost of sanctioned works
minus the expenditure at any time) to Allocation ratio is kept on higher side than other States
in the country so that higher quantum of ongoing work is available for better utilization of
same level of funds.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
111. The Committee also desires to know the action plan of the Ministry to utilize the
maximum benefit from the  higher allocation ratio kept for the NE Region as a concession
to their limited working season of 5-7 months in a year.
112. The Committee feels that some kind of special procedures may be devised for the region.
Funds may be put in non-lapsable category as is being done for other such areas of the country.
Cost-norms of the project also need to be made State specific. For land acquisition, environmental
and other clearances etc. single-window facility should be put in place at the earliest. In view of
the quality works carried out by the  BRO, their involvement need to be strengthened in a big way
both technically and financially in the areas of the road development. Adequate security, financial
and otherwise, needs to be given to the people working on these projects. (Para 129, ibid)
Reply of the Government
113. According to the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways, the process is already in place,
wherein funds allocated to various Ministries/Departments for the North Eastern States, if unutilized
at the end of the Financial Year, are placed under the Non-lapsable Central Road Resources Head
at the disposal of the Ministry of Development of North East Region (M/o DONER). The funds
are being allocated by M/o DONER for various projects such as construction of State roads, Water
and Sanitation, Health Services etc. Perhaps M/o DONER may supplement the deficient allocation
of funds under Maintenance and Repairs, which is of the order of about 50% of the requirement
as per Ministry’s Standard Norms.

19
114. In respect of Land acquisition and Environmental and forest clearance, it may be mentioned
that land acquisition of NHs is being done through the Revenue Authority which is directly under
the control of the respective State Governments.  Whereas, Environmental and Forest Clearance is
being initiated by the Forest Department of the State Government and final approval is accorded
by the Ministry of Environment and Forests (MoEF) at the Regional Office or at Headquarter
depending upon the areas of forest land involved. In the light of the above, it may not be feasible
to have a single window clearance of Land Acquisition and Environmental Clearance. BRO has
already been entrusted with projects of 3806 km road length out of 10141 km road length under
SARDP-NE, which is beyond its capacity. Efforts are being made in the direction to provide
adequate security, financial and otherwise to the people working on these projects.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
115. The Committee notes the reply.
116. The Committee feels concerned to see the poor maintenance of roads and fails to
understand to have the kind of roads/National Highways in hilly terrain that got damaged almost
every year due to vagaries of the adverse climatic conditions. Why can’t we have concrete roads
in place of bitumen roads in this highly rain-fed area? The Committee was given to understand that
the bitumen roads are more durable/suitable in such difficult terrain because these roads are capable
of adjusting themselves in case of small land slides, etc. whereas the concrete roads tend to get
damaged and its repair will be difficult. (Para 130, ibid)
Reply of the Government
117. In this regard the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has informed that the
construction of bituminous roads is preferred over concrete road from the economic consideration
and ease of maintenance particularly under the situation of damages due to natural calamities. The
poor maintenance of roads has resulted due to cascading effect of shortage of funds allocated to
the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways under Maintenance and Repairs, which remained
about 50% of the requirement as per the prescribed norm of that Ministry.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
118. The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the matter of shortage of funds
for maintenance may be taken up during the demands for grants of subsequent years.
119. The Committee also has noticed during the deliberations that the utilization of funds were
done in a haste manner in order to meet the budgetary stipulations which ultimately compromises
the quality and the standard procedure of constructions. Ultimately, the whole exercise becomes
futile. (Para 131, ibid)
Reply of the Government
120. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways have mentioned that the working season available
in the North Eastern Region of the country is from the middle part of October to March every
financial year. Thus, road construction work progress at a much faster pace during this period and
accordingly, the major part of the expenditure also incurred during the last 2 quarter of the financial
year. Therefore, it appears that the utilization of funds is done in a haste manner. As regards quality
of work and standard procedure of constructions is concerned, Standard Specifications for Road
and Bridge Works, Indian Road Congress (IRC) Codes/Special Publications and Ministry’s
guidelines are already in place for necessary compliance.

20
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
121. The Committee notes the reply.
122. The Committee desired that involving the local bodies in the planning for the
development of National Highways passing through the towns and villages with a view to avoid
the damages to the National Highways by having proper drainage system, should be considered.
(Para 132, ibid)
Reply of the Government
123. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has informed that the fact of the case is that
proper drainage is vital part of the bituminous road projects and is provided accordingly including
in towns and villages through which National Highway passes. The local bodies responsible for
controlling plinth levels of roadside properties, cleanliness of the drains and protection of natural
drainage courses fails to do so probably due to paucity of funds wherein the natural drainage
courses are invariably encroached upon by local inhabitants resulting flooding and serious damages
to National Highways. Highway Authorities often compel to bypass or fly over the townships to
isolate National Highways from the mismanagement of town portion by the local bodies.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
124. The Committee recommends that local bodies may be alerted on the seriousness of
such incidents and may be advised to take necessary action to provide proper drainages.
125. The Committee is also of the view that prescribing the fixed period of 5 years for repair
of NH in hilly-terrain like that of North Eastern region is too long as the roads there get damaged
frequently due to frequent rainfall, poor drainage system, land slide, etc. The Committee, therefore,
feels that the repair guidelines also need to be modified for this region to provide that whenever
there is damage to the NH, the repair work should be taken up immediately. As regards the damage
to the National Highways passing through the towns and villages due to poor drainage, the
Committee, recommends that the agencies engaged in planning and development of NH should
consult the local bodies to know the patches of the roads where the National Highways get
generally damaged due to poor drainage, etc.                                 (Para 133, ibid)
Reply of the Government
126. Ministry of Road Transport and Highways have informed that in fact the prescribed life
cycle for periodical renewal (major repairs by way of thin overlay), which is taken up under Non-
plan Head varies from 3 to 5 years depending upon existing crust composition, type of  periodical
renewal carried out in the recent past and condition of particular stretch at particular time.
However, the potholes, damages etc. are also repaired under other sub-heads of Maintenance and
Repairs e.g. Ordinary Repairs (OR), Flood Damage Repairs (FDR) and Special Repairs (SR) earlier
to prescribed life cycle for periodical renewal. It is pertinent to mention here that fund provided
under Maintenance and Repairs are about 50% of the requirement arrived at as per prescribed
norms of the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways. Executing Agencies through routine
inspections of their officers are well aware of the patches of the roads where the National
Highways get generally damaged due to poor drainages etc. and suitable improvement works are
planned and executed accordingly depending upon availability of funds and inter-se priority.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
127. The Committee notes the reply.

21
128. The Committee was informed that the arterial road from Siliguri to Gangtok (NH31A) is the
lifeline of Sikkim that connects it to the rest of the country through West Bengal. The Committee,
therefore, recommends that the proposal for double-laning of the National Highway is being done
by the Border Roads Organization (BRO) and the widening activity from Gangtok to Nathula and
some intermediate stretch between Sevoke and Gangtok may be completed at the earliest. It was
also brought to the notice of the Committee that the road condition from Tripura to Guwahati is
extremely bad. The Committee also recommends that the road from Guwahati to Tripura should
be maintained as an all weather road. (Para 134, ibid)
Reply of the Government
129. The Ministry of Road Transport & Highways with regard to the widening of NH-31A
(Sevoke-Gangtok road) have informed that works amounting to Rs. 286.78 crore covering a length
of about 59 km out of total length of 80 km have been sanctioned and works are in various stages
of progress. Also, works of widening to 2-lane amounting to Rs. 586.67 crore covering entire
length of Gangtok – Nathula road (68.79 km) had been sanctioned and works are in various stages
of progress. Phase-A of SARDP-NE including 2-laning of both the above roads is targeted for
completion by March 2015. National Highways No. 40, 44 between Guwahati to Tripura are all
weather road being maintained in traffic worthy condition.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
130. The Committee notes the reply.
131. The Committee notes the lackadaisical attitude of the Government to the project of 4 laning
of NH-44 that exposes its lack of seriousness in developing an important national highway in the
State of Tripura which is of critical importance for movement of traffic and goods including
essential commodities. The project announced by the Hon’ble Prime Minister in the year 2005 and
approved by the Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs in its meeting held on the 1
st October,
2007 is yet to take-off for one or the  other reasons. Even the above information was elucidated
from the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways when the Committee took up the issue with
the Ministry. The Committee hopes that such things will not recur in future especially that of road
projects related to North-Eastern Region where road transport is the only lifeline for the people as
well as for the trade. The Committee came to know that the Government of Bangladesh has
provided India the access to Chittagong and other ports to India. The Committee has the view that
if this opportunity is exploited properly, it will not only boost up the economic activities in the
entire NE Region but also increase the tourism prospects in NER. However, in order to avail this
opportunity the NH 44 should be maintained in proper conditions so that the  highway will become
the lifeline of NER. The Committee recommends that proper funds may be provided for the
complete development of NH 44.                                           (Para 135, ibid)
Reply of the Government
132. In this connection, the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways have informed that the
development of NH-44 in Tripura to 4-lane standard has been approved by Cabinet Committee on
Economic Affairs (CCEA) on 1.10.2007 and the work was entrusted to NHAI. Thereafter a detailed
survey was conducted by NHAI and it was observed that the traffic on NH-44 is only 4562 PCU
as against the threshold limit of 8050 PCU for 4-laning in hilly terrain. Accordingly, with the
approval of Cabinet Committee on Infrastructure (CCI) on 16.12.2009, the Churaibari - Agartala
section of NH-44, which is partially less than 2-lane, is now proposed to be developed to 2-lane
standard under Ministry’s normal scheme NH (O), whereas the stretch from Agartala to Sabroom,
which is less than 2-lane will be improved to 2-lane standard under Phase ‘A’ of SARDP-NE.

22
Double laning of about 58 km stretches of NH-44 in Tripura out of total 244 km length of existing
less than two lane is targeted for sanction during 2011-12. Phase-A of SARDP-NE including
2-laning of Agartala-Sabroom Section of NH-44 is targeted for completion by March 2015 by when
2-laning of remaining less than 2-lane stretches of Churaibari-Agartala Section would be also
accomplished. Otherwise NH-44 is being maintained in traffic worthy condition within the available
funds.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
133. T he Committee notes the reply.
134. The Committee has received complaints about adulteration of fuel in most part of the region
which has increased not only the maintenance cost and durability of the vehicles adversely, but
pollutes the air also. This thing does not augur well for the rich biodiversity of the region.
Therefore, the Committee recommends the Ministry of Tourism to take up the matter with the oil
companies, State Governments and other concerned authorities to ensure that adulteration of
petroleum products are stopped. (Para 136, ibid)
Reply of the Government
135. Checking FUEL adulteration is a continuous process and the Ministry of Petroleum &
Natural Gas has taken several technological and institutional measures, which are summarized
below:
(i)   
Essential Commodities Act, 1955: As per the Control Orders issued by the
Government to prevent fuel adulteration, under the Essential Commodities Act, 1955,
State Governments are empowered to take action against those indulging in
adulteration. The Central Government has requested the State Governments/Union
Territory Administrations to take steps to control adulteration.
(ii)
Inspections: Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) undertake regular surprise inspections
of Retail Outlets and also take action under Marketing Discipline Guidelines (MDG)
and Dealership Agreements against those indulging in adulteration and malpractices.
(iii)
Tamper-proof locking system:  OMCs have introduced new tamper proof tank-truck
locking systems to prevent en-route adulteration by transporters.
(iv) Canalization of import of Superior Kerosene Oil (SKO):  Keeping in view the
misuse/diversion of SKO for adulteration, the import of SKO by private parties has
been canalized through OMCs.
(v)
Creation of separate enfor cement wing:  As advised by the Government, OMCs
have created a separate wing to report to a Director other than Director (Marketing)
to oversee and monitor all activities and operations to curb adulteration.
(vi)
Automation of Retail Outlets:  In order to monitor the activities at retail outlets
through the latest technological means, MOP&NG has directed the oil marketing
companies to complete automation of retail outlets selling more than 200 KL per
month, to begin with.
(vii)   
Monitoring of movement of Tank Trucks thr ough Global Positioning System
(GPS):  In order to prevent adulteration during transportation, OMCs have been
directed to install GPS for complete monitoring of the movement of all the company-
owned/dealer owned/contractor-owned tank trucks.

23
(viii) Third Party Certification of Reta il Outlets:  OMCs have been directed to complete
third party certification of all retail outlets selling more than 100 KL per month.
(ix) Marketing Discipline Guidelines: The Marketing Discipline Guidelines (MDG) under
which the oil marketing companies take penal actions against the erring dealers were
revised during August, 2005 making the penal actions more stringent. As per MDG,
2005, a dealership is liable to be terminated in the first established instance of
adulteration.
(x)
Toll Fr ee Numbers:  The Oil Marketing Companies in the public sector have
introduced toll-free numbers, for both LPG as well as retail outlets, for registration
of complaints by the consumers.
(xi)
Installation of Global Positioning System (GPS) based Vehicle Tracking System
(VTS) on tankers transporting Public Distribution System (PDS) SKO:  Some
State Governments have started responding to the request of this Ministry for
installation of GPS based VTS on tankers transporting PDS Kerosene. OMCs are in
touch with the interested State Governments for implementation of the system.
Further, OMCs have hosted a public portal where information on PDS SKO such as
dispatch time, quantity, and vehicle details are available to general public.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
136. The Committee desires to know the details of complaints received and the action
taken in each case from April, 2011 to February, 2012 by the Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas.
137. Because of poor road conditions, the accidents are very frequent. Adequate numbers of
ambulances and recovery cranes should be provided by the transport agencies. The skill of
drivers should be honed with regular training which is very important in the risky terrain.
(Para 137, ibid)
Reply of the Government
138. In this regard the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways has noted the recommendations
of the Committee for compliance to strengthen the existing policies in vogue.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
139. The Committee recommends that the follow up action in the matter may be
submitted at the earliest.
140. The Committee is also of the view that due to increased requirement of transport and road
net-work, the cities and main town need to have redesigned, circular-roads around them to
decongest the traffic, which has huge financial implication. Government of India may provide
financial assistance for improvement of traffic management in the NE region. (Para 138, ibid)
Reply of the Government
141. The Ministry of Road Transport and Highways is primarily responsible for the development
and maintenance of National Highways in the country. In respect of NHs passing through
congested town and villages, suitable bypasses are provided/constructed for the through traffic so
as to reduce the traffic congestion in the towns/cities. The responsibility for development of
various towns/cities including construction of ring roads rests with the concerned Urban

24
Development Department of the State Government and Ministry of Urban Development, Govt. of
India.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
142. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Urban Development may be informed
about the matter.
143. The Co mmittee notes that most of the demands submitted by the State Governments relates
to promotion of Tourism. The Committee recommends that Ministry of Tourism should take up
these matters with all concerned and help solve the problems in consultation with State
Governments and if necessary, consider to provide special financial assistance under intimation to
the Committee. (Para 139, ibid)
Reply of the Government
144. The Ministry of Tourism provides assistance to the State Governments for Production of
Publicity material in collaboration with the private sector including promotional brochures, films,
etc. by contributing upto 50% of the cost of production of the material. The Ministry of Tourism
also provides assistance to the State Governments/Tour Operators approved by the State
Government of the Region for print advertisement by contributing upto 75% of the cost of the
advertisement campaigns. The Ministry of Tourism also run special advertising campaigns on major
television channels across the country for promoting the North Eastern Region.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
145. The Committee also desires to know the impact of these measures in improving the
tourist flow to these States. The details of assessment made may be furnished in the regard.
146. Some of the transport operators had complained that adequate quantity of fuel is not
provided to them. This situation creates difficulties in and makes the operations very costly.
Tourists also have to pay more due to this situation. The Committee, therefore, recommends that
efforts be made by the Transport Department to ensure the sufficient supply of fuels to the
transport operators. (Para 140, ibid)
Reply of the Government
147. Provision of fuel to transport operators is basically the task of transport Department of
State Governments. However, the Ministry of Road Transport and Highways has been asked to
look into the matter.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
148. The Committee notes the reply.
149. The Committee is of the view that affordable mode of transport to all sections of the people
is rail service, it is, therefore, desirable to have all the places of importance connected with rail
service. The remote areas are isolated from the main land because of improper connectivity
especially during the difficult climate and rail service could solve the problem to a great extent.
Also, the rail journey can be made another means of tourist attraction as in the case of Ootty-
Mettupalayam rail and Kalka-Shimla line where the passengers can enjoy the beauty of the places
during their journey. The Committee also recommends that broad gauge rail links may be
introduced in order to tackle the difficulties caused by geographically isolated nature of Tripura to

25
have inter and intra State rail links. The Committee further recommends that maintenance of
coaches and provisions for cleanliness of coaches and good quality food to the passengers in order
to facilitates the tourists, particularly in Tripura should be given priority. (Para 141, ibid)
Reply of the Government
150. Ministry of Railways has replied that this para relates to various directorates under them and
they are in the process of getting information from them.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
151. The Committee recommends that the matter may be pursued with Ministry of
Railways and information may be furnished at the earliest.
152. The Committee notes that North East is endowed with some of the most beautiful rivers
which offers exciting water sports like river rafting, boating, paddling as well as river cruises.
North East can be marketed for its swift, surfing waters of Brahmaputra  for river cruise. Ministry
of Shipping and Inland Waterways Authority should make all the rivers navigable in the North-East
and provide the infrastructure for development of cruise tourism in large scale. (Para 142, ibid)
Reply of the Government
153. The Ministry of Shipping have informed that the development and regulation of only those
waterways which are declared as National Waterways by the Acts of Parliament come under the
purview of the Union Government while the other waterways remain under the purview of
respective State Governments. As far as North-Eastern Region is concerned only one waterway
namely Dhubri-Sadiya Stretch (891 km) of Brahamaputra river has been declared as National
Waterway-2 and Ministry of Shipping has developed substantial Inland Water Transport (IWT)
infrastructure (namely fairway, terminals and navigation aids) thereon which can be utilized not
only by the cargo vessels but the tourism/cruise inland vessels as well. River tourism/cruise
vessels are already being operated on Brahmaputra by Private companies with commercial
viability and it is expected that these will further grow in time. As regards, the infrastructure for
development of cruise tourism in large scale is concerned no such proposal is under
consideration in Ministry of Shipping at present. It is understood that such infrastructure
development may perhaps be taken up by the Ministry of Tourism and as and when inputs with
regard to infrastructure for navigation is required the same would be provided by Ministry of
Shipping.
154. Another waterway namely Lakhipur-Bhanga stretch of Barak River is under consideration of
the Government for declaration as the sixth National Waterways (NW) of the country. When this
declaration is made, Ministry of Shipping will develop IWT infrastructure on this waterway also
which can be used by the cargo as well as tourism/cruise vessels.
155. As regards waterways other than these two national waterways are concerned it is to
mention that necessary initiatives for development of IWT as well as other infrastructure related
to cruise tourism will have to be taken up by the respective State Governments and in this case
also Ministry of Shipping would be happy to provide to the concerned States, the inputs/expertise
with regard to navigation.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
156. The Committee also recommends that State Governments may submit their cruise
tourism projects to the Ministry of Shipping for getting their assistance on the projects.

26
157. The Committee noted that Majuli Island, a tourist destination, is under threat due to
extensive soil erosion and with this pace, Majuli would cease to exist. Further, a proposal has been
sent to UNESCO for declaring it as World Natural Heritage Site. The Committee recommends that
steps should be taken to protect the Island and get it declared as the World Natural Heritage Site.
(Para 143, ibid)
Reply of the Government
158.  The Ministry of Culture have informed that the satellite imagery procured from National
Remote Sensing Agency (NRSA) as part of Nomination Dossier by the Consultant team of ASI
pertaining to January, 2010 and 2002, 2004, 2006 and 2011, though indicates a periodic process
of erosion and accretion but does not give any scientific evidence to show complete non-existence
of the Island, in near future due to erosion. This has been analysed with the help of literature and
studies and investigations conducted in the field of Geography, Geology and Hydro Geology of the
Island. A proposal was sent to UNESCO for declaring Majuli as World Heritage Site which received
a decision of ‘deferral’ by the World Heritage Committee due to certain technical reasons. The ASI
has since appointed a Consultant to prepare a dossier which will be considered for submission to
UNESCO at an appropriate stage, for the inscription of Majuli as a World Heritage Site in Cultural
Category.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
159. The Committee hopes that the efforts will be continued in getting world heritage
status to Majuli.
160. The Committee had seen some of the important places of tourist attraction in some of the
States. The facilities provided at various such places /sites leave much to be desired, including their
accessibility. The Committee, however, is not satisfied with the facilities and pace of work at many
of these sites. The Committee also noticed that out of the 79 monuments, only 10 places have been
provided with tourist amenities, that also at the bare minimum in many places. The role of the ASI
needs to be increased in this area which does not have a visible presence there. (Para 144, ibid)
Reply of the Government
161. The Ministry of Culture have informed that at present ticketed monuments, and some of
the other major monuments in the North-Eastern Region, have been provided with essential tourist
amenities. Apart from the 10 monuments, Guwahati Circle has already provided drinking water and
toilet facilities at Dhandi Temple, Singri Hills Ruins, The Mound and Ruins of the Stone Temple
at Dah-Parbatia (in Sonitpur District of Assam) and Sivadol at Neghriting in Golaghat District of
Assam. At other monuments, where number of visitors is large, such facilities are being provided
in a phased manner. The recommendations of the Committee are well taken and will be
implemented subject to the availability of resources.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
162. The Committee desires that latest development in these projects may be provided to
the Committee.
163. The Committee is of the view that the Pilak and Boxanagar monuments need more
excavation works and recommends that ASI may take the necessary actions during the current year
itself, as the monuments are getting damaged. The Committee also desires that the Committee may
be informed about the preservation status of Unakoti monuments which is the world’s largest rock
cuttings. ASI should examine the damages to rock carvings and necessary steps need to be taken

27
to stop further damages and its repair works. The Committee also recommends that rope way
connection may be provided between Bhubaneswari temple and Matamari in Tripura. (Para 145, ibid)
Reply of the Government
164. The Ministry of Culture have informed in this connection that the excavation work at the
site Shyam Sundar Tila Pilak, Distt., South Tripura was taken up in 1998-99 to ascertain the nature
and extent of the structure partially exposed earlier (1984-85). The excavation of Boxanagar, Distt.
Tripura was carried out during 2001-02 and 2002-03 and report is being published. As far as
conservation work is concerned, essential repairs to the monuments at Pilak and Boxanagar are
attended to regularly. The rock cut sculptures at Unakoti are locked in forest area, subjected to
heavy rain fall and weathering action. The rock mass comprises the soft variety of sand stone. The
conservation work at these sculptures is attended to, regularly and they are in a good state of
preservation. The ASI has also undertaken the issue of preservation of Unakoti rock-cut reliefs. The
proposal has not yet been received from the Government of Tripura regarding the rope way
connection between Bhubaneshwar Temple and Matamari in Tripura.
FURTHER RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE
165. The Committee further recommends that Government of India should pursue with
the Government of Tripura to furnish the detailed project on these lines for an early follow
up action.

28
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
The Committee desires that final replies in respect of those recommendations/observations
which have been categorized as interim replies by the Committee should be furnished to it
at the earliest. (Para 3)
The Committee notes with concern that the Ministry’s reply does not reflect the
seriousness required to boost tourism in these states. The Committee is not satisfied as the
Ministry has  thrown no light on the reasons for decreasing the tourist arrivals to certain
North Eastern States. The Committee recommends that steps should be taken to attract
more and more tourists to the North Eastern States so that ‘the paradise unexplored’ did
not remain unexplored for long. (Para 7)
The Committee observes that compared to 2010-11 the amount sanctioned so far
during 2011-12 to Assam, Meghalaya and Tripura seems to be very less. Also, the number
of projects sanctioned has come down. The State Governments may be sensitized to submit
the projects for allocation and utilize the funds in a time bound manner. (Para 11)
The Committee is not satisfied with reply given by the Ministry of Tourism which is
of a routine nature. The Committee may be informed about the actual action taken
subsequent to the recommendations communicated to the Ministry of Tourism. (Para 15)
The Committee notes that tourism potential of  ‘Neer Mahal’ as important tourist
destination could not be exploited so far.  Reason being that the State Government did not
submit any proposal for financial assistance. The Committee recommends that Government
of India may bring to notice of the Government of Tripura to ask them to submit the
proposal for development of ‘Neer Mahal’ on priority basis. (Para 18)
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Government in facilitating the growth
of tourism industry. The State Governments may be sensitized to take benefits of the
various schemes for growth of hotel accommodations. (Para 23)
The Committee recommends that the Governments of Assam, Meghalaya, Nagaland,
Sikkim and Tripura also may be informed to avail the benefit of Central Financial
Assistance of Rs.5 crore for setting up Convention Centre. The Committee also reiterates
its earlier recommendation for review of classification of cities in NE Region and upgrade
appropriately by taking up the matter again with Ministry of Urban Development as special
case for promoting tourism. (Para 27)
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry for creating Hotel
accommodation infrastructure in the country. However the Committee’s concern of existing
high luxury taxes and pollution charges remain unanswered. The Committee recommends
Ministry of Tourism  to take up the matter with the concerned agencies to review the tax
structure  for making these affordable to tourists of all the categories. (Para 32)
28

29
The Committee notes the amount sanctioned in the X th and XI th Five Year Plans.
However, the status of work completed so far is not provided to have a comparative view.
The Committee also desires to know further steps taken by Ministry of Tourism to augment
the scheme. (Para 35)
The Committee notes that the benefit of Central financial assistance for construction
of Helipad has not been availed by other States except Sikkim. The Committee recommends
that the scheme may be reviewed to assess the reasons for non utilization of funds  under
this scheme. (Para 44)
The Committee recommends that measures should be taken to involve more travel
associations in the meetings. The official site should also be made more interactive with the
facility for providing replies to various stakeholders. The Committee also desire to have
details of conference/meeting held and participants who took part therein. (Para 49)
The Committee recommends that further development on the above scheme may be
communicated in due course. (Para 52)
The Committee hopes that with the revamping of the official website, the tourists
will get all the information at one place. (Para 60)
The Committee may also be informed whether any additional flights have been
proposed during the summer of 2012. (Para 67)
The Committee notes that a major chunk of the flight operation to North East
connecting Delhi are now run by private airlines. At the same time Air India is talking
about traffic demand and commercial viability in these routes. If the two criteria above are
not meeting in these regions, why the private airlines flourish there? The Committee
recommends that the contribution of the national carrier need to be enhanced in the region
connecting other major cities of the country as the demand is very high after introduction
of the LTC package for the Government employees. (Para 70)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 73)
The Committee notes the reply with dismay that the facility to operate international
flights has not been utilized properly. (Para 80)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 83)
The Committee wants to know the steps taken for re-transfer of Lengpui airport to
Airports Authority of India. The Committee hopes that with the completion of the projects
at various airports of the NER and the operationalisation  of runways, night landing will also
start there. The Committee recommends that the latest developments with regard to Tezu
project be informed in due course. (Para 88)
The Committee reiterates its recommendations that airlines may be allotted the time
slots in order to  make them to  start flight operations at early hours. (Para 91)
The Committee finds the reply of the Government casual. The Airline Operators will
always look for profit making routes to operate their aircrafts. Therefore, Government’s
intervention is required to provide air connectivity to North-Eastern Region. (Para 96)

30
The Committee is not satisfied with  the reply and points out that the Ministry has
not given proper replies on the recommendations/observations of the Committee. However,
on the basis of reply to para 114, the Committee reiterates its recommendation at para 124
and desires that Ministry of Civil Aviation/Air India may look into the matter and ensure
that route dispersal guideline should be modified so as to ensure that Air India, the national
carrier get the slots judiciously. (Para 102)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 105)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 108)
The Committee also desires to know the action plan of the Ministry to utilize the
maximum benefit from the  higher allocation ratio kept for the NE Region as a concession
to their limited working season of 5-7 months in a year. (Para 111)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 115)
The Committee notes the reply and recommends that the matter of shortage of funds
for maintenance may be taken up during the demands for grants of subsequent years.
(Para 118)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 121)
The Committee recommends that local bodies may be alerted on the seriousness of
such incidents and may be advised to take necessary action to provide proper drainages.
(Para 124)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 127)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 130)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 133)
The Committee desires to know the details of complaints received and the action
taken in each case from April, 2011 to February, 2012 by the Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas. (Para 136)
The Committee recommends that the follow up action in the matter may be
submitted at the earliest. (Para 139)
The Committee recommends that Ministry of Urban Development may be informed
about the matter. (Para 142)
The Committee also desires to know the impact of these measures in improving the
tourist flow to these States. The details of assessment made may be furnished in the regard.
(Para 145)
The Committee notes the reply. (Para 148)
The Committee recommends that the matter may be pursued with Ministry of
Railways and information may be furnished at the earliest. (Para 151)

31
The Committee also recommends that State Governments may submit their cruise
tourism projects to the Ministry of Shipping for getting their assistance on the projects.
(Para 156)
The Committee hopes that the efforts will be continued in getting world heritage
status to Majuli. (Para 159)
The Committee desires that latest development in these projects may be provided to
the Committee. (Para 162)
The Committee further recommends that Government of India should pursue with
the Government of Tripura to furnish the detailed project on these lines for an early follow
up action. (Para 165)

MINUTES

34

35
XII
TWELFTH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday the 17 th May, 2012 in Room No. 63, First
Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Satish Sharma
3. Shri Thomas Sangma
4. Shri Shadi Lal Batra
5. Shri Jagat Prakash Nadda
6. Shri Bashistha Narain Singh
LOK SABHA
7. Dr. Mahesh Joshi
8. Shri Hassan Khan
9. Dr. Kruparani Killi
10. Shri Jose K. Mani
11. Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik
12. Shri Bal Kumar Patel
13. Shrimati Meena Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shri N.K. Singh, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Assistant Director
Shri T. Kennedy Jesudossan, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee. Thereafter, the
Committee considered the draft 179
th & 180 th Reports on the Action Taken by the Government on
the recommendations/observations of the Committee contained in its One Hundred Sixty-seventh
Report on the Functioning of National Museum and its One Hundred Seventy-second Report on the
Development of Tourism in North-Eastern Region respectively. After some discussion, the
Committee adopted the Reports with minor modifications.
35

36
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman and in his absence, S/Shri Shadi Lal Batra and
Jagat Prakash Nadda to present the reports in the Rajya Sabha and Shri Hassan Khan and
Dr. Sanjeev Ganesh Naik to lay the reports in the Lok Sabha on the 21
st May, 2012.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. The meeting then adjourned at 4.05 
P.M.
*** Relate with other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335, Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.