I N D I A N 
INDIA 
NAT IONAL HIGHWAYS 
:o !o! r ·.~ ~ no 
-....J =:::J 
0 C ~ A N 
IS& 
B~NGAL 
IN T~NATtOI'tAl. BOAOER 
NATIONAL HIGHWA'r 
&YP,A.SS£$ 
"BRJOGES 
E'XPR£SSWAY 

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT .AND TOURISM 
(1994-95) 
THIRTEENTH REPORT 
ON 
THE NATIONAL HIGHWAY SYSTEM 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
April, 1995/Vaisakha 1917 (Saka) 

I. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
CONTENTS 
Co11.1POSJTION OFn«£ CoM'11Trt..~; ...•....•.•..•. ...•.....•.........••..•............•• • ....... 
I '<TRODUC"TlON ... 
Rlii'ORT ................................. . ...................................................... .. 
SuMMARY <)f' Rt.co~tMEI'IOATJONs .....•.•.... ········~··························· .•.......• 
s. A '!'-:EXL:RE!o. 
il. 
Lisr of Wirnesses appeared before I he Commiuee 
II. Pres~ Communique ................................................................... . 
Ill. Lisr or lndividuals/Organisauon from whom memoranda wer~ received .. 
IV Eigh•h F1vc Year Plan 1992·97 Conmuc1ion of Bypasses around 
congc>1ed 10" ns .. .. .. .. ....... .. . . .. .... .... .. . .... .. ... . . ....... .. 
V Li~t of proJeCtS bcmg t.ikcn up under various cxh.:rnal aids ............... . 
Ml .... tiTES ....... . 
PAGES 
(i) 
(iii) 
14 
IY 
2<1 
21 
2o 
3l 

COMPOSITION OF TilE COMMlTIEE 
(1994-95} 
l. Shri Pramo<.l Mahajan - Chnirmnn 
RAJYA SABH A 
2. Shri S. Austin 
3. Shri Ghufran Azam 
4. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
5. Shri John. F. Fernande s 
6. Shri Bhadre~war Gohain 
7. Shri Narain Prasad G upta 
8. Shri Ram Jethmalana 
9. Shri· Saty;t Praka sh Malaviya 
10. Shri Raghavji 
11. Shrimati Basanll Sa rma 
12. Shri Iqbal Singh 
13. Shri Shankar Dayal Smgh 
14. Shri Naresh Yaduv 
15. ·shri Ratna 13ah:tdur Rai 
LOK SABHA 
Hi. Shri Vilasrao Nagnuthrao Oundewar 
17. Shri K. Muralccdhur(tn 
18. Shri Shivendra 13ahadur Singh 
19. Shri A. Charles 
20. Shri L. Adaika laraJ 
21. Shri Ourcha rHn Singh Dadhahoor 
22. Shri K.M. Mathew 
23. Shri Peter 0 . Marbaniang 
24. Shri Swarup Upadhayay 
25. Shri C.K. Kuppuswamy 
26. Shri R. Surender Reddy 
27. Shri 1mchalemba 
28. Shri Manphool Singh 
29. Shri K.D . Sultanpuri 
30. Shri Jangbir Singh 
31. Shri Santosh Kumar Oangwar 
32. Prof. Prem Dhumal 
33. Shri Clutttrapal Singh 
34. Shri Kalka Das 
35. Shri Arvind Trivedt 
36. Shri Vishwanath Das Shastri 
37. Shri Ram Naresh Singh 
38. Shri Ram Sunder Oas 
39. Shri Anadi Charan Das 
40. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
41. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
42. Shri Lokanath Choudhury 
• Nominated to the Commiucc w,c.(. 18.6.94 vice Sm1. Veen Verma. 
(i) 

(ii) 
43. Shri S.M. L~l Jan l:lashu 
44. Shri Knshna Marandi 
45. Shn Uday Pralap Singh 
, SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Sat ish Kumar, Jomt Secretary 
2. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shn Syed Aw.ar Hu~a•n. Under Secretary 
4. Shn K.P . Singh. Commiuce orriccr 
' 
' 
• 

INTRODUCfiON 
1, the Chairman, Standing Committee on Transport and Tourism. having been authorised 
by the Commiuee to present on their behalf. present this Thirteenth Report on the N~tional 
Highway System in the country. 
2. The Commiuee took up for constderallon the National Highway System ;~t its meeting 
held on the 20th September. 1994. The Commiuee examined various aspects of the N;ttional 
llighway, its deve lopment and mainte nance, construction of expressways. OJ>Cning of the 
roud sector to the priv;tle sector and muliers connected therewit h. The Committee held >ix 
meetings to cons ider the subject. The Commince heard the Secretary of the Ministry of 
Surface Transport in the maller . II also heard the exper t views of the reprcscnwtivcs of 
Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and Industry (FICCI). A lbt of witnessc;. 
appeared before the Committee is placed at Annexure-!. 
3. The Committee had issued a Press Communique inviting the views of tndividu:tb I 
institutions/ organisations on the National Highways System for its consideration A copy 
of the Press Communique issued by !he Secretariat is at Annexure -II. ln respon se thereto 28 
memoranda were received by the Commi ttee. A hst of the Mcmor:~nda re~:etved i~ at 
Annexure Ill . 
4. The Committee is thankful to the Office~ of the Ministry of Surface Transport for 
providing relevant material / inform;~tion desired in this connection. The Commiuec also 
expresses its thanks to the expe rts who appeared before the Commi uee. 11 also expresses it> 
gratitude 10 the individuals and the insti tuti on~ who submiued their view> /suggestions for 
its considerat ion. 
S. The CommiHee at its meet ing held on 21st february. 1995 considered and ;~dopted the 
Report. 
New Delhi; 
Ftbruary 21 . 1995 
Phalguna 2, 1916 (Saka) 
(iii) 
PRAMOO MAHAJAN 
Chauman, 
Standing Committee on 
Tranwon and Tourism 

REPORT 
National Highways (NH) are the main arteries running through the length and breadth <>f 
the country. They play vital role in the economic and ~oc i al upliftmcnt of the country . Today 
when economic growth and prosperity are the hall mark of the modern age. N;ttion;d 
Highways assume still more important role in the atmosphere of humming business and 
commercial activity. Tite proper upkeep and maintenance of national highways is, therefore 
our prime concern. National Highways have witnessed vast expansion in rec;ent years and 
brought even the most distant places in the country into the economic mainstream. Nation .. ! 
Highways extend to 34058 Kms. approximately connecting the State capitals, major ports , 
industrial complexes , tou rist destinations, serving de(cnce needs and providing links to 
adjacent countries. These form the pri mary 11etwork to carry long and medium . distance 
goods and passenger m•ffic. 
2. National Highways is a Centra l subject in terms of "Entry 23" of the Union List under 
the Seventh Schedule . The entire expenditure on the development, construction . 
improvement and maintenance of national highways is met by the Governmem of India. The 
national highway Act, 1956 ( 48 of 1956) governs the matters related to the Nat ional 
Highway System. The works are, however. executed by the respectiv e State Governments 
and Border Road Development Board (B.R .D.B ,) in respect of certain highways on 
"agency" basis through Annual Plan/Five Year Plans. The Governmcm constit utt:d National 
Highway Authority of india (NHAI) in June 1989 in order to develop, maintain and manage 
the national highways and other highways vested in or entrusted to it by the Government. 
Initially the Authority was expected to execute the externally aided projects such as those of 
ADB and World Bank and later to take over the ent ire charge of development and 
maimenance of national highways which has bee n done so far by the State Governments on 
agency basis. The Author ity however is yet to become operational. The Secretary. Ministry 
of Surface Transport while deliberating before the Committee on 28.10 .94 stated that the 
I 
Authority could not become operational as the government could not find adequate 
personne l for it. He also informed the Committee that the Authority would get fully 
operationalised in a few months. 
3. The Commillee is not convinced with the reasons put forth by the Ministry of Surface 
Transport for non-operation of N.R.A.l. as five years have elapsed since its inception. The 
Committee feels that this issue was taken up in a lackadaisical manner. It appears that 
Government was not serious to operationa lise the N.H.A.I. The Commillee deplores such 
altitude of the Government and impresses upon il now to make serious efforts to see that the 
Authority becomes operlllional at the earliest to fulfil its objectives. 
Major coiiStraints and SJrategy in the 8th Plan 
4. 'fhe Plan document (1992-97) states that over the years, the National Highway System 
has come under severe strain due to high rate of growth in traffic volume. Selection and 
priontisation of different s.egmems of road network for improvement and upgradation 3JC 
handicapped by the absence of reliable data. There i$ no systematic collection of data on 
road traffic because of the absence of traffic recording and reporting procedures, multipilicty 
of transport ••gcncic> ~nd preponderance of single vehicle operators. Attempts had been 
lllilde in the pa>t by different groups rtnd Committees to build up estunates of wad traffic for 
goods and passengers by different methods and under different assumptions. These traffic 
estimates and projections showed considerab le variations. It is, therefore, necessary to 
undertake periodic traffic surveys to update the information at the regular intervals. 
1 

2 
5. Road traffic is bound to increase substantially in the next ten yean. The major 
deficiencies/constraints hindering the development of National Highways are inadequate 
road pavements, breadth and thickness and presence of old, weak and narrow bridges and 
culverts. The maintenance of NH System is further hindered by lack of adequate funds. 
Funds generally do not exceed 60% of normal requirement of the national highways. 
6. The existi ng deficiencies in national highways would require construct ion of missing 
links, four-laning and two-laning of various sections, construction of bridges nnd bypusscs 
etc. According to the Eighth Plan document, the tint priority would be given tl1 comp lete 
the ongoing works. For systematic development of the NH system, different strategies 
would need to be adopted for low, medium and high volume traffic dcn~ity routes. 
Capacity augmentation of high density corridors carrying more than 15,000 Passenger Car 
Unit~ (PCU) traffic per day through four-laning will need to be taken up during the Eighth 
Plan For selected high density comdors, it may be necessary to consider expressway 
facility for rapid and safe movement of fast traffic. Levy of tolls may be con,idcred for 
highway users . For national highways carrying medium traffic density. traffic upto 15,000 
PCUs , strengthening of pavement and widening to two-lanes including rccon,truction of 
bridges, wherever necessary, need to be taken up. For low traffic density route~ carrying 
traffic upto 5.000 PCU, widening to two lanes may be considered only on a selective basis, 
depending upon the resource availability. However, weak and narrow bridges have to be 
replaced. 
7. As regards additions to the National Highway system, it would be necessary to adopt 
a very selective approach in view of the resource constrai nts and the need to give priority 
to removal of deficiencies on the existing NH system. 
8. The Committee was informed by the Mini~try of Surface Transport that the Indian 
Roads Congrcs~ (IRC) had drawn up a road development plan (1981- 2001), known as 
Lucknow Plan whereby the NH network was to be extended to 66000 kms . by the year 
2001. But due to resource con~traints , only 3100 Kms. were added to the NH network and 
thereby extending it upto 34058 kms. The Ministry also informed the Committee that the 
recommendations of lRC were recommend atory in nature. 
9. Declaration of roads as National Highways depends on several factors , such as the 
criteria laid down by the Government for declaring new National Highways: recommenda­
tions of the National Transport Policy Committee (N T.P.C.) and inter se priority of a road 
on All India basis including proximity to other Ntttional Highways in the region and overall 
availability of funds. For declarati<ln of roads as new National Highways following crite ria 
have beetr laid down by the Government; 
(i) Roads which run through the length and breadth of the country. 
(ii) Roads connecting adjacent countries. 
(iii) Roads connecting State capital~. 
(iv) Roads connecting major port~ and impo rtant industrial or tourbt centres . 
(v) Road meeting very important strategic requirements. 
(vi) Roads carrying high density of traffic over an adequate length, and 
(vii) Roads which will enable sizeable reduction in travel distance and achievement 
of substantial economy thereby. 
10. The National Transport Policy Comm ittee (NTPC) was set up by the Govemment in 
1978 and it submitted its report in May 1980. The Comm ittee recommend ed Yl roads 

3 
covering a distance of 12955 Km. for inclll!iiOn in N.H. ~-ystem . Out of these, 11 roads 
aggregati ng 3595 Kms. were included in the NH network. 
11. The Committee was informed by the Ministry that the targets as set up by lRC and 
NTPC could not be achieved due to lack of adequate funds. The Ministry stated unless the 
funds for development of National Highways were enhanced substantially, it might not be 
possible to declare any new National Highway at all. 
lm•esrmenr.~ in the 8th Five Year Plan (1 992-97) 
12. While finalising the strategy for the development of National Highways during the 8th 
Plan, the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission" was of the view that National Highways 
being an important area of infrastructure, require adequate attention especially in view of 
large scale deficiencies existing in the system. The following priorities were suggested by 
him: 
(i) Construction of missing bridges/reconstrcution of weak bridges. 
(ii) Widening oi the roads to suit the traffic needs. 
a) Conversion of single lanes into two Janes and 
b) Two lanes into four lanes. 
(iii) Strengthening of weak pavement to the required level of traffic loading. 
13. The Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission. also directed that progress be expedited 
and attention on priority basis given to the requirements of externally aided projects so that 
utilisation of foreign aid gets accelerated. 
14. Keepinj in view the need for a phased removal of deficiencies on the National 
Highways as suggested by the Deputy Chairman, Planning Commission, a minimum 
require01ent of Rs. 7830 crore for Central Sector Roads during the Eighth Five Year Plan , 
1992-97 was projected to the Planning Commission. However, an outlay of only Rs. 2600 
crores was approved by the Planning Commission, of which an outlay of Rs. 2460 crores was 
earmarked for National Highways. As regards the enhancement of the funds keeping in view 
the requirements, it was suggested by the Planning Commission that the same would be 
considered at the time of mid term appraisal. 
15. As regards the expenditure in the First three years of the Eighth Plan, the Committee 
was informed that the actual expenditure of National Highways in 1992-93 was of the order 
of Rs. 445.50 crores . The allocation of funds for the year 1993-94 and 1994-95 was 
Rs. 559.59 crores and Rs. 635.50 crores respectively. Of the funds allocated for the year 
1994-95, Rs. 270 crores were for externally ai~d projects. The externally aided projects are 
no d9ubt needed but these are capital intensive and cover only 5% of the length of National 
Highways network. Thus , balance 95% of National Highways remain starved of funds 
resulting in their poor health. 
16. The Committee io its Tenth Report on Demands for Grants, 1994-95 relating to the 
Ministry of Surface Transport presented to Parliament on the 25th April, 1994 strongly 
recommneded that Government should have a £resb look on the allocations which should be 
totally need based. The Committee .also recommended that if the NH System was to be 
maintained in a traffic worthy condition, external aid should be treated as an additionality. 
17. The Ministry of Surface Transport informed the Committee that the matter had been 
taken up with the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission. A reply from Finance 
Ministry regarding .additional funds for road sector had been received wherein the Ministry 
• •Ei&Juh Five Year Plan (1992-97). National H.igbwa)", Oovemmenl of India. Minlstry of Surface Transport (Roads wing), 
October 1992, J>'li< 2-3. 

4 
had ,~;ucd Lhal additi onal funds proposed for NH projects had 10 come out of Plan 
resource,. It is a mall er for the Planning Commis~ion to decide in the context of Plan 
priorities. The matter rcg<trding enhancemen t of the allocations was discus~ed with the 
Plan ning Commiss ion during mid-term review of the Eighth Plan_ As per their broad 
ut\lications_ any substantial enhancement in budgetary support is not likely to come. 
18. While deliberating before the Committee, the Secretary, Ministry of Surface Transport 
admitted that there i~ a nusmatch between the requirements projected and the funds 
allocated_ A~ per the allocation made for the Etghth Plan period, on an average Rs. 520 
uorc, would be available annually. II had been made clear to the Planning Commission that 
the Ministry wa; unable to achteve the targets. Planning Commission then suggested that the 
Minbtry should propose some of the projects as Build Operate and Transfer (BOT) Projects , 
i .c. Private Sector Projc" s. llut as fa r as removal of deficienc ies and repairs arc concerned 
the Planning Commission provides Rs. 200 crores annua lly. This is again too inadequate to 
meet the requirement. There ;trc only some of the new projects which could be executed as 
UOT project>. 
1'.1. The lndtan Ro<td> Congress in their memor~ndum submitted to the Committee stated 
that considering thc prc,cnt construction cost of the roads of national htghway~ standard. the 
v;tluc of the national highw;ty network currently would be more than Rs. 50,000 crores. Not 
le" th;tn 2% or this value is required annually for proper maintenance and upkeep of the 
p~vcmen t and right·of-w;,y of national highways. The Indian Roads CongrCS> therefore 
>Uggc>ted that the funds allocalton for maintenance should he incre~• scd 10 Rs. 1000 crores 
keeping in view the v~lu c of the assets to be preserve d. 
20 Jt is .pert inent 10 mention that allocat ion of money for the development of nation al 
lughwuy~ ht~s declined to only 0.57% of lhe tOtal Centrttl Government Plan outlay for the 
Eighth Plan from it> 1 4% >hare during the First Five Year Plan. 
21 The Committ~ notes that inadequate funds han resulted in gene ral fall of the level of 
mnintenance of NH network. The Commi ttee also lakes note of the observation made by the 
Planning Commission that the fund.~ for the maintenance generally do not exceed 60% of the 
normal requirement. The overa ll gap between the requirement and actual allocation has be.en 
accumulat ing over s~verul yctlrs with treme ndous b~ck-log of maintenan ce. 
22. The Co mmitte e further notes that major part of the maintenance budget Is spent over 
the wages of the large labour force and the remaining funds available get further reduced in 
case of budget cut~ and get eroded due to price rise. 
Rt•ml•estmetit of Rnenue generated by Road.< 
23. A' regllrds the contribution of roads to the economy, there i' direct contnbution to 
the excheque r in the form of various types of taxes such as vehicle tax, road tax, licence fee 
and other taxes on fuel, lyres. spares etc. which gcncr;tle revenue to the tune of Rs . 85()() 
crorcs annually. whereas the indirect contribution of roads 10 the economy comes through 
~uv i ng in transpo rt<tlion costs, such as vehicle operating cost (VOC) which ·includes fue l, 
tyrc:. spare> and crew e tc. As per the detaib given by the lndian Roach Congress in their 
mcmonutdum subm itted to the Committee that the annual vehicle opcmting cost on roads m 
the country ba~ been c'tunated at nearly Rs. 100.000 crores of which R> 40,()()() crorcs il. 
uc:c:ounted for by nutional highways alone _ Accordtng to Indian Road' Congres~. extensive 
road u-er cost studic' h:tvc cst:tblished Lhat by bringing improvement tn roa<b it is possible 
to effect a saving upto 15% in VOC. Thus, this would mean an annual saving of Rs. 15,1XXJ 
crorcs constsung of Rs. (>()()() crores on national highways and Rs. 9000 c:rorc~ on Sl<tle 
Roads in VOC. As the component of fuel con~ltlutes abou t 15 per cent uf VOC, the 

5 
resultant sav ings in fuel consum ption will l>e of the order of Rs. 2.250 crores per annum 
including Rs . 91X) crore~ on nationa l highway s. This in nutshe ll qmmtifie> the cost, bud roads 
infiic t on the economy due to increased vehicle operating cost . In aduition. improved mads 
will cause travel time savings which will give a tremendous boost to economy by increasing 
the e((icicncy of transport system. 
24. The Committee w;~s informed by the Indian Ro<tds Congress th;lt in severa l o ther 
coun tries the expend ituo·e o n roads w;1s 8(}-J(X)% or even more of the total amount of road 
user taxat ion . A country like Japan spends o n the roads as much as 130% of the revenue 
collected from ro<1ds and U.S. A. 97% whereas India spends barely 40% . Thus . roud secto r 
in Ind ia heavily cross subs idises othe r sectors of the econo my while itself remains starved of 
funds . 
25. The Comm ittee takes note of the fuel that road transport taxation has been utilised by 
the Government as a means of genera l rev enue mobilisation and adequate amount of moner is 
not reinvested in the roads. The Committ ee was informed by the Indian Roads Congress that 
the yearly revenue earned hy way of r<>ad luxati on in 1987-88 was Rs. 1!200 crure s. 
Consideri11g 10% annual growth rate, the estimated revenue of the Centra l Government for 
the year 1994-95 works out to Rs. 9000 crores . The allotment during 1994-95 for the Cent ral 
Secto r roads Is Rs. 870 c ron~s whith works out to just ahout 10% of the Central Government 
share of road taxes . 
26. Whi le considering the Oem~nds for Grants. 1994-95 or the Ministry of Surface 
Tra n ~-port. the Commiucc cx;omincd the a>pcct of development and mainteown<:c of nntio nal 
highwoys in detail. In its Tenth Report the Committee observed th~t maintenance of 
nationa l highways was no Jess unpo rtant than builthng up of new national hog.hway network. 
The maintenance or N;otional Highway s comprises ordinMy repairs, routine rep;, in •. 
periodic<OI renewa ls, specia l oepairs, flood damages repa irs etc.. The Comm ittee also referred 
to the Tecommenda tions of the ·Comm iuee o n Norms for M<~intenance·. ct1nstituted in 
hnuary. 1993 in pursu;oncc of the decision of Tenth Fimo n~c Commission and Transport 
Deve lopment Council. The Co mmiuee on Norms suggested a sum o f Rs. 415 crorc> fo• 
maintenance of road$ against which an alloca tion of Rs. 204 crore' Qu$t ha lf of the 
requirement) was made by the Planning Commiss ion . The Commi ttee then recommended it' 
Tenth Report for a revi ew of allowtio ns and suggested that 70% of the revenue generated 
by national highways sho uld be given to nat ional highways for infrastructure and expansion. 
27. In their Action Tuken Report to the Committee's T enth Report. the Minostry of 
Surface Tnonsport replied as under: 
"The matter has been taken up with the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commiss ion. 
A reply from Finance M i n~er regarding additional funds for Road Sector has been 
received . The Finance Minister has staled that for ma intenance of NHs, the provision 
in the budget is Rs. 210. 00 crores which is not insubstantial. ln view of ~evere 
budgetary constr<!ints. it is not feasible co give any addi tional funds. for the purpose. for 
any additionality requored, the Minis try has to locate s:wings in the budgetary gmnts. 
Tlie Budget provided is hardly 55 to 60% of the requirement worked out as per the 
norms. It may be stated that enhancement of funds for maintenance and repairs is 
essential and, therefore , further persuation with Fina nce Ministry is cont inuing. 
28. The Comm ittee expresses its conce rn on the decline of alloe<!tion of funds for the 
development and maintenance of national highways which has been reduced to 0.57% of the 
Central Government Plan outlay. The Committee apprehends that by making available ltSS 
than half of the .requirement the Govern ment have itself neglected the roads maintenance 
which if continued will resull in the collapse of the network and it can reasonably be foreseen 

6 
that rehabili tation would bo: cu>llier alTair. Since Externally Aidt d projects (EAPs) are limitrd to 5% of 
the national highway network a nd private sector is likely to feel shy of Investing In the maint enan ce and 
repnir of national highways, the Conunith•• feels that It is this sector which suffers and will continue to 
sofTer due to budgetary constraints. The Committee fceiJ that thiJ crls i< can be overcome by making 
ovailable more money for this Sector. T be Committee suuests to increase tht mart of total roa d t ax 
rt\·eo ue-s for lfl,:e.stment in national highways as recomn1ended in Its Tenth Repo rt. 
28. 1 The aug mentation of rnourc cs c•n also be athi t vcd If Govern ment implements the Ruol ution 
adopted by tbr Parliamen t in May 1988 for the Cen trlll R oad Fund. The Committtt rtftrs to its 
recommendation contained in It~ Tenth Report In this matter. The relevant para read.< as under: 
.. A reso lution was :~doptcd by the Parlin mem on 1 3.5.88 on earma rking n ccs.~ on the sale of 
petrol and diesel at the revascd ra te of 5% of the basic price of petrol and diesel for the Central 
Road Fund (CRF) The Commiuec IS constra m cd 10 note th•• CRF Rcrolution is yet 10 be 
implcmc rllcd by the Governme nt although 6 years have e lapsed since then. h appea rs tha t 
Gover nment arc nol keen 111 chc impleme ntation of CR F Resul utinn which they chcmselves had 
introduced in Par1iamcut. In chc absence or 3 dcci~ion in lhc IIMHCr. at.ldiuonal fund" could not 
be generated and as a result the road sector suffers Roads arc life lines or the country. The 
Commiuce urge< for a final dccrsion without any fun her dcl~y •· 
29. The Ministry or Surface Tran;po n 111 their ActiOJI Tn ken Report on the aforesaid rccommcnda­
laon Malctl as under· 
.. Th~ Group of Mirmrers mcc on 24 .. 1.1994 in this regard and dcerdcd that Mm istry nwy pre pare 
,, p(rpcr indicllltng the now of tunds '" the road sector. Accordrng ly. a note on 1he fl<>w of funds 
h;1s been prepared and sent to the (h;urman of the Group of Ministers on 17.5.94. Subsequently 
addiuonal tnformauon has been recctvcd from the Planning Commission regarding the flow or 
lunds, which IS bemg cxnm rned m the Ministry .·· 
J(J. Th< Committ<t is not sullsfiod with the reply submit ted by the Government. It rather gets an 
impnssion that the Go.emment ar< not willing to Implement the Resolution. The Ministry could not 
>pell out the difficullie~ beittR faced by them in th< Implementation of the Re<olution. Nor could it 
mention as to how much time wus then needed ln doing so. The Cummittet . is, therefo re, \'cry crit ical 
nf such on au ilude taken by the Govt. 
31 I he Committtc also reiteralts its recommendations contained in para 3.1. of the IOU. Report that 
all the ~:~ternally uided projects shnuld be trea ted as 1111 addi tionality to the normal bud~ct und loan 
prvcc('dS rrom lcndinl( agencies ~hould be pusscd on to tht! ~1inistry of Surfacl' 'fronsport fdr national 
highway purpose. 
32. The CommtllCe tnkcs ntiiC or the fact thai national highway sysiCIII i~ under trcmcndou> 
prcs.,urc mamly due 10 1he phenomenal growth in 1he traffic handled by the nalional highways. The 
present level of fre1gh1 traffic by road has reached 300 billion tonne km . whtlc pas~cngcr· trit((ic has 
rcoched 1000 billron passange1 km. level. Abou t forty per cent of the 101al volume of thc traff ic is 
hand led by the na11onal highways. A pcru~;d of the traffic movements on the Ml iona l highways wou ld 
trvcallhat n is not the entire road system which is under strain but road system is cenainly bursting 
10 certain locauon>. The Comnunec wa' informed by the representative of Fedcn111on of Indian 
Chamber of Commerce and lnduwy (FICCI) I hat there w~s 20% nf lhe road >y;tcm in the nationa l 
highw:rys which was ovcru ~ed i.e . thi~ segment is not ~ r blc to cope up with the k1nd uf 1raffie taking 
place today . Out of thi• 20% possi bly S 10 10% of scsmcms is actually affcct rng the performance of 

• 
7 
the rest of the highway system. Those areas mainly suffer from the bonlenccks. such as 
encroach ments. poor bndses and variety of other !actors. 
33. lnspite of the heavy growth in the movement of traffic. the road quality standards hove not kept 
pace with the changes in vehicle and freight techn ology and they largely suffer from the following 
boulenecks : 
(i) The 15% of National Highway is single lan e; 
(ii) there are about 500 kms. missing links; 
(iii) National Highwa ys have inadequate capacities and are ill maintained. 
(iv) As per the Ministry of Surface Transport Survey in 1936, out of 929 bridges, 240 were 
suffering from seriou~ distresses and another 313 from non serious distresses; 
(v) The tra(fic on the road is further conscrained by numerous checkposts. Holding up ol traffic at 
these chcckposts arc estimated to result in the loss of about Rs. 2000 crorcs annually; 
34. These factors have restricted the smooth movement of traffic resulttng in heavy losses in terms 
of money and time. The Committee feels lluot the Co•·emment should attord top pri ority to remove 
these botUenocks so as to facilitate free flow of traffi c at optimal speed and minimising excess 
consumption of fuel. Slnct long term Policy of the Government in NH Sector Is likely to take a couple 
of years some of the measures are urgently needed to Improve rightaway the Nil System so that 
lmmrdlate demands are met. This <an be done basically by Increasing the capacity augmentation and 
by Increasing single and Intermediary lane to three or rour lanes. As regords the restriction on account 
of octroi and check post the Commi ttee suggests that except for the joint check posts at the state borders, 
all checkposts at midpoints must be removed. 
Bypasses 
35. N:nional Highways arc facing tremendous pressure as most of them pass through the urban 
populated areas and thereby restric ting the movement of traffic due to congestoon and also affecting 
people from the pollution that is arising out of it. The only solution to this problem lies in 
constructing the bypas.~es as it will serve both the purposes i.e. increasi ng the speed and save the 
towns from pollu tion. 
36 As per the criterion lnid down by the Mi11istry of Surface Transport broad ly the links within 
Iorge towns having population of 20,000 or more served by the national highway having road land 
width less than 30 metr es arc termed as unsuitable links nnd are eligible for construction of a bypass. 
Cons truction of 52 bypasses around the congested towns was mcluded in the Eighth Five Year Plan. 
A list of these bypasses und their present position is at t\nnexure·IV . 
J.7. As regards the bypa.~ses construc ted durin& the first three years of the Eighth plan, the 
Comminee was informed by the Ministry that three bypasses were constructed on 1992·93 agains t the 
target of four bypasses. In the year 1993-94 only one bypass was construc ted agail)st the target ol 
three. Construc tion or five bypasses has been e<~rmarkcd for the year 1994-95. 
38 The Ministry stated before the Commine c that bypasses were given lower pri()rity due to 
coMtrnint of funds and anenopts were being made to undertake them under pnvatisation programme 
as far as possible . 
39. The Commillee is constrained to note that Covemmeot have not glvtn due priorfty to the 
bypasses as is e•ldtnt from the progress achieved so ror. A persual of the list of bypasses Included in 
thr Eighth Plan reveab that only Jabalpur bypass Is under construction; tight bypasses have been 
sanctioned; six bypasses ore under Build Operate and Transfer (BOT) scheme; and onr bypass is under 
Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund (OECF) (Japan). The Committee feels that in view of the 
procress stated above It Is just not possible to construct these bypasses in the target period I.e. ·1992-97. 
The Committee also &•!hers an impression that lhe response to BOT scbeme is not very encouruging . 

En('rOuclum::nt on !he fU(td,'l 
40. Ath.:ntion of lhc Commitl!.!c was also invited to chc congestion on the highways on account 
of encroachments. The Committee was informed by the Ministry or Surface Transport that 
encroachments along the National Highways can be removed under Public Premise~ Eviction Act 
under which State Govemments arc author ised 10 appoint Estate Officers for the purpose. 
Howcvc1. since there have been difficulties in its implementation owing to duality of control. 
Centra l Government ts contemplating scp~.r atc legislation in respect of National Highway land 
belonging to it. 
41. The Committee expresS(.'"$ its conc.:ern on the situation and feels that existing arrangements urt! 
far from satisfactory. The time has come for not nnEy to remove the encroachmen t on the highways 
hut olso lo pre\·ent c.:ommercial uctivilies along the road. The CornmUtet suggests that Government 
shou ld bring into necessary legislation prohibiting d.t"'t!lopmental activities at least within ont Km. 
of either side of the bypasses and highways to be constructed in future. 
Uniform Wt'ight Policy 
42. T he N;lliOnal Highways largely suffer from the overloadi ng of the vehicles . The 
Committe e was informed by the Ministry of S urface Tr;111sport tha t the enforcement or 
lega l weight llf trucb on highway> is a St;.~te subject ;tnd is the concern of State Road 
Transport AUihoritics . This aspect comes under the Motor Vehicle> Act. 
43 T he Roads Wing of Minis try has no mech anism tn ei ther checking or enfo rcing 
these measure' except in <tdvisory capacity. The Committee was also informed by the 
represe ntat ives of M inistry of Surface Transport th;ll <LS against the prescribed load or 18 
tonnes. the vehidt!s t:~1 rry t~bOul lo!Xccss loud. 
44. The Commillee was shocked to know aoou l the blatant vioiMion of the law of the 
land and the inaction of the· enfo rcement machinery in the maller. Government have 
become the silent spectato r to witness lhe damage being caused to its own properly­
national highways. There is no use in enact ing a law which cannot be enforced. The 
Commi ttee cautions the Government and advises to be firm while dealing with such 
encroachers. 
45. In their Memoradum subm itted befo re the Committee. the Fcdcnuion of Indian 
Ch<Hnbers or Commerce <111d Industry (FICCI ) stated tha t the road quality standards have 
not kept pace wit h changes in veh icles and fre igh t techno logy. Indian roads are designed 
for single <txle load upto 8.2 to 10 tonnes. Multiaxle vehicles and container carriers 
require roads which can t<Oke higher axle load. T he Committee was also apprised by the 
Central l{oads Researc h Inst itute (CRR !) that :multiaxle veh icles should be e ncour<~gcd on 
the national highway> and thereby reduce damage to the highway s. 
46. The Committee desires thai Govern ment should give u serious thought lo the 
suggestions of the FICC! !hal highways should be designed so as to meet the requirement 
of multi axle vehicles and contai ner carriers. 
Extemally Aided Projects 
47. In September. 1985. the Governmen t of India signed a loan agreement with tht: 
World Bank for national highwa y imp rovement projects in six states. Thereafter. Asian 
Deve lopment Bank (A .D.B.) and Overseas Economic Cooperat ion Fund (OECF) Jap;ua 
had also show n their interest in providi ng assistance for NH improvement Projects . 
Subsequently, the Government signed loan ag.reeme nts with World Bank. ADB. OECF 
for various NH improvement proje .cts. Deta ils of these projects are at Annexure- V. These 
projects cover abou t 5% of the NH net-work. The Committee was informed by the 
Ind ian Roads Congress {l.R.C .) that per unit c:osl of the exte rnally aided project is quite 

9 
large as compared to the domestic funded schemes of the similar naturo as a number of 
condition and procedures of the lending agencies had to be followed . Conditions of lending 
agencies need review to ~uit our system. 
48. The Secretary, Ministry of Surface Transpon during his evidence infom1ed the 
Committee that World Bank and ADB were willing to g1ve credit to lndi<L World Bank is 
Willing to give one billion dollar for national highways for the projects called ·overlay and 
Widen' as existing road is already there where land upto 150-200 width roughly 45-60 mctr.:s 
had already been acquired and the existing road is 10 metres. The project involve ~ to make 
an overlay on the existing road and improve by way of shoulders from one to two or four 
lanes. The Com mittee was informed that similarly ADB told that they would like to give 
another 250 million dollars for these programmes. The Secretary also made it clear before 
the Committee thut these roads would be toll free as the widening of the existing roads 
would be with the loan from World Bank and ADS. 
49. The attention of Secretary was then drawn to the fact that out of the loan sanctioned 
by World Bank so far, a sum of Rs. 289.19 crores had been cancelled by the World Bank 
even before the completion of the projects for which loan was sanctioned . The representa­
tive of the Ministry then explained the reasons for cancellation of loan. which arc as under: 
1. When the international competitive bidding was introduced, the Indian contractors. 
engineers and the Ministry itself were not well versed with these matters. lienee poor 
performance of the contractors was the main reason as they were not exposed to 
bigger projects and lacked heavy equipmc nts and proper technology needed for the 
job. 
2. Inordinate time was taken in litigation and awards and by that time period of loan 
expired. 
3. Failure of ties between the foreign and Indian contractors on account of delay and 
thereby resulting in escalation of cost. It resulted in withdrawal of forc1gn partners. 
50. The Committee was informed that the Ministry had taken following steps to av01d this 
kind of Sltuation-
1. Introduction of a system of prequalificatton of contractors; 
2. Change of specification and management has been trained to these specifications; 
3. In order to expedite the projects each prOJect has been assigned to seperate Project 
Director; 
4. System of supervising Consultancy. The consultant would be performing the role of 
State Governmem working directly undc:r the control of the Central Government; 
and 
5. In respect of mega project s of specialised nature where the technology is not 
available, the foreign consultants are being appointed at all the stages involved in the 
development or national highways. 
51. The Committee is pained to note that initially the loans from World Bank were 
cancelled before the projects were completed. In particular the Committee takes note of the 
mordinate delay in completion of Ahmedabad - Vadodara Expressway which was orginally 
sanctioned 1n 12 contracts (8 roads and 4 bridges) at a cost of Rs. 137.2 crores tn 1987 under 
World Bank loan assistance Programme. As per the information made available by the 
Ministry. the overall progress of the road contract is 47.08% and bridge contract is 55.67% 
upto september, 1994 and corresponding expenditure are Rs. 84.27 crore and 51.77 crores 
respectively . The revised cost for completion of the project is estimated at Rs. 312 crores. 
When enquired about the target date of completio n of the project. the Committ ee 

10 
wot' tnformcd that due to f.ulurc of JOint ventutc h~tv.~cn the forc tgn ;tnd lndt<tn <:ont ractot-. 
ln;h<tn contractor V()lutttccrcd tn comp lete the bul:tnt·c wor k hut could not dn '<> hcc:tMte of 
c·:"h llow problem und aiM, he dema nded revi,ion nf t :ttc' m Octubcr. {1)92. l he 
(invcrnmcnt of l ndm dill nnl agree to hts requc't and uc~aued to rcrmanatc tht• wntra<t The 
St:atc Government wa' tht·n rcmind~u to take furthc·r ;a.·t,on The Commtllec "'"' wid that 
111 Vt<'" uf this tt wa' ven difficult In indicate the hkch IM!!cl dah: of .:omrlcrtnn nf tht" 
rrnj~<·t fhc 'ituallon furthct wmscncd dut· lc> th<: c:ancdl:atann nf funding o~ the World 
13ank 
'\~ The Com millee u.presses its concer n o>er lh~ inordinal~ dela) in the construction of 
lhi< pilot projec1. The Commilt~c hopes that the meu,ure~ adupl~d by the Mini,try of Surfact> 
TrHn•port thereafter would impro>c the situal ion. 
L tpre~'ll t1 y< 
~-' In February. JQ<I(J the Mtnl'try of Surface Tr:111,por1 in,lllutetl :an ADil attkd 'tutl\' ,, 
·ncvcln pment of Long 'I crm Plan fur Exprc"""·"' 111 India. · 'I h" 'tud\' cnvi"'!!''" th< 
e\amanalion of related "'ll<:rh ol Expre"way pl;<nn<ng development ;111<1 op..ratann '!11~ 
~llldy '"" completed in I'I'JI It rcconuncndcd fnr 1hc development ol IIKI~II tm <>I 
E'pr•·"ways O) the end nf ~1115 111 phase' tn the fnlln"<ng manncL 
I 'J'J'\-2(KI0 
21XIl-~IXIS 
21Xl6 ~fllO 
2010 201~ 
r 0 I \I .: 
Lt·ttgth ( ~nh . ) 
1.350 
I 932 
2 79ll 
3 <).)() 
lltc· m'<''lment nf uutl,,~, t<'<(Uir~d fpr the amplt•mt·nt.llllln of thi~ Dcvcl<>rmcnt !'ian "'" 
,·,tuna tnl <II Rs. 58.00() n '" "' itt I<J'Il. As <>I 11<'"' tit<· <'<"l est1mate wuul<l ,.,~,1latc at l 'i'J4· 
Y~ pracc' In Rs l!O.IXMI note 
'~ 1 he 'llldy. in!<'' (1/m, '"!!gestcd that optimal 'nlu11on for capacity augmcnt:uinn " four 
huuttg hdorc con,tructtn!,! cxptc'""a~ for diffetcnt ""umcd lcvcb of c~l'llng tr.tffl~ It ""' 
''"'' 'll!(gcstcd in the 'tudy that constructtng a '"" l.anc cxpre"wa~ .anu ''' ,uh<eqncnt 
upg.ratl:tiiOO h_, a (our I.IIIC' \.'Xprc,"lway yield' lll~lf~inall) higher (.'(.."OOOmk rctUIO 111 
~o.'OIIl(Mri,on lo pro' adm~ .1 lour lane Expn.·,,wav tn thl· hr"SI m~tanre 
-;~ t\' regard' 111<' c·ntblrlllln>n of Expre"ways a~ per the ADB r<:pnrt the Commtllcc 
"''" anlormed b)' the Sen<'l!itV. MmNry of Sutl:a~c Tran,port rhat" foreign '''"'1""11) wanted 
l<> lkvelop ll.tXIO km nl I xpr<=-swav network con tt<•cting all the mctrnpolit:tn ~tiles, Thc 
mll<: 'ub miucd oy the Mtnl\try lurrhcr sla te' that lhc firm requested for excl u•ivc rig h t~ to 
··onqruct the Exprc"w;t\'s undc1 130T scheme The propos•! " under con,i<lcrauon of the 
( onvcrnmcnt The G<>Vl·rnmcnl " )Cl 10 decide what way 11 'hould pmcecd wtth rc~ard to 
con,tructlon of Expr"'"'·'Y' 
I'm 'til< s.·ctor flllrllflf'UIWII Ill t\'otiUIIIII II iglt WO.\'\ 
~h AI th~ lame of finalt'itlton of the Erghth l'lan 11 wa' r<"aliseJ tha• foa addtlaun It> the 
Natt<Hlal ll ighwa) "'"ctn it would be nccc\sary to adopt a •crv >elective JPI'"'·Il'h tn v1ew ol 
the rc")urce constrmnt• . lit~: l'lun doc ument \ Iitie' tha t rn vtcw of the re\ourcc comtnnnts. 
11 would he de;.irabk tu look lor non-Glwcrnmcnt al so u tce~ of fund' ami ptivalc 

I! 
p..rllctpation on ro<~d ' "'" lrucllon. AugmeRiation of Central Road rund 'hould help to 
'uane extent , incr.:.a ~e the r~'I>Urces ava ilable for road development Another po~iblc >Ource 
l<•r .tddata{)n:al rc,..;~urcc' lvr the roud >CCIOr could he toll-based haghwuy projects. Private 
pa allctp<ttaon thro ugh Huald. Operate and Tr ;m~fcr (DOT) pn)JCCI~. should be encouraged. 
57. Jn the ir wriuen note ' ubmiued 10 the Cnmllullce. ahe Mmistry of Surfucc Tntnspon 
anformcd the comma llec that Government h~ d encouraged the p~rtinpallon of Pravate Sec tor 
anduding NRI , and foreign investors to finance, construct. maant:un <tnd operate ident ified 
haghway and bridge prOJCCIS from their own re>Ourccs. Thi~ would not only bnng m the 
a ddationalit~ of rc>ources hut also the managcnal skill nf the Private Sector Under thi' 
''"heme the entrepreneurs would be allowed t() collect the fee Cor a \pccafic<l peraod from the 
U>er> whereafter the f:acilaty would revert back to the Government 
51;. The Polacy of the Government 1s yet to be fina lised. However the Manistry huvc tak~n 
followang steps to aura" pnvate entr eprene urs i n the roa d constructaon sector: 
(u) Roa d sector hm, been ded arcd an lndu strtill acllvity under the prov asions or ID Bl 
Act. 1964 :md IFC I Act, 1948 to facilitate lo~ns from lending tnstitu lion' to Provatcr 
Public Sectnl Companies 10 take up toll bas~<.! highway proJclts. 
(h ) Road Sector rul\ been declared a~ l nfrastructun:' 'o as to pcrnHI the Ooaung of 
Public Sector Bnnd' for mvesunent on road, . 
(.:) The provi>>On> of MRTP Act have heen relaxed with :1 view 10 enable the large firm> 
to enter the h1ghway ,ector 
(d) Natio nal 1-laghwt~y' Act, l951i has heen ame nded for lcvyang of toll on any of 
Nullo nal Haghwuy by the Governm ent. 
(e) A propo sal " under con>aderataon fo~ amend ang the Nati omal Highw:ays Act further 
so as 10 permit the private entrepre neurs to undert ake 1he acuvitv of development 
•nJ maintenance of National Highways ancluding collecting toll dare"il' from till· 
user 
([) The c~l of l:md acquasation. preliminary project preparation .md removal of utalil"'' 
an relation to 'uch proJect> will be borne by thc Gov~rnm~nt. 
(g) Custom> duue' on amport of const rucrion equ ipment have been cOn\ldcrahl) reduced 
<>nd procedu res Mrcmnhned. 
59. Meanwhil e, the Govern ment bas ide ntafied 27 projec ts relat ing 10 t'onw ucrion of 
13radges, Bypasses and Exp ress ways by the Private Sector under the 1.30'1 'chemc The 
Comm111ee was informed bv the Minis try that a lerter of an tent had he en .-sued m respect of 
3 number> of Bypas.e' and I number of J3r•dgc 10 enable the partie' to collect the detaals 
.tnd necessary data for considerdtion for signing the Memorandum of LmdeP.>tandang 
ugreement based on the final guadeline> and polic~ 
60 Hesad~. a M.O. U had also been sagned with lnfra>tructurc: LC>l\llll) .and riiMncial 
Service> (lL&FS) for the cons truction of Panvel Bypo'> 111 Maha rashtra "' "n e>lamatecJ co'l 
or abo11t Rs. 100 crorc' 
t\l In thei a present UII(HI before the C:ommillee the rcprcsc nratavcs of nec l staled that 
folltlwing Meps wo uld allracl mves to rs 111 t he Road Sector: 
(a) Repatriation of prolat an fore ign exchange to be permlltcd without ltnk111g at ao 
carnang$ an foreign exchange . 
(u) Ve~ung of haghway construction activaty With private sector 
(iai) Evolving mechanl\m for fixation of viable road user charges . 

12 
(tv) Settmg up of a Sranding Tribunal wtth full powers 10 resolve all dispures . 
(v) Pcrmiui ng income! tax deductions on profits reinvested in simtlur projects. 
(vi) Tax holiday for a ~pccificd period. 
(vii) Evolving mechanism for permitting cotlecuon o f fee directly by the private sector. 
(viii) Permit commerci;tl cxplotrarion of land nt selected locations . 
(ix) Exempting such project s from the purview of the Public Investm ent Board (PIO) and 
Cab inet Comm ittee on Economic Affatr s (CCEA) 
(x) Allowing debt equity ratio of 4 : 1. 
(xi) Cons tituting the Standing Empowered Committees for expeditious approval at State 
and Central level. 
62. Thr Commiller gathers an impression from the views expressed by various individuals/ 
Institution~ in their "rillen memornnda that broad policy needs detailed guidelines in order to 
facilit:tl e th~ speedy frucrification or projects. Following issues need Government consideration: 
(i) Scope of re(lulation that Govern ment would adopt with regard to entry, operational 
c011trols u11d puhlic interest prote~tion. It should be made clear what kind of regulatory 
body would be responsible for monitoring of private sector projects and their 
implementation. The role of National Highway Authority of India and Standin g Tribunal 
~hould be clearly indicated. 
(ii) I'Ot~ntial inv~~tor would like to know the policy position regarding guarantees that 
Government would offer to investors, so that the Iauer could assess the risk element 
'iithout Government guarantees . 
(iii) Porential investor would rec1uire cle.ar statement of the Government whether BOT projects 
would replace the existing roads or create parallel roads. 
Th• Committee. desires that the Ministry of Surface Transport should initiate action in these 
mauer ) ut the e~rliest. 
63. Foregoing paras indicate that the Government is constrained with the limited resources 
which are much below the requirement. Government have not only to remove the existing 
deficiencies but also to develop road sector keeping in view the future requirements. It 
necessit:ttes four-laning of existing NH network and construction of Expressway network. Tbe 
Committee observes that presently the Government is left with the following options: 
(i) t.o substantially augment the share of road user taxation for reinvestment in road sector 
and also implement the l'orliament Resolution of 1988 for the enhuncemcnt of Central 
Road Fund; 
(ii) to go for the World Bank/ADS loans for removal or road deficiencies and making an 
overlay on the toxisting roads and improve by way of shoulder, from one to two or four 
Innes; 
(iii) to assign the projects for the construction to Private Sector under Build, Operate and 
Transfer (BOT ) Scheme. 
Policy of the Government in this regard is yet to be announced; detailed guidlines need 
be issued; and necessary legislation has to be brought into so as to facilitate the Private 
Secto r participation. 
64. ln the present circumstances it seems quite impossible for the Government to go ahead with 
its own plan for development and maintenance of the national highway s because of resource 
constraints. 

l~ 
65. The commiltee takes a serious view of the delay in finalisaUon of policy on privatis ation. 
The Commiuee feels that Government ~t10uld take a decision and proceed with u ti~ bound 
a~enda and simplify policy guidelines and procedures as protructed delays in negotiation and 
approvals are counterproductive. 
66. The Committee olJserves that the existing mech;mism lJeing followed in respect of 
National Highways involves muJtiplicity of procedures and approvals first al the State level 
and thereafter by Central Government. ll k!ads to avoidable delays. It feels that there is a 
need to simplify and streamline the procedure with. a view to eliminate delays in decision 
makin g. The Central Government shou ld dire ctly discharge all the functions relating to 
National Highways. Settil111 up a National Highway Authority of India is a welcome step. J.lut 
the committee is constrained to reco~d thai tbe Authority could not become opuational due to 
I;Jck of willingness on the part of the Government. Government must take necessary steps In 
muk e the National ):lighway Authority fully operational on professional lines. Any furth er 
delay in the matter would comp licate the problems. the country is facing. 

SUMMARY Of RECOMMENDATIONS 
I. The Committee i\ critical or the ullilude or the Co-ernment fur not activisinl( the 
National Highway Authority of India (NHA 11 although five years h3v• elapsed since its 
inception and irnpresse> upon the Government to operationalise the AuthoriiJ at the earliest. 
( l'ura 3) 
2. The Conu uittee not e' that inadc<lu;ote funds ha••e resulted in generitl fall of mainlcn;utce 
of nalionnl highway net wtlrk. The overall gap between the requirement und actual allocution 
has heen accumulating U>H ,c,eral year' with lrl'lttenduu' back-log of nmintenanct>. (Par;t 21) 
.1. The Committee furth~r notes thut mnj or part of the maintena•u ·e l)udj:et is spent o>cr the 
"ages of th< I urge labour l"un·c and the remaining funds uvniluble get further reduced in cuse 
of budget cut.s and get eroded due to price rise. (Para 22) 
4. The Comm illc e feels that maintenance and repair of nation al highways ha' been 
neglected by Government h~ making availab le Jess than half of the fund~ required for th~ job. 
The Committee sugge'" fur <~n incre:~.>e in the share of totul road tax revenues for in•~'tment 
in Road,, ;md implement the Parliament Resolution p3'!>ed in J98!1 for :<Ugmentalion of 
Central Rond Funrl. (Para 2l!) 
5. The Committee rccunun~ncls that all lhe externally aided projects ~hould be treated us 
addi(jonalily to the normal lludget and loan proceed> from lending Agencies should be ll'"sed 
<m tu the 1\tinist~ of Surface Tran'J><>rt. (1'01ro1 3 11 
II. fhe Committee n'<·ommends that Go•·ernment ~hould accord top 1>riorily to remove the 
bottleneck' ~o as to f:ocilitntc free now of traffic at optimal speed and minimi~e excess 
consumption or fuel. The Committee ;uggests for the capacity ~ugmentalion by increa,in~: llw 
lanes fr om >ingle lane or intermediat~ hlnes lo three or four lanes and removal or all the 
checkpo'~ except the juint ("heckposLs at Stale bord ers. (l';tra 3-ll 
7. The Committee ;, con•trained to note that con>lruction of b) pas'"' "as gi-.n lo" 
priority; tar~:ets set up in l!th pl•n are not likely to be achieved; and re~ponse to BOT scheme~ 
is not very ~ncouraging. (l'ant 39) 
1!. The Com mittee ~uggc,ts that <;ovcrnment should enact necessary le~:islation to prohibit 
developmental acLi>·iLie• at leust "ilhin one km. of either side of the b) pa>scs and highwll) s to 
be constructed in future. (Para -'Ol 
9. The Com millee is shocked to know that 80% of the vehicle, carry excess load as again~t 
lhe 1>rescribcd load by the Governme nt and tbe enforcement machinery has hecome 11 mere 
spec tatOr. The Committee caut ions the Government and advises them to be firm in the 
matter. 
(Para -'2, -'3 & 44) 
10. The Commi lle,e desires that highways ~hould be so designed as to meet the requirements 
of multi-uxle vehicles and container carriers. 
(Paru 461 
I I. The Committee •~presses its concern over the inordinate delay in the cor1.~tructiun of the 
pilot projcu 1.e.. Ahmedabad-Vadodara expressway. The Committee hopes thut the 
measure' adopted b) the Ministry of Sur face Transport after the conccllation of the World 
Bank loan' would improve the situation. 
(Purn 52} 
12. The Comntittee observes that brond policy of participation of Private Sector needs 
14 

15 
detailed guidelines in order to facilitate the speedy fructification of projects, and desires that 
Ministry of Surface Transport should initiate action to clarify (i) the scope or regulation thai 
Government would adopt and role of regulat~ry body; (ii) guarantees that Governml'nt would 
offe•· lo investors so as to assess the risk; a"d (iii) whether BOT roads would replace the 
existing roads or create parallel roads. 
(Para 62) 
13. The Committee observes that the Government have not only to remove tile existing 
deflc.iencies but also develop road sector keeping in view the future requirements . It 
necessitates four lar.ing of existing national highways net-work and construction or expressway 
net-work. 
(Para 63) 
14. Jn the present circumstances it seems quite impossible for the Government to go ahead 
with its own plan for development and maintenance of the national highways becau54' of 
resource constraints. 
(Para 64) 
15. The Committee takes a serious view or the delay in finalisation of policy on 
privatisation. The Committee feels that Government should take a decision and proceed with 
a time bound agenda and simplify the policy guidelines and procedures as protracted delays in 
negotiation and approvals are counterproductive. 
(Para 65) 
16. The Committee observes that the Central Government should directly discharge all the 
functions relati ng to national highways. Setting up or National Highway Authority or India is 
a welcome step. Government must take net:eSSary steps to make th~ National Highway 
Authority fully operaiional on professional lines. Any rurtber delay in the matter would 
complicate lhe problems the country is facing. 
(Para 66) 

ANNEXURES 

ANNEXURE-I 
(Vidt para 2 of Introduction) 
List of Wllnesses appeared btf<>rt the Commllt~ 
Sl. 
No. 
Name of Witnesses 
I. Shri C.L. Ram Das. Seeretary. Ministry of Surface Transpon 
2. Shri M.V. Shastri . D.O. (Road Development) 
3. Shri l.G . Mamtani . Chief Engineer (Planning) 
4. Shri R.N. Kaul. Choef Engineer (T.N.T.) 
S. Shri N.K. Sinha, Chief Engineer (T.I.C.) 
6. Shro M.R. Kachhwaha. Chief Engineer (Bridges) S & R 
7. Shri S.C . Sharma. Chief Engineer (R) N 
8. Shri P.R. Rijwani . C hief Engineer (R) S 
9. Shri A.D. Narayan, Chief Engineer (R) ~ 
10. Shri K.B. Sarkar. Chief Engineer (R) S 
II. Shri Prafulla Kumar . C hief Engineer (B) C & w 
12. Shri R. Mukundan Dy. Sccy. P & D 
13. Shri N.S. Jain. Suptd. Engineer (Planning) (R) E 
14. Shri H.R. Sharma , Suptd . Engineer (R) E 
15. Sfiri N.K. Gupta. Chief Engineer (R) W 
16. Lt. Colonel R. Suresh. Joint Director, DGBR 
17. Shri ·A.R.K. Sharma, Superinte nding Engineer (R) 
18. Shri M.A.J. Jeyaseclan. Secretary. (Infrastructure), Federation of Indian Cham· 
l>ers of Commerce and Industry (F:I.C.C.T.) 
19. Shri M.Y. Reddy. Senior Assn . Secretary. (Transport), Federation of Indian 
Chambers of Commerce and Industry (F.I.C.C.I.) 
19 
Date 
28.10.1994 
06~10 . 1994 
28.10.1994 
06.10.1994 
28.10. 1994 
28.10.1994 
28.10.1994 
28.10.1994 
28.10.1994 
28.10.1994 
28.10.1994 
06.10.1994 
28.10.1994 
06.10.1994 
28.10.1994 
06.10.1994 
28.10.1994 
28.10.1994 
28.10.1994 
28.10.1994 
28.10.1994 
31.01.1995 
31.01.1995 

ANNEXU RE-II 
(Vide para 3 of Introduction) 
Press Communique 
Parliamentary Standing Comminec on Transpon a nd Tourism headed by Sbri Pramod Mabajan, 
M.P., has decided to mokc an indepth study of National Highway System in the country l11e 
Committee will examine v~rious ~spccts of N~tio na l Hia hways such as presen t con dition. mainte· 
nance, financial cons traints being faced by the Govt. panicipation of private sector. construction of 
expressways etc . and suggest remedial measures to the Government . 
The Committee invites t!te views of the individualsk>rganisationS'Institutions interested in the 
subjec t maner . The views may be sent in the form o f Memorandum to the Under Sccre~rY. Rajy~ 
Sabha Secretariat, Room NQ. 64-F, Fint Floor, Parliament Hou..,, New Deihl latest by tbe 31st 
October, 1994. 
New Delhi; 
Ocrobtr 11. 1994. 
20 

ANNEXURE-liT 
(vide para 3 or 1ntroduction) 
List of Individua1s/Organi sntion from whome Memoranda were 
rtteivtd by the Commillee 
1. Shn Y.l'. Katyal 
Public Works Dcpa rlmcnt (B & R) 
Haryana 
Chandigarh 
2. Shri Shanmugam . LCE 
Knshnagiri 
Dharnwpuri Distric t 
Tamil Nadu. 
3. Shri Sivasanmugam, M.E. 
F-2, Rohini Garden~. 
Santhome High Road 
Madr t~s-6 000 28 
4. Shri G .S. Bapna 
Co r: ~uha nt Eng ineer & Valuer of Properlies 
Hira Bagh. Ramsingh Road 
Ja1pur. Rajas1hun 
5. Dr H .A .B. Parpia 
Pre~ident 
Ce nuc for Consumer Ed ut~tton & Environment 
Proiec1ion 
llinkal Mysorc . Karnat.tka 
(>, Shri H. Karak (Reade r m Commerce) 
Baharagora College 
P.O . 13aharagora Di~II-
Eust Singhbhum 
Bihar- 832101 
7 Shr i Satis h Ahraham 
Padi np rckara 
Pos1 Box No. 22 
Kottayum-686001 
8. Shri G . Makuga 
Chairman 
Puo1ic Demand Commiuec 
Tamenglong 
Manipur Stall! 
9. Labour Welfare Officer 
Foods, Fah & Fertilizer Ltd .• 
Tadapalli Oudem-534101 
Andbra Pradesh 
21 

10. Shri Gtresh Sanghi, 
Managi!Jg Director 
Sanghi Industries Ltd . 
Sanghinagar, R. R. District 
Andhra Pradesh-501511 
II. M/~ K:trnchi Taxi Company 
No 34, Janpath 
New Dc11u- IL000 I 
12. Slui Thiruvengadum 
Staff Officcr-Homeg uards 
No 494, llnd Cross Road 
Robersonpet -l'fJst 
K G F , Kolar District 
Karnataka-563122 
13 Shn M.N. Badre 
Hat No. 4, Sunrise 
Var.;ova Road, Andheri (W) 
Bombay-400061 
14. Shri R.G Jain 
No. SA, Pkt.-8 
A~ho k Vihar, Phasc-ll 
Dclht - 110052 
15. Shri B. Vijay Reddy 
Chez Novs Form 
1-10-315. llashmctpet Road 
Bowenpathy. Secunderabad 
Andhra Pradcsh-500011 
16 Shri V Malhotra 
11. Navoda Colony 
Near T .V. Tower 
Allahabad - 21 1001 
17. Sccrcto ry 
22 
Althur Taluk Consumers Protection Forum 
West Kattusscry 
Alathur Post 
Palakkad . Kerala -67854 1 
18 Shri Krishna Mohan 
Gopal Machinery Stores 
rownhall 
Amroha, Uttar Pradesh 
19. Shri K.B. Garg, M. Sc. (Phy.), M.Ed. 
Member District Paryavaran Vahini 
Fath. Sr. Sec. School 
Uda ipur, Rajasthan State 

20. Shro l<umprat<op Kau,fuk 
Mukhaon N:onl\ingpuoa 
Pathur,ilri Po~! 
Jhunjhunu Dim . Rap,th:on-333001 
21. Centre lnr La" ;ond Economic> 
l.HiU. L;anc No. '.1 North Ghonc.la 
Po'! Office MauJpuo, Delhi 
22. Central Road Rc,can:h ln,lolule 
l"cw l)elho 
23 Shn B.S. 13hodc, f.ngont•cr (Retd) 
II No 11-12 Kh;odch:ogan 
23 
Shahpuo- S901Xl3 Belgauon, Karn:ol:ob 
24 Indian Roads Congre" 
l,om,omogar llou'c. Sh:ohphan Ro~d 
l'cw l.klho 
25 Sh11 ~.C. Bhattacharya 
Con,oohlllg ~hothemiloic o nn 
IV IIJ·A. Shcokh S:orai, l'hasc · ll 
Toweou. New Delhi 
26. MaJOO S Ohawuu, Engs. (Rctd.) 
WZ-52. Ruu:ooo Park 
( lpp. Rum•~•h Nagur 
Nt·w Dclho 
27 Shri y (j lllhC 
ll N,, 6·3·'.1 
114, Ao unc.lclpct 
Cluntur -522002 
Andhr;o Pradc'h 
28. Pctlcratoon uf Indian Chamhcr of 
Commerce and Industry 
Fcdcrauon llou'c 
T;ono,cn :O.Iarg 
!'cw Ddlu 

Sl. 
No . 
1. 
2 
3. 
4. 
5 
6. 
7. 
!;, 
l) 
10. 
JJ. 
12. 
IJ. 
14. 
15 . 
1(\. 
17. 
18 
I \1. 
20. 
21. 
22. 
)' __ ') , 
24. 
25. 
26. 
27 
ANNEXURE-TV 
(Vid1! para 36 of Rcpon) 
Eighth Five Yea r Plan 1992--97 
Construct ion of bypasses a.-ound Congested Tours 
State Nll No Name of Bypas.~ Estima ted 
CO>! 
R~ Crore 
Andhm Pradc>h 7 Gooey (L.A. on ly) 0.50 
-do- 5 Nellore 11.00 
-do- 5 Pi! Ia,:. 10.00 
·d<l· ' Eluru son 
·dO· .J3 Km 473 481 (rea lign· 2.0(1 
mcnl) 
Go;;t 17 Rihandar 3 lXI 
·dO· 17 Varna 1.00 
-do- -lA Ponda 2 .()() 
-do- ~A Mardol 1.011 
-do- 17 km . Cl.'i-85 (realignment) J8.00 
Haryanu 10 Rohta k (LA . on ly} 2.00 
Himacha l l'r;Hicsh 2 1 Kulu 19.00 
-do - 22 Slum la (pavement) 2.00 
·dO· 22 Barog (pav e ment) 2.00 
Kttrn(tl\tka 4 Sira 3.00 
-do· 4 ll ubh Dharwar IO.IXI 
·dO· 7 Yelahanb !0.00 
-do- 48 Ha~sa n 5.00 
Kerala 47 i) Trivandrum l'h ase I 16.00 
(Km. 5.6-10 2) 
ti) l'hase 11 (LA . only) 
-dO· 47 Quilo n Phase 11 15.00 
-do· 47 Alleppy ?base u 9.00 
-do· 17 Kozik ode-Phase 1.11' .J(J.IXI 
111, IV 
-do- 17 Tell ichcrry ·M a he K.OO 
Phase -ll (L. A. only) 
Mudhya Prade sh 7 Rewa II. 00 
-do- 7 K~tni (L.A. only} 3.00 
-do· 7 Jabalpur 10.00 
·dO· 3 Mhow (L.A. on I)') 1.50 
24. 
Remarks 
Under BOT 
Scheme 
LA Satwtioncd 
Under 1:301 
Scheme 
8.txl 
Under constru~tion 

25 
Sl. State NH No. Name of Bypass Estima ted Remar ks 
No. cos t 
Rs. Crore 
-- --
28. Muha rash tra (, A kola 7.20 Under S.B.T . 
~heme 
29. -do· 6 Amravati 18.00 ·do-
30. -do· 4 Pan vel -do-
31. -do- so Peth 0.70 Sanc tion ed 
32. Manipur 39 Imphal (L.A. o nly) 5.00 
33. Meghal aya 40, 44 Shillong (L.A . only) 7.00 
34. -do · 44 Jowai (L.A . only) 1.00 
35. Orissa 5 Rambha (Pavement 2.00 
only) 
36. -do - 5 Kha iliko tc 3.00 
37 Pondichen-y 45A Villainu r 1.00 
38. Punjab IS Gurdas pur 4.20 Sanc tion ed 
39. Raja sthun 8 Udaipu r Phase-1 4.00 Under BOT 
Sche me 
40. T;,mil N<tdu 7 Nam; lkkal (L.A . only) 1.00 Sanctioned 
41 -dO· 4. 5. 45 Madr;1s Phase -1 5.00 
42. -do· 47 Coimba torc 18.00 Under BOT 
Scheme 
43. Utta r Pradesh 2 Etawah-Pbase-11 8.80 
44. -do- 24 Hapur Unde r OECF 
(Japa n) 
45. -dO· 24 Moradabad 14.00 Under BOT 
Scheme 
46. -do- 24 Shahjahanpur 9.30 Sanc tioned 
47. -do - 28 Basll-Phase -11 6.00 
48. -do- 28 faizabad-Pha se-11 18.30 Sanctioned 
49. West Bengal )4 Santipur 7.00 Sanctioned 
50. -do · 34 Du lkota 8.00 LA Sanctioned 
51. Gene ral Surveys & 5.00 
I nvcst igations 
52. -do- Unforeseen 18.00 
Tota l 400.00 

ANNEXURE -V 
(Vide para 47 of Report) 
List of Projects being taken up under various external loans 
Sl. No . State 
World Bank Loan-/ 
l. Gujua t 
2. Haryana 
3 Punpth 
.J. Tamil Na<lu 
5 U11ar Pradesh 
6. West Be ngal 
World Bank Loan·ll 
1laryancl 
, Madhya Pradesh 
3. Orissa 
4. Punjab 
5. West Bengal 
6. Ma harashtra 
A .D.H. Loan·! 
1. Andhra Pnidt:;h 
2. Haryttntt 
3. Uttar Pradesh 
NH No. N:Hne of work Length 11\ km. 
NE I Construetion of new <lual carrwgcw~y 
between Ahmedabad- Vadod<~ra 
l 'Widening to 4-lanes km. 50.0--130 .0 
of Murthal -Karnal section. 
45 
2 
2 
l 
3 
5 
2 
2 
2 
Wide ning to 4-lanes km. 252.25--372 .7 
Sirhind-Jalaudhar sec tion. 
Widen ing IO 4-lanes km. 27.8---67 and 
strengthe ning km. 67.0-160.2 
Varanasi bypass mcludmg major bndge 
across Ganga riVer. 
Construction of a new two lane road 
with grade inter-secuon in Delhi-Cal-
cutta corridor. 
Widening to 4-lanes km. 
132.88--212.16 Karnal-Ambala 
Lion. 
a) lndon.: bypass 
b) 4-laning km. 574.4---591.6 Indore · 
Dew as section. 
Widening to 4-lanes km. 0.0-27.8 
Cuttack-Bhubaneshwar section . 
Wideni ng to 4·lanes km. 212.2--252.25 
Amba la-S irhind sec tion. 
Widening to 4-lanes krn. 438.6-474.0 
Raniganj -Bihar/Be ngal border 
Widening to 4-lanes krn -H9--494 
Bassien Cn:ck·Manor sec1ion . 
Widening to 4-la ne; krn 
358.0--395.875 Vijayawada -Vis-
hakhapatnam and km. 0.0-2 .837 of 
Vishakhapat nam- Bhuhaneswar section . 
Widening ro 4-lanes km, 37.30-93.83 
of Delhi-Mathura sccuon . 
Widemng to 4·1anes km. 93.83--148 .33 
Oi Delhi-Ma thuta SCCitO il . 
26 
93.00 
li!UXl 
'>6 ()() 
132.00 
30.00 
65.00 
79.50 
31.40 
18.20 
27.80 
40.00 
35.00 
46.33 
56.53 
54.50 

'il No Stule 
, \ n R Loan -l/ 
K;tl'nataka 
K.:rala 
·\ I J.IJ. L<!l.m-111 
Anuhra Pradesh 
An<.lhra Prao.Je,h 
( btryana 
r I f:.' C. F I otw-1 
IJ tl<tl' Prauc~h 
IJ F. C. F Lo<Jt, -II 
Amlhr~ Pradesh 
2 
O.f.C F. Loa11-flf 
O rissa 
l. uar Praue~h 
0 E. C 1-. rour~sm 
flih:tr 
27 
NH No. Name of work Length in km. 
7 
47 
9 
1 
5 
27 
Wiuenmg to 4-Jancs km. l:\--33 !Jang<t· 
lore lamil Nadu.:Karnataka border 
Widening to ·1-l:tnes ;md strengthcmng 
of cXt:>ltng pavement of Alw;~vc· Vytilla 
and Aroor·Shcrtallat 'ection 
Wtdcning to 4-lane' km . 11>2.5-2~1.0 
of Dclhi-Jaipur secttn ll. 
Widening to 4-lanes km. 25:!-2o5 and 
strens.thcning ~m 217-~f\:\ 
Wide111ng to 4-lane' km ;,4 -L' II. 
str~ngthctung km. 3.-l-SJ 1:! anu 
69 2--75.0 including Eluru bypass km 
53.1'\-
69 2 
Wtdcrung to •H:mcs k111 
39H. 7~--141.44 of l33t w:1 Alld<t· 
Barakat 'cctuttt 
Widentng 10 -1-Janes km .. \6.6.\-107.1!! 
of Dclht-Jatpur road. 
Wtdemng to .:-Jane' km 
107.18-162.50 of Delhi-J<ttpur ,c;:tion 
Wid•·nmg 10 4-lancs km. 474--Sih 
Ra ntgallJ· p., nilg:trh sect ion. 
Widening 111 4-lancs km. 1-llUJ-IY\.l 6 
of Mathul':l •i\gra section. 
Widclltll)! In ~-lane' ;.;m. 3SS.U--I.\4 0 
Chilak;oluripct- \'ipya,~adil \CCil<>n . 
Con~twclt<ltl of bridg~ ov~t liVer 
Yamuna ill Alle~haoad!?-i;ltnl. 
Wu.Je11ing Ill 4-lanes .lag:11pur-Ch:111· 
lltkho l sc.:llltrt 
Widc11tng tu 4-lan'" Glt;JthLbdd-1 laput 
'ecttOil includtng Ghaziabau b\'P""· 
2. 21;, Improvement of ~auonal Highw"Y' 
:lO & 31 around l3tu.ldlust Circu il. 
~- 21; 
& 2\1 
Improvement of :'-httLOilal Highw,ty' 
mou nd llud<lhl'l Circu il. 
2.'i.\Xl 
-17.m 
69.00 
4S.Oti 
n oo 
43.00 
7l(XJ 
55.00 
42.01) 
5l.IJlJ 
l.{3JXI 
5.-111 
4.~ 011 
247m 
lU!/.1!0 

M I NUTES 

VUI 
'EIG HTH MEET ING 
The Committ ee met at 3.30 P.M. on Tuesday. the 20th September, 1994 in Room No. 
139, First Floor. Parliament Hou se Annexe. New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Pramod Mahajan - Clwinnan 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABIIA 
2. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
3. Shri John F. Fernandes 
4. Shri 13hadreswar Gohain 
5. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
6. Shri Satya Praka sh M:•lttviya 
7. Shri Raghavji 
8. Shrimati Basanti Sarma 
9. Shr i Narcsh Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Vila~rao Nagnathrao Gundcwar 
II. Shri K. Muralccdh;~ran 
12. Shri Shivcndra Oahadur Singh 
13. Shri A . Charles 
14. Shri Peter G. Marbaniang 
l5. Shri R. Surendcr Reddy 
16. Shri K.D. Sultanpuri 
17. Stu i Janghir Sing h 
18. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
19. Prof. Prem Dhumal 
20. Shri Ch<Htrapal Singh 
21 Shri Kalka Da~ 
22. Shri Vi,hwanath Das Shastn 
23. Shri Anadi Charan Das 
24. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
25. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
26 Shri S.M. Lal Jan Basha 
27. Shri Uday Pr;ltap Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shn Sati~h Kumar. Join t Secretary 
2. Sltri R;~j;t Ram , Deputy Sec retary 
3. Shri Sycd Ausaf Hu~:•in. Under Sccret"ry 
4. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Shri K.P. Singh, Commit tee Officer 
. . 
· I h) VII mttltngs "' 1M Cl'lmm,nee rcl:nt 11) m.;tUers nul mduckd tn th1s R~pon 
.. Rd;'lu·s 10 m:utcrS nnt •ncludetl 1n lh•" Re-port 
31 
.. • • 
.. • • 

32 
5. The Committee also decided to take up (i} National Highway and • • and; (ii) • • as the 
subject matters for its next nteeting. 
6. •• 
The Commiucc then adjourned at 4.30 P.M. 
•• Relates 10 matters not -i.nduded in this Repon 

IX 
NINTII MEETING 
The Comm iuee mel at 3.00 P.M . on Thursday, the 6th October, 1994 in Room No .. !39. 
first Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Pramod Mahajan 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri Bhadreswar Goha in 
3. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
Chairman 
4. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
5. Shri Raghavji 
6. Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
7. Shri Naresh Yadav 
LOK SABRA 
8. Shri Vilasrao Nagnathrao Gundewar 
9. Shri K. Mura leedharan 
10. Shri A . Cha rles 
11. Shri C.K. Kuppuswamy 
12. Shri Imchalemba 
13. Shri K.D. Sultanpuri 
14. Shri Jangbir Singh 
15. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
16. Prof. Prem Dhuma l 
17. Shri Chatlrapal Singh 
18. Shri Kalka Das 
19. Shri Arvind Trivedi 
20. Shri Vishwanath Das Shastri 
21. Shri Ram Naresh Singh 
22. Shri Ram Sunder Das 
23. Shri Anadi Charan Das 
24. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
25. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
26. Shri Lokanath Choudhury 
27. Shri Krishna Marandi 
28. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shr i Salish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Raja Ram, Deput y Secretary 
3. Shri Syed Ausaf Husain, Under Secretary 
4. Shri K.P. Singh, Committee Officer 
33 

I. Shri 
2. Shri 
3. Shri 
4. Shri 
5. Shri 
2. 
34 
Representatin s of lhe Departmj!Dt of Surface Transport 
M. V .. Shastri. D.O . (Road Development ) 
R. Mukundan , Deputy Secretary 
LJ. Mamtanl. Chief Engineer (Planning) 
K.B. Sarkar. Chief Engineer 
N.S. Jain, Superintending Enginee r 
• 
3. The Comminee heard the representatives of the Mmisuy of Surface Transport on the 
Nalional Highway System m lhe country . The Committee noted that the background note 
sent by th"e Minist~ . was not adequate. During the deliberations, some queries were raised 
and clarifications were sought. The representativ es, however, could not give satisfactory 
replies . The Committee directed the representatives to furnish detailed inforn1ation ''s sought 
for latest by the 20th Oct , 1994. • 
3. I A verbatim record of the proceeding was kept. 
4 The Commlltec also decided to seek clarification~ from the Secretary Mmistry of 
Surface Tro1nspon in the matter at ots meetmg to be held on the 28th Oct.. 1994. 
S. The Committee funher dectded to issue a Press Communique inviting the views of 
interested individuals/org<tnisations in writing on the National Highway System in the 
country. 
6. • • 
The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 P.M . 
·t~cltncs to Jnilttt i'S not inchujcd Jn l hh Rcpon:. 

X 
TENTH MEETING 
The Commillee met at 3.00 P.M . on Tuesday, the 18th October, 1994 
in Commiuee Room 'B'. Ground Floor. Parliament House Annex~. New 
Delhi. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Pramod Mahajm1 -- Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2 Shn S. Austin 
3. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
4. Shri Bhadreswar Goham 
S. Sbri Narain Prasad Gupta 
6. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
7. Shn Raghavji 
8. Shri Naresh Yadav 
lOK SABHA 
9. Shri A. Char les 
10. Shri L. Adaikalraj 
II. Shri K.M. Mathew 
12. Shri Swarup Upadhayay 
13 Shn C.K. Kuppuswamy 
14. Shri lmcha leml><t 
IS. Shn Manphool Singh 
16. Shri K.D. Sultanpun 
17. Shri Jangbir Singh 
18. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
19. Prof. Prcm Dhumal 
20. Shri Chattrapal Singh 
21. Shri Kalka Das 
22. Shri Arvind Trivedi 
23. Shri Vishwanath Das Shastri 
24. Shri Ram Naresh Singh 
25. Shri Ram Sunder Das 
26. Shri Anadi Charan Das 
27. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
28. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
29. Shri lok.anath Choudhury 
30. Shri Krishna Marandi 
31. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
35 

36 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri 
2. Shri 
3. Shri 
2. 
3. 
Satish Kumar, Joint Secretary 
Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
Syed Ausaf Hu.~ain. Under Secretary 
• 
• 
4. The Chairman reminded the Committee about its next meeting to be held 
on the 23th October. 1994 at which the Transport Secretary would be present to 
di~cu~s the subject matter on National Highways . 
The Committee then adjourned at 3.45 P.M. 
•Rel:uu co mattt!rs nol included in ;his Rc:pon. 

XI 
ELEVENTH MEETIN G 
The Commi ttee met at 3.00 P.M. on Friday. the 28th October. 1994 in Room No. 63, 
Fir.ot Floor, Parliament House, New Dclh1. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Pramod Mahajan - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABOA 
2. Shri $. Austin 
3. Shri Jagir Singh Oard 
4. Shri John. F. Fernandes 
5. Shri Bhadreswar Gohain 
6. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
7. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
8. Shri Raghavji 
9. Shrimati Basanti Sam1a 
LOK SABRA 
10. Shri Vilasrao Nagnathrao Gundewar 
ll. Shri A. Charles 
12. Shri Gurcharan Singh Dadbahoor 
13. Shri Peter G. Marbaniang 
14. Swarup Upadhayay 
15. Shri C.K. Kuppuswamy 
16. Shri R . Surcnder Reddy 
17. Shri Imchalemba 
18. Shri K .D. Sultanpuri 
19. Shri Jangbir Singh 
20. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
21. Prof. Prem Dhumal 
22. Shri Chattrapal Singh 
23. Shri Kalka Das 
24. Shri Arvind Trivedi 
25. Shri Vishwanath Das Shastri 
21i. Shri Ram Naresh Singh 
27. Shri Ram Sunder Das 
28. Shri Anodi Charan Das 
29. Shri Siva ji Patnaik 
30. Shri Su khcndu Khan 
31. Shri Lokanath Choudhury 
32. Shri S.M. Lal Jan Busha 
33. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
SEC RETARIAT 
1. Shn Satish Kumar. Joint Secretary 
2. Shn Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
3 Shri Syed Ausaf Husain. Under Secretary 
4. Shn K.P. Singh, Commiuee Officer 
37 

38 
Ministry of Surface Transport 
I. Shri C.L. Rum Das, Secretary 
2. Shri M. V. Sastri. D.G.(R.D.) 
3. Shri LJ. Mamtani. Chief Engineer (Planning) 
4. Shri R .L. Kaul , Chief Engineer. T&T 
5. Shri N.K. Sinha, Chief Engmccr, I'IC 
6. Shri M.R. Kachwaha, Chief Enginee r (Bridges). S&R 
7. Shri S.C. Sham1a Chief Engineer (R) N 
8. Shri P.R. Rijwani , Chief E ngineer (R) S 
9. Shri A.D. Narayan , Chief Engineer (B) N 
J() Shri Prafulla Kumar , Chief Engineer (B) C&W 
II. Shri R . Mukundan. Dy. Secy. P&B. 
12. Shri N.S. Jain, Suptd. Engineer (Planning) (R) E 
13. Shri I LR. Sharma, Suptd. Engi nee r (R) E 
14. Shri N .K. G upt a, Chief Eng ineer (R) W 
15. Lt. Colonel. R . Surcsh. Joint Director. DGBR 
16. S hri A.R .K. Sharma. Superintending Engineer (R) 
2. • • 
3. The Committee then heard the views of the Sec rewry and other offic ials of Ministry of 
Surface T ran sport on the Nationa l l lighways System in the country and sought clarifications 
from them. 
Duri ng the course of delibe rations. the members wanted to know the rationale behind the 
criteria (or selection of ro;~d~ from the routes recommended by the National T ransport 
Committee for addition to National Highway Network . The Secretary. Surface Transport 
ag.reed to submit a detailed note on this s ubj ect. 
A verbat im record of 1hc proceedings was kept. 
The Committee then ad journed m 5.30 P.M . 
•Reh:ues to maucn not included in lhis Rcporl. 

xn1• 
THIRTEENTLI MEETiNG 
The Committee me1 al 11.00 A.M. on Tuesday, 1he 3Jsl January, 1995 in Room No. 139, 
Firsl floor. Parliamcnl House Annexe, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
J. Prof. Prem Dhumul - Chairman 
ME!'.ffiERS 
RAJYA SABIIA 
2. Shn S. A U\lin 
.l. Shn Jagir Singh Dard 
4. Shri Bbadreswar Gohain 
5. Shri Salya Prakash Mulaviya 
tl. Shri Raghavji 
7. Sbrima1i Oa~an1i Sarma 
R. Shri lqb<tl Singh 
9. Shri Shank:or Day;d Singh 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri Shivcndra Bahadur Singh 
I I. Shir A. Charles 
t2. Shri K . M. Mathew 
IJ . Shri Peter G. Marbani;mg 
14. Shri Swarup Upadhayay 
15. Shri C.K. Kuppuswamy 
Ill. Slui K.D. Sullanpuri 
J7. Shri Jangbir Singh 
18. Shri Santosh Kumar G<mgwar 
19. Shri Chattr~pa l Singh 
20. Shri Kalka Das 
21. Shri Vishwamnh Das Shastri 
22. Shri Ram Naresh Singh 
23. Shri Ram Sunder Das 
24. Shn Anandi Charan Dus 
25. Shri Sukhcndu Khan 
U• Shri Kri<hna Marandi 
27. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
J. Shrimali V .S. Ram;t De vi, Secretary-General 
2. Shri Sali<h Kumar, Jom1 Secrewry 
3. Shri Raja Ram, Depu ly Secrewry 
4. Shri Syed A usaf Husain. Under Sccrcl<lr)' 
5. Shri K.P. Singh. Commince Officer 
Repr~se nt at i ves or Feder alion of Indian Chamber of Com merce a nd Ind ustry 
1. Slui M.A.J. J eya~ecltt n , Secrclary (JnfraMructure) 
2. Shri M. Y. Reddy. Senior Assn . Secrelary {Transport) 
2. •• •• 
· Xll mtt"h ng rC'IAtt"S 10 m;atccn nl)t indudcd In thi' Report 
• • R<latc:s co m3tlt"ts ooc ill(IIJdt"d t l'l this Rtpot't 
39 

40 
3. The Committee cons idered the memoranda received from various individuals/organisa· 
lions/in stitution s on the National Highway System in the country. The Comm ittee then 
heard the represe ntatives of Federation of India n Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
(FICCI) and sought clar ifications on some matters re lating to the Nationa l Highway System 
and private participation in the road sector. 
A verbatim record of the proceedi ng was kept. 
4. Thereafter , the Committee decided that members willing to give their suggestions, 
should send the same to the Secretariat by the . 7th Feb, 1995 for incorporation in the Draft 
report on the National Highway System in the country . 
5. • • 
The CommiHcc then adjourned at 1.00 P.M. 
• Relates 10 m3ner not mdoded 10 this Report. 

XIV 
FOURTEENTH MEETING 
The Commiuee met at 3.()() P.M. on Tuesday, the 21st February, 1995 in Room No. 63, 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri S. Austin 
3. Shri John. F. Fernandes 
4. Shri Bhadreswar Gohain 
5. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
6. Shri Raghavji 
7. Shrimati Basanti Sarma 
8. Shri Naresh Yadav 
LOK SABHA 
9. Shri Muraleedharan 
10. Shri Shivendra Bahadur Singh 
11. Shri A. Charles 
12. Shri K.M. Mathew 
l3. Shri Peter G. Marbaniang 
14. Sbri C.K. Kuppuswamy 
15. Shri Manphool Singh 
16. Shri K.D. Sultanpuri 
17. Shri Jangbir Singh 
18. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
19. Shri Chaurapal Singh 
20. Shri Kalka Das 
21. Shri Vishwanath Das Shastri 
22. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
23. Shri S.M. Lal Jan Basha 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Sbri Salish Kumar , Joint Secretary 
2. Shri Raja Ram, Deputy Secretary 
3. Shri Syed Ausaf Hu.sain, Under Secretary 
4. Shri K.P. Singh, Committee Officer 
2. • • • 
3. The Committee then considered the Drafl 13th Report on National Highway System in 
the country and adopted the same with slight modifications. 
4. The Committee authorised the Chainnan to make necessary cb;mges in the Report in 
the light of the discussions held in the meeting. 
The Commiuee then adjourned at 4.00 'P.M. 
•Rdat" to manrrs n<H tncludrd 1n thh Report 
41 

XV 
FIFTEENTH MEETING 
The Commiuee met at 3.00 P.M . on Tuesday, the 7th March, 1995 in Room No. 63, First 
Floor. Parliament House, New Delh1. 
PRESENT 
I. Shri Pramod Mahajan - Chairman 
MEMBERS 
RAJYA SABRA 
2. Shri John F. Fernandes 
3. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
4. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
5. Shn Raghavji 
6. Shri Iqbal Singh 
7. Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
8. Shn Nare>h Yadav 
LOK SABRA 
9. Shri A Charles 
10. Shri lmchalemba 
11. Shri K D Sultanpuri 
12. Shn Jangb1r Singh 
n. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
14. Shn Kalka Das 
15. Shu Vish•wmath Das Shastri 
t6. Shri :>ukhcnuu Khan 
17. Shn SM. Lui Jan Basba 
SECRETARIAT 
I. Shn RaJa Ram, Deputy &crctary 
2. Shri Syed Ausaf Husain. Under Secretary 
l 5hrt K.P Singh Commiuce Q((Jcer 
2. • • 
1. • 
• • • 
• • • 
4. The Commiucc authorised its Chaim1an and in his absence Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
to present its thirteenth Report on the National Highway System to the Rajya Sabha, and 
Shri lmchalemha and 1n his abscm:c Shr i Sukhendu Khan to lay the Repon in the Lok 
Sabha. 
The Commlltcc then adjourned at 3.45 P.M. 
42 