RAJYA SABHA 
COMMI1TEE ON TRANSPORT AND TOURISM 
(1993-94) •• 
! 
SECOND REJ>ORT 
ON 
GOVERNMENT POLICY ON 
PRIVATE AIR TAXI OPERATION AND 
MATIERS CONNECfED . THEREWITH 
. 1 7 AU r 1993 
(PRESENTED ON , 1993) 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
August, 1993/Sravana, 1915 (Saka} 
.,. 

··<J~' 
i· 
Page No. 
·' 
RAJYA SABHA · $EC~ET ARlAT 
ERRATA 
TO 
SECOND REPORT OF COMMI-TTEE 
ON TRANSFll(fRT & TOURISM 
(iii) Para 2, Line 5~ for 'repre:Sentcttive' read 'represe~t.ives' 
Line 6, for 1subseque:1ts trip' read 'subsequex:: meeting' 
1. Top Line, for 'CHAFER' read 'CHAPTER' 
2. 
·3. 
4, 
5. 
6. 
7. 
9. 
11. 
15. 
Para 1.1, Line 4, .for Iunder restricti 1 read 1\,lr:Z.estricted' 
Para 1. 4, Line -1, ·for 'Rajya' read 'Lok' 
Para 1. 9, Sl. No. 3; for and read in and add. 'a."ld'-·a;:fter loss·$ 1 
Para 2.1, Line 9, for 'admited' read 'admitted' 
L.LTJ.e 14, for 1may' read 'May' 
Top Line, for 'he' read 'the' 
./-- ---
Para 2.10, Line 2, for 'is 1 read 'in' 
Para 2.11, Line 3 ,. for 'udtter' read 1urrder' 
Para 2.14, Line :9, for 'effected' read 'affected· 
Line 34, for 'ifuprotar.t' read 'important' 
Para 2.17,Line 2, fo:- 'Ta:xi' read 'Taxis' 
Para 2.20, Line 1, for- rpiolts' read-'Pilots' 
Para 2. 27, Line 16, for 'enconomic' read 'econo=:!ic' 
Para 3.1, Line 5, for 'the 1 read 'be' 
Para (c) Line 15, for 'calcutation' read 1 calcul~:ion " 
Para (d) Line 2, for '?ersent 1 read 'present' 
16. Para (g) Pne l; for 'to go' .read 'g~ ·.,:to' 
18 .• · Para 4.5, bottom line for 'passanger' read ·-=•pas:enger' 
19. I...ine 3, for 'proposal' read 'proposed ... ~ 
20... Para 4;:15, Line ··-"3, -for ·1:no§nier' .r.ead 'Dorr.irr' c::nd for 'inl read 
Para 4.16, Line 2, delete 1loss' 
Line 7. for 'Dosnier' read ' Dornier' 
Line 8 for 'DR 1 read 'FDR 1 
'-- . 
/ 
i . 
t 

, 
: .. . : . t 
.. 
• 
21. Line 6,frorn bOt to= for · 'rio' ··read 'not• · 
~3. Line 10, for 'whe:r . .' read 'When' and for 'decheclt' read 'D-check' 
25. Para 5. 3, Line 3, 3.dd ~session; after 'Mor-saon' 
26. 
28. 
29. 
31. 
36. 
38, 
4L 
43, 
44. 
Para 5, 5, _ Sl. No . (e) Line 2, :vr "reconsituted' read 
'reconstituted' 
Para 5. 7, Sl. No. (Ii) Line 3, for 'Effecti~t' read 'Efficient' 
Para 5. 8, Line 1. :or •out' read 'cut' . 
Line bottom, del e :~ 'in ~ 
. . 
Para (L) Line 2, :or 'rigths 1 read 'rights' 
Para (m) Line 2, :or 'I.C.C.' read 'I.O.C. ' - --
Para 2, Line bott o~ for 1opertors' read 'operators' 
Para 3, Line 3, fe::- 'for' read 'from' 
Sl. No. (IV) for '::-enewal' read 'renewable ' 
Sl. No. 6(i) Line 2, for 'Pubic' read 'Pub lic' 
SI. No. 13, Line:, for 1tranportation 1 rezc 'transportation' 
SI. No. 14, for '~'?- IS: read 'NRis' 
Line 2, for 'AIR: ::-ead 1Air' 
SL No, 1 (iii) Li:-.: 1, ' for 'Repayment' rea d ;Repayment ' 
Line 4, for 'Ind i ~ Airlines' read 'Indian Airlines' 
Line 9, for 1 7412 -;- reaC. 1 31-74127 1 
Line 13, for '/92 ! :-ead '/91 1 
Line 14, for 1 /lQ::· read '/1991; 
45, Line 8, for '7412'7 read '31-74127 ~ 
53. Sl. No. 28, for :::.gbir; read 'Jangbir' 
55. Sl. No. 1, for •c::-.=.irmam' read 'Chairman ' 
57. Sl. No. 7 deletoa 'Shri ' 
59. Line 5' for 'MEr !: E.?~S' read 'MEMBERS I 
61. Para 3, Line 11 fc:- 'Monson' read 'Monsoo r.' 
~ ~ 

0 
CONTENTS 
1. Composition of the Committee . 
2. Introduction 
3; Report . . 
4. Note of Dissent . 
5. Annexures 
6. Minutes 
, 
... 
<. \ ¥ · 
PMiES 
. (i) - (ii) 
(iii) 
J.J() 
31·32 
JJ-41) 
51-61 
.. 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMEN­
TARY STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT AND TOURISM 
- (1993-94) 
· -1. Shri Pramod Mahajan-Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri S. Austin 
3. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
*4. Shri John F. Fernandes 
5. Shri Ghufran Azam 
· 6. Shri Bhadi'eswar Gohain 
7. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
8. Shri Ram Jethmalani 
9. Shri Iqbal Singh 
10. ~hri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
11. Shri Mohd. Khaleelur Rahman 
12. Shri Ratna Bahadur Rai 
'13. Shrimati Basanti Sarma 
14. Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
15. Shrimati Veena Verma 
LOK SABHA 
16. Shri Vilasrao Nagnathrao Gundewar 
17. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
18. Shri Shivendra Bahadur Singh 
19. Shri A. Charles 
20. Shri L. Adaikalaraj 
21. Shri Gurcharan Singh Dadhahoor 
22. Shri K: M. Mathew 
23. Shri Peter G. Marbaniang 
24. · Shri Swarup Upadhayay 
25. Shri C. K. Kuppuswamy 
26. Shri R. Surender Reddy 
27. Shri lmchalemba 
28. Shri Manphool Singh 
29. Shri K. D. Sultanpuri 
30. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
31. Prof. Prem Dhumal 
32. Shri Chattrapal Singh 
.. 
.. 
,. 
·---'-
. ) 
. . · 
(i) 

lii) 
33. Shri Kallw Da' 
34. Shri Arvind Trivedi 
35. Shri Vishw<ulath Oas Shastri 
36. Slui Ram Narcsh Singh 
37. Shri Ram Sunder Dass 
38. Shri Anadi Charan Das 
39. Shri Sivaji Putnuik 
40. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
41. Shri Lokanath Choudhury 
42. Shri S. M. Lui J:.m Baslw .. 
43. Slui Krishna Marndi 
44. Shri Uday J>ratup Singh 
45. Shri Janghir Singh 
'SECRETARIAT 
--1. Shrimati Shovana Narayan. Director 
2. Slui Raja Ram, Under Sccretury 
3. Slui P. R. Guharoy. Committee Officer 
4. Shri Ram Behari, Committee Offkcr 
0. 
•Term expired on 7th July, '93 . Renominated un 2nd August '93. 

( ¥ 
INTRODUCTION' 
I. the Chairman of Dcpurtment Relutcd Purlimnentury Standing Committee on 
Transport and Tourism. huving been authorised by the Committee to present the Report on 
their behalf, present this their Second Report. 
2. The Committee took up for considcnttion Government policy on Air Taxi Operution, 
its impuct on Indiun Airlines and matters connected therewith. The Committee, at . its 
1111.:cting held on the 9th June, 1993 heard the Secrctury. Department of Civil Aviation in the 
nwtter. The Committee ulso heard the management of the lndiun Airlines at its meeting 
hdl.l on the 7th July. 1993 and ulso the representative of the private air taxi operators in the 
matter at its subscqucnts trip on 8.7.93. '" 
3. The Committee considered and adopted the Draft Report at its meeting held on the 
21st July, 1993. Shri Shivaji Patnaik, M.P. and a Member of the Committee, vide his letter 
dutcd 22.7.1993 gave a note of dissent which has been appended with the Report . .t 
New Delhi; 
July 21, 1993 
(iii) 
PRAMOD MAHAJAN 
Chairman 
Committee on 
Transport & Tourism 
«·. /'; __ .__,.., . 

CHAPER I 
AVIATION ~POLICY 
\ '¥ -
Section 18 of the Air Corporations Act, 1953 confers monopoly right of operation of 
scheduled air transport services on the Air Corporations (Air India and Indian Airlines and 
their associates) while there is an impression that the Open Sky Policy announced by 
Government in April, 1990 permits under strict operation of Air services by Air Taxi 
Operators. · 
The Air Corporations Act, 1953 Section 18(1) provides as under:-
" ..... It shall not be lawful for any person othe r.. than the Corporation or "their 
Associates to operate any scheduled air transport service from, to, in or across . 
India ...... " 
Sub-section 2 of the said Section also provi~es::_ 
"Any person who operates a scheduled air transport service in contravention of the 
provisions of this Section shall be liable in..{espect of each offence tQ. a fine which 
may extend to One Thousand Rupees or to imprisonment which may extend to three 
months or to both." 
1.2 Under the said Act, Corporations means ''Indian Airlir.es" and "Air India Inter­
national" established under Section 3 of the Act and Corporation means either of the 
Corporations. 
1.3 Air India, Indian Airlines and their subsidiary Vayudoot Limited created under the 
provisions of the said Act continues to function till date. 
1.4 A suo-moto statement was made in the Rajya Sabha on 11.4.1990 by the then 
Minister of Energy and Civil Aviation on certain matters pertaining to Cargo Operation, Air 
Charters and Air Taxis. · In the suo-moto statement the following provision/guidelines 
relating to the Air Taxi Operation were made:-
, 1. "At present air taxis ctin operate to 55 specified ~tirports in the country. This 
limitation will be abolished. Air Taxis will be permitted to operate to all the airports in the 
country which are open to scheduled operations, subject , however, to prior approval of the 
authorities of the airports where such approval may be required. 
2. At present, there is a ceiling of 50 seats on the capacity of the aircraft that can be. 
operated under the scheme. This ceiling will be abolished. However, to ensure that the 
scheme contributes to the augmentation of capacity for genuine toursit and public passenger 
traffic, the minimum seating capacity . for air taxi operations will henceJorth be 15 and the 
actual physical configuration of the aircraft should ensure this minimum seating capacity. 
Approvals already given for aircraft with a lower seating capacity will .however not be 
reopened. 
· 3. At present, there · is a ·limitation that air taxis should operzte two hours before or .... 
after the scheduled time of the flights of Indian Airlines and Vayudoot. This restriction wjll _.. 
be abolished. - -·-· . . 
4. Air . Taxi servicecan b~ operated both as a charter or on a non-charter basis. The 
schedule of operations not necessary to take approval for each flight separately from the 
DGCA. 
5. At present, there is a restriction that air taxi operators should not charge fares lower 
than those of Indian Airlines and Vayudoot on a pro-rated basis. This restriction will be 
abolished. 
-~-· 
1 
. ~.:l. :, __ 
-.. . {~· 
· .. 
-·· .·-:· 
·-. ,. 
' I ., 
. I 
·i 
r 

·.·· ,_ ; · . · ···. 
2 
These decisions have been taken in order to give a boost to the export and tourism 
earnings as well as to enhance air cargo and passenger capacity of the country. I would 
welcome the suggestions of the Hon'ble members for further improvement in this area." 
1.5 The Department of Civil Aviation vide their Order AIC NO. 24190 dated 
11.12.1990 issued further guidelines for Air Taxi Operation (See Annexure-!). The same 
Department vide their Order AIC No. 18;1)2 issued clarifications pertaining to Open Sky 
Policy for Cargo flights from India (See Annexu·re~ll). That Department vide their Order 
AIC No. 3193 dated the 25th February, 1993 (See Annexure-Ill) issued an · addendum to the 
Order AIC No. 24 of 1990 pertaining to guidelines for Air Taxi Operation which provides 
for obtaining of N.O.C. from I.A.A.I., Vayudoot and Pawan Hans for employing any of 
their employees for Air Taxi Operation. The Departmoot of Civil Aviation vide their AIC 
No. 4193 dated 15th March, 1993 issued further guideline for operation of tourist charter 
flights to India (See Annexure-IV). 
1.6 On 4th May, 1993, the Ministry of Civil, Aviation and Tourism in an answer to 
,.Rajya Sabha Unstarred Question 823 stated as under:-
"The Open Sky Policy of the Government- is in respect of Cargo flights only. Cargo . 
operations ·under this Policy have recorded impressive growth." 
"In pursuance of policy announcement on air taxi operations in Parliament on 
· 11.4.1990, air taxis are allowed to operate to all airports in the country which are 
open to scheduled operations subject to prior approval of the airports authorities 
~·.:. wherever necessary. As a part of the same policy, there is no restriction on fares 
charges by Air Taxi Operators." 
' ; 
l• - --·· 
1.7 It is understood that the Air Corporations (Transfer of Undertakings on Repeal) 
Bill, 1992 is pending in the Lok Sabha since 4th May, 1992. The Bill provide~ for the 
transfer and vesting of the undertakings of Indian Airlines and Air India respectively to and 
in the Companies formed and registered as Indian Airlines Limited and Air India Limited 
,and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto and also to repeal the Air 
' Corporations Act, 1953. 
1.8 In view of the fact that the Air Corporations Act, 1953 and operation of Air Taxis 
under the Open Sky Policy announced by Government are at variance, the Committee 
decided to consider Government policy on Air Taxi Operations and matters connected 
therewith. The Committee also decided to hear the views of the Secretary, Department of 
Civil Aviation as well as the representatives of the Air Taxis Opera!ors. 
1.9 ISSUES BEFORE THE COMMITTEE 
1. Legality of Operation of private air taxis; 
2. Impact of suo-moto statement by the Minister of Civil Aviation on 11.4.1990 and the 
guidelines issued. thereunder regarding operation of Air Taxis; 
3. Adverse effect of private taxi operation on Indian Airlines- in regard to increase and 
losses exodus of skilled personnel; ___ / 
4. Operation of Air Tax~s fleet position, their maintenance and operational routes; 
5. Fulfilment of aviation ~'equirements by the Private Taxi Operators; 
6. Quality of service being rendered by these Operators vis-a-vis . Indian Airlines; 
7. Co-ordination between Indian Airlines and Private Taxi Operators; 
8. Role of Air Taxis in promoting exports and tourism; 
9. Conditions required for fair growth of Private Airlines to provide better services to 
the public at reasonable costs; 
10. Requiremen~ of seating capacity to meet the present requirement of air traffic. 

" t ,_ 
CHAPTER II 
VIEWS OF MINISTRY OF CIVIL AVIATION 
The Secretary, Department of Civil Aviation, while deposing before the Committee on 
9.6.1993 admitted that the present ongoing liberalisation of economic policy started from the 
aviation. He submitted that still there is no clarity 'about this Policy. After announcement of 
the Policy in April, 1990 it was felt that it required amendment in the Air Corporations Act, 
1953. Views were expressed that the policy should 9e modified und made conforming to the 
existing law. However the Government decided to go ah'ead with the policy announced in 
April, 1990 and a Bill to repeal the Air Corporations Act. 1953 was introduced in the · 
Parliament in May, 1992. He referred to the questions raised in and outside the Parliament 
about the legality of policy on Air Taxis Operation. The Secretary admited that the existing 
Law and the Policy announced are at vuriance unU Government propose to amend the 
. existing law. Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation also admitted before the Committee that 
generally after introduction of a Bill in the Parliamem it goes through the process to become 
Act. But in the instant case it has not happened so far. The Bill has been pending 
consideration for more than a year after its introduction in may, 1992. The main reason for 
non consideration of the amendment is that there is lack of clarity in the Government Policy 
regarding operation of Air Taxis. The intention of the Government is to amend the existing 
Air Corporations Act, 1953 so as to be consistent with the Government Policy on Air Taxi 
Operation. Till amendment is made in the existing law, the policy is to keep the operation of 
air taxis limited within the law. Under the existing law, any scheduled flights can only be 
operated by the Air Corporations mentioned under Act. Air Corporations means Air India 
or lnidian Airlines or their Associates. The Act further defines the "Scheduled air transport 
_ service" as an air transport service undertaken between the same two or more place and 
according to a published time table or with flights so regular or frequent that they constitute 
a recognisably systematic series, each flight being open to use by members of the public. 
• "The law does not prohibit operation of non scheduled flights. When asked to comment on 
the fact whether the Air Taxis Operation are at present not operating any scheduled flights 
· and whether such flights are legal under the law, the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, 
· informed. 
"That is the law according to our understunding and we have consulted the Law 
Ministry. I would like to tell the Committee that considerable amount of examination 
has taken place and what 1 am submitting before the Committee is the result of our 
interaction with legal experts. What is scheduled air transport service is already 
defined in the Act. It is very clear and it is a very tightly drafted law. Section 2 of 
the Act clearly defines what is scheduled air transport service." 
"I must submit again for the purpose of clarity that the pe~mits given by the DGCA 
for air-taxi operation are issued under the guidelines, making it abundantly clear that 
the permit is given for non-scheduled operation. DGCA cannot give permission _ for 
scheduled operation. Sir, I am confident that' I will clarify the position to your full 
satisfaction. The permit is issued only for non-scheduled operation. _Now the point 
that the hon. Chairman mentioned is that after all they are not free to operate from 
anywhere and at any time they like .. and in reality whether somebody is actually 
authorising air taxis to operate scheduled air transport service attracting the 
limitations imposed by the Act." 
2.2 The Secretary further informed that at present, Air Taxis are operating between · 
two stations. They are operating at a particular time each day and everybody knows it. The · 
-'· 
/ . 
3 
....: 
.1 • 

.... 
4 
: only thing is that it is not published. Moreover Air Taxis operation is something different 
i from taxis operating on the road where one can operate any time according to his will. But 
: ~ - - - so far as Air Taxis in the air is concerned, nobody can go to the airport and fly out at his 
will. · It takes proper planning, permission of DGCA and other concerned authorities and if 
they are to be operated on regular basis between two destinations, they are required to give 
a schedule of such flights to the authorities concerned for prior permission. Further the 
permission is not taken daily and for each Uight. The Secretary also informed that the 
permits given by the DGCA for Air Taxis Operation are issued under the guidelines making 
it abundantly clear that the permits are given for non scheduled operation. The DGCA 
i ... • 
1.· . 
cannot give permission for scheduled operation. · .. 
2.3 Although the Secretary; C. A., neither admitted nor mentioned but this is clear that 
Air Taxi Operation at present being undertaken are scheduled flights without publishing 
their schedule of operations. . 
2.4 The directions of D.G.C.A. issued tq the Air Taxis Operators prohibiting 
publication of their schedule of flights is meant only to avoid violation of the provisions of 
Air Corporations Act, 1953 and nothing else. Tl'l.£ Secretary, however, admitted that as per 
the guidelines the schedule of operations of Air Taxis can ·be filed in advance and it is not 
_ nec~ssary to take approval for each flight sepanitely from the D.G.C.A. 
2.5 . The Secretary also clarified: 
"I must make it very clear before this august body thar it will be wrong on my part 
to say that everything is fine and nobody is violating the Jaw. No, Sir. There could be 
possibilities of somebody violating the law ... " 
"By somebody who could be operating a scheduled air transport service, who is not 
authorised to do it. Nobody is authorised to do so." 
"The action has to be taken by the regulatory authorfty. We have a regulatory 
authority on the subject" which is the Director-General of Civil Aviation. Everybody 
knows, the hon. Members are aware that the Air Taxis have been permitted to 
operate non-scheduled service, but in actual practice some of them could be 
operating services of scheduled nature. This is the opinion or rather the impression." 
2.6 To a query as to what will be the position when a person or a body representing 
public utility service not operating an Air Taxi service, publishes the time table of all the 
airlines for the benefit of Air passengers and whether it will attract the Jaw, the Secretary 
submitted: 
"the 'Times of India' or whoever is publishing it is not punishable. · But under the 
Act. .. " 
"As a matter of fact, a reference has come to me like that. I know this cannot be done. 
If he does it, then · we have the law courts and things will have to l;>e settled there. 
Many of our actions are being challenged before courts :-" 
2. 7 The Secretary also clarified that: 
. "the DGCA cannot issue any orders, statutory or otherwise in conflict with the law. 
When I say "statutory order", I mean he is statutorily empowered to issue orders. That 
is what I am submitting. The guidelines spell out the conditions o( the issue of permit. 
It also has a clause that says that anyone who violates any of the conditions, is liable to 
forfiet ·the permit to operate." 
2.8 To a query as to whether air taxis are operating as per the Jetter of the law and not 
as per the spirit of the law, the Secretary submitted that: 
.·' 
~·I would respond exactly in the spirit in which the hon. chair is asking me this 
question. Thefe is an element of haziness. I will come back to the question, to the same" 
point with which we started; policies vis-a-vis the law of the land as it stands. The Jaw is; 
very clear that no scheduled air-transport service can be pperated by anyone other than 

l "" 
5 
the two Corporations and their associates. If anyone is operating it, obviously, he is 
violating the law. Out policy, our duty as the executive, is to see that as far as possible 
within the framework of the policies announced on the floor of the Parliament, 
everybody is brought within the ambit of the law. That is why very clearly we have said 
that nobody can publish any schedule. Thereafter it is a matter of fact whether anybody 
is actually operating a scheduled air-transport service or not. If that fact is ascertained 
beyond doubt and it is found that somebody is violating the law, I would hold the view 
action is required against him." 
2.9 He further added: 
"It is very difficult for me to pronounce on facts, Sir. The facts will come out on the ­
basis of reports that come to the Ministry. You will kindly understand my predicament. 
I · am trying 100% to be as constructive and as responsive as possible. How does one 
know about it in the Ministry unless the facts are brought out that _ somebody is 
violating the law? The Parliament is also saying that. Parliamentarians on the floor of 
the House have mentioned that the law is beingviolated. The Minister 'also said that if · 
anybody would violate the law, he would take action. He has gone on record that he 
has forbidden publication of the schedule because that is clearly violative of the law." 
2.10 He clarified the position of suo-moto statement vis-a-vis the law on the subject. 
"On this point I have got absolutely no problem is stating very clearly that no statement 
can override the law. There is no doubt in my mind on this subject. But, Sir, you will 
understand that when it comes to the executive arm of the Government, it is composed 
of hundreds of people. They also have to give due respect and regard to statements that 
have been made on the floor of the Parliament, in pursuance of which successive 
Governments have gone on record saying that they would continue to follow the liberal 
policy. 
2.11 In reply to a question "Is the Civil Aviation Ministry to override the law which got 
sanction of the people, the sanction of the Parliament?" On the basis of a suo-moto 
statement inade by the Minister ·the Secretary replied as udner:-
' 'l 
"On this point I have got absolutely no problem in stating very clearly that no 
statement can override the law. There is no doubt in my mind on this subject. But, Sir, 
you will understand that when it comes to the executive arm of the Government, it is 
composed of hundreds of people. They also have to give due respect and regard to 
sta.tements that have been made on the floor of the Parliament, in pursuance of which 
successive Governments have gone on record saying that they would continue to follow 
the liberal policy. I am absolutely clear on the point that there should be no violation 
of the law. Sir, I am grateful to you for having raised this.;O;question. Today this is the 
vice in which we are caught and I would appeal to the ·fion. Members to give a _ 
direction in which the country can move. The obligation of the executive is to see that 
the law is being followed. Whether law reflects justice or not is not my concern. That 
will have to be decided by the Courts." 
2.12 The Secretary added: 
"Whether a service is scheduled or not scheduled will depend upon the facts and 
circumstances of each case." 
2.13 During the deposition of the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation, it became 
evident that the Government is trying to look into the loopholes to fit in the- air taxis 
operation. The Committee was of the view that nobody is against privatisation and as such 
Jaw must be changed · according to the policy of the Government. If the Govenunent is 
changing the policy, it should see to it that the law is changed first. Committee is well aware _·, 

.. 
·'. 
. ' ~. 
6 
that a Bill to repeal the Air Corporations Act, 1953 is pending for one year. It is very hard 
to believe that the Government could not take it up in the past four sessions. Had it been 
serious about it. The impression of the Committee about the present air taxis operation is 
that these are running by violating the law · and the Oovernrrient should amend the law 
accordingly. 
2.14 About the impact of Air Taxi· Operation on Indian Airlines the Secretary, Ministry 
of Civil Aviation submitted: 
"As far as the impact of that policy on Indian Airlines is concerned, there are both 
positive and negative effects. · 
. " 
I will start with the negative impact first. The negative impact has been most severe in 
terms of loss of skilled personnel, that is, pilots and engineers. A large number of them 
have left Indian Airlines, about 100 pilots and about 40 engineers, because they can 
find better opportunities of getting higher remuneration from the Air Taxi Operators. 
This has severely effected the Operators of Indian Airlines and our assessment is that it 
has affected about one-third of the flights, meaning thereby that th.e normal capacity 
utilisation by Indian Airlines is now less by abOUt 30 percent. I am not talking in terms 
of number of. pilots; each one has limited duty hours, which ar~regulated by rules and 
agreements . If . we go by the old contracts and agreements, I can say that Indian 
Airlines now are unable to utilise the fleet in optimal way." 
" ..... Earlier everybody was almost forced to use Indian Airlines because there was no 
other operator. Now since alternatives have come before the passengers, they have a 
choice and they go by Indian Airlines or Air Taxi Service. 
Now from the _limited angle of Indian Airlines, this is an adverse development because 
they are losing business. But that Is not such a. big setback to the lndiun Airlines. Air 
Taxis are carrying approximately ten to fifteen percent of the traffic. This is on the 
basis of the last review that we had done. The Indian Airlines is carrying much larger 
traffic. I will· no~ go into those details now. The biggest challenge before the Indian 
Airlines is how to keep experienced and trained personnel with it in the face of highly 
· attactive terf!lS offered by the Air Taxi Operators. One view is that they are free to go 
and· offer what the market is offering and so, there should be no worry on that account. 
But the worrycomes on this question that it takes a very long time to make a pilot, a 
Commander. It takes about eight to nine years to train a co-Pilot to become a 
Commander of an aircraft. Even if you pay higher salaries, overnight you cannot get a 
large number of persons. · · 
The positive aspect is that there are now alternatives before the passenger. There are 
signs as of now fhe sign is indistinct and not very clear of indian Airlines as an 
organisation becoming more responsive to the needs of passengers. I would not say 
anything. But I have seen a clear change in their attitude ·and they now feel ·mat the . 
passenger is improtant because otherwise he will go away, desert the Indian Airlines 
and travel by some other air service. So the sense of caring for the pas.liengers is coming 
· to Indian Airlines as an organisation, because now alternatives are available to the 
passengers. Though this is a positive aspect. I ~ould like to qualify it by saying that it is 
still very indistinct and it is not yet reflected in terms of very great improvement in the 
quality of service. But the realisation has come that Indian Airlines must cater to 
passenger needs in terms of better care and comfort and regularity of service in order 
to be in business; otherWise; the passengers will not care for Indian Airlines." 
2.15 From the evidence tendered, it was evident that the Indian Airlines has losta large 
number of Pilots, Co-Pilots and maintenance Engineers, . Technicians etc. and as ·a result 
. thereof one-third of .the operations of Indian Airlines have affected. This being the negative 
;.. , ' 

'· ~: 
J·. -
\ .. ·· 
7 
· . t 
.impact of the Air Taxi Operations on Indian Airlines will ultimately reuslt in further losses ~~ 
in its earning. However, operation of private Air Taxi has positive impact on the Indian ', .:1 
Airlines. The Organisation has now become more responsive to the needs of the ' · f 
passengers because of danger to its survival. · . : ·1 
2.16 When asked to comment whether the Ministry had not visualised the impact o~ . J 
1 the Private Air Taxis Operation on .Indian Airlines the reply of the Secretary of the 
Ministry of Civil Aviation was as under: 
:; . " ..... A concious application of mind reduced to writing was not there." 
... . :~ . . 
! . 
. . ~· . 
,. 
: . 1 · , 
I " 
.·.. ·. r 
, ,1 .-, , 
I ,\ •• • ' t 
.- · .. r 
., 
! - ~ 
'. 
' ' .. . i 
,~ : ·• ' . 
I .. 
2.17 To the Committee, it was evident that before inaking the policy statement on Air 
Taxi Operation, no study/survey was made about its likely impact on the Indian Airlines.· 
2.18 To a query from the Members what action has been taken by the Government to 
compel the Air Taxis Operators who are operating pnly on trunk routes to operate also in 
· ' less attractive remote and backward areas. The Secretary informed that the instructions 
had been issued in December last. He explained: , _ · · · · 
"An air taxi operator should. operate for each long haul service, at least one short 
haul service." . 
2.19 He, however, admitted that: 
"Enforcement part of it was, perhaps, not as much as it should have been at that 
time. When, the negative features came to light during the strike and after the strike 
in a big way then the DGCA. issued instructions and made it obligatory for them to 
submit returns and statistical data as to how many short hauls they operate, how 
many long haul they operate. If there is a short-fall, they will be liable to answer for 
that. So, I must submit that regorous implementation of it has started a few months 
back." · 
, 2.20 On the exadus of trained Pilots, Co-Piolts, Egnineers and Technicians of Indian 
Airlines towards the Private Air Taxis Operators and the action taken by the Government 
to stop the same, the Secretary informed the Committee: · 
· "We find that the Pilots were going away under the rules, theywere supposed to give 
one months notice before leaving and joining anybody else. What they did was, they 
came and gave one month pay. I am talking of the Pilots and Engineers who wanted 
to leave. They just gave the money and said "we have gone" not "we are going" so 
we brought in this clause regarding'No Objection Certificate'. · Sir; I can tell you that 
flight of skilled persons was having a very adverse effect on the Indian Airlines. So 
we started wondering about how to curb this tendency. One way of 'Curbing. this 
tendency is to say that none of .the air taxi operators can employ anybo.dy who is 
employed with the Indian Airlines or the Air India without getting a 'No Objection 
Certificate'. If they are surplus, there is no harm in letting them go. If the Airline~~ 
are being denied of experienced people whom they would not lik~ to go they wou~d 
not give the 'No Objection Certificate'. It had first been issued only as circular. Later 
on we got it incorp~rted as a part of the licence conditions for the .Air Taxi Operators 
that the licence is liable to be forfeited if they employ anybody from the Indian 
Airlines or the Air India without taking . the NOC.'; 
2.21 To · a suggestion that there .should have been some kind of bond or · something like 
that to compel such persons to stay jn the airlines, the Secretary . replied: . · 
"You are absolutely right. We have included this condition for the new entrants.'' 
2.22 During the evidence it was pointed out that private airlines pay higher emoluments 
to pilots for the risk they take in operating flights ~ven · when there are minor snags. 
Further, there . is variation in the working of private airlil!-es: A pilot working ·for private I , . 
I . 
i 
I 
~}~J< 
i . ' . 
. .' f~j' ; ,, 
-~~ t:. ;:~ _ -·-:_-. ·. 
. --1. · ··~ ~ --:: r t"f ...... <i 
j· . 
I 

p .... 
· ~ 
' I - ! ,· , 
:ri 
I 
I 
~ , t.. "" ~- 7. ;~ 
! . -· ~ 
8 
airlines works for nearly 8 hours and in between 'he rests in the airport itself whereas, the 
Indian Airlines pilot works only for 5 to 6 hours. · 
2.23 When asked to comment on the fact if there is any kind of restriction on the number 
of hours a pilot can put in, the Secretary commented as under:-
"The number of working hours put in by a pilot for private airlines is much higher than 
that of an Indian Airlines pilot. But at the. same time they are not violating any rule as 
such. There is a statutory limit of 11 hours. A pilot cannot work more than 11 hours in 
a day; 125 hours in a month and he is allowed not more than six landings in a day. As 
far as the Indian Airlines pilots are concerned, they entered into a bilateral agreement 
with the management some year!i ago that notwittistanding any other rule, they will fly 
not more than 61/2 hours in a day and not more than 65 hours in a month and not more 
than 3 or 4 landings in a day. Now they are unwilling to increase ·the flying hours 
unless they are paid more.'' 
2.24 When asked to comment on the relative aspect of services that are provide 'd in the 
private airlines and how Indian Airlines is going ·te compete with them [n this sphete and 
what steps are proposed to be taken to improve the services of Indian Airlines, the reply of 
the Secretary was: · 
"This is a difficult and important task before us. It is not only an impression but a 
belief confirmed by interaction with Indian Airlines personnel that with the advent of 
air taxis, the Indian Airlines have now felt the need to cater to passengers in terms of 
quality service. Now, to what extent it has been translated into action is something on 
which I am unable to say anything with confidence because for wor!< force, used to a 
particulcu work culture for years; it is extremely difficult to change overnigh ,t. But the 
quality of service is being improved and in fact, introduction of better quality of food, 
upgradation of pre-embarkation and inflight.services, etc., is being constantly emphas­
ised and I am hopeful that they will be improved. There is need for attitudinal change. 
It will take some more time for all these to be actually implemented. And the last point 
that I would like to make on this subject is that since it required time. the airlines must 
be helped to survive." 
2.25 To a ql;1ery regarding the growth of air traffic, the Secretary informed the 
Committee:- · · 
"Sir, the fact is that air traffic is not growing in the manner in which it is expected to 
grow. As a matter of fact, the level of air tniffic attained three years ago during 1989~ 
90 was higher than the present level of traffic. At an earlier stage we were attributing 
it to the grounding of A-320 aircraft and at . another stage we attributed -it t() gradual 
re-introduction of the A-320 aircraft. Today it appears that the level of ecorioJnic 
activity in the country, and worldwide also, is not growipg for air tra.nsportation ·as 
much as it was expected to grow. As a matter of fact, · it will tJe of interest to the 
Committee to know that for the first time in the history of the world after the __ s_ec6nd 
World War, there was a negative growth in air traffic in the year 1991. ,-. 
From 1945 to 1990, it went on increasing . I am t<!lking of the World-~ide position. In 
1991, there was a negative growth. In 1992, it was still at a depressed level. It had not 
gone back to the old path. That is because . of recession prevailing_ in the world 
economy . Having said that, I should also say-that prospects of growth exist in the Asia 
Pacific region. There will be growth here because Europe and America have reached a 
plataeu in terms of air transport. But the Asia-Pacific region is the area of growth. 
Looking at the Indian scenario in terms of emperical evidence, the traffic. has not 
picked up. On the other hand, the level of operations, the level of traffic demand is 
lower now than what it was some three years ago even though larger capacityhas been 

':, 
9 
deployed in the country. In addition to the Indian Airlines fleet to which twelve more 
A-320 aircraft are being added. About 12 of B-737 type aircraft have been brought by 
air taxi operators. So there is a clear possibility of over-capacity prevailing in the 
airlines industry in the country." 
2.26 The view points of the Secretary give a very gloomy picture of the growth of air 
traffic in the country and the Indian Airlines whiCh is already under the Joss is likely to 
suffer the most. The Committee, therefore, feels that in view of the over capacity which 
already exist in the country. Government should re-consider and review its policyof adding 
12 more A-320 aircraft in the fleet of Indian Airlines . .. 
2.27 When attention of the Secretary was drawn to the fact that in the absence of any 
regulatory system and all the air taxis operating on the major trunk routes, entire airline 
industry is likely to become sick, his reply was:-
.. The tmffic is not growing as it should be. The capacity has increased considerably. The 
' entire industry may become sick, including the private .airlines. Our objective should be 
·to see that in our desire to libemlise . We do not repeat the same mistakes that we did 
prior to 1953. There were ten private operators then operating in this country. The 
entire uviution, industry becume sick ut that time. Then it was nationulised.Thc entire 
industry became sick because of internecine problems , the capacity being higher than 
the demand and the requirements of the industry. Today we know that the old system 
of continuing a monolithic and monopolistic service is not be best way of running an 
airline. That is why supplemental air services have been brought into being. Having 
done that. we find that there is a situation emerging of over capacity vis-a-vis demand. 
There is a possibility of the industry becoming sick unless timely action is taken to 
regulate. not in a manner of preventing entry or going back to the same monolithic 
system. but in a more rational and purposeful way by making techno-enconomic 
assessment of the real potentiality. as the Chairman himself has very rightly 
mentioned . Then it may be said. well. this is the type of potential that exists, this is the 
type of capacity that exists and may be some excess capaCity should be there, but that 
excess capal'ity should not_ be so high as to kill everybody, by indulging in fare wars 
and cut throat l·ompl'lition that is happening in some parts of the world, particularly in 
the Atlantk scl·tor. in U._S.A. and Europe. Our objective should be to prevent that 
kind of a situation . It was not there some time ago because there was nobody to be 
rq;ulated, only Indian Airlines. Now that a number of people have come into air taxi c -· 
hu ... tncs.s with capm:it~cs and t~1ere is indic?tion now of some of them getting hurt ~y / / 
thl· arllon of others 111 the pnvate sector atself not to speak of damage to the pubhc · 
\l'l'lor ••irline, some element of purposeful regulation may become necessary. It, is -a f 
,crvicc industry and has to be guided by sui'table norms." . . . I 
2.28 While agreeing with the proposal to introduce some re'galatory system. by m~re 
statutory body the Secretary mentioned:-
.. Yes, Sir, I would submit that if one were to do it through a governmental, 
departmental type of method there is bound to be charges of favouritism, corruption 
and misdoing. You might like to delibemte on this. If the Committee feels, in its 
wisdom. that regulation should be done by a statutory agency which is not a 
department of the ·Government better results could be achieved. It . should be a 
transparent system overseen by an autonomous, statutory body. This is my 
submission." 
. ;., _. · •, ! 
• l , 
.. ... .. 

CHAPTER III 
Views of Indian Airlines 
\ ¥ -
\ . , . I 
• I. 
The Committee at its meeting held ori the 7th July, 1993. heard the views of the Chairman­
cum-Managing Director and other representatives of the Indian Airlines about the impact of 
Air Taxis operation on the Indian Airlines. The C.M.D. of Indian Airlines informed the·. 
Committee: 
"Now in the ne'V scenario that is emerging, Indian Airlines will the facing 
competition in the market, in line with the general atmosphere of liberalisation in the 
country and what we in the Indian Airlines are concentrating on is how we improve 
ourselves and our services to increase t~e present level of passenger satisfaction with 
us. This is one of the major areas into which we have to go in this new context, 
secondly some problems have arisen as a resu!t of the increased operations of air, 
, taxis, particularly, in the area of personnel which is proving to be very difficult;' 
situation for the Indian Airlines at the present moment. Then there is the question of 
the competitive market and the social responsiblffiies of the Indian Airlines should 
continue to discharge as it does at the present moment. There are particularly t~ 
major areas where the impact of the air taxi operators is going to be felt by t~e . 
Indian Airlines. Whatever guidance the Committee can give is most welcome." ' 
3.2 On being asked "what is the number of people who have left Indian Airlines and : 
what categories of staff have gone to the private airlines and what are you doing about it?" ~ 
the reply of the C.M.D. was: . 
"The first is the category of pilots and the second is that of engineers which is the ·. 
most skilled manpower that we have. Sixty-six people had left in 1992. Thirty-nine · 
people have left this year. This makes up a total of 105 in the last two years. Out of 
this, 68 were Commanders. The remaining 37 persons were experienced first officers 
and co-pilots. In 1991, two people had resigned and in 1990, one." 
·He further added: 
"This exodus of pilots is what, that is hitting the Indian Airlines the most. We have 
estimated that if we had operated at the optimum capacity, i.e., 2800 hours of flight 
utilisation per aircraft per day, we would have offered about 43-44 seats to the 
passengers every day. But at the moment, because we do not have enough number of 
pilots. our offering capacity has come down to 31.000 seats per day. This is one 
direct impact." 
3.3 From the evidence tendered the Committee inferred that; but for the exodus of 
pilots, the Indian Airlines would have offered about 43-44,0<Xl seats to the passengers on 
optimum . utilisation of its fleet instead of 31,0<Xl seats which they are offering at present. 
When pointed out that at this rate of exodus of skilled pilots and engineers, the Indian 
Airline .s will be left with only aircrafts and no Commanders, the re~tjon of the C.M.D. was 
"This is the situation, Sir." . · . · ./ 
3.4 When the C.M.D. was asked as to whether the Indian Airlines at any stage thought 
about this policy of Air Taxis Operation and its likely impact on the Indian Airlines, the 
reply of the C.M.D. was: 
, ·. "From whatever I have been able to gather about what happened in 1990 and earlier 
market scenario, perhaps what was behind the whole thinking in the Indian Airlines: 
is that the traffic would go up at the rate of 8 percent. In 1990 that was the' 
expectation of the growth of truffic. Perhaps. may be in that context, they might have. 
thought th<lt there as scope for everybody there." ; 
11 

11 
3.5 The C.M.D. explained as under t~e contingency plan of Indian Airlines: 
"From wha.tever I have been able to gather fro"' the papers, no such contingency 
plan was made to meet the likely impact nf ~ i1c operations of the air-taxi servil·e in 
future. In 1990-91 nothing much h ~;d ha!JI.'I(;ned on the ground. Since last year in 1992 
the position is staring in ~verybo,iy's iacc. Since then attempts are being mi1de. 
Basically we have to approach it from two . <mglcs. One is, what we did about the 
personnel, to retain them. The other is about meeting competition and increasing the 
level of passenger satisfaction." 
H~ further added: 
.:."We have to expedite our own training pattern. As a result of the negotiations with 
the Commercial Pilots Association over a period of time we have fixed training 
pattern. Now we have to change it and speeden up the whole programme. That is thl· 
one area where we have to take action. 
The other would be as an immediate solution to the problem we are thinking of 
giving two years extension to the people who are retiring at the age of 58 years. The\ · 
.can continue to fly as pilots. ·-
· · Earlier we have allowed them to leave the service of the Indian Airlines by giv111g 
one month's notice or one month salary. Now we have amended it. Now they should 
give us six months notice or six months salary . 
. Then, Sir, in this competitive scenario in the market we have to match the "<~1-!l.'" 
much more than what they have been till now. At the moment. negotiations an: 
going on with the Commercial Pilots Association on this matter. We are thinking of 
increasing the flying hours and the availability of individual pilot is also being 
ensured." · 
3.6 On being asked to give figures of the total revenue loss in the last three years on 
account of air taxis operation. the reply of the C.M.D. was:-
. " ... in the last three years on account of air .taxi operation we incurred a loss of 
Rs. 200 crores in 1992-93. Till 1992, air taxi operation was only 4 percent. The 
. impact has not been quantified in that way. Earlier the percentage of their market 
share was negligible. But after the strike of the Pilots in the month of November, 
December and January, it has increased. At the moment , they are having a share of 
· ·19 percent of the market. This is based on our intelligence." 
3.7 When asked to elucidate his point of view in terms of loss of passenger traffic, the 
C.M.D .. informed the Committee: 
"In April this year we carried 21,679 passengers per day. The air taxi operators 
carried 4,271 passengers per day. These are the roughly estimated figures. The 
market share was 84% for Indian · Airlines in 16% 'for air taxi operators . We have . 
compared these figures with the figures for the month of April last year. .The total 
passengers carried by both the ATOs and the Indian Airlit~es were 27.425 per day. 
The number of passengers has come down by l.)()() in April this year. In 'May I992, 
we carried 27,667 passengers and the ATOs carried 1.100 passengers. 1 think there 
was only one operator at that time. In May 1993. we carried 23,232 passengers and 
· the total number of passengers carried was 28,767 ~ Private operators carried nearly 
5,500 passengers. Our market has not .been increasing. Last year two or three 
· uircrafts were operating. Now twenty aircrafts are operating. In June 1992. the 
· number of passengers carried by us was 25,000 and the number of passengers t·arried 
by the ATOs was 1,100. The total number was 26.100. In June 199~. we carried 
12 

'. 
I 
I 
i' ! 
I~ 
22.000 passengers and the ATOs carried 5,00() passengers . The market share was 
81% and 19% respectively. The total number of passengers carried was 27,291." 
3.8 The Committee 'thus came to know that the number of passengers carried by air 
taxis has increased during the period from June 1992 to June 1993. It was 1100 passengers in 
June 1992 while it is nearly 5000 passengers in June 1993. 
3.9 During the same period share of Indian Airlines came down from 25.000 passengers 
per day in June, 1992 to 22,000 passengers per day m June. 1993 . 
.. 
--
., 

CHAPTER IV 
VIEWS OF PRIVATE AIR TAXI OPERATOR 
The Committee at its meeting held on 7th July, 1993 heard the views of M.G. Express, 
the Air Taxi Operator, Shri S.K. Modi, C.M.D. and Shri A.D. Sharma deposed before the 
Committee to express their views on the air taxis operation. On Air Taxis Operation in the 
country, the following were the views of Shri Madi:-
(a) "Sir, we have been working on this scheme for a number of years. It is a well 
known fact that the late Mr. Rajiv Gandhi was very much in favour of introducing more 
airlines. At the moment, if you want to compare India with.,any other country, you can only 
compare it with China, in terms of size and population. You cannot compare it with any 
other country. Now in China, last year, there were 12 million visitors. China has got 300 
aircraft. In our case, unfortunately, we have only 50 odd aircrafts. The riumber of tourists 
who visited India was only 2 million. Since this Committee is also dealing with tourism, I 
would like to point out that it is very important that we take stock as to where we stand 
today in the world market. One of the reasons-1 wouUJ not say that thi_s is the only. 
reason-· Why tourism has not developed much in India when compared with a country like 
China is because of our faulty air traffic policy. Even in China, which is a communist 
country, there are seven airlines. They are allowed to compete with each other. Of course, 
these seven airlines may belong to various regions. One of them may be at the national le~el 
and the ·others at the regional level. Still, there are seven airlines there. Therefore, it is very 
important for us, in India, to see that out tourism industry grows. 
(b) As I said, we had only two million tourists. Look at the size of the country. If we 
want to grow, there is only one way and that is upward . .This is the reason why we took the 
decision to enter into this business. Once we decided that we should enter into this business, 
we wanted to do a very professional job of it. Our company has made the entire selection on 
its own. We have not tried to snatch pilots from Indian Airlines or any other airlines. 
(c) Our paid-up capital is Rs. 24 crores which we ourselves had put in. We have three 
aircraft on dry lease from Lufthansa. We have entered into an arrangement with them 
whereby they are training our pilots, they are training our crew members. We have also an 
inter-line agreement with them. Sometime back I had the occasion to meet the German 
Ambassador. 
He said that about SQO,OOO tourists from Ger~any alone were going to Turkey. The 
reason why we have less number of tourists in India, the reason why they are not coming to 
India, is that they are not able to get confirmed bookings. They are not able to get 
confirmed bookings to the various places in India. Now, India is a big country. When a 
person comes to India, he does not like to see only Delhi or Bombay because it is not every 
year that he can come to India which is far off from Germany. Therefore, when he comes to 
India, he would like to go and see Agra, Khajuraho, Goa and various other places. If a 
person cannot get confirmed bookings, there is no way he can travel to these places. 
Therefore, we decided to enter into this inter-line agreement witb-.L.ufthansa so that we can . 
attract a large ~umber of German tourists to In~ia: We h~ve made some cal~utations. o~ · an//~ 
average, a tounst spends about Rs. 100,000. Th1s 1s nothmg when you take mto account lhe 
hotel cost, the airfare and the shopping that a tourist does. If you consider the number of :, 
tourists who can be attracted-as I said, 500,000. tourists from Germany alone v~sited 
Turkey-It will amount to a mind-boggling figure. You will be able_ to earn something like 
· Rs. 5,000 crores. 
(d) One of the reasons why we have a poor performance in the field of tourism in India 
is because of the persent situation. Therefore, I am glad that you are correcting it, the 
Government is correcting it, in the sense that they have allowed competition in this field, . , . . 
. - .. \. 1~ · ------~-) . 

lo 
they have allowed the so-called private air taxi operators. In this connection, I would request 
that the private ai·r taxi companies should be recognised and they should be given a proper 
status. This would mean that the Air Corporations Act should be amended. This has 
happened in various parts of the world. No where else is there a monopoly. Why shmJld 
there be a monopoly in India? Let the passengers have the choice. This is very very 
important. We feel that the growth that is needed in this country for commerce , for tourism. 
for business. for national integration, is tremendous. 
(e) As I was pointing out earlier, in China, they have 300 aircraft and they are planning 
to go up to 1.000 aircraft. The country whith is on top in this respect is the United States of 
America . It has 6,000 aircraft. In India , we ·have just 50 odd aircraft. I am sorry to say that 
even out of this , only about 40 or l€!ss than number are operational. This is the sad scene 
today. Therefore, if you want a large number of people to t ravel to India, with comfort, if 
you want tourism to develop in India, you will need about 300 aircraft. Of course , you have 
moved in this direction. You have made' a beginning. But I would suggest that the 
Government should allow more private sector houses to come into this field , to buy aircraft. 
to set up ground-handling services and all th<it:' The problems the priVate air taxi operators 
are facing are tremendous. We feel that we should be treated on par with the national 
carrier. The passenger should be in a position to travel in comfort. The passenger who 
comes by the flight of the other airlines should have all the information. he should know 
about the schedule and other things. Another thing is. at the airports. there is a lot of vactn( 
land . A lot of open space is available at the airports which the Indian Airlines is not usin!-!. 
This space can easily be given to the private air taxi opercators. 
Thereby you will earn much more money. It is important that the schedules of all these 
airlines should be allowed to be print t d for the sake of the convenience of the people . 
Fourthly, I think , it is very very important for this Committee to understand that by allowing 
all these things, you will be promoting tourism in a very big way . It is a well known fact that 
from October till March it is impossible to get tickets of the Indian Airlines. it is impossible 
to get bookings of the Indian Airlines. How do you expect the tourists to come here? 
(f) I would like to put before the Committee that it you look at any part of the world . 
all the tourist destinations are ititerconnected. In our country , one of the biggest centre of 
attraction as far as tourism is concerned is Goa . A huge number of tourists-! would say 
half a million tourists-are descending in Goa. We have one of the seven wonders of the 
world in our country, the Taj Mahal. There is no non-stop flight from Goa to Agr<l. Today 
one has to go from Goa to Bombay, then to Delhi and then to Agra. Then he cannot check 
out. He has already booked his hotel in Goa for two weeks. If he can take a flight from Goa 
to Agra to sec the Taj Mahal at~d in the evening he c:.in go back to Goa . that way you l'an 
attract tourists. You cannot expect the Indian . Airlines io do that. Also it is very important 
that people should have trust. 
(g) It is important that when people travel from on~· country to another ·country they 
find air hostesses speaking in their language. We feel very happy when we to go _ariy foreign 
airline and find Indian air-hostesses on board. We forget that from Europe there are not 
many tourists who speak -English. Air-hostesses who can speak German. Italian, French , you 
will never find in the Inqian Airlines. The tourists do not know English. So, that is also a 
problem. There is a communication gap. You are not inviting only English-speaking tourists. 
(h) So, these are the factors which have led us to believe that there is a huge vacuum in 
the country. If the Government of India allows this policy in the right spirit , I can guarantee 
you that the country will attract a huge number of foreign tourists and also our own tourists. 
(i) Sir. if you take today~on't mind my saying so---::-all the major cities o{ the world in 
every country are connected with shuttle services. No longer for flying do you have to book 
in advance. Between London and Manchester , London and Glasgow. New York and Boston 

17 
\ '¥ 
there are shuttle services. That means you go to the airport. Every hour there is a flight. 
Even in Thailand there is every hour service, but not in our country. The situation 
unfortunately in our country is something like that was in the western world or even in the 
eastern world 25 years ago. We are two decades behind , and the passenger is not used to 
that. He is comparing us with them. 
(j) Secondly, it lower ou.r prestige also. A tourist comes to India. It is all right we have 
very big art and we have very big this and that, but ·he is not bothered . He comes to the 
airport, and he goes to tourist destinations. That is how he judges the efficiency of our 
country. If he finds that all these things have happen ·ed very welL he says that India is a 
great country. ·· .. 
(k) Why I am saying this is that I . must congratulate all the parliamentarians and the 
Government for the libcrulisillion policy. I can tell you that every country and all the top 
comp:mies in the world today are ready to come t9 India, to have collaboration or. to 
participate and to develop India. But these are very important factors. . .t 
. - .- ~ ~ - -- ~~-
4.2 When asked to comment whether therQ.. should be some regulatory S¥Stem, the 
representatives of the M.G. Express stated as under:-
There should not be any regulatory system. It has to be survival of the fittest. The 
country is going through a situation where survival of the fittest is the on,ly way. If 
you want me to reserve a seat in one month's advance. I cann't do it. This system is 
not feasible. But it is a well known fact that people who come with foreign 
reservation are not able to travel by some flights because they are overlooked . These 
things agitate the people. If the international community gets confidence in the 
Indian air. l am not saving Indian Airlines, it will be better for the tourism industry 
and the country. The airlines industry has tJ be competitive. lt has to be free for all. 
This is my submission.'' 
4.3 On the point of popularising various tourist destinations in the country Slui Modi 
opened as under:-
"Sir, I said that in the interline agreement we have to go to nearly twenty 
destinations. We have to build infrastructure. When you sig1i an inter-line agreement, 
as we have signed, you have to take the incoming passengers to their destinations. 
That is what I am trying to explain. Suppose a tourist wants to go to Goa and then 
he wants to go to C~tkutta. Then I am defeating my inter-line agreement. Modiluft 
has got inter-l _inc agreement with , at least, ten foreign airlines. I am persuading 
Lufthansa to declare in Germany a 'Promotion India Year'. We are sitting on the top 
of an iceberg. We will definitely be taken in. I am requesting again and again that we 
should not have restrictive policies. Nobody ~ill become sick. as you rightly said. 
because there are plenty of opportunities. Sickness is there where there is less growth · 
potential. Sickness may be due to many reasons . Today. Sir. ~.rplace, l am sorry to .._ 
say. should fly minimum 4,000 hours a year." ./ 
4.4 He also informed that D.G.C.A are not allowing them to bring lates aircraft such-as 
_Boeing 737-400 and Air Bus-300:-.320 for their operations with which they can provide more 
comfortable service to international tourists. On the present state of various restrictions 
imposed by the Government on Air Taxis Operators, the C..M.D. explained his views as 
under:-
"We would like the restrictions to be removed. I say this because they are wide­
bodied jets which are Airbus aircraft and we would definitely like to bring wide­
bodied jets because they are a wide-bodied comfort. In fact. we would like to have jt 
in the domestic sector first. If you fly from Delhi to Madras . it is a three-hour flight 
and you must make flying a little more interesting . Other airlines which are having 

\ ¥ 
18 . 
more than two hours flights are showing movies. You also have to show movies. If 
you are thinking of ,having a new aircraft, I can say that each and every passenger 
can watch a movie so that he does not feel the stress of flying. In other countries, 
they are giving you the latest news and the aircraft has telephones so that a business 
passenger who is travelling can get in touch with his share market and do whatever 
he likes. So, these are the facilities. These are the things which we would like to 
bring into our aircraft. In the USA, there is a TV screen on each and every seat 
where a passenger can watch all the 18 channels and they are giving the latest news­
and in the business and first classes they have telephones with credit cards. 
What I would like to say is that you give us permission and we will get you 
foreign exchange. What more do you want?" 
4.5 On the. 8th July, 1993 the Committee heard' the views of the various Air Taxis 
Operations. The first witness was representatives of Delhi Gulf Airways Services. He 
mentioned that:-
"We have got two helicopters which were brought about 10 years back. Subse­
quently, when Air Taxi operation started in India, we also converted our company 
into an air taxi company. Since then we are working as air-taxi operators and non 
schedule operators. As far as helicopters are concerned, ·we had to face a lot of 
problems from the Government and other agencies. We had started our service from 
Jammu to Vaishno Devi. We did a lot of hard work on it. It was a very good and 
very popular service. Unfortunately we were forced to close it down. Th<tt i~. we had 
to pay royalty charges, we had to pay airport charges and we had to pay so many 
other charges which I don't want to give now. Ultimately we were forced to close 
down. First of all, getting the permission itself took us about one and a half years or 
so. The D.G.C.A. and other Government agencies took a lot of time. The Defence 
N,linistry itself took six months to give us permission to operate between Jammu and 
Vaishnodevi, just about a ten minutes flight. We were harassed for almost one-and-a­
half years. After that we got the permission and we started operating. But because 
our cost str\.}cture is very high, we were forced to close down. We thought the market 
would be there for up passanger service. But it was not there because of heavy cost." 
4.6 When asked to comment what are you doing with your helicopters his reply was 
"They are standing in Delhi waiting for customers." 
On a querry from the Members whether they tried anywhere else other than Jammu & 
Vaishnodevi route his reply was:-
"We did not try. We were quite discouraged. Right now, the two helicopters are 
standing in Delhi. Pawanhans has purchased new helicopters and. they have closed 
down the operations within a week's time. Those helicopters are standing in Delhi. · 
Of course, in their case it was a different thing their fare was really very high which I 
think normal people cannot afford. I think it was Rs. 12,500/-. In our case, I thought 
lcould have brought down the fare. Unfortunately the charges which we were paying · 
the airport charges, forhaving a counter in· the airport and so many other charges. 
For example, we had lo pay Rs.· 250/- to have a counter in the airport. These 
charges are very high for small operators like us. I would appeal to you all to review 
all these charges which are being levied on us so that private operators , could 
survive." 
When asked to comment on the fact that in a nutshell because of various establishment 
charges and all that~ you were not able to run services for Rs. 3,500/- or less than that and 

~-- · 
19 
that made you get less passengers coming. up and down and so you closed down·. As such 
your request is that if these charges being levied by the Government agencies are reduced 
than this proposal can become a viable option his reply was-
"There is a 15% inner travel tax also, that itself is a very high component. ·• 
4.9 When asked to give his suggestion to improve the situation he stated:-
"My suggestion here would be that the D.G .C.A. and the other agencies should keep 
an open wind like the open sky policy. I mean , it should not be too restrictive. Of 
course, we are bound, and we would like to make sure that operationally we do not · 
become unsafe. We are definitely with the D.G.C;.A· and the other agencies on that 
by and large, the attitude has to change a bit towards the air taxi operators.·~ . 
4.10 The Committee thereafter heard the view of the representatives of V.B. Air Pvt. 
Ltd. He explained to the Committee:-
, "In fact the V.B. Air has the distinction of country. They were stranded at the 
airports. We expected that in the light -~ the new economic policy, in the light of the 
growing traffic, Government will appreciate and relax its policy. Open sky is very 
much warranted but the brakes that are being put on us are not conducive to the new 
economic policy envisaged by the present Government for developing aviation 
infrastructure in this country." 
4.11 On asked to comment over the fact whether they would like that the Air 
Corporations Act should be amended be stated:- · 
"No, we will not wait for the Act to be amended because as we now currently see, 
we can successfully provide capacity without publishing schedules. Therefore, even 
without that we agree that we have scope and we have the intention to start, but 
purely as a basis of policy we feel that it is not conducive for people who are playing 
a role." 
4.12 Regarding role of Air Taxis Operation and its impact he stated:-
"! am sure Hon'ble Members will have seen that wherever competition has come in, 
the Indian Airlines are at least taking out of their mind that they can do anything. 
There is already an awareness and it is a good thing. Of course, competition can be 
over-done, but as I said, it should be such that both private operators and the Indian 
Airlines must supplement areas. In fact,_ private operators must take tourists to small 
destinations ........ " 
4.13 The representative of the Trans-Bharat Aviation stated:- · 
"From the inception of our organisation till today, our operations constitute more 
scheduled flights which mostly we do to Kullu during the season, carry the tourists. 
· We also operate charters wherever they want to go. Our d{ive and effort has been to 
cater to the tourists who come to India and who want to travel at their convenience, 
not according to the schedule of our domestic open1tors .... " · ~-·/ 
1 , .'\. 
" .............. We are now a carrying groups of people to destination they want. We· 
have carried people to the North-East, to Ja_isalmer, Jaipur. Udaipur, Varanasi, · 
Gujarat and Himachal Pradesh. . ......... Our aircraft is being used as an ambulance 
in times of emergency to transport sick patient." 
4.14 Regarding problem being faced ~y them he stated:-
"! would like to submit before Hori'ble Members that if your air taxi scheme is . 
consistent and it has fixed guidelines and politics , air-taxi operators will be in a f?etter : 
position. to plan their expansion programmes better. When we brought the air-craft ~ 
we had the import licence system, the duties were very high etc. we could not do it · 

20 
\ ;e 
easily. We have done a lot of capital investment on our two aircmfts. Today the 
. relaxation is so mcuh that we can even bring a Boeing 737 without paying duty. My 
suggestion is, if our taxi operators know the law for certuin. they can invest thei-r 
money better. We have no problems with the D.G.C.A ......... .. 
4.15 Thereafter the representatives of the Jagson Airlines appeared . before the 
Committee and stated:-
"lt started with bosnier-228-201. Its headquarter is in Delhi. We mainly aim to 
operate at tourist places. So far only one aircraft is in operation. Its destinations were 
Delhi-Dehradun, Delhi-Shimla-Kullu and s<lmetin1es Chandigarh and the charter. as 
and when required to any destination i.n the country. Of late even one aircraft . which 
was in service has not been flying because of technical problems. I hope it will 
resume the operation very soon. We have taken steps to meet the necessary 
requirements. It was mainly due to the flying date recorder which was not there in 
' the aircraft and subsequently it was introduced ... 
4.16 He further stated:- --
"The provisidn loss is that Flight Data Recorder is to he fitted for a weight of 5.700 
Kgs or more. This was introduced in 1982. It kept on getting extension from th~ 
regulatory authorities. Finally they said that if you do not have the installation by 
31st March. no extension would be given. We went running to the people. This item 
was not readily available. So, we requested the Government saying. ''Please give us 
extension for some more time. These are the steps we are taking. We have 
approached the Dosnier who are our manufacturers. The Dosniers have given us six 
months time to install it. The Vayudoot is being allowed to fly without DR. What is 
wrong with u_s'! On that point no reply has come to us till today ... · :· 
4.17 The representatives of the East West Airlines who appeared before the Committee 
stated:-
"To begin with, 1 would like to say that it is really an open sky policy which was 
started in 1986. Up to the last two years there were one or two companies in a small 
way. They started and closed down within a short period. The reason for their 
closure was inexperience and there was no· support from the Government. East West 
is the largest air company in the country. Within ten years we have had an annual 
turnover of over Rs. 500 crores. I am sure. nowhere in the world so far. no Indian 
company, has promoted this much business. In the last ten years we have received 
250 international prestigious awards 'frQm many countries. We can say that 30 per 
cent of the international air traffic is catered th1"ough our locations. We are having 
the largest bank guarantee in Asia. In the last ten years we have built up a very good 
reputation for our company. We started · in thret!'". -sectors carrying nearly , 600 
passengers. Then we added 2 more aircraft. The travelling public was very n1uch 
relaxed. They had a lot of appreciation. At t~at time there W<\S a threat coining to V 
the country because of the Indian Airlines pilots ' strike. At that time the Minister, 
Shri Madhavrao Scindia , the DGCA and other Government agencies held various . ·i 
·meetings with us. They wanted support from us. Therefore, l had to postpone my :~~ 
programmes and took some loan from the IDBI because the project was approved by ·• 
lOBI. Yfe put on every labour to add 7 more fleet. We felt that we were doing right 
service to the community and the strande'd passengers. 
With the grace of God our carrier is carrying 10.000 passengers whereas the national carrier 
with 40 years of experience has got 30,000 passengers carrying capacity. That means l have 
got one third of its capacity. At the same time I am facing some problen1s. There is no 
hanger available to us. For the last one year the Government has been promising for this. 

~I 
e · 
but nothing has come out yet. You will not hdic\c th;&r after every half an hour our airnaft 
fighter take off or land at Bombay. where we ha\ ~..· to cater to the needs ·of 10.00~ 
passengers. They have given us a small root~l with two small counters. So. we are unable ·tti 
provide efficient ground -service. From time to time we have to go to the officials begging fr;t· 
better ground facilities, but to no avail. These have discouraging effects. But we .feel. since . 
we have taken up a new challenge, we have to · face the music. Because of the open sky· 
policy today I have generated 3,000 employment. Besides I have given Rs. 50 <.."fores to the 
Government as revenue in the form of parking charges, landing charges. fuel charges . Thttt 
apart we arc bringing in Rs. 300 crores worth of foreign exchange within the country within 
a short period. With all your blessings, we can double qur passenger carrying capadty 
minimum to 20,000 during this year or may be in another two to three years and giving 
employment to 3,000 more people. Foreign exchange inflow would not be less than Rs . 
10,000 crores. There is an area unfortunately-Civil Aviation Minister or the Civil Aviation 
people or the national carriers people may know it or not-where with their ignorance th~ 
couptry is losing more than Rs. 5,000 crores of foreign' exchange and nobody has realised "it~ · 
so far. There are many undue traffic rights enjoyed by the foreign airlines, especially those 
which are operating from the ' Middle East. If you provide these rights on ~. bilateral basis, of 
course the Air India or the Indian Airlines today do not have. the capacity to fulfil on that 
basis. When the foreign exchange is so badly needed , l do not know how our authodti 'es arc 
so easily giving permission to the foreign airlines and allowing them to have their earning 
maximum up to 70-80 percent of the revenue. Hon'ble Members. as has been mentiom.•tl. 
today our company is absolutely a professional setup. Our company is. carrying out major 
maintenance. C-Che~ks are done after 30.000 hours of flying. We an: capable of doing lh~..: 
D-Check. which is after 18,CX>O hours of flying. The team of our maintenance s:tall ~s 
absolutely of international standard. As we have mentioned we have got 10.000 passenget " 
·Carrying capacity . We will be able to increase the capacity further more. Many times we . 
ihave requested the various department in the Civil Avi~ttion and in the DGCA for allotmeti( 
·. 
''• of necessary hanger facilities and other ground facilities, but nothing has been done ye( '. 
\Vithout proper shelter, no airline can make successful operation . We are fiaiding it very very· . · 
bard to pull on. For last two major maintenance, we had toapl)roach HAL. They were kind.. · · ·: ~~:: 
enough to provide us the facilities. Now our aircraft have to go through more maintenance. 
If we do not have the facilities, we may again have to "pproach HAL or some other 
authority for the purpose. If we do not have the facilities, we will have no option but going 
to other foreign companies. which will result in outflow of a large amount of foreign : 
exchange." · · 
The Conu1littee thereafter heard .the views of the representatives of Aerial Services Py.t.. 
Ltd. He mcntionecl vurious problem at present being faced by then and stated: . 
\ . 
••we we;~~,,fu~~~- some problem. Basically we only w~re nnt 'inlerested in ;an 
aircraft wi1h more than 20 seats. Other Air Taxi O.perat6rs Jet Air , E4tst West' 
Airways ·11ave their own id~as. We were ah·eady offering a service based few ... ... 
associute compunics which was one of the . reasons that the gu-ideline~ were iil\!,~/ · 
You have authorised a workshop. We use indawers'! They have been her~. for the . · : ·· . · · . 
last 45 years in th~ country. They have the experience and back up of :~~i~. :/ .:--.. ··· 
AU -the Engineers .in the com puny are trained abroad <and the product . !>Y'.i~ the ~ .:;:;. . 
Beechet Aircurft.. ~~ •. brought into the Air T~txi service a corporate Jet and w( -~:~ <· ,. ,·r;.;. 
have bt;en operutmg ·l'mt we are non-schedule operators. We do no need rcheck-in . ·; · . :· ·;...: · 
counter. We just need FBO (Fixed Base Operation)~ either in Delhi or Bombay. ·. · 
Just the USUal SOrt of things like pick-up at the airport. security. most of rlhem "'e 
have gone . through. With the usual sort of police staff one has to go throu~7fl .. Jf 
you land today at Bombay or . New Delhi airport, you have t-o <.<til up .the tower. 
you have to arrunge the transport. it is not av<iilable ... .. l would like to get st-imc 

."£· . 
22 
hanger space because an aircraft costing 10 or 20 crores of rupees cannot be left in 
the open.·· · 
When asked to comment whether there was any commitment on the part of the 
Government that the land or hanger will be made available his reply was:-
"There was no commitment in black and white, but there was indication that we 
would manage as you come but first bring the aircraft here and probably in Delhi 
you have a better response than at Santa Cruz; the impact of the actual release of 
the NOC and the activities and the emerge'hce of the very air taxis and so on was 
realised and hence, there was no commitment." 
On being asked to give his view on the requirement of CVR and the FOR as prescribed . 
by the DGCA he stated:- -
"What we would like to do is to go ' to the DGCA for an _ amendment. 1 am 
preparing an amendment on CVR."- ' 
4.21 The representatives of the Damania Airways explained to the Committee:-
" ...... We are running 737-200 operation based in Bombay, We have got two 
737-200. We are running our aircrafts between Bombay-Bangalore, Bombay­
Calcutta, Bombay-Goa, Bombay-Indore and Bombay-Pune. These are the services 
which we are running. Uptil now, our services have been very good. We are 
carrying very good load factors. As far as average safety measures are concerned, 
we are meeting with the DGCA requirements. We have got the required number 
of pilots and engineers. The operation is running very well. This is in · nutshell what 
we are doing. Our average fleet utilisation is about 10 hours a day . . It is equal to 
the world standard. Our new .aircrafts have got very high powered engines." "We 
are planning to get two 737-200 aircrafts of 50 seater · each. We do have an 
expansion programme. We have got our project cleared. We want to start our 
project as early as possible. We are finding changes in the Government policies. A 
lot of changes have taken place in the last two months which are not very healthy · 
for the taxi operators. We feel that some policies are not very clear, not very 
concrete. I will just go through what we have noted in the present policies which 
are not very clear regarding the non-scheduled operators. Airport authorities 
demand taxes as scheduled operators give. They are asking us to pay travel tax· 
which is onlY. for scheduled operator. We feel that if more private airlines come 
1 
into existence, there will be more competition. The quality of project will also· 
improve. I am quite sure that :the services of th~ Indian Airlines have gone up 
after we came as taxi operators . If there is competiji9n , the quality will certainly 
improve and the consumer will get a better deal." . · .... 
"Another important thing is that the Air Corpo~ation Act.should be rep{aled . 
Only then can we become NTis. Now, we are somewhere between a NTI and 
~on-NTI. We do not know as to how we should define our present status . Then, 
we are not allowed to advertise our schedule. Delta and Lufthansa are advertising · 
their schedul~· Why is it that we should not advertise our schedule? Another point 
...._ is that there is· a condition "One short flight for every long flight. If somebody is 
operating A 300, how can he fly a distance less than 700 kms? It is· not a question 
of 700 kms. sector length being economical or non-economical. It is a question of 
the size· of the aircraft. Certain aircrafts make sense of operating less than 700 · · 
kms. If we do not have smaller aircrafts, things become difficult because of the . 
stipulation of clearing our schedl.de by the DGCA only when this condition is met. 
Another problem that we are facing · is absolute unequal distribution of the 
facilities at the airport. At one site in Bombay in the old domestic airport, there 

, 
-~ -
23 
are 23 countries of the Indian Airlines which are not being used because most of 
the big flights go from the new terminal. We have not been allowed to use them 
and, as a result , all of us are crammed. Why shouldn't we have equal number of 
infrastructural facilities? Why not there be fair competition? If we are not up to 
the mark, we will close down a':ltoQlatically. This unequal distribution of 
infrastructural facilities at the airport is also making things hard on us. Another 
problem is that there is no hanger space. I had personally written to the Chairman 
of the Indian Airlines about this. Why cannot the Indian Airlines work with us? I 
do not mean that they should give us their passenger. But why should our engines 
be sent abroad for servicing? when a place comes for decheck, we spend 
something around two-and a half · crores in foreign currency. Why cannot the 
Indian Airlines take ·up the service for us? Why cannot they do the ground 
handling for all the private Air Taxi ope,~;ators? Why cannot they service our 
machines and thereby give us the same facilities? They can make money. There is 
so much potential. If the Indian Airlines - <~gree to do the maintenance service for 
us, it will be saving a lot of foreign exchange. Now, every part is being sent 
abroad. We get it fixed and bring it back." 
·-=- . 
. ~. 
' '-
. '· .. , .. •\. 
C'l!.·,.;lc :• ;.._. :~,~---:~--~ _~.;_ 
( . 

CHAPTER V 
CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 
Prior to 1953, nine air corporations were functioning namely Air India Ltd., the 
Air Services of India Ltd., The Airways (India) Ltd .. the Bharat Airways Ltd., the 
Deccan Airways Ltd., the Himalayan Aviation Ltd., The Indian National Airways 
Ltd., the Kalinga Airlines and the Air India International Ltd. The Air Corporations 
Act, 1953 came into force with effect from 25th May, 1953 to provide for establish­
ment of Air Corporations, to facilitate acquisition of the · undertaking belonging to 
erstwhile air companies by the newly formed Air Corporations and gerterally to make 
further and better provisions for the operation of air transport services. The Act 
conferred a monopoly right of operation of scheduled air transport services on the Air 
Corporations namely Air India and Indian Airlines and their associates. 
, 5.2 (i) The major change in Government' policy came in January 1987 when 
Indian and Foreign carriers were given freedom to operate cargo flights in 
and outside the country. In ·a- way Government had 'Open Sky Policy' 
only limited to cargo flights thereafter. 
(ii) On April 11, 1990 Government went one step further. The then Civil 
Aviation Minister made a suo-moto statement in the Parliament liberalising 
the policies regarding Cargo Flights, Air Charter and Air Taxis. 
(iii) Though . the Government never admitted it but this suo-moto statement 
was taken by the people as 'Open Sky Policy' for passengers flights also. 
And as a result a number of · air taxi operators came forward and started 
their operations. Though in legal terms-:- these air taxi operators were 
operating non-scheduled flights, for all practical purposes, they were 
operating as regular private airlines. · 
(iv) It seems that when Government realised these anomalies, the then Civil 
Aviation Minister introduced a Bill in Parliament to re{>eal the Air Cor­
porations Act, 1953 on the 4th May, 1992 which is still pending. For 
strange reasons the Government is neither pressing the Bill nor withdraw­
ing it. 
(v) Due to this indecisiveness of the Government, presently there is a con­
fused policy regarding entire Aviation Industry. Neither Indian Airlines is 
allowed to retain its monopoly status nor it is thrown open to competi­
tion. And the private taxi operators are neither allowed to grow freely 
nor are asked to shut immediately. Indian Airlines is not sure about · its 
role in future Aviation Policy. Private Taxi Operators also have apprehen­
sions in their mind about their own status also. M9reover, they are con­
stantly complaining about stepmotherly treatment right from not allowing 
the time tables to be published. space problems and daily overdos~ of 
guidelines. . " --~ 
5.3 The Committee feels that such a confused and indecisive policy of Aviation 
·· , . will prove to be disasterous for the entire Aviation · Industry and, 'therefore, ·recom­
- mends that the Air Corporations Act, 1953 should be repealed in the Monsoon of 
Parliament. ' - · · : ... 
5.4 The Committee also recommends the Government to chalk out a clear cut 
Aviation Policy without further delay, defining the role and status of Govern .ment and 
D.G.C.A., national and · private air carrieJ:S and enact a new. law, if necessary. 
2S 
-, . . . 
I 

. \ . 
. ' ... . _ _. 
~ '~ . ·- ~-
·' ..... ·. ··' ·' : 2~ . 
~ , .,.,,.., ~ r. "' r 
----·:.:: 
.... . . 
);;- .. 
. 5.~ After a ~orough examination of Civil Aviation Ministry and Indian Airlines, the· 
. . Committee has rome to . following conclusions:- .. . . .., . .,.. . ,._ 
· ·'_ . - ~ (a)' The optimuni capacity ot Indian Airli ~ es is 43-44ooo passengers per day. :However 
.>:::(;{ . :~ :~ ~.'~ . . actual passengers ~ing carried by Indian Airlines is at present 31,000 passengers 
, S:d}~~f~~n ~ , which is s~ort 9! its optimum .. After introduction of private Air Taxi Operators 19o,/o 
· ., ,,~~{~~ "'' ·._ ~f _total passengers traffic has been . lost to these operdtors. till dat~ : . nc. ~, · 
·. :. ··:}~~i'~~ . {bl Th~re' havebeen ) req U:ent complaints 'regarding ground service, in flight servi ~ ·and 
--,~:::;:~i~tJ".'.t€'~.~· :~·:. punctuality of Indian Airlines service. There were strikes in .Indian Airlin e! by 
-~: ... 2~1; i ~~~: ir!V !' Pilots an~ Engineers durfng 'yean ' 1990-91 and 1992-93 which also . affe~~~d ) he 
.- : :~~~ ·:> .' . /~-;; •·: }lerfoimarice' of Indian · Airlines. ,, • .. ·' ... · ~ •·. · ·' ' ·' " ·· : 
1 
· :·· :)·:·~~.H (~) The Committee · also notices the fiequent chan~s in the Board of Indian" Airlines 
· .~;~. c aqd at present the board is yet to be reconsituted and a full tim.e C.M. P,. is yet. to 
.": . · ·· · . be appointed : This. has also affected the efficiency of Indian Airlines:· .. . -
• • .. : .... -)",\; ;."" .":..~_~ , ' .'""-. ,"' ~ 1 . .i. ""'<t , ~ • ~ 1 .., .I f . <" 
. · (d) As ·a result -of the introduction of the Private Air Taxis Operators. over 140 Pilots, 
)~ :~~t:~-~ " Co-~ilots :.~rid Enginee~ h~ve .eft ,the, India~ Airlines to join t~e~ operators for 
· · , better prospects. · 
(e) Except for preliminary report on the impact of Private Taxi Openttors, no detailed 
study was made in this respect by Indian Airlines. 
5.6 The Committee was· informed by indian Airlines management that certain measures 
were under consideration for combating the situation. · 
(a) The tnii~ing' pattern of Pil; ts and Enginee.r:s is being speeded up. 
(b) Extensions to retiring Pilots and Co-Pilots are under consideration . • 
(c) The earlier one month notic~ period for resignations is being substituted by six 
months notice period. • .. 
(d) Increase_ in the flying hours is under consideration. 
(e) Revision of wages of skilled 'personnel is also under consideration . . 
5. 7 The Committee is strongly of the view that under the changed circumstances of 
competition Indian Airlines has to change its approach to make it more effective and that 
proper attention should be given so as to make Indian Airlines the premier National Airlines 
. of the country. To achieve this end the · ~ommittee rec~mmends that:-
(i) A detailed survey should be undertaken to study the present situation and the 
impact of growing Air Taxis. ,Qperations on Indian Airlines. 
\ . 
(ii) The management has to look into ways and means of improving ttie ground as well 
as the inflight service, punctuality of flights, baggage claims and varrous aspects of 
, passengers satisfaction and tone up its administration. Effectient in-house manage­
ment will plug the exo~us of trained personnel. 
(iii) A full time Chairman of the Board be appointed and the Board be reconstituted at 
the earliest so as to provide effective professional and competent leadership. The 
Board should have adequate repres_entation of professionals. ~ 
(iv) Immediate contingency plan and a long term perspective plan be made by the 
Indian Airlines to meet the situation. 
(v) The management of Indian Airlines should also consider its future plan of 
expansion of inducting new planes in its fleet keeping in view the under utilisation 
of passenger carrying capacity at present being faced by them. 
·.,~ . 

.. 
27 
(vi) Indian Airlines should introduce a system of bond/agreement with the pilots prior 
to their training , stipulating that on successful completion of their training, they 
. will have to render certain minimum service in the Indian Airlines to ensure that 
they do not leave the Airlines on whose training lakhs of rupees are spent. 
(vii) Indian Airlines must start refresher courses/re-orientation programmes for its 
ground staff; air hostesses, pilots and co-pilots etc. so as to meet the challenges of 
the changed atmoshphere of competition. Attitudinal change in handling passenger 
service is necessary in order to regain the confidence of the foreign as well as 
domestic tourists. 
(viii) It is necessary for the management of the Indian Airlines to have worker's 
participation to maintain good industrial relations which are much needed at this 
juncture. 
5.8 In this situation where there is no clear out policy. The private operators are facing 
a nJ,Jmber of problems which are enumerated below:'- · · 
(a) The directions to private air taxi operators are lssued very frequently and on adhoc 
basis. The Committee recommends that the guidelines should be formulated after 
due consultations and then issued. Any change thereafter should be mad~ only if it 
is absolutely necessary. 
{b) Air Taxi Operators are not allowed to publish and advertise their schedule of 
flights. Committee is of the opinion that as it is rediculous not to allow the 
publication of time schedule. This restriction must be withdrawn forthwith. 
{c) Air Taxis Operators are not allowed to be engaged in air transportation of Cargo 
within the country . The Committee feels that this policy needs further review f9r 
capacity utilisation of Air Taxi Operators available within the country . 
(d) The D.G.C.A. guidelines on requirement of C. V.R . and F.D.R. is causing 
grounding of smaller aircrafts which are not equipped with these kits. These 
restrictions are not made applicable to similar/comparable aircrafts owned by 
Vayudoot thereby creating discrimination between the private air taxi operators and · 
Vayudoot. It is understood that these equipments have no link with flight safety 
measures and are not applicable to smaller .aircrafts in developed countries. The 
Committee feels that Government should consider whether requirement of C. V .R. 
and F.D.R. prescribed by the D.G.C.A. is in conformity with the international 
flight safety measures and if not, the same should be dispensed with . 
(e) It was brought to the notice of the Committee that the various smaller airports in 
the country have watch hours to suit the time schedule of Indian Airlines and 
Vayudoot flights and thereafter they are closed . Accordingly, the private air taxis 
operators have to syncronise their operations with the ... flights and operational 
timings of Indian Airlines and Vayudoot. The Committee feels that N.A.A. should 
keep open smaller airports for landing and take off of the flights of air taxis 
according to th~ir flights timings and provide them with all necessary infrastructure 
including availability of airport staff for handling such flights . . 
It has been brought to the notice of the committee that in the case of small air 
taxi operators and helicopters for specialised services, such as mediCal aid, 
evacuation etc., landings were not permitted without the extension of watch hours. 
It is felt that if request for extension of watch hours in case of emergencies, medical 
or otherwise, is not possible because of paucity of time, Government should permit 
landing and take off even without any watch at the airport. 
(f) At present there . is a large drainage of foreign exchange from the air taxis operators 
in 

I 
·: ! . 
I 
I 
l 
I 
i 
I 
in the form of import uf spare purts. maintenance of aircrafts and training of cockpit 
crew which has to be undertaken ubroad. This outflow of crucial foreign exchange 
can be. avoided if the facilities available in the country with the Air India and Indiun 
Airlines for maintenance of aircmft and twining of cockpit crew is also made 
available to the Air Taxi operators. The Committee feels that Government should 
consider and review the policy as it will not only save the outflow of foreign 
exchange but also supplement the revenue earnings for the organisation like Indian 
Airlines, Air India and Airport Authorities. 
(g) Committee feels that for fair growth of air taxi . operation in the country there 
should be a clear cut policy regarding import of aircrafts and import of their spare 
parts. It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that Government have 
taken a decision to allow private airlines to import aircrafts without licence. The 
Committee was also informed that as per the suo-moto statement made by the 
Minister in April 1990 and subsequent assumnces from the Ministry. the private 
op~rators could lease or buy aircrufts against u 'No Objection Certificate' from the 
Ministry. However, there seems to be u fluid situation as the ather Governmentul 
authorities do not seem to recognise the adequacy of the NOC. The Committee, 
therefore, desires that the Govt. may review the situation. 
(h) At present under bilateral agreements, the International Airlines are enjoying more 
traffic rigths for opemtions to India because of the constraints of resources in Air 
India as the latter has not been able to utilise these routes as per tiie agreement for 
sharing of operation. The Committee therefore feels that Govt. should consider 
possibility as to whether Indian Airlines can operate on these routes either 
independently or jointly with the private air taxi operators on some o{ these 
international routes where Air india has the permission but is not in a position to 
operate so as to s~ive the much needed foreign exchange which is at. present being 
taken away by the foreign airlines. 
(i) Although under the provisions of the D.G.C.A. certain facilities are being extended 
to private airlines but exorbitant charges for such facilities are charged from them 
irrespective of the kind of aircrafts used and the purpose of operation. The 
Committee is of the view that these charges should be made reasonable and a ·two 
slab system could be considered according to the types of aircraft used and the kind 
of operation i.e. commercial or otherwise. 
(j) At present private air taxi operators have not been given adequate space and have 
not been provided wi.Lh utilisation of infrastructure available 'with the Airport 
authorities . as most of the existing facilities are being utilised by the Indian Airlines 
<tnd Air India. The Committee considers it necessary ~hat when the Government has 
allowed air taxi operation in the country it should also allocate them adequate space 
at the airports and allow them to utilise the other equipments and infritstructure such 
as X-ray machines, conveyer belts and other luggage handling ' facilities and hanger 
space etc. The Committee also recommends that they may also be provided with 
parking bays, cargo areu, communication fucilities at the uirports for their . opera­
tions. Government should consider providing space to air taxi opemtors to raise 
their own workshops for maintenance . 
(k) In order to meet shortage of pilots, the Committee desires that the pilots who have 
retired from the Indian Airlines, Air India and Indian Air Force and are physically 
fit should be considered for employment I re-employment by the lnJian Airlines 
and Private Taxi· Operators. 

29 
(I) There are many pbl'<.:!'> in the country particularly in the North-East region where 
Indian Airlines han: no airlinks although these places can attract tourists in large 
numbers. The Committee desires that private air taxi operators may be allowed to 
develop airports · at these places for the benefit of the public. 
(m) It has been brought to the notice of the Committee that at present, private air taxi 
operators do not enjoy credit facility in the matter of aviation fuel as I.C.C. insists 
on cash payment. The Committee recommends that credit facility may be extended 
to them on the basis of bank guarantee. 
(n) The Committee also desires that Air India and Indian Airlines should have interline 
agreement with private taxi operators for car1'ying passengers to their destinations. 
5.9 The Committee takes a serious note of the fact that even a partial privatisation ·of 
airlines will create problems for implementing the reservation policy for SCI ST and other 
backwards as under the present laws this policy is ,not applicable to private sector. Therefore 
.t the Committee asks the Government to take an initiative in formulating a policy and if 
necessary enact a law by which the reservation polic~will remain unaffected even after the 
privatisation, partially or fully. 
5.10 Presently the air routes in the country can be broadly categorised as under:-
(i) Profit Making 1 
(Trunk routes-and Goa, 
Hyderabad, Bangalore etc) 
(ii) Break Even 
(Madhya Prmlesh, Rajasthan etc.) 
(iii) Loss Making 
(Bi!1ar, U.P. etc.) 
(iv) Very Loss Making 
(North East routes) 
At present the Indian Airlines is operating on all the four routes. With the profit 
generutcd · on trunk routes Indian Airlines maintain its operation in the Loss Making and 
Very Loss Making routes thereby discharging its social obligation towards the nation. 
Although the present share of air taxi operators in the country is only 19% of the total air 
traffic but as their operution is mainly restricted to the trunk routes. their actual share of 
pasenger traffic on these routes is between 45o;., to 56%. Committee. therefore, is of the 
opinion that Government should enact a law or evolve a regulatory system .to check this 
trend of operation by the Private Taxi Operator on the Profit Making trunk routes. The 
social obligation towards the nation must be shared by both Indian Airlines and the Private 
Operators alike. 
~ ~ 
5.11 The Indian Airlines and Vayudoot are at present paying crores of Rupees collected 
by them as surcharge on Inland Travel Tax to the Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of 
Finance, however, does not give any budgetary support to the Indian Airlines or Vayudoot 
which are also operating on loss making routes in North East and remote areas of the 
country to meet their social obligations towards the nation. The Committee feels that some 
assistance or budgetary support may be considered for the Indian Airlines and Vayudoot by 
the Government in this regard. 
5.12 The Committee ulso notes that in absence of clear cut policy, Indian Airlines und 
other privute Air Tuxi Operators are operuting muinly on trunk and busy routes. None of 
them is currying to their optimum capacity, wasting previous aviation fuel and in the end the 
entire Aviution Industry is likely to become sick. Committee is of the opinion that this 
situation clearly warrants for monitoring of different uirlines operating on .these trunk routes. 

30 
513. In view of the problems faced by Aviation Industry. The Committee recommends 
that a Committee . consisting of representatives of Indian Airlines, Private Air Taxi Operators 
and Members of Parliament may be set up by the Government and it should be asked to go 
in to all details and submit its report at the earliest . 
• 
~ . 
--

. ' 
CHAPTER VI 
NOTE OF DISSENT BY SHRI SHIVAJI PATNAIK, M.P. 
Despite the clear-cut provision in the Air-Corporations Act, the Government of India 
has allowed operation of private airlines which has immensely harmed the Indian Airlines 
since large number of passengers have been diverted to private airlines. The private airline 
lobby is operating in the Government and DGCA which has resulted in serious difficulties 
for the Indian Airlines. 
The mismanagement in Indian Airlines has resulted in deterioration in air services 
causing deep resentment among the air passengers. ,l-Iowever, solution does not lie in 
adopting the so-called open sky policy. The Govt. should have taken steps to improve the 
functioning of the airlines. However, the Govt of India filled in Directors post with persons 
who have to knowledge or experience of airlines industry. This policy has considerably 
helped the private airline opertors . 
The private airlines are reported to have taken excess passengers, arbjtrarily cancelled 
confirmed tickets. cancelled flights when they were short of passengers. They have not 
observed all safety norms. They do not pay to the Govt. the tuxes collected for passengers. 
They operate only on routes that are profituble while they refused to operate on uneconomic 
routes. As a result of competition and operation of large number of airlines , the aircrafts are 
going half empty and country is losing huge foreign exchange through use of costly aviation 
fuel. These private airlines encoumged strikes in Indian Airlines during peak season with an 
eye on capturing passenger traffic. Some of the Airlines have dubious international 
connections. 
1 strongly suggest that the Govt. of India should enquire into the operation of the 
private airlines . and their patrons so that the factual position would be brought before the 
country. Inefficiency in operation of Indian Airlines should not be the ground to cover up 
the misdeeds of ·the private taxi operators. 
The Ministry of Civil Aviation and DGCA ·have not monitored the working of the 
private airlines. The second defence line of the country should not be allowed to be 
tampered by unscrupulous operators and multinational airline corporations . 
I recommend that the Governinent of India should review the working of the Indian 
Airlines in consultation with unions working in it and prepare a programme to improve the 
quality of services so that the Airlines capacity can be fully utilised and it can run profitably. 
The encouragement given by the IA management to the formation of craft unions has 
been the root cause of frequent industrial relations problems in the organisation. An 
erronious industrial relations policy adopted by the management has led to periodic 
indust.rial unrest among the employees . The Ministry of Civil A~ i ~ 1tion has never made any 
attempt to ensure involvement of employees in efficient running of the industry. The Govt. 
of India instead of making efforts to set the house in order has clandestinely encouraged 
private airline operators. The conditions have come to such an extent that "the Air India was 
directed by the Govt. to transfer its domestic passengers to private taxi operators. The Govt. 
itself is a part'y to divert the IA traffic to private air taxi operators. 
Therefore, I do not subscribe to the view that private airline operation should be 
encouraged further. It would spell disaster on the Govt's own airline which has built huge 
passenger capacity over the period. 
31 . 

I 
! 
i 
I 
. ' { 
1 I 
32 
' I do not agree to the view that the private taxi operators should be given the facilities 
for operating in internutional routes. The Govt. should t<tke steps to improve the functioning 
of Air India. Any sue~!, arrangement with Private airlines for developing tourism may be 
completely on 'temp<>rary basis. 
'l.'he Govt. of India has not investigated properly the role of Indian Airlines and the Air 
. lndi;•. in the share scam. The role of bureaucracy in this may come to light. The Govt,. of 
·. · india · should initiate independent probe into the links between air taxi opera~ors and the 
1l'lalions of some politicians in the country. · 
I • • -;rhe profitability of the. private ta~i open lJors who did not create any infrastructure and 
,. used official apparatus ' to make ill gotten gai'ns, should be properly looked into. How much 
:_ foreign exchange they frittered away should also be highlighted before the public. 
I, therefore, do not subscribe to the view that air taxi operators should be given more 
airport facilities at concessional rates. · 
'· Since Govt. has already allowed the private airlines with hug~ investments on their part 
. they may be allowed to operate in the routes, for development of tourism and touching the 
'remote areas as well as the industrial centres, which are not covered by Indian Airlines at 
present. But their operation should be controlled by Indian Airlines or by an authority 
under Govt. of India. · 
If the recommendations in the report are implemented it would only result in gradual 
liquidation of our Airlines. This will noi be in the interest of the country as well as tourist 
tntffic in the country. · · 
t: · l.~' ~ · - · -
~ . ~· , ) 
"": .... 
·( '• 
--

" 
• 
-
--
ANNEXURES 
~ .• ., ~ 
. ' . /, .. 
- ~ 

Phone--6060111293 
Telegraphic address: 
Aeronautical-VIRKYA YT 
Commerdal-AIRCI VIL 
-NEW DELHI 
Telex-31-66407 
FAX-091-011-607851 
35 
INDIA 
AERONAUTICAL INFORMATION 
SEVRICE NO. 
CIVIL AVIATION DEPARTMENT 
EAST BLOCK 11 & Ill, .. R.K. PURAM, 
NEW DELHI-110 066 '~'" 
No. AV 14015/2188-AT-1 
ANNEXURE-I 
(Vide para 1.5) 
A. I. C. 
No. 24/1990 
DATED: 11-12-90 
20 PAUSA 
SAKA 1912 
The following Guidelines for Air Taxi Oper~tions are issued for information and 
guidance. With the issue of this AIC, the Guidelii_l~'i issued earlier vide A.l.C. No. 10/1990 
dated the 28th May, 1990 stand superseded. 
(M. R. Sivaraman) 
Director General of Civil Aviation 
& Additional Secretary. 
GUIDELINES FOR AIR TAXI OPERATION 
I. AIR TAXI OPERATORS 
Air Taxi Operators shall be air carriers engaged in air transportation of persons, 
alongwith their baggage, within the territory of the Indian Union. 
Such Air Taxi Operators shall: 
(i) get themselves registered with the Director General of Civil Aviation; 
(ii) maintain current liability insurance coverage in compliance with the requirements 
set· forth by Director General of Civil Aviation; · 
(iii) maintain current certificate of insurance with evidence submitted to the Director 
General of Civil Aviation . 
OPERATION BY THE AIR TAXI OPERATORS SHALL BE CHARTER OPERA­
TIONS AND OR NON SCHEDULED OPERATIONS UNDERTAKEN FOR TRANS­
PORTATION OF PERSONS AND THEIR BAGGAGE 
3. AIRCRAFT 
(i) Multi-engined fixed wing aircraft and single or multi-engi,n~d helicopters may be 
used for the purpose of Air Taxi Services. · ' 
(ii) Only NRis shall be permitted to import aircrafts from their own foreign exchange 
resources provided such NRis set up an Indian Company or participate in one with 
upto 100% equity shares of NRis in accordance with the relevant guidelines set 
forth in Annexure 'B'. 
4. LICENSING AUTHORITY 
· (i) The Director General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi shall be the authority for 
granting Air Taxi Operators Permit. 
(ii) Application for an Air Taxi Operators Permit shall be submitted to the Direc..1or 
General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi in the prescribed form alongwith a Bank 
Draft of Rs. 25,000/- (Rupees Twenty Five thousand only) drawn on any scheduled 
Bank at Delhi in favour of Central Pay and Accounts Officer, Directorate General 

of Civil Aviation. New Delhi and such other dm:unh:llt' "' liLt\ h'-· rl:lluin:d by the 
Director General of Civil Aviation. 
{iii) The No Objection Certificate issued to an appliclllt will 'land automatil:alh · 
cancelled if such applicant does not take effective step' to obtain the Air Taxi 
Operators Permit within a period of one year from the date of issue of the ~~~ 
Objection Certificate. 
( iv) Air Taxi Operator's Permit shall be renewal every year against payment of a fee of 
Rs . 5000/- (Rupees Five thousand only) by Bank Draft drawn on any scheduled 
bank at Delhi in favour of the Central_ Pay and Accounts Officer, Directorate 
General of Civil Aviation, New Delhi. • · 
The Air Taxi Operator's Permit shall not be transferable. 
5. DOCUMENTS REQUIRED 
Application for Air Taxi Operators Permit tnust be accompanied by the following 
documents:-
' (i) A current comprehensive insurance policy-covering the aircmfi. crew. passengers 
and third party risks as may be specified by the Director Geneml of Civil Aviation; 
(ii) For any existing company audited balance sheet and profit and Joss account for the 
preceding year and for a new company acceptable proof of financial viability of the 
Company; 
(iii) Details and particulars of the type of helicopters and aircmft intended to he used; 
(iv) Certificate of Airworthiness of the aircraft or helicopter to he used; 
(v) Licences of the operating crew and the engineers; 
(vi) Any other documents that the Director General of Civil Aviation may specify. 
6. ELIGIBILITY REQUIREMENTS 
(i) Any citizen of India or a group of individuals of Indian Nationality including Non­
resident Indians or Pubic Sector Undertakings of the Government of India or State 
Government shall hl: eligible to apply for Air Taxi Operators Permit. 
(ii) Before tlu: Air Taxi Operators Permit is issued. an applicant should be in possession 
of an aircraft either by outright purchase or through lease . In the case of a new 
company promoted hy NRIINRls. the aircraft shall he registered in India after it 
has been validity imported into the country. Such aircraft as are obtained on lease 
from outside India shall he registered in India under the normal passenger category 
and a copy of the lease deed should be filed with the DGCA. 
(iii) The applicant shall either have own maintenance and repair .ta.dlities duly approved 
by the Directorate General of Civil Aviation or shall furnish proof of the availability 
of maintenance and repair facilities by way of a subsisting contract wjth any other · 
organisation who have the maintenance and repair facilities for the aircraft to be 
used , duly approved by the Directorate General of Civil Aviation. 
(iv) The flight crew members and aircraft maintenance engineers shall be duly lkensed 
by the Directorate General of Civil Aviation. 
(v) The applicant should be financially sound and solvant. 
Note:-Applicant who fulfil comlitions (i) & (v) of 6 above shall be issued with a provisional 
letter approving their eligibility. However. the Air Taxi Operators Permit shall bt 
issued after fulfilling all the terms and conditions of the Permit including operational 
requirements . 

~· ' . 37 
7. PURPOSE 
The applicant must specify the reasons for starting Air Taxi Services and adequately 
· justify his proposal in terms of its economic viability. 
8. OPERATIONAL BASE · 
The applicant shall declare to the Directorate General of Civil Aviation the location and 
address of the Head Office and his Operational base. 
9. OPERATIONAL REQUIREMENTS 
(i) Air Taxis shall be permitted to operute to all the auth ")rised airports in the country 
which are open to scheduled operations subject however. to prior approval of the 
authorities of the airports. where such approval may be required and such other 
airports which mc.ty be notified by the Director General of Civil Aviation. A list of 
airports which are at present opu1 to sched~led operations may be seen at 
, Annexure 'A'. 
(ii) Security shall be provided in the manner and swtle as applicable to the ~)assengers 
travelling by scheduled air transport Tbe Air Taxi Operators shall be responsible to 
ensure that all the security requirements as specified by the Bureau of Civil 
Aviation Security are strictly followed in respect of their operation at all airports. 
International Airports Authority of India or National Airports Authority or 
Defence Authorities as the case may be. shall provide the safety services for 
operation of Air Taxi from their aerodromes within the normal watch hours. 
Operations outside the watch hours at controlled aerodromes of Defence and 
National Airports Authority shall be in accordance with the conditions to be 
specified and approved by such authorities. 
(iii) In the case of opemtions under instrument meteorological conditions. the aircraft 
must be fitted with suitable equipment required for instrument flying and the 
aerodrome to which operations are proposed shall be declared fit by the competent 
authorities for lFR operations. 
(iv) It shull not be necessary to obtain authorization from the Directorate General of 
Civil Aviation for every individual flight. The operator shall submit the flight plan 
to the concerned air tmffic services unit in the normal course and obtain clearance 
thereto before the expected time of operations. ln case of aircraft operations. in Air 
Defence Identificution Zones (A.D .I.Z .) the ad ditionul requirem ent of"ohtaining air 
defence deurance shall be strictly udhered to . 
(v) The pilot-in-commund of the aircraft must obtain meteorological and ATC briefing 
before undertaking the night. 
(vi) C:.trriage of arms. ammunitions, explosives and inflammable lll i,l t ~ rial and such other 
articles as the Director General may decide from time to time shall not be 
permitted on board . 
(vii) An Air Taxi Operator may borrow an aircraft from another Air Taxi Operator for 
air tmnsportation in case of need with the prior permission of the Director General 
of Civil Aviation. 
(viii) An Air Taxi Operator may obtain suitable airfcraft in the country on lease for 
increasing fleet strength for Air Taxi Operation with prior approval of the Director 
General of Civil Aviation. 
(ix) All aircraft engaged in Air Taxi ·operation must carry a route guide. 
(x) Every Air Taxi Operator shall, submit to the Director General of Civil Aviation a 
monthly return of . statistics of passengers and cargo including foreign exchange 
earnings etc. carried .and hours flown during the particular month and airport tax 

.. -
38 
collected and deposited. Such return for a particular month shall be submitted to 
the Director General of Civil Aviation within 10 days of the following month. 
(xi) A copy of the permit issued for Air Taxi Operation shall be carried on board the 
aircraft when operating such services. 
(xii) Air Taxi Operations shall not be permitted to destination!! outside India. 
(xiii) The flight plan submitted by an Air Taxi Operator, in accordance with para 9 (iv) 
of the Guidlines, for the repetitive operation of flights to certain locations, will be 
approved only if an equal or larger nu mber of direct flights are operated to 
locations with a stage length below 700 kms. as to locations with a stage ·length 
more than 700 kms. Although Air Taxi Operation is non-scheduled in nature, the 
programme of flights under Air Taxi Operation for a period of every two months 
shall be submitted to DGCA for a~proval. 
.t (xiv) No Air Taxi Operator shall employ_any one already servicing any of the national 
carriers, namely, Air India, Indian Airlines, Vayudoot and· Pawan Hans without 
obtaining a 'No Objection Certificate ' from the employer with whom they are 
working. They shall further submit to DGCA a monthly return on pilots/engineers 
employed by them in a specified proforma (Annexure 1) . 
. 10. LANDING AND PARKING CHARGES 
Landing and Parking charges shall be payable to the owner of the airfield. For 
operations from Defence airfield where National Airports Authority have civil enclaves, a 
separate charge may be payable to National Airports Authority. The Route Navigation 
-Facilities Charges (RNFC) will be payable to the organisation which provides the facilities. 
11. OPERATIONS MANUAL 
In accordance with the requirement of CAR Series '0' the operator shall prepare the 
Operations Manual for each type of aircraft to be operated by him and carry a copy thereof 
on board each flight. The operator shall operate the flight in conformity with the Operations 
Manual. -
12. Flight and duty time of the crew shall be governed by the Aircraft Rules in force. 
13. TICKETING 
An Air Taxi Operator shall issue necessary passenger ticket for air tranportation 
according to rules prescribed by the Director. General of Civil Aviation which will include 
conditions of carriage including liability of the operator as is applicable to the national 
carriers of India. 
14. SPECIAL CONDITIONS FOR NRIS 
(i) On the import of aircraft Non-Resident Indians are liable to pay in full applicable 
dut(ies). · 
(ii) The Non-Resident Indians may for the purpose of providing such Air Taxi Services 
draw fuel for which payment may be made in the Indian Rupees (INR). However, 
in the event of need for spares for the aircraft providing such Air Taxi Services, the 
cost of spares-would have to be borne by the Non-Resident Indians from their 
own exchange resources or foreign exchange earnings in India. 
(iii) Annexure to this Aeronautical Information Circular contains two model ~ for the 
Non-Resident Indians, viz., 
a. Project Finance Model. 
b. Lease Finance Model. 
iv Facilities for repatriation of funds would be available in .accordance with the 

provisions as applicable in conformity with those specified in para 14(iii) annexure 
above. 
(v) Aircraft imported by the Non-Resident Indians (NRIS) .into India for the purpose of 
obtaining Air Taxi Operators Permit would have to be registered with the Director 
General of Civil Aviation for obtaining Certificate of Registration . 
15. Breach of any of these conditions, or of any ·provisions of Aircraft Rules, 1937 or 
any other law applicable in India in this respect, or of any rules which may hereafter be 
enforced in regard to the issue of such Air Taxi Operators Permit shall render the Permit 
liable to cancellation without Notice. • 
{M.R. SlY ARAMAN) 
Director General of Civil Aviation 
& Additional Secretary 
.t 
--
., 
·--· .. 
.. ' 

ANNEXURE 'A' 
List of Airfi elds available for AIR Taxi Services in India 
1. Delhi . 
2. Agra (IAF) 
3. Amritsar 
4. Chandigarh (IAF) 
5. Gwalior (IAF) 
6. Jaipur ' 
7. Jammu (IAF) 
8. Jodhpur (IAF) 
9. Kanpur (IAF) 
10. Khajuraho 
11. Lucknow 
12. Srinagar (IAF) 
1.3. Udaipur 
14. Varanasi 
15. Leh (IAF) 
16. Bikaner (IAF) 
17. Dehradun 
18. Jaisalmer (lAF) 
19. Kota 
.20 . Kulu 
21. Ludhiana 
22. Pantnagar 
23. Simla 
24. Gorukhpur 
25. Bombay 
26. Ahmedabad 
27. Aurangabad 
28. Vadodara 
29. Belgaum 
30. Bhavnagar 
31. Bhopal 
32. Bhuj 
33. Goa (Navy) 
34. Indore 
35. Jabalpur 
36. Jamnagar (IAF) · 
37. Keshod 
38. Kohalapur 
39. Nagpur 
40. Poona (IAF) 
41. Porbandar 
42. Raipur 
43. Rajkot 
44. Kandla 
45. Nanded 
46. Ri.ttnagiri 
47. Surat 
48. Madras 
49. Bangalore (HAL) 
• 
·-
41 
\ ¥ 
.... 

50. Calicut 
51. Coimbatore 
52. Cochin (Navy) 
53. Hyderabad 
54. Mangalore 
55. Madurai 
56. Tiruchirapally 
57. Trivandrum 
58. Vijayawada 
59. Visakhapatnam (Navy) 
60. Tirupati 
61. Cuddepah 
· 62. Mysore 
63. Rajamundry 
64. Agatti 
65. Pondicherry 
66. Calcutta 
67. Agartala 
68. Aizwal 
69. Bagdogra (IAF) 
70. Barapani 
71. North Lakhimpur 
72. Bhubaneswar 
73. Balurghat 
74: Cooch Behar 
75. Daparizo 
76. Dimapur 
77. Guwahati 
78. Gaya 
79. lmphal 
80. Jorhat (IAF) 
81. Jamshedpur (Tata) 
82. Kailashahar 
83. Kamalpur 
84. Kumbhirgram (IAF) 
85. Dibrugarh 
86. Maldaha 
87. Patna 
88\ Passighat 
89. Portblair 
90. Ranchi 
91. Rourkela (SAIL) 
92. Tezu 
93. Zero 
• 
... 
. .. 
42 

ANNEXURE 'B' 
PROJECT FINANCE MODEL 
(i) Under this model, an Indian Company with upto 100% equity of Non-Resident Indians shall 
be set up. Repatriation of dividends will be admissible on the same principle as is followed in 
respect of Non-Resident Indians while setting up industries under 74% schemes. 
(ii) Such a company may acquire aircraft by raising foreign currency loans. However. payment of 
these loans shall not be guaranteed by the Government of India or by any Indian Institutions 
(Bank or Financial Institution). The lenders may be permitted to have a charge on security of 
the aircraft. They may also obtain a guarantee of any overseas promoter or overseas 
institution. • 
(iii) Repayment of principal of foreign currency loans or interest thereon shall be permitted from 
the net foreign exchange earnings of the company . The formula for calculations of net foreign 
exchange earnings shall be worked out by the Department of Civil Aviation on the lines of the 
Reserve Bank of India formula in the case of Air India and India Airlines. 
(iv) Dividend, if any. may be allowed to be repatriated <mly after generating surplus net foreign 
exchange earnings over and above the requirements of repayment of principal and interest. 
(v) Repatriation of equity capital shall not be allowed for the firest five years of operation of the 
Air Taxi Scheme. Thereafter, it may be repatriated in the same manner, the Non-Resident 
Indians arc permitted while setting up manufacturing industries under 74% Schemes subject to 
the condition that repatriation will be only out of the accumulated net foreign exchange 
earnings that may have remained after regular payment of principal. interest and dividend, if 
any. 
~. LEASE FINANCE MODEL 
(i) Under this model. an Indian Company with upto 100% equity of Non-Resident Indians shall 
be set up. Repatriation of dividends would be admissible on the principal which is followed in 
respect of Non-Resident Indians while setting up industries under 74% schemes. 
(ii) Such a company may take aircraft on lease for running Air Taxi Service. The lease rental in 
foreign exchange may be paid only from the net foreign exchange earnings of the company to 
be calculated in the manner indicated in the Project Finance Model above. 
(iii) The dividend and repatriation formula shall be as indicated in the Project Finance Model. 
-. . 
. -· -
. .t ·: 
43 

Telephone No.: 4622495 
Extn. 5CXl 
Telegraphic Address: 
Aeronautical : VIDDY A YG 
Commercial : AIRCIVIL 
NEW DELHI 
Telex : 74127 DGCA IN 
Fax : 011 4629221 
ANNEXURE-II 
(Viele para 1.5) , 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
AERONAUTICAL INFORMA­
TION SERVICE 
DIRECTOR GENERAL OF 
CIVIL AVIATION . 
(OPPOSITE SJ\FDERJUNG 
AIRPORT) 
NEW DELHI-110 003 
• 
{ .,_ 
A. I. C. 
No. I&/I992 
11th Muy. I992 
F.No . 3 / 1/92- AIS · 
F.No . AV. 26012/l/92-AT.Il 
The following A.l.C. is issued for information and necessary action. This supersedes 
AIC No. 2111992 dated 28th October. 1991. 
--
(M.R. SIVARAMAN) 
Director General of Cil'il A l'iation 
OPEN SKY POLICY FOR CARGO FLIGHTS FROM INDIA 
1. Earlier Open Sky Policy for foreign cargo carriers wus declared for a period of three 
years ending December, 1992. ln order to fudlitate cargo carriers to muke their investment 
decisions and undertake commitments on long term basis, it has been decided to place this 
'Open Sky Policy' for curgo operations on a permanent basis. 
2. The cargo flights may be cleared freely from uirports where customslimmigrutions 
facilities are available. Scheduled and non-scheduled ()perators. both Indian and Foreign 
may submit application/proposal to the Director General of Civil Aviation for getting 
clearances for such flights. Cargo flights into India are also permitted . 
3. Government will give fuvourable consideration to private operators. associations of 
exporters etc .. to run air cargo operations on their own or on a consortium basis through 
purchased or leased freighter aircraft. · 
4. Carriers are free to charge rates according to the demand and supply situation. 
5. Operators are required to meet the operational and safety requirements while 
operating such <~dlwc cargo flights. 
. . 
44 
-- _ .. ---::::...-.----· 

ANNEXURE-Ill 
(Ville para 1.5) 
Telephone No.: 4622495 
Extn. 5<X> 
Telegraphic Address: 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
AERONAUTICAL INFORMA­
TION SERVICE 
DIRECTOR GENERAL OF 
CIVIL AVIATION 
A. I. C. 
Sl. No. 03/1993 
25th February 1993 Aeronautical : VIDDY A YG 
NEW DELHI 
Telex : 74127 DGCA IN 
Fax : 
(OPPOSITE SAFDERJUNG 
AIRPORT) • 
, 
NEW DELHI-110 003 
F.No. 3/1/93-AIS 
F.No. AV. 1401512188-AT(I) 
The following A.l.C. is issued for informatiqll. and necessary action. -
(M.R. SIVARAMAN) 
Director General of Civil Aviation 
GUIDELINES FOR AIR TAXI OPERATION 
The following sub-pura is added to the AIC 24 of 1990: 
"9 (xiv). No. Air Taxi Operator shall .employ anyone already serving any of 
the national carriers, namely, Air India , Indian Airlines, Vayudoot and 
Pawan Hans without obtaining a 'No Objection Certificate' from the employer 
with whom they are working. They shall further submit to DGCA a monthly 
return on pilots/engineers employed by them in a specified proforma 
(Annexure I)" 
AlC 03/1993 
ANNEXURE I 
STATEMENT REGARDING EMPLOYMENT OF PILOT~ENGINEERS BY 
WS (NAME OF THE AIR TAXI OPERATOR) - ----
During the Month of ________ .___ 
·-- ·- ·-- -· ·- ------------
No. Name ~f the Pilot/Engineer Date of Joining Name of the : Whether NOC Rcferem:e No .. 
previous obtained frum Date of the 
Employ~· r the previous NOC if 
employer oblllincd 
1 2 5 
_.;__.--------~---'-----------------====- ~-- -···--.. 
45 

Telephone No.: 4622495 
Extn. 500 
Telegraphic Address: 
Aeronautical : VIDDY A YG 
Commercial : AIRCIVIL 
NEW DELHI 
Telex : 31-74127 DGCA IN 
Fax : 011· 4629221 
ANNEXURE-IV 
(Vide pam 1.5) 
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA 
AERONAUTICAL INFORMA­
TION SERVICE 
DIRECTOR GENERAL OF 
CIVIL AVIATION . 
(OPPOSITE SAFDERJUNG 
AIRPORT) .. 
NEW DELHI-110003 
A.l.C. 
Sl. No. 04/J«.J9.' 
15th March. JIN3 
t The following guidelines for operation of Tourist Charter flights to India are issued 
for information and guidance. · 
CANCELLATION:-Aeronautical Information Circulm No. 3 of 1992. 
. ' M.R. SIVARAMAN 
DIRECTOR GENERAL OF CIVIL AVIATION 
File No. ~/1/93-AIS 
File No. AV14011/l/93-AT-I 
OPERATIONS OF TOURIST CHARTER FLIGHTS TO INDIA 
The Government has decided that with immediate effect. the tourist charter flights to 
India will be cleared by the Director General of Civil Aviation in place of the Tourist 
Charter Committee in the Department of Tourism. The application shall be made to the 
Director General of Civil Aviation pn the prescribed form (Appendix 'A') duly signed by 
the Charter Operator or its authorised travel agent/Hotelier recognised by the Department 
of Tourism in India. · 
The officers dealing with the subject in the DGCA will by Dy. Director Air Transport 
Tel. No. 4628922; ~622495 Extn. 418. Priority Officer Tel. No. 4622495 Extn. 436. The 
approval of the charter flights will be communicated to the Charter Operator/authorised 
travel agent/Hotelier in India alongwitll the conditions for operation of Tourist Charter 
flights. 
~. 
The Department of Tourism and the officer-in-charge of the concerned aerodrome/ 
aerodromes in India shall be informed by the Director Generul of Civil Aviation of the 
deanmce accorded to such flights. 
. Proforma for the approval und the conditions of the operation of charter flights are at 
appendix ·s· 
The DepartmL'Ilt of Tourism will monitor thl· fli!-!hts nptratt·d & realisation of the 
prcsnihcd fcc per pasi\L'nger by thL· ,·harter openttors. 
46 
@ 
. 
. 
' 

.'f 
AIC 04/lJ.\ 
Appendix ·A· 
APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION TO OPERATE TOURIST U IARTER FLIGHTS 
TO INDIA 
, 
1. Name of the Charter Operator 
Addre~s 
2. Name of the authorised Travel 
in India 
Address and Telephone No. 
3. Details of Charter Flights 
(i) Type of Aircraft 
(ii) Place of Origin 
(iii) Charter Schedule 
Agent/Hotelier 
·-
Flights operating at only one airport in India 
(a) Airport of arrival in India 
(b) Day and date of arrival 
(c) Airport of departure 
(d) Day and Date of departure 
• 
Hig.hts operating at more than one airport in India 
. S. No. Airport of Day and Airport of Day and 
Arrival date of · Departure date of 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
arrival 
4. Frequency of charter flights 
5. Period of operation of charter night 
6. Number of passengers 
7. Number of Crew 
Date: 
· Departure 
,( 
47 
. •' 
(Signature of Charter Operator/ 
Authorised tmvcl Ag.l·nl'llotdier 

To 
Subject:-Permission to operate tourist charter flights to India. 
Sir, • 
AIC 04/93 
Appendix 'B' 
With reference to your application No. dated to operate 
tourist charter to India permission is hereby granted to you for operating tourist charter 
with · type of aircraft as per the details given helow:-
Nd. Destination Airports in 
India 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Date •or 
Arrival 
Date of 
· Departure 
The above permission is subject to conditions overleaf. 
Airport 
Departure 
Yours faithfully, 
for Director General of Civil Aviation 
Copy to:-
~ t. The Director General of Tourism. 
C-1 Hutments, Dalhousie Road, 
New Delhi-110011. 
2. The Airport Director/The Aerodrome Officer/---'·~----
AlC04/93 
CONDITIONS FOR OPERATION OF TOURIST CHARTER FLIGHTS lN INDIA 
1. Charter flights shall originate from any place out of India. Each tourist shall have 
foreign passport with endorsement to visit India. 
--2. The charter flights shall operate to the airport in India as specified in the permit. 
For any change the operater shall ob,tain prior approval of Di~e~tor General of Civil 
Aviation. 
3. All the tourists carried on these flights should have booked the package tours in the 
originating country. · 
4. The stay of tourists in India will be for a minimum period of 7 days and maximum 
of 45 days. · 
5. All arrargements in India for the tourists will be made through Indian PrincipaV 
Travel Agent/Operator/Hotelier recognised by the Department of Tourism and the 
charges for arrangements will be paid in foreign currency in advance. 
6. All Charter passengers are required to pay minimum of 350 US Dollars per person 
for .a 7 day package for travel in charter flights for t~e period 1st October to 31st Match 
and 300 US Dollars for the period 1st April<tl> 30th September. However for tourists from 
48 L 
() . 
' 

49 ·,. 
SAARC countries viz., Bangladesh, Bhutan, Maldives Srilarika, Nepal & Pakistan the 
amount to be paid is 50% of the aforesaid amount. The amount is to be remitted by the 
Charter Operator to India through the .recognised Indian PrincipaVfravel Agent/Hotelier 
recognised by the Department of Tourism. 
7. The charter flights will not be permitted to be used for purpose other than carrying 
bonafide tourists . · 
8. The Indian PrincipaVCharter Operator/Indian Travel Agent/Hotelier may send his 
bonafide representative by the charter flights to finalise arrangements with the principals. 
9. _Handling of the charter should be given to Air {ndia or Indian Airlines and the 
handling charges be paid in foreign exchange. 
10. Charter operator will inform DG Tourism , the names and description of the 
passengers concerned within 24 hours of the arrival in India . 
I 
11. The flights shall be operated in accordance with the approved schedule. , 
12. All charter flights shall operate on promtrlgated ATS routes. 

\ ¥ 
• 
--
MINUTES 
~ . 

\ ·~· 
v 
FIFrH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3.00 p.m. on Tuesday, the 8th June, 1993, in Committee Room 
'A', Ground Floor , Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Pramod Mahajan Chairman 
2. Shri J agir Singh Dard 
3. Shri John. F. Fernandes • 
4. Shri Ghufran Azam 
5. Shri Bhadreswar Gohain 
6. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
7. Shri Iqbal Singh 
, 8. Shri Satya Prakash . Malaviya 
9. Shri Mohd. Khaleelur Rahman --10. Shrimati Basanti Sarma 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Vilasrao Nagnathrao Gundewar 
12. Shri Shivendra Bahadur Singh 
13. Shri A. Charles 
14. Shri Peter G. Marbaniang 
15. Shri Swarup Upadhayay 
16. Shri C.K. Kuppuswamy 
17. Shri Imchalemba 
18. Shri K.D. Sultanpuri 
19. Shri Santosh . Kumar Gangwar 
20. Prof. Prem Dhumal 
21. Shri Chattrapal Singh 
22. Shri Kalka Das 
23. Shri Vishwanath Das Shastri 
24. Shri Anadi Charan Das 
25. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
26. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
27. Shri Krishna Marndi 
28. Shri Jagbir Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri T.K. Bhattacharya, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri P.R. Guharoy, Committee Officer 
3. Shri Ram Behari, Committee Officer 
2. At the outset, the Chairman informed the Members of the Committee that he had 
suggested to the Secretariat that the matter regarding Government policy on Air-Taxi 
operation, its impact on Indian Airlines and the matter connected therewith should from the 
agenda of the next meeting of the Committee and Relevant papers/materials be collected 
and obtained from the Ministry. 
3. The Chairman gave the background of the subject chosen for the discussion. ·He 
informed that the Air Corporations Act of 1953 had not been ameqded. Still private airlines 
have been allowed to operate which is in consistent with the existing provisions of the Act. 
53 

The said Act permits only the domestic Indian Airlines, although the Air Corporations 
(Transfer of Undertaking & Repeal) Bill had been introduced and was pending for 
ccnsideration. Members unanimously approved the subject selected for consideration of the 
Committee. 
4. During the general discussion, some Members pointed out. that private airlines were not 
observing safety rules. These air taxis were supposed to pperate on remote routes although 
they were found to be operating on regular routes. Seating capacity had also been exceeded. 
Some MembeJs were of the view that there should be healthy competition between the 
domestic airlines and the private air taxis for the benefit of the country and for that purpose 
certain guidelines were required to be formulated to improve the performance of the · air 
taxis and the domestic airlines. Some Members reffered to the induction of _the staff in the 
private air taxis from abroad. They suggested that there should be no compromise so far the 
question of national security was concerned. They wanted Government to take all 
precautions to ensure that the security of the country was not jeopardised. Some Members 
also referred to the inherent defects in the whole set up entrusted to deal with the operation 
of Indian Airlines. They were of the view that the staff were more concerned about their 
pay and allowances rather than their output. They opined that because of the failure of 
Indian Airlines, Private air taxis had been introduced for which the Indian Airlines itself had 
to share the responsibility. 
5. The Committee thereafter decided to hear Secretary, Department of Civil Aviation 
on the above matter at its next meeting to be held on Wednesday, the 9th June, 1993 . . 
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.45 p.m. to meet again at 10.00 a.m. the next 
day. 
--
- . --... -- - -~-:-- - -- ___ · ... __ , __ ·-- · - ~· .... - -- ---- -- -:-:- ------ ···-----..: 
..... - .'·- · 
54 

\ ., 
VI 
SIXTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 9th June, 1993, in Committee 
Room 'A' Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABRA 
1. Shri Pramod Mahajan --. Chairmam 
2. Shri Jagir Singh Dard • 3. Shri Ghufran Azam 
4. Shri Bhadreswar Gohain 
5. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
6. Shri Iqbal Singh 
.t 7. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
8. Shrimati Basanti Sarma 
--9. Shri Shankar Dayal Singh 
LOK SABRA 
10. Shri Vilasrao Nagnathrao Gundewar 
11. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
12. Shri Shivendra Bahadur Singh 
13. Shri A. Charles 
14. Shri Gurcharan Singh Dadhahoor 
15. Shri Peter G. Marbaniang 
- 16. Shri Swarup Upadhayay 
17. Shri C.K. Kuppuswamy 
18. Shri Imchalemba 
19. Shri Manphool Singh 
·. 20. Shri K.D. Sultanpuri 
21. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
22. Prof. Prem Dhumal 
23. Shri Chattrapal Singh 
24. Shri Vishwanath Das Shastri 
25. Shri Ram Naresh Singh 
26. Shri Anadi Charan Das 
27. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
28. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
29. Shri S.M. Lal Jan Basha 
30. Shri Jangbir Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri T.K. Bhattacharya, Deputy Secretary 
2. Shri P.R. Guharoy, Committee Officer, 
3. Shri Ram Behari, Committee Officer. 
Department of Civil Aviation. 
1. Shri S. Kaoungo, Secretary, Deptt. of Civil Aviation. 
2. Shri K.A. Ardhanarreeswaran, Chairman, NAA. 
3. Shri AVM (Retd.) H.M. Shahul, Member (Ops .) NAA. 
4. Shri Robey Lal, Member (Engg.), IAAI. 
5. Shri Satinder Singh, Dy . DGCA. 
55 

·-
6. Shri A.M. Bhardwaj, Joint Secretary. 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Secretary and other representatives of the 
Department of Civil Aviation. The Chairman requested the Secretary, Deptt. of Civil 
. Aviation to give a brief account on Air Taxi Operation, its implementation and impact on 
the Indian Airlines and Vayudoot. 
The Members of the Committee sought clarifications from the Secretary and · other 
representatives of the Deptt. About the reasons behind policy statement made by 
Government on 11.4.90, difference between air taxi and an Airline , legality of air taxi 
service in view of the existing provisions of the Air Corponations Act, 1953; loss suffered by 
the Indian Airlines a Vayudoot as a result of air taxi operation, safety measures ensured in 
air taxi operation, foreign collaboration, operation of scheduled flights and publicity thereof, 
conditions imposed for operation of air taxis; uniformity in fare structure , Government 's 
assessment about air taxi operation and question of full autonomy to the Indian Airlines. 
' A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
3. The Committee thereafter decided to hold its next meeting on Wednesday , the 7th 
July, 1993 to hear the Chairman-cum-Managing Director of the Indian Airlines and also on 
Thursday, the 8th July, 1993 to hear the representatives of the private air taxi operators in 
the country. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 2.15 P.M. 
--
~ . 
56 
0 . . 

' -
A I 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
t ¥ 
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Wednesday, the 7th July, 1993, in Committee 
Room 'A' Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
MEMBERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Pramod Mahajan __ Chairman 
2. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
3. Shri Ghufran Azam 
4. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
5. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
6. Shri Mohd. Khaleelur Rahman 
7., Shri Shrimati Basanti Sarma 
LOK SABHA 
8. Shri A. Charles 
9. Shri Gurcharan Singh Dadhahoor 
10. Shri K.M. Mathew 
11. Shri Peter G. Marbaniang 
12. Shri C.K. Kuppuswamy 
13. Shri Imchalemba 
14. Shri Manphool Singh 
15. Shri K.D. Sultanpuri 
16. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
17. Shri Chattrapal Singh 
18. Shri Kalka Das 
19. Shri Arvind Trivedi 
20. Shri Vishwanath Das Shastri 
21. Shri Ram Naresh Singh 
22. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
23. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
24. Shri Lokanath Choudhury 
25. Shri S.M. Lal Jan Basha 
26. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shrimati Shovana Narayan, Director 
2. Shri Raja Ram, Under Secretary 
3. Shri P.R. Guha Roy, Committee Officer 
INDIAN AIRLINES 
--
1. Shri Brijesh Kumar, Chairman & Managing Director 
2. Capt. D.V. Sharma, Dy. Director (Operations) 
3. Shri S.C. Rastogi, Director, Personnel 
4. Shri K. Lal, Commercial Director 
5. Shri Daya Narain, Director, Corporate Affairs 
6. Shri R.N. Saxena, Offg. Director Finance 
7. Shri Ashok Bhushan, Dy., Director Plaiming 
8. Sh'ri Satpal, Consultant, Wo Civ~l Aviation 
57 
.. 
.. .. 
' · 

\J.G. EXPRESS t:OI<PORATION LTD. 
1. Shri S.K. Modi. ( 'hairman 
2. Shri A.D. Sharn1<1. Director 
2. The Committee hcurd the views of the n·presenwtives of the Indian Airlines on the 
< iovt. policy on Air Taxis operation and its impa1.:t on Indian Airlines. The Committee ul~o 
heard the views of representatives M.G. Express Corporation on 'Govt. policy on air taxi 
upcnttion and matters connected therewith.· 
A verbatim recorU of the proceeding.' was kept. 0 
3. The Committee then adjourned at 6.15 p.m. "to meet again at 10.00 a.m. on 
Thursday, the 8th July, 1993. 
--
58 

VIII 
EIGHTH MEETING 
\ ¥ -
The Committee met ut 10.00 A.M. on Thursday. the Hth July. 1993 in Committee Room 
'A'. Ground Floor. Purliument House Annexc. New Delhi. 
\IF.l\IERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Pramod Muhujan Chainn(ln 
2. Shri Jugir Singh Dard 
3. Shri Ghufran Azmn 
4. Shri Bhudrcswur Gohain 
5. Shri Nurain Pmsud Guptu 
6. Shri Iqbal Singh 
, 7. Shri Sutya Prakush Mulaviyu 
8. Shri Mohd. Khulcelur Ruhmun 
lJ. Shrimuti Busunti Surmu 
LOK SABHA 
10. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
11. Shri Gurchurun Singh Dudhuhoor 
12. Shri K.M. Muthcw 
13. Shri Peter G. Murbuniung 
14. Shri Swurup Upudhuyuy 
15. Shri lmdullcmbu 
16. Shri Munphool Singh 
17. Shri K.D. Sultunpuri 
18. Shri Suntosh Kumur Gungwar 
19. Prof. Prem Dhumal 
20. Shri Chuttrapul Singh 
21. Shri Kalk<~ Dus 
22. Shri Arvind Trivedi 
23. Shri Vishwunuth Das Shustri 
24. Shri Rum Nurcsh Singh 
25. Shri Sukhcndu Khun 
26. Shri Lok•muth Choudhury 
27. Shri S.M. Lui .Jun Basha 
2X. Shri Uday Pratap Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shrimati ShovHnH Naray:.m. Director 
2: Shri Raja Rum. Under Secretary 
--
.\ . Shri P.R. Guhu Roy. Committee Officer 
I . Delhi Gulf Airways Services 
Cupt. Vinnd Kum<~r. Director 
" lfh Air /'11 . /.tel. 
Shri N. Gopala Rao. Vice President 
3. "hans Bharat Aviation 1'1'1. Ltd. 
I. Shri P.N . Kum:.1r. M:.mugin~ Direchll· 
~ Shri l{nllll \hutteril 'l:. Dy. Commen.:iHI 
~ I) 
• 
M<~nuger 

·.1r ' ,.... ! i 
4. Jagson Airlines 
Shri V. Sahai, General Manager 
5. East West Airlines 
1. Shri Nasir A Wahid, Chairman 
2. Shri T.A. Wahid, Managing Director 
3. Shri Ramchandran, Commercial Manager • 4. Capt. O.P. Vashist, Operational Manager 
5. Shri Murthy, Engineering Chief 
6. Shri Bhatnagar, Regional Marketing Manager 
7. Shri Riaz, Manager (Coord.) 
6. Aerial Services Pvt. Ltd. 
1. Shri R.G. Koszarek, Managing Director 
2. Shri A.K. Murthy, Director 
3. Shri S.K. Bhasin, Resident Manager 
7. Damania Airways Ltd. 
1. Shri Parvez Damania, C.M.D. 
2. Shri Jahangir Damania, Director 
8. Jet Airways 
1. Shri S.K. Datta, Executive Director 
2. Shri Javed Akhtar, Director 
9. Archna Airways Ltd. 
Shri N.K. Bhartiya, Managing Director 
Shri V .P.S. Sindhu, Chief Executive 
·10. Saraya Aviation Pvt. Ltd. 
Shri S.S. Majithia, Chief Execunve 
Shri R.K. Blaggana, General Manager (Operation) , 
11. Air Operators Association 
Vice Admiral S.C. Chopra, President. 
\ ¥ 
~ . 
2. The Committee heard the views of above mentioned organisations on 'Government 
Policy' on Air Taxi Operation and matters connected therewith. 
A verbatim record of proceeding was kept. 
/ 
. . _3 . . The Committee decided to hold its next meeting at 11.()() a.m. on Wednesday, 21st 
July, 1993 to adopt the draft report. · · 
The Committee then adjourned at 6.30 P.M. 
. '· 
60 
0 

/ 
IX 
NINTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 21st July, 
139, First Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Del}li. 
MEMERS PRESENT 
RAJYA SABHA 
1. Shri Pramod Mahaj~n Chairman 
2. Shri Jagir Singh Dard 
3. Shri Bhadreswar Gohain 
4. Shri Narain Prasad Gupta 
5. Shrf Ram Jethmalani 
6. Shri Iqbal Singh 
7. Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya 
8. Shri Mohd. Khaleelur Rahman 
9. Shrima.ti Basanti Sarma 
10. Shrimati Veena Verma 
LOK SABHA 
11. Shri Gurcharan Singh Dadhahoor 
12. Shri K.M. Mathew 
13. Shri Peter G. Marbaniang 
14. Shri C.K. Kuppuswamy 
15. Shri Imchalemba 
16. Shri K.D. Sultanpuri 
17. Shri Santosh Kumar Gangwar 
18. Prof. Prem Dhumal 
19. Shri Chattrapal Singh 
20. Shri Kalka Das 
21. Shri Arvind Trivedi 
22. Shri Vishwanath Das Shastri 
23. Shri Anadi · Charan Das 
24. Shri Sivaji Patnaik 
25. Shri Sukhendu Khan 
26. Shri Krishna Marndi 
27. Shri Jangbir Singh 
SECRETARIAT 
1. Shri Raja Ram, Under Secretary 
--
2. Shri P.R. Guha Roy, Committee Officer 
• 
\ '¥ 
1993; in Room No. 
2. The Committee considered its Draft Report on 'Govt. Policy on Air Taxi Operation 
and· matters connected therewith' and adopted the same with some modifications. The 
\J Committee also authorised its Chairman to see that the suggestions made by the members 
are carried out in the report. ~ · 
3. The Committee decided to present the Report during the Monson session of 
Parliament and authorised the Chairman and in his absence Shri Satya Prakash Malaviya to 
present the Report in the Rajya Sabha. The Committee also authorised Shri Peter G. 
Marbaniang and in his absence Shri Anadi Charan Das to lay the Report on the Table of the 
Lok Sabha. 
A verbatim record of the proceedings was kept. 
4. The Committee then adjourned at 1.45 P.M. 