The Committee on Transport and Tourism, at its meeting held on Tuesday, the 11th August 1998, decided to undertake the examina
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/40threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:03]
INTRODUCTION
            I, the Chairman, Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport & Tourism, having been authorised by the
 Committee to present on their behalf, present this Fortieth Report on “Problems faced by Tourists/Passengers at the
 Airports in the Country”.
2.         The Committee at its meeting held on 18
th January 1999, 22nd January 1999 & 27th January 1999 considered the
 subject and took evidence of representatives of Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of
 Finance, Airports Authority of India and Tour & Travel Agencies.
3.         The Committee wish to express its thanks to the officers of Ministry of Civil Aviation, Ministry of Home
 Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Airports Authority of India and representatives of Tour & Travel Agencies for placing
 before the Committee the material and information desired in connection with the subject and for giving evidence
 before the Committee.
4.         The Committee at its meeting held on the 1
st March 2000 considered and adopted the Report.
NEW DELHI                                                                                                                 MD. SALIM
March, 1, 2000                                                                                                                 Chairman
Phalguna 11, 1921 (Saka)                                                                           Parliamentary Standing Committee on
 Transport & Tourism
 
 
REPORT
 
The Committee on Transport and Tourism, at its meeting held on Tuesday, the 11th August 1998, decided to undertake
 the examination of the problems faced by both the foreign & domestic passengers/tourists at the airports while
 negotiating various mandatory clearances like Customs/Immigration/Visa/Foreign exchange etc.  Besides this, the
 Committee felt that the travelling public also encounters problems in the use of several facilities like
 Transport/Luggage Trolleys, toilets, drinking water, restaurants, medical aid, enquiry counter for assistance etc.  The
 Committee is of the view that the general opinion about the functioning of the airports amongst the travelling public is
 very poor.  The services provided at the airport are not upto the mark as compared to international standards and as
 such these need adequate improvements.
2.            Keeping in view the public importance of the subject, the Committee on Transport and Tourism issued
 advertisements in the leading newspapers all over the country as well as on Doordarshan/All India Radio seeking
 personal experience, suggestions of the public and views of the leading tour and travel operators regarding the
 difficulties/ harassment faced by the foreign/domestic passengers/tourists in availing the various facilities like visa,
 customs, immigration, foreign exchange, transport, shopping, security, general amenities etc. presently made available
 at the airports in the country.
3.         The advertisement issued in the newspapers/Doordarshan/All India Radio evoked encouraging response from the
 general public as well as from the leading Tour & Travel operators.  A total number of 132 memoranda were received
 containing the personal experiences of the travelling public and suggestions for improvements in the running of the
 airports.
4.         The Committee held discussions with the Ministry of Civil Aviation and Airports Authority of India.  The
 Committee also heard the views of the Ministries of Home Affairs, Finance (Department of Revenue) and External
 Affairs, which are directly related to the management of many mandatory clearances, which a tourist has to obtain at
 the international airports in the country.
5.         The Committee also heard the views of leading Tour & Travel operators/Agencies and individuals on the
 subject.
6.         The Committee on Transport and Tourism visited Airports at Delhi, Mumbai, Goa, Chennai,
 Thiruvananthapuram, Guwahati and Ahmedabad to examine the functioning of these Airports and the facilities
 provided to the tourists at the airports.
The Committee was informed by the Airports Authority of India that they provide only tourism related facilities to the
 tourists at the airports which consists of paid/free facilities.
The Committee was also informed by the AAI that it manages five International airports namely Mumbai, Delhi,
 Chennai, Calcutta and Thiruvananthapuram, 87 Domestic airports and 28 Civil Air Terminals at Defence Airfields, a
 total of 120 airports in the country.
The Committee, after careful examination of the memoranda received by it and hearing the views of the concerned

The Committee on Transport and Tourism, at its meeting held on Tuesday, the 11th August 1998, decided to undertake the examina
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/40threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:03]
 Ministries, Tour & Travel operators and individuals, came to the conclusion that the major areas which require
 improvement at the airports are lack of co-ordination amongst the various agencies functioning at the airports,
 overcrowding of the departure/arrival lounges, harassment of tourists in obtaining immigration, visa/customs clearance,
 wearing of uniform by the staff working at the airports for their proper identification, transport facility and problem of
 touts, lack of civic amenities and etiquette and behaviour of the staff at the airports, shortage of luggage trolleys etc.
 
CO-ORDINATION AMONGST VARIOUS AGENCIES AT AIRPORTS
The Committee was informed by the Airports Authority of India that a large number of organisations are working at the
 airports and AAI is one of them.  The main agencies working at the airports, particularly at the international airports,
 are customs, foreign exchange department controlled by the Ministry of Finance, visa under the Ministry of External
 Affairs and immigration and security with the Ministry of Home Affairs.  It was further explained to the Committee
 that the AAI does not exercise kind of control over these agencies and it only provides working space to them.  The
 Committee observed that there is a complete lack of            co-ordination amongst the various agencies/organisations
 working at the airports, particularly at the international airports, due to which the travelling public in general and
 tourists in particular, face a lot of problems as they do not know which single authority they should approach in case of
 any problem.   They have to go separately to each department for the redressal of their problems/complaints and every
 department/official shift its responsibility upon others.  The question of bestowing special powers to the Airport
 Director to enable him to have a better grip on the situation at the airport was also suggested as a possible solution to
 the lack of co-ordination.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be one working officer posted at
 the airports for maintaining efficient co-ordination amongst all the agencies viz. Customs, immigration, visa, security,
 foreign exchange etc. operating at the international airports.  This power should be vested with the Airport Director, as
 this would go a long way in streamlining the management of the airports.  To have greater transparency at the airports,
 there should be a Central Control Room supervised by the Airport Director where the passengers could lodge their
 grievances/complaints in respect of any of the agencies functioning at an airport.  The proposed Central Control Room
 should also be equipped to handle any emergency situation.  The Committee further recommends that to make the
 airports more user friendly, an advisory committee, on the lines of Railways Advisory Committee, may be constituted
 at all the airports comprising of officials of the agencies functioning at the airports and the representatives of general
 public.
 
IMMIGRATION/STAMPING OF PASSPORTS
The Committee was informed that it takes a lot of time at the immigration counters for passengers to obtain clearance. 
 The problem is further aggravated due to bunching of flights at night, which leads to more delay in getting clearance. 
 The representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs informed the Committee during evidence that in 95% cases,
 clearance is done in 30 minutes and in only 5% cases, the time taken is 45 minutes.  The international prescribed
 standard clearance time on arrival of the passengers is 45 minutes.  The Committee was also informed that a proposal
 relating to computerisation of passport office is also under consideration so that machine-readable passports could be
 issued in future.  For this comprehensive computerisation proposal, the Ministry has taken the advice of the Department
 of Electronics, as it is a technical subject. The Committee was also informed that at our airports, each regulatory agency
 viz. Customs, Immigration and Security compulsorily stamps the boarding card after check of each and every
 passenger, and this stamping is further checked subsequently by these regulatory agencies, thus making a passenger to
 stop at many places before proceeding for boarding.  At most international airports, none of the agencies stamp the
 boarding card, thus, passenger is not required to stop at different points and his flow becomes smooth. 
 The Committee is of the view that 30-45 minutes is a long time for the passengers of a flight to be cleared.  The
 Government should make efforts to reduce this time to 15-20 minutes.  Steps should be taken to open more counters,
 especially during nights when there is bunching of flights.  The Committee appreciates the proposal of computerisation
 of passports office and issue of machine readable passports and recommends that the matter should not be delayed
 much so that machine readable passport facility can be introduced at the earliest in order to reduce the checking time at
 immigration counter and till this takes place, the Ministry of Home Affairs, in consultation with the AAI, should ensure
 speedy clearance of the passengers by opening more counters.  As regards the stamping of passports, the Committee
 observes that a streamlining of these regulatory procedures would go a long way in reducing passenger fatigue, tension
 and resultant problems to passengers, especially tourists, who are used to much simpler departure procedures at other
 international airports.
The Committee was informed that in several countries the citizens of those countries holding a valid passport are not
 required to pass through the immigration counter whenever they return home country after visiting a foreign country. 

The Committee on Transport and Tourism, at its meeting held on Tuesday, the 11th August 1998, decided to undertake the examina
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/40threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:03]
 The representatives of the Ministry of Home Affairs also informed the Committee that simplification of immigration
 formalities is under the active consideration of the Government and the Ministry of Law has accorded clearance for
 these proposals.  The Committee desires that the matter should be got expedited so that necessary notification should be
 issued to make immigration clearance easier both for the foreign tourists as well as for the Indian passport holders
 returning their home country.
 
VIDEO MONITORING OF THE MAIN AREAS OF THE AIRPORT
During its discussion with the various tour & travel operators and individuals, the Committee was informed that a lot of
 overcrowding takes place at the airport especially at the halls where immigration/custom/visa counters are functioning. 
 The problem is further worsened when there is a bunching of flights.  The Committee was also informed that a tourist
 also suffers a lot of harassment and inconvenience due to this overcrowding as it leads to long delays and also by the
 malpractices indulged in by the official/staff working on these counters.  The Committee was surprised to know that at
 present no regular monitoring at the airport is being done with the help of video cameras/CCTV.  The officers incharge
 at these organisations posted at the airport are some times not even aware of the problems of overcrowding taking place
 at their respective counters.  Therefore, they are not able to take timely action to cope up with the situation. The
 Committee, therefore, recommends that all international airport should be equipped with video monitoring system
 which should be kept working for twenty four hours at all the public handling areas viz. Immigration, Visa and Custom
 counter in arrival/departure halls/lounges and that this monitoring should be done at one centralised place where a high
 ranking officer can monitor immigration/custom/visa/baggage areas.  The person handling the video monitoring should
 immediately inform the concerned agency/officer in case he notices any overcrowding and malpractice being indulged
 in by the staff manning a particular counter.  The authority/representative of the Ministry should be more vigilant in
 taking action promptly.
 
WORKING OF ESCALATORS AT THE AIRPORTS
The Committee was unhappy with the recent escalator incident at the Indira Gandhi International Airport in which a
 minor girl was crushed to death and that no official/doctor attended the girl for a long time.  During its visit to the
 airport, the Committee noted that the escalator had not become operational even after two months of the incident,
 resulting in inconvenience to passengers, especially old people, ladies and children.  The Committee was informed by
 the AAI that it was not made operational due to the enquiry in process into the escalator accident.  The Committee,
 however, recommends that the escalator at IGI airport may be put into operation immediately in order to avoid
 inconvenience to the passengers.  The Committee further recommends that the escalators installed at the airports should
 be properly maintained and the same should be regularly monitored.  It is also recommended that in view of the
 increase in passenger load, the escalators should be fitted with latest security equipments and safety measures.  The
 officials posted near the escalators should be aware of the switches that could be switched off in case of emergencies. 
 The Committee feels that the airport management should be ready to deal with any emergency situation and that
 response time to emergency situations must improve.
 
WEARING OF UNIFORM BY THE STAFF AT AIRPORTS
It has come to the notice of the Committee that officials working at the airports come on duty without their uniforms,
 which causes a lot of inconvenience to the passengers with respect to their identification.  The Committee was further
 informed by the Ministry of Home Affairs that the immigration officers are being paid uniform allowance @ Rs.750/-
 p.m.  However, since this rate is very less they have requested the Ministry of Finance for enhancement of this amount
 from Rs.750/- to Rs.2900/- per month but the Ministry of Finance has rejected their proposal.
The Committee feels that the uniform of the officials shows discipline of any organisation.  However, it is also of the
 view that the uniforms allowance, which is at present being paid, is very meagre and needs enhancement.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up this matter with the Ministry
 of Finance for reconsideration of their proposal relating to increase in uniform allowance.  It further recommends that
 uniform should be provided to each of them and it should be made compulsory to wear. 
It is also recommended that instead of identity badges, the names of the officials should be embroidered, in big letters,
 on the uniforms of the officials.  They should also be directed to display the identity card on their uniform, which not
 only gives an impressive look but also helps one to recognise them easily in case of need.
 
CUSTOMS
The Committee was satisfied by the services provided by the custom department.  However, it observed that some

The Committee on Transport and Tourism, at its meeting held on Tuesday, the 11th August 1998, decided to undertake the examina
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/40threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:03]
 custom officers insist upon the passengers to open their suitcases even after X-ray of the baggage has been done.  The
 passengers find it difficult to repack their baggages.  The passengers also face a lot of problems while passing through
 the red channel.  The Committee also observed that generally Custom officials look at the passengers with suspicion
 specially the labour class coming from gulf countries.  As labour class is less educated they do not have much idea
 about the articles that are allowed to be brought or not.  They also do not know how much duty could be levied on the
 articles carried by them.  The lack of knowledge of rules in this regard results in their harassment by the customs
 officials and some times they have to pay money to get cleared their baggage.  The Committee was also of the view that
 neither Indian Airlines nor Air India or for that matter any other personnel working at the airports have any knowledge
 about the baggage rules or custom rules.
The Committee was further informed by the representatives of the Ministry of Finance that they publish a book called
 “Guide for Travellers” relating to customs regulations for travellers and they also circulate this book.  The Committee
 observed that many people do not know about this book and therefore, recommends that ‘Guide for Travellers’ should
 be made available to all the passengers/tourists at all the international airports not only in Hindi but also in English and
 in local languages so that less educated passengers from different parts of the country and abroad can understand the
 rules relating to customs regulations for passengers.  The Committee also suggests that physical checking of baggage
 should not be done on a discriminatory basis and it should be based on some rationale and be reduced to the minimum
 to avoid harassment to the passengers.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that a booklet containing relevant
 information like financial limit, what goods one can bring, what are the items for which the passenger should go
 through the red channel, on which articles custom duties can be imposed etc. should be given to the airlines at airports
 and may be kept at other places also.  It can also be attached with dis-embarkation card so that an average passenger
 can be aware of custom rules and regulations.
 
FRISKING
The Committee was informed that at the Indian airports, manual frisking is carried out for each and every passenger,
 instead of using sophisticated modern equipments.  Consequently, the passengers at the airports have to wait for a long
 time in a queue for their security check.  The Committee recommends that the security arrangements for frisking should
 be thoroughly modernised so that dependence on manual checking is reduced to the minimum.  Placing more reliance
 on modern security equipments would expedite security checks and reduce long waiting time and congestion outside
 the security hold areas.  Security personnel carrying out physical search should be friendly and courteous.
HAJ TERMINAL
During its visit to the Indira Gandhi International Airport at Delhi, the Committee visited the newly constructed Haj
 Terminal.  The Committee was informed that the Terminal would serve as a single point area for the departure and
 arrival of Haj Pilgrims.  The Committee noted that outside the terminal, there were no sheds/tents for taking rest by the
 relatives who had come to receive and see off the Haj pilgrims.  The Committee also noted that there was lack of basic
 facilities like drinking water, toilets, canteen etc. outside the Terminal.
The Committee appreciates the construction of a new Haj Terminal at Delhi by the Airports Authority of India for the
 benefit of Haj pilgrims.  The Committee feels that the new Haj Terminal would help in smooth and expeditious
 clearance of Haj pilgrims.  The Government may explore the possibility of having such Haj Terminals catering to Haj
 flights at other airports also.  However, the Committee recommends that some shed etc. may be constructed outside the
 Terminal at IGI airport at the earliest.  Immediate steps may also be taken to provide facilities for drinking water,
 toilets, canteen etc.
 
ETIQUETTES, BEHAVIOUR AND TRAINING OF THE STAFF
It has come to the notice of the Committee that the officials deputed at immigration & customs counter generally behave
 rudely with the passengers.  This type of behavior does not go well with the tourists and creates an unpleasant
 atmosphere.  Today national/international airports are gateways of any country.  The passenger/tourist gets first
 impression of a particular country at the airport itself, which represents the culture and society of any country, as the
 immigration counter is the first point of contact for any traveller.    A pleasant smile and courteous behavior of the
 airport officials can give a sense of relief to a person tired from the journeys.  The Committee, therefore, recommends
 that officials deputed at the airports, especially at the immigration/custom counters should be strictly asked to be
 courteous and behave good mannerly with the passengers.  The Committee is of the view that this could be done only
 by constant training and strict supervision.  A regular training, based on latest managerial and behaviour modules
 developed by consultants of national repute, should be imparted to the officials in dealing with the passengers/tourists
 to make them more tourists friendly.  The officials so trained would be better equipped to welcome the tourists with a

The Committee on Transport and Tourism, at its meeting held on Tuesday, the 11th August 1998, decided to undertake the examina
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/40threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:03]
 smile on their faces.  This would go a long way in creating a courteous atmosphere at the Airports.
 
TRANSPORT SYSTEM AT THE AIRPORT
During its interaction with the tours and travel operators, the Committee was apprised that when a passenger lands at the
 Airport he has to face a lot of problem in hiring Transport.  It was noticed by the Committee that pre-paid taxi counters
 had not been opened at some of the Airports.  If a counter is there, adequate number of taxis are not available to the
 passengers.  Taxis that are available at the airport are of 20-35 years old and are in bad condition.  Old people, ladies
 with children always face problem in getting taxis as they are not in a position to run with their baggage.  There is no
 display board mentioning the rates to be charged for various destinations, which always leaves the possibility of
 cheating, specially with the foreigners.  Taxi drivers are generally without uniform and identity badges. 
 Passengers/tourists are some times forcefully stopped and looted by the private taxi owners.  Sometimes passengers are
 not allowed to reach pre-paid taxi counters.  The Committee also noted that most of the Airports do not have their own
 carrier facilities for the passengers to reach their destination/airport.  The Committee was informed that AAI are
 running free buses for inter-terminals movements for passengers.  However, for their journeys outside the airports, it is
 done by other public transports or taxi services.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that pre-paid taxi counters at the airports should be increased and opened at all
 the airports in the country where this facility is not available.  The Government should make it compulsory that all the
 taxis, which operate at the airports, should be neat, clean and in good condition.  There should also be facility of air-
conditioned taxis for those passengers who prefer this mode of transport.  It should also be made compulsory for the taxi
 drivers to wear uniform and show their identity badges/names on the dress.  More counters of pre-paid taxis should be
 opened to avoid rush at one place and a queue system should be introduced and preference should be given to old
 people/ladies with children. Some police personnel should also be deputed at the prepaid taxi stands to ensure that the
 queue system functions properly.  A rate-list showing charges for various destinations within the city should be
 prominently displayed at the prepaid taxi counters.  A mechanism should be developed whereby the private taxis
 operating at the airports are not able to overcharge/cheat the passengers.  Private taxi owners should not be allowed
 inside the airport.  The Committee also suggests that AAI itself should make some arrangement for providing bus
 services at the minimum charges from the airport to the city.
The Committee has also been informed that parking area is not well connected with the arrival/departure halls at the
 airports.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that these areas should be well connected.
 
DUTY FREE SHOPS
The Committee noted that most of our airports are very congested and duty free shops at our international airports are
 limited in number with limited stock of items and there is also not enough space for the shopkeepers to demonstrate
 their wares. The Committee is of the view that since the shopping areas are earning a lot of money for the AAI, they
 should be given enough space to display their items.  The Committee desires that number of duty free shops should be
 increased and these shops should also have items of Indian handicrafts.  The Committee feels that at Indian airports
 there is a lot of potential to generate revenue from non-aeronautical sources and that a conscious effort should be made
 towards increasing the share of commercial revenue by fully exploiting the commercial potential of the airports.
 
CIVIC AMENITIES AT THE AIRPORTS
It has come to the notice of the Committee that there is utter lack of civic amenities like toilets, drinking water etc. at the
 airports.  The cleanliness and hygienic conditions of these places are not up to the mark and these are not being
 maintained properly.  It is noted that the officials working at the airports also use the same toilets, which are meant for
 the passengers/tourist.  The Committee was also informed that the toilet facilities are not available outside the
 arrival/departure halls of the airports.  Persons who come to receive/see off their clients/guests experience difficulty due
 to the absence of toilets outside the arrival/departure lounge.  Lack of toilet facility at car/taxi parking area outside the
 Airports also creates inconvenience.  Drivers are using the open space for toilet purpose as a result of which the whole
 parking area stinks. The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be separate toilets for the officials
 working at the airports.  The Committee also recommends that toilet facilities are also to be provided outside the
 arrival/departure lounge and parking areas in order to avoid inconvenience to the persons who visit the airports to
 receive/see off their near and dear ones.  There should always be one or two persons on duty for proper cleaning of
 these places and regular inspection of these areas should be carried out for their proper maintenance.
 
TOUT PROBLEM

The Committee on Transport and Tourism, at its meeting held on Tuesday, the 11th August 1998, decided to undertake the examina
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/40threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:03]
Tout menace at the airports is one of the major problems.  At almost all the airports, they are exploiting the people.  As
 soon as the passengers/tourists arrive at the airport, the touts surround and misguide them by giving all sort of wrong
 information.  Sometimes they even take them to far away places and grab all their valuable belongings and leave them
 to their fate.  This creates a bad image of the country.  The issue of tout menace is of prime concern and is reported
 from time to time on the city side area under the jurisdiction of Airport Police Station.  AAI has no direct control to
 prevent the touting on the city side.  The matter is discussed regularly in the Airport Security Committee Meetings of
 which Dy. Commissioner of Police (Airport Security) is the convenor.  AAI has taken various steps to educate/caution
 the passengers by displaying notice boards and informing various facilities available over CCTV monitors.  Free inter-
terminal shuttle coach facility has also been provided to passengers for their inter-connecting flights.  Further, the
 airlines are also operating similar services between terminals, besides pre-paid taxi services and car rental services, to
 prevent the passengers from touts.  AAI will also be interacting with the State Governments to tackle this menace.
The Committee recommends that to overcome the problem of touts, special teams should be constituted which may
 conduct surprise checks on a daily basis.  The Committee further recommends that like Railways, which have their own
 Railways Protection Force, AAI can also have their own airport protection force to look into this problem.
 
VISA ON ARRIVAL
The Committee understands that in many countries facility for stamping the visa are made available to foreign tourists at
 the respective airports on arrival.  Since the Indian Embassy offices are situated at far away places in many countries,
 the foreign tourists have to travel very long distances to obtain visas to visit India.  Distance has acted as a disincentive
 to visit India.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should explore the possibility of
 introducing the facility of granting visa to visiting foreign tourists on arrival at the International Airports.
 
MEETING AND GREETING AREA
Many relatives/friends come to the airports to see off/receive their near and dear one, which creates congestion at the
 airport.  It has come to the notice of the Committee that most of the airports lack facility relating to the meeting and
 greeting place where people could meet a person to whom they have come to receive and see off.  It has also come to
 the notice of the Committee that passengers remain unaware of the friends/relatives who have come to the airport to
 meet and receive them.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that Airports Authority of India should create meeting
 and greeting area facility at all the airports where people can receive and see off their friends/relatives.  In addition to a
 computerised information centre, facility for a message desk should also be provided at the airports so that the
 incoming passengers get the information that somebody is waiting for them.
 
‘MAY I HELP YOU’ COUNTER
A passenger can have some problems at the airport regarding visa, custom or requires some information related to delay
 flights etc., for which they look here and there. The Committee noted during discussion that such counters are not
 available at the airport.  The Committee, therefore, suggests that all the international airports in the country should open
 ‘May I Help You’ counters round the clock and an official should be present at these counters.  It would certainly give
 the impression that this country is welcoming the passengers/tourists.
 
AEROBRIDGES
Today, aerobridges at the airports are needed not only from the security point of view but also for the convenience of
 the passengers.  It was noticed by the Committee that even some of the major airports in the country are not equipped
 with the aerobridges.  In Delhi, at the Domestic Airport, there are no aerobridges and the passengers have to walk
 through or travel in bus after the flight lands.  It was also noted that aerobridges were not being fully utilised at the
 airports or remain inoperational over a considerable period due to lack of adequate maintenance facilities.   Therefore,
 the Committee, keeping in view the security reasons and the convenience of the passengers, recommends that Airports
 Authority of India should give preference to build aerobridges at all the major airports in the country.  Wherever the
 aerobridges are lying dysfunctional, they should be made operational and put to use.
 
MEDICAL FACILITIES
Medical facilities at the airports are primary requirement now a day.  Most of the airports in the country do not have first
 aid facility to be used in case of need.  The Committee understands that there have been cases of death at the airports
 due to the absence of medical facilities.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that medical aid counters/chemists
 shops should be made available at all the airports where passengers can be treated in case of emergency and buy

The Committee on Transport and Tourism, at its meeting held on Tuesday, the 11th August 1998, decided to undertake the examina
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/40threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:03]
 medicines.  Airports should also have sufficient number of ambulances for transporting the serious patients
 immediately to a nearby hospital.
 
TOUR OPERATORS COUNTER
During its interaction with the Tour & Travel operators, the Committee was informed that no separate counter is
 available to the tour operators at the airport so as to provide detailed information about the availability of the hotels and
 tourist spots in a particular city.  The Committee is of the view that a separate counter should be made available at the
 airports to all the three prominent operators i.e. (i) Hotel and Restaurant Federation of India (ii) Tour Operators
 Association of India and (iii) Indian Association of Tour Operators where all sorts of information regarding hotels,
 tariff, reservation of rooms and other facilities could be provided to the needy passengers/tourists.  However, during its
 visit to the Indira Gandhi International Airport, the Committee found that although tourist information assistance
 counters had already been made available, no officials were present there.  The Committee took it very seriously and
 observed that once the Airports Authority of India provides the space for some useful purpose, that purpose should be
 achieved.  The Committee is of the view that some officials should always be present at these counters so that
 necessary information is provided to the tourists and that they are not harassed/misled by selfish minds.
 
TRANSIT PASSENGERS
Today transit passengers are major sufferer of delay or cancellation of flights.  To catch the connecting flight a
 passenger has to wait from half an hour to forty-eight hours.  A passenger who lands at the airport after one journey and
 has to catch another flight needs facilities like lockers, rest-room, bathroom, restaurant etc. It has been noticed by the
 Committee that no locker facility is provided at the airports for these passengers in the name of security.  At some of
 the airports no rest room and bathroom is available to these transit passengers.  The Committee recommends that
 restrooms, along with bathrooms, should be provided to the transit passengers at all the airports.  As regards the locker
 facility the Committee suggests that such a facility could be provided outside the Main Terminal Building at the airport
 to overcome the problem of security.
 
PROPER SIGNBOARDS
Proper signboards, guiding the passengers as to how to go and where to go after check in, are not available at most of
 the airports.  The Committee is of the view that there should be proper signboards inside the airport, beautifully
 decorated to attract the passenger and to show them the right way.  One person from each organisation like custom,
 immigration, security etc. should always be available at the halls in the airport so that in case of any difficulty the
 passenger could contact him.
 
LUGGAGE TROLLEYS
The Committee understands that sufficient numbers of trolleys are not available at most of the airports.  Passengers face
 a lot of difficulties in transporting their luggage, as they have to wait for these trolleys.  It has also been brought to the
 notice of the Committee that the trolleys available at the airports have also not been designed keeping in mind the
 requirement of the passengers.  It is very difficult for passengers to keep their luggage in the presently available
 trolleys.  Therefore, the Committee recommends that AAI should look into the matter of providing sufficient number of
 spacious luggage trolleys.  
 
*******
 
OBSERVATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS AT A GLANCE
 
Co-ordination amongst various agencies at airports
The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be one working officer posted at the airports for maintaining
 efficient        co-ordination amongst all the agencies viz. Customs, immigration, visa, security, foreign exchange etc.
 operating at the international airports.  This power should be vested with the Airport Director, as this would go a long
 way in streamlining the management of the airports.  To have greater transparency at the airports, there should be a
 Central Control Room supervised by the Airport Director where the passengers could lodge their grievances/complaints
 in respect of any of the agencies functioning at an airport.  The proposed Central Control Room should also be
 equipped to handle any emergency situation.  The Committee further recommends that to make the airports more user
 friendly, an advisory committee, on the lines of Railways Advisory Committee, may be constituted at all the airports

The Committee on Transport and Tourism, at its meeting held on Tuesday, the 11th August 1998, decided to undertake the examina
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/40threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:03]
 comprising of officials of the agencies functioning at the airports and the representatives of general public.
                                                                                                                         (Para 10)
Immigration/Stamping of Passports
The Committee is of the view that 30-45 minutes is a long time for the passengers of a flight to be cleared.  The
 Government should make efforts to reduce this time to 15-20 minutes.  Steps should be taken to open more counters,
 especially during nights when there is bunching of flights.  The Committee appreciates the proposal of computerisation
 of passports office and issue of machine readable passports and recommends that the matter should not be delayed
 much so that machine readable passport facility can be introduced at the earliest in order to reduce the checking time at
 immigration counter and till this takes place, the Ministry of Home Affairs in consultation with the AAI should ensure
 speedy clearance of the passengers by opening more counters.  As regards the stamping of passports, the Committee
 observes that a streamlining of these regulatory procedures would go a long way in reducing passenger fatigue, tension
 and resultant problems to passengers, especially tourists, who are used to much simpler departure procedures at other
 international airports.                                                                    
The Committee desires that the matter should be got expedited so that necessary notification should be issued to make
 immigration clearance easier both for the foreign tourists as well as for the Indian passport holders returning their home
 country.                    
   (Paras 12 &13)
 
Video Monitoring of the Main Areas of the Airport
The Committee, therefore, recommends that all international airport should be equipped with video monitoring system
 which should be kept working for twenty four hours at all the public handling areas viz. Immigration, Visa and Custom
 counter in arrival/departure halls/lounges and that this monitoring should be done at one centralised place where a high
 ranking officer can monitor immigration/custom/visa/baggage areas.  The person handling the video monitoring should
 immediately inform the concerned agency/officer in case he notices any overcrowding and malpractice being indulged
 in by the staff manning a particular counter.  The authority/representative of the Ministry should be more vigilant in
 taking action promptly.         
                                                                                                                      (Para 14)
 
Working of Escalators at the Airports
The Committee, however, recommends that the escalator at IGI airport may be put into operation immediately in order
 to avoid inconvenience to the passengers.  The Committee further recommends that the escalators installed at the
 airports should be properly maintained and the same should be regularly monitored.  It is also recommended that in
 view of the increase in passenger load, the escalators should be fitted with latest security equipments and safety
 measures.  The officials posted near the escalators should be aware of the switches that could be switched off in case of
 emergencies.  The Committee feels that the airport management should be ready to deal with any emergency situation
 and that response time to emergency situations must improve. 
  (Para 15)
 
Wearing of Uniform by the Staff at Airports
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Home Affairs should take up this matter with the Ministry
 of Finance for reconsideration of their proposal relating to increase in uniform allowance.  It further recommends that
 uniform should be provided to each of them and it should be made compulsory to wear.  It is also recommended that
 instead of identity badges, the names of the officials should be embroidered, in big letters, on the uniforms of the
 officials.  They should also be directed to display the identity card on their uniform, which not only gives an impressive
 look but also helps one to recognise them easily in case of need.              
   (Para 18)
Customs
The Committee observed that many people do not know about this book and therefore, recommends that ‘Guide for
 Travellers’ should be made available to all the passengers/tourists at all the international airports not only in Hindi but
 also in English and in local languages so that less educated passengers from different parts of the country and abroad
 can understand the rules relating to customs regulations for passengers.  The Committee also suggests that physical
 checking of baggage should not be done on a discriminatory basis and it should be based on some rationale and be
 reduced to the minimum to avoid harassment to the passengers.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that a booklet
 containing relevant information like financial limit, what goods one can bring, what are the items for which the

The Committee on Transport and Tourism, at its meeting held on Tuesday, the 11th August 1998, decided to undertake the examina
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/40threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:03]
 passenger should go through the red channel, on which articles custom duties can be imposed etc. should be given to
 the airlines at airports and may be kept at other places also.  It can also be attached with dis-embarkation card so that an
 average passenger can be aware of custom rules and regulations. 
(Para 20)
 
Frisking
The Committee recommends that the security arrangements for frisking should be thoroughly modernised so that
 dependence on manual checking is reduced to the minimum.  Placing more reliance on modern security equipments
 would expedite security checks and reduce long waiting time and congestion outside the security hold areas.  Security
 personnel carrying out physical search should be friendly and courteous.                                                                   
            (Para 21)
 
Haj Terminal
The Committee appreciates the construction of a new Haj Terminal at Delhi by the Airports Authority of India for the
 benefit of Haj pilgrims.  The Committee feels that the new Haj Terminal would help in smooth and expeditious
 clearance of Haj pilgrims.  The Government may explore the possibility of having such Haj Terminals catering to Haj
 flights at other airports also.  The Committee recommends that some shed etc. may be constructed outside the Terminal
 at IGI airport at the earliest.  Immediate steps may also be taken to provide facilities for drinking water, toilets, canteen
 etc.
                                                                                                            (Para 23)
 
Etiquettes, Behaviour and Training of the Staff
The Committee, therefore, recommends that officials deputed at the airports, especially at the immigration/custom
 counters should be strictly asked to be courteous and behave good mannerly with the passengers.  The Committee is of
 the view that this could be done only by constant training and strict supervision.   A regular training, based on latest
 managerial and behaviour modules developed by consultants of national repute, should be imparted to the officials in
 dealing with the passengers/tourists to make them more tourists friendly.  The officials so trained would be better
 equipped to welcome the tourists with a smile on their faces.  This would go a long way in creating a courteous
 atmosphere at the Airport.
                                                                                    (Para 24)
 
Transport System at the Airport 
The Committee, therefore, recommends that pre-paid taxi counters at the airports should be increased and opened at all
 the airports in the country where this facility is not available.  The Government should make it compulsory that all the
 taxis, which operate at the airports, should be neat, clean and in good condition.  There should also be facility of air-
conditioned taxis for those passengers who prefer this mode of transport.  It should also be made compulsory for the taxi
 drivers to wear uniform and show their identity badges/names on the dress.  More counters of pre-paid taxis should be
 opened to avoid rush at one place and a queue system should be introduced and preference should be given to old
 people/ladies with children. Some police personnel should also be deputed at the prepaid taxi stands to ensure that the
 queue system functions properly.  A rate-list showing charges for various destinations within the city should be
 prominently displayed at the prepaid taxi counters.  A mechanism should be developed whereby the private taxis
 operating at the airports are not able to overcharge/cheat the passengers.  Private taxi owners should not be allowed
 inside the airport.  The Committee also suggests that AAI itself should make some arrangement for providing bus
 services at the minimum charges from the airport to the city.           
                                                                                   
The Committee has also been informed that parking area is not well connected with the arrival/departure halls at the
 airports.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that these areas should be well connected.
(Paras 26 & 27)
 
Duty Free Shops
The Committee is of the view that since the shopping areas are earning a lot of money for the AAI, they should be given
 enough space to display their items.  The Committee desires that number of duty free shops should be increased and
 these shops should also have items of Indian handicrafts.  The Committee feels that at Indian airports there is a lot of
 potential to generate revenue from non-aeronautical sources and that a conscious effort should be made towards

The Committee on Transport and Tourism, at its meeting held on Tuesday, the 11th August 1998, decided to undertake the examina
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/40threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:03]
 increasing the share of commercial revenue by fully exploiting the commercial potential of the airports.
(Para 28)
 
Civic Amenities at the Airports
The Committee, therefore, recommends that there should be separate toilets for the officials working at the airports. 
 The Committee also recommends that toilet facilities are also to be provided outside the arrival/departure lounge and
 parking areas in order to avoid inconvenience to the persons who visit the airports to receive/see off their near and dear
 ones.  There should always be one or two persons on duty for proper cleaning of these places and regular inspection of
 these areas should be carried out for their proper maintenance.
(Para 29)
 
Tout Problem
The Committee recommends that to overcome the problem of touts, special teams should be constituted which may
 conduct surprise checks on a daily basis.  The Committee further recommends that like Railways, which have their own
 Railways Protection Force, AAI can also have their own airport protection force to look into this problem.
(Para 31)
 
Visa on Arrival
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Government should explore the possibility of introducing the facility of
 granting visa to visiting foreign tourists on arrival at the International Airports.
(Para 32)
Meeting and Greeting Area
The Committee, therefore, recommends that Airports Authority of India should create meeting and greeting area facility
 at all the airports where people can receive and see off their friends/relatives.  In addition to a computerised information
 centre, facility for a message desk should also be provided at the airports so that the incoming passengers get the
 information that somebody is waiting for them.
(Para 33)
 
‘May I Help You’ Counter
The Committee, therefore, suggests that all the international airports in the country should open ‘May I Help You’
 counters round the clock and an official should be present at these counters.  It would certainly give the impression that
 this country is welcoming the passengers/tourists.
(Para 34)
 
Aerobridges
Therefore, the Committee, keeping in view the security reasons and the convenience of the passengers, recommends that
 Airports Authority of India should give preference to build aerobridges at all the major airports in the country. 
 Wherever the aerobridges are lying dysfunctional, they should be made operational and put to use.
(Para 35)
 
Medical Facilities
Therefore, the Committee recommends that medical aid counters/chemists shops should be made available at all the
 airports where passengers can be treated in case of emergency and buy medicines.  Airports should also have sufficient
 number of ambulances for transporting the serious patients immediately to a nearby hospital.
(Para 36)
 
Tour Operators Counter
The Committee is of the view that a separate counter should be made available at the airports to all the three prominent
 operators i.e. (i) Hotel and Restaurant Federation of India (ii) Tour Operators Association of India and (iii) Indian
 Association of Tour Operators where all sorts of information regarding hotels, tariff, reservation of rooms and other
 facilities could be provided to the needy passengers/tourists.
The Committee took it very seriously and observed that once the Airports Authority of India provides the space for
 some useful purpose, that purpose should be achieved.  The Committee is of the view that some officials should always
 be present at these counters so that necessary information is provided to the tourists and that they are not

The Committee on Transport and Tourism, at its meeting held on Tuesday, the 11th August 1998, decided to undertake the examina
file:///C/Users/user/Desktop/pri/Committee%20on%20Transport,%20Tourism%20and%20Culture/40threport.htm[28-08-2018 12:45:03]
 harassed/misled by selfish minds.
(Para 37)
 
Transit Passengers
The Committee recommends that restrooms, along with bathrooms, should be provided to the transit passengers at all
 the airports.  As regards the locker facility the Committee suggests that such a facility could be provided outside the
 Main Terminal Building at the airport to overcome the problem of security.
(Para 38)
 
Proper Signboards
The Committee is of the view that there should be proper signboards inside the airport, beautifully decorated to attract
 the passenger and to show them the right way.  One person from each organisation like custom, immigration, security
 etc. should always be available at the halls in the airport so that in case of any difficulty the passenger could contact
 him.
(Para 39)
 
Luggage Trolleys
Therefore, the Committee recommends that AAI should look into the matter of providing sufficient number of spacious
 luggage trolleys.
(Para 40)
 
*******