PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA SABHA 137
DEPARTMENT -RELA TED PARLIAMENT ARY STANDING
COMMITTEE  ON TRANSPOR T, TOURISM  AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY SEVENTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09)
OF MINISTRY OF CULTURE
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28 APRIL, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28 APRIL, 2008)
TH 
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28 APRIL, 2008)
TH 
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28 APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)APRIL, 2008/VAISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)

Website:http://rajyasabha.nic.in
E-mail:rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in

PARLIAMENT OF INDIA
RAJYA  SABHA
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,
TOURISM AND CULTURE
ONE HUNDRED AND THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT
ON
DEMANDS FOR GRANTS (2008-09)
OF MINISTRY OF CULTURE
(PRESENTED TO THE RAJYA SABHA ON 28 TH APRIL, 2008)
(LAID ON THE TABLE OF THE LOK SABHA ON 28 TH APRIL, 2008)
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
APRIL, 2008/V AISAKHA, 1930 (SAKA)


CONTENTS
PAGES
1. C OMPOSITION  OF THE C OMMITTEE ......................................................................................... (i)-(ii)
2. I NTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................ (iii)
3. R EPORT OF THE C OMMITTEE .................................................................................................. 1—28
4. O BSERV A TIONS/CONCLUSIONS /RECOMMENDATIONS — A T A G LANCE .................................... 29—37
5. M INUTES ................................................................................................................................. 39—44

(i)
COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,
TOURISM AND CULTURE (2007-08)
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury – Chairman
MEMBERS
RAJYA SABHA
*2. Prof. Ram Deo Bhandary
3. Shri Naresh Gujral
^4. Shri Vedprakash P. Goyal
*5. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
*6. Shri Janardhana Poojary
7. Shri M.V . Mysura Reddy
8. Shri Satish Kumar Sharma
9. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
*10. Shri Shatrughan Sinha
LOK SABHA
11. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
12. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
13. Shri Joachim Baxla
14. Shri Sartaj Singh Chhatwal
15. Shri N.S.V. Chitthan
16. Shri Adhir Chowdhury
17. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
18. Shrimati Priya Dutt
19. Shri Dip Gogoi
20. Shri P. Karunakaran
21. Dr. P . P . Koya
#22. Shri Vijay Kumar Khandelwal
23. Dr. Ramkrishna Kusmaria
24. Shri Samik Lahiri
25. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
26. Shri Hemlal Murmu
27. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
28. Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
29. Shri Dushyant Singh
30. Shri Suraj Singh
31. Shri Prahlad Joshi
**32. Shri Rakesh Singh
^ Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f.  2nd April, 2008.
* Ceased to be a member of the Committee w.e.f.  9th April, 2008.
# Expired on 13.11.2007.
** Nominated on 1.12.2007.

(ii)
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer

(iii)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport,
Tourism and Culture, having been authorised by the Committee to present on its behalf, do hereby
present this One Hundred and Thirty-seventh Report on ‘‘Demands for Grants 2008-09 of the
Ministry of Culture’’.
2. The Committee, at its meeting held on the 26th March, 2008, considered the subject and
heard the Secretary and other officials of the Ministry of Culture.
3. The Committee wishes to express its thanks to the officers of the Ministry of Culture for
placing before the Committee the material and information desired in connection with the subject
and for clarifying the points raised by the Members.
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report at its meeting held on the 24th April, 2008.
SITARAM YECHURY
N
EW D ELHI; Chairman,
April 24, 2008 Department-related Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Vaisakha 4, 1930  (Saka) Transport, Tourism and Culture.

1
REPORT
India is one of the few nations in the world having a developed culture and a fast
developing economy. Its culture is deeply rooted in a pluralistic society. Development of culture
should be considered as a catalyst to the economic development. As such culture cannot be
confined to the boundaries of any particular sector. However, it could be recognized that there
are certain sectors wherein presence and contribution of culture and creativity are much more
dominant and visible. Elements of culture encompass media, films, music, handicrafts, visual arts,
Performing Arts, literature, heritage management, cultural and creative industries etc. The Cultural
development inter-alia  includes areas of Culture both in tangible and intangible fields.
2. The mandate of the Ministry of Culture is to preserve and promote all forms of art and
culture. To this end, the Ministry of Culture undertakes the following activities :
• The maintenance and conservation of the country’s heritage, ancient monuments and
historic sites;
• Promotion of the literary, visual and performing arts;
• Administration of libraries, museums and anthropological institutions;
• Maintenance, preservation and conservation of archival records and archival libraries;
• Research and development in the conservation of cultural property;
• Observation of centenaries and anniversaries of important national personalities and
events;
• Promotion of institutions and organizations of Buddhist and Tibetan studies;
• Promotion of institutional and individual initiatives in the field of art and culture;
• Entering into and implementation of cultural agreements with foreign countries;
3. The functional spectrum of the Ministry ranges from generating cultural awareness at the
grassroots level, to promoting cultural exchanges at an international level. Along with programmes
for the preservation of India’s ancient heritage, the activities of the Ministry encourage and
disseminate a variety of contemporary creative arts as well. The Ministry’s aim is to develop
ways and means through which the basic cultural and aesthetic sensibilities of the people remain
active and dynamic. The activities are carried out through the two attached offices, i.e. ,
Archaeological Survey of India and National Archives of India; seven subordinate offices and
thirty-three autonomous institutions working under the Ministry.
The following are the subordinate offices under the Ministry of Culture:
• Anthropological Survey of India, Kolkata
• National Museum, New Delhi
• National Gallery of Modern Art, New Delhi
• National Library, Kolkata

2
• Central Reference Library, Kolkata
• National Research Laboratory for Conservation of Cultural Property, Lucknow
BUDGET ALLOCATION AND OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE FINANCIAL
PERFORMANCE FOR THE YEAR 2007-08
4. Demand No. 18 containing the details of the budget allocation of the Ministry of Culture
for the financial year 2008-09 was considered by the Department-related Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Transport Tourism and Culture at its meeting held on the 26th March, 2008. For
the year 2008-09, the Ministry of Culture has been allocated Rs. 1025.00 crore including the plan
component of Rs. 600.00 crore.
5. The Ministry informed the Committee that as against Rs. 4965.99 crore proposed by the
Ministry, for Art and Culture Sector for the Eleventh Five Year Plan (2007-12), the Planning
Commission has tentatively allocated Rs. 4024.00 crore. Thus, keeping in view the allocation in
2007-08 and 2008-09, the allocations for the next three years will have to increase substantially
for Ministry of Culture.
6. The Ministry further stated that they had projected demand of an Plan Outlay of
Rs. 864.73 crore for 2008-09 on the basis of the proposals received from various cultural
organizations, divisions under the Ministry. The Planning Commission has allocated a sum of
Rs. 600.00 crore for developmental activities thereby resulting a cut of Rs. 264.73 crore for the
year 2008-09 on account of resource constraints. This cut has an effect on almost all the
sectors of the Ministry including organizations such as Archaeological Survey of India,
Akademies, Zonal Culture Centres, National Council of Science Museums, Science Cities,
departmental central schemes and the new schemes of the Ministry of Culture.
7. The sector-wise break up of plan and non-plan allocation for the year 2008-09 is as
follows:
(Rs. in crore)
Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Certified Budget Estimates
2007-08 2007-08 Expenditure 2007-08 2008-09
Upto 29.2.2008
Plan Non- Plan Non- Plan Non- Plan Non-
Plan Plan Plan Plan
557.00 375.61 520.00 460.00 370.39 298.72 600.00 425.00
8. The Committee notes that the expenditure trend during 2007-08 is not very
satisfactory. For the plan allocation, expenditure of Rs. 370.39 crore has been incurred out
of the RE of Rs. 520.00 crore. In the non-plan also, expenditure of Rs. 298.00 crore has
been incurred out of Rs. 460.00 crore upto 29th February, 2008. Thus, Rs. 149.61 crore
in plan and Rs. 161.28 crore in non-plan remained to be utilized in the month of
March, 2008.
9. Regarding low utilization of funds, while considering the A TNs, the Committee was
informed by the Secretary that the Ministry has a very large number of small and diverse
activities which is probably causing the underutilization of funds. During the RE exercise in the
month of November by the Finance Ministry, the BE of Ministry of Culture has been reduced
invariably. The Secretary, Ministry of Culture has expressed its constraints:

3
‘‘One is that, about a quarter of our expenditure is done by the ASI which is not a
CPWD type but nevertheless of a work related expenditure which can only happen after
the monsoon and, therefore, gets into the second half of the year... Secondly, cultural
activities do come in, in an odd way because of cultural season which is really winter
and thereafter. Therefore, we have this second half of the year type of expenditure.
Usually the Ministry is able to spend 53% by December, however, the Ministry of Finance
desires that only 33 per cent of the allocation can be spent in last quarter. Thus, the
Ministry of Culture finds itself at a disadvantage.’’
10. The Committee in its 120th Report, had recommended to the Ministry of Culture that the
review of budgetary allocation by Government in the month of December may be taken up
instead of the month of September of the financial year. Subsequently, this matter was taken up
with the Ministry of Finance for their views/comments. In this regard, the Ministry of Finance
have shown their inability to alter the reviewing system of budgetary allocation, since the
preparation of budget documents for presentation of Annual Budget on 28th February starts from
December and it is, therefore, necessary to complete their R.E. exercise before this, which is
done during October-November every year.
11. The Ministry of Culture informed the Committee that the reduction in the budgetary
provision at RE stage from the original provision for the Ministry every year affects important
ongoing activities as well as proposed activities included in the Plan allocation made to cultural
organizations of the Ministry of Culture. This reduction in the budgetary provision hampers the
growth of cultural organizations especially development of infrastructural facilities including
building component, application of modern techniques and IT related techniques in their
functioning. Therefore, it is felt that the cultural organizations including autonomous organizations
need to be funded adequately to meet their developmental activities.
12. The Committee is unhappy to note that despite its concern and considered
recommendation, the Ministry of Finance has refused to review the budgetary allocations
in the month of December instead of in the month of September thereby subjecting the
Ministry of Culture to financial cuts at RE stage. The Committee observes that there is
a greater need and scope for scrutiny of entire exercise of Budgetary Process beginning
from budgetary proposals in September by the Ministry of Finance in respect of Ministry
of Culture because of its special needs. The Committee feel that the entire budgetary
process and procedure involving about eight months has actually given both to the evil of
mis-utilisation of funds in a hurried manner and apprehension of losing valuable but
scarce financial resources made available to them by Ministry of Finance at the fag end
of the financial year. It appears that given the rigidity in budgetary exercise the Ministry
of Finance has failed to assess actual requirements of the Ministry of Culture for funds
to be utilized for various developmental purposes. The Committee is of the firm belief
that the underutilization to a great extent in the Ministry of Culture is the result of rigid
financial practices and procedures. The Committee therefore, recommends the Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance for giving an active consideration through a rigorous
and rational scrutiny for reforming and rescheduling of the present Budgetary procedures
and practice as far the Ministry of Culture is concerned, so that the final plan and non-
plan allocations are conveyed to the Ministry and to respective Institutions/organizations
by the month of December every year for effective and fruitful utilization of scarce
financial resources. Alternatively, the Committee recommends that the possibility may be
explored for provision of budget allocations for various activities may be converted as non-
Iapsable fund taking into account the seasonal nature of work and activities undertaken
by various institutions under the Ministry of Culture.

4
13. The Committee is happy to note that for the first time, allocation for the Ministry
of Culture has reached to four figures. The Committee feels that it is a good beginning
for this vital sector which has huge potential but yet to be explored. The Committee
hopes that all the new schemes and projects taken up by the Ministry during the financial
year 2008-09 will be completed in a time bound manner.
14. The Committee also recommends that possibility of organising off-season festivals
and organizing Dance/Cultural programmes throughout the year may be explored. The
Ministry should also explore for decentralization of some of the schemes which can help
the Zonal Centres in expediating their work. This will certainly help in providing much
needed relief to the Ministry. The Committee also recommends that inspite of the
constraints faced by the Ministry, there is need to spread the expenditure evenly and
making efforts for full utilization of the allocated amount through proper planning and
monitoring. Only then the desired result for Eleventh Five Year Plan can be achieved.
15. The Secretary while deposing before the Committee informed that the Ministry of Culture
has set up three-member Committee of the Ministry to look at the performance of various
schemes, to try and improve them, make them perhaps even more flexible or decentralise them,
and improve their quality. They are trying to improve the capacity to spend properly in time.
16. The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry to improve its performance.
The Committee may be apprised of the findings of the three members Committee and the
steps proposed to be taken to improve the performance of various schemes being
implemented by the Ministry of Culture.
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA (ASI)
17. The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) was established in 1861. It is an attached
office of the Ministry of Culture. The major activities undertaken by ASI are: maintenance,
conservation and preservation of centrally protected monuments/sites and remains. In addition to
the above activities, it conducts archaeological exploration and excavation and underwater
archaeology regularly. Since its inception, the ASI has grown into a large organization having its
network of 24 circles throughout the country. There are 3667 monuments of National importance
in the country which are Centrally Protected Monuments, which include 21 properties inscribed
on the World Heritage List by UNESCO. ASI is also engaged in developing epigraphically
research, setting up and reorganization of site museums, imparting training programmes in
Archaeology, strengthening of the Chemistry Branch and Horticulture Branch. Publication
programme of ASI encompassing the fields such as academic, informative and awareness
generation is one of the important activities of ASI. This programme will be strengthened further
during the year 2008-09 so that more publications relating to archaeology could be brought out
for the general public, particularly for students.
18. In the BE 2008-09 the ASI has been provided with Rs. 312 crore consisting of plan
component of Rs. 111.00 crore. While emphasizing the importance of ASI, the Ministry of
Culture has informed the Committee that the increase in the budgetary allocation will benefit
mainly the Archaeological Survey of India and the building projects of National Gallery of
Modern Arts. The Committee drew attention of the Ministry of Culture to the problem vanishing
of centrally protected monuments. In the reply, the Secretary, Ministry of Culture during the
course of evidence submitted to the Committee:
‘‘... regarding the monuments which appear to be vanishing and which do not seem to
find trace. There are about 30-odd such monuments which we ourselves are now trying

5
to see where exactly and when they went out of the book. But, Sir, it is not easy
because some of these are not available for quite some time. It is not a recent
phenomenon per se . Some of them, I am given to understand by my Archaeologist
colleagues, are, actually, available. They know where it is but, maybe, it is covered by
water. They know that it is there but it is not protected in that sense. Since there is a
need to go into all these in detail, we have set up recently an internal committee within
the ASI to study this and come back with the factual position and, perhaps,
recommendations in this area. It has been recently done. That is something we would be
looking at.’’
19. The Committee notes that the cases of vanishing of our monuments is a dangerous
process which if not controlled in time, may lead to a situation where we will be left with
only a few monuments as symbols of our culture and tradition. The vanishing of
monuments should be stopped with all the resources at our disposal. The Committee notes
that the Ministry has already taken appropriate measures to prevent it. The Committee
may be apprised about the findings of the internal Committee to study the problems and
the steps taken to implement the findings with the result it achieved.
20. The Committee notes that the allocation for ASI has been reduced from BE 2007-08 of
Rs. 98.00 crore to Rs. 89.00 crore at RE stage. The main reason for reduction of allocation
at RE 2007-08 was that Rs. 10.00 crore under Sub-head 03 00 50 (other charges) was
earmarked in the BE 2007-08 for the National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities. Since the
NMMA is yet to be fully operationalized and State level implementation committees are not yet
formed, projects to be approved by them are yet to take off. Consequently, the allocation for
NMMA had to be reduced drastically at RE stage. Other sectors in which provision was
substantially reduced (in percentage terms) at RE Stage are Archaeological Site Museums and
externally aided programme. This work is now in advanced stages and the projects will take off
during 2008-09. In externally aided projects (JBIC project at Ajanta-Ellora) the low expenditure
level is due to time taken in completion of certain formalities. The increased allocation of
Rs. 111.00 crore under Plan for the financial year 2008-09 will be utilized to increase IT
applications in ASI, increased provision for publications, celebration of heritage awareness weeks
at various Monuments/Museums and greater participation of school students; to take up more
Conservation projects and to complete ongoing works; and for providing better facilities at
protected monuments (toilets, drinking water etc.).
21. The Committee hopes that ASI will learn from its past experience on the reasons
for underutilizations of allocated funds and take appropriate steps to utilize the allocated
resources. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take immediate steps to
operationalise NMMA and expedite formation of State level implementation Committees so
that funds are utilized within the financial year. The Committee may be apprised about
the steps taken to operationalise NMMA and the status of its implementation.
22. The Ministry of Culture stated that the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) receives
proposals regarding excavation work from its field offices in the month of May-June, every year
and they are scrutinized and approved/not approved by the Standing Committee of C.A.B.A.
based on the merits and importance of the proposal. The current season of excavations expires
in September, 2008. During the period October, 2006 to September 2007 (excavation season) the
Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) excavated 6 sites namely, Juafardih, district Nalanda
(Bihar), Bangarh, district South Dinajpur (West Bengal), Barabati Fort, district Cuttack (Orissa),
Salvankuppam, district Kanchipuram (Tamil Nadu), Daulatabad, district Aurangabad (Maharashtra),
and Dwarka, district Jamnagar (Gujarat). 56 excavation reports were pending with ASI
since 2002. Out of these, 15 reports have been submitted so far and one has been deferred as

6
the matter is sub-judice. Seven excavation reports are likely to be submitted soon. The remaining
33 reports are under completion and about 50 to 60 per cent progress has been achieved so far.
ASI is rigorously monitoring the progress of these pending reports to ensure early completion.
23. The Director-General, Archaeological Survey of India informed the Committee that
Archaeological Survey of India has extended all necessary facilities to the retired officers to
expedite the completion of their respective pending reports. The Government has approved the
release of part payment of honorarium as an advance to retired officers. Archaeological Survey
of India has also fixed a time-limit for the completion of the reports by serving officials by
July, 2008. To check pendency of excavation reports in future, Archaeological Survey of India
has also modified the format in which proposals for excavation are invited from field offices and
other institutions to include details and budgets specifically on the plan for completion and
publication of the excavation reports. The format will be included in the Ancient Monuments and
Archaeological Sites and Remains Rules, 1959. During the year 2007-2008, ASI has made
considerable progress in bringing out the excavation reports of sites excavated by ASI officers.
The status of such excavation reports received for publication is given below:
1. Udaigiri Published
2. Adam In Press
3. Kalibangan In Press
4. Bekal Fort In Press
5. Tarkhanwale Dera Chak 86 In Press
6. Mahabalipuram In Press
24. The Committee notes that more than 56 excavation reports are pending with ASI
since 2002. The Committee is of the views that this is a serious matter since there is
inordinate delay in the preparation of reports. The Committee hopes with the new system
in place, there will be no delay in preparation of reports on excavation in future.
25. The Ministry has informed that 249 centrally protected monuments have been encroached
illegally. Steps proposed to be taken to solve the problem of encroachments at protected
monuments are as under:—
(i) The monuments prone to encroachments shall be fenced on priority basis.
(ii) Secu rity at the monuments will be strengthened to avoid encroachments by
deploying regular watch and ward staff, private security guards.
(iii) To ensure better coordination and liaison with State Government District and Police
authorities to take immediate preventive action against the encroachers.
(iv) Arrange frequent inspections of the monuments by the officers.
(v) Make fresh appeal to various courts wherein status-quo  orders have been passed
against the removal of encroachments.
(vi) State/District level committees to be formed with members drawn from Revenue
Police, ASI, State Department of Archaeology, etc.
(vii) Rehabilitation policy will be put into effect for eviction of encroachers from the
centrally protected monuments.

7
26. The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry to prevent encroachments.
The Committee desires that possibility of making financial provision to pay for the
rehabilitation of the encroachers who are removed from monuments may also be explored
in consultation with Ministry of Finance so that the Ministry is not dependent on
respective State Government for rehabilitation of encroachers.
27. The Committee also notes that more than 249 centrally protected monuments have
been encroached upon by various elements due to multifarious reasons. Some of the
reasons are historical whereas some others are socio-economic in nature. The Committee
observes that the problem needs to be addressed on a permanent basis with a lasting
solution wherever possible. Appr opriate mechanisms may be evolved to rehabilitate the
encroachers and the Government should ensure the retrieved monuments are not illegally
occupied again. The Committee notes that an appropriate Committee may be constituted
to look into the various aspects of the encroachments with the mandate to recommend
appropriate mechanism for finding a solution. This may be done on a time bound basis.
28. The Secretary, Ministry of Culture informed that defacement is something the Ministry is
discussing internally and they hope to look at some more stringent measures, if possible. The
Ministry will try to reduce the scope of the people actually going up to the monuments and
suggest them to look at them from a distance, to the extent possible. It may not be possible
in all monuments, but the Ministry will try to implement the restriction on touching a monument.
The Secretary further stated that as far as defacement of monuments is concerned, section 30
of the Ancient Monuments and Archaeological Sites and Remains Act has a provision in this
regard. Unfortunately, the extent of punishment is laid down in the Act itself is maximum of
three months or Rs. 5,000 or both, which is very low. But, unfortunately, the Ministry cannot
increase this either through an amendment in the rules or through an Executive Order because
the Ministry need an amendment in the Act to change this. The Ministry is going to make a
beginning with the 18th April, which is the International World Heritage Day. The Ministry hopes
to launch different ways by which to reach out to school students, college students, NSS
volunteers and the like.
29. The Committee recommends that to preserve the National Heritage from
defacement, penal punishment under the Act should be suitably revised to deter the
culprits along with other positive steps like generating awareness towards protection and
maintenance of beauty of the Monuments as valuable national heritage.
30. The Committee notes that the advertisements in the print and electronic media to
create awareness among the population about bad effects of defacement of monuments is
giving an impetus to the tourism sector. The Committee feels, the propaganda mechanism
needs to be more strengthened by introducing appropriate curriculum in the school
syllabus on the bad effects of defacement of our monuments. Moreover, the Committee
notes that a special campaign may be launched to educate the school children for the
preservation of our monuments. In addition to this, the media campaigns should also
focus the legal punishments involved in defacement of our national heritages.
31. The Committee was informed that Archaeological Survey of India is contributing for the
conservation and restoration of ‘Ta Prohm Temple’  in Cambodia under ITEC programme of
Ministry of External Affairs. The projects of conservation of Ta Prohm Temple  Complex in
Cambodia was started in 2003-04 under ITEC programme of MEA. This project is undertaken
by ASI. It is a ten years project. During 2008-09 also ASI proposes to continue this project.
Archaeological Survey of India has conducted scientific studies and investigations pertaining to
structural, geo-technical, water stagnation and arbouriculture aspects of this temple and have

8
submitted a report to ICC-UNESCO. A project implementation programme for the locations
identified by the ICC-UNESCO have also been approved by Cambodian Government and work
is in progress.
32. The Committee appreciates the efforts of ASI for putting India on the world map
by undertaking conservation work in Cambodia and hopes that similar projects may be
taken up in other countries also.
ANTHROPOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
33. The Anthropological Survey of India is a premier research organization under the Ministry
of Culture. It has completed 60 years of its splendorous existence and has adhered itself to its
commitments to carry out anthropological researches in the area of bio-cultural and biological
aspects of Indian populations in general and on those who are referred to as the ‘‘Weakest of
the Weak’’ in particular. This pioneer organization in the present days also leaps forward to
biotechnology in its field of operation in scientific researches, in particular, DNA study and its
allied lab work. Over the years, the Survey generated information from grass-root level through
sustained research activities by its Head Office at Kolkata and also with its Regional Centres,
Sub-Regional Centre, field stations located in various parts of the country, besides a Camp Office
at New Delhi also as liaison to the Ministry.
Major schemes/programmes proposed to be undertaken during the Eleventh Plan
Continuing Scheme
♦ Documentation and dissemination
♦ Fellowship programme
♦ In-service training
♦ Collaborative Schemes
♦ Computer services
♦ Cultural Exchange Programme
♦ Publication
♦ Induction of DNA Technology
♦ Functional modernisation of new and existing office buildings/minorworks/furnishings
♦ (a) International Conference (b) National Conference
♦ DNA polymorphism of the Contemporary Indian populations and Ancient Skeletal
Material
♦ Physical Growth and Developemnt of Children in North-East India-A Public Health
Issue.
♦ International School of Anthropology
♦ Human Genetics-Extension Programme
♦ Narmada Valley Excavations
♦ National Repository

9
New Schemes
♦ People of India: Cultural Diversity
♦ People of India: Bio-cultural Adaptations
34. The Committee notes the plan allocation of Rs. 6.50 crore was reduced to
Rs. 6.00 crore at RE stage and enhanced allocation of Rs. 8.50 crore has been made for
BE 2008-09. However, the expenditure incurred upto 29th February, 2008 is Rs. 4.79 crore
only. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take corrective steps to utilise
the funds for the Anthropology which is very vital sector in today’s world.
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA
35. Set up as an Imperial Records Department in 1891 in Calcutta, this Department was
shifted to Delhi in 1937 and renamed as National Archives of India after independence in 1947.
The National Archives of India is the custodian of non-current records of enduring value of
Central Government Ministries/Departments/offices and their predecessor bodies. National
Archives of India has one Regional Office at Bhopal and three Record Centres at Jaipur,
Pondicherry and Bhubaneswar. The main functions of National Archives of India include
accession of Public Records for permanent preservation, care and conservation of records in its
custody for posterity, preparation of reference media, dissemination of information, acquisition of
microfilm copies of records of Indian interests from abroad, regulation of access to records for
research and other purposes. Besides, National Archives of India is the Nodal Agency for records
management activities of the Central Government Ministries/ Departments/Offices as also of
Public Sector Undertakings, Statutory Bodies, Corporations, Committees and Commissions set up
by the Union Government and ultimate transfer of records of enduring value to National Archives
of India for permanent preservation and use by the posterity.
36. About the financial allocation the Ministry informed the Committee that the B.E. of
Rs. 4.00 crore was reduced to Rs. 2.00 crore partly due to the overall cut in the budget
allocations under information technology (Rs. 20.00 lakhs) and Grant-in-Aid scheme
(Rs. 53.00 lakhs) were reduced because the intended purchase/release could not materialize due
to non-completion of formalities. During 2008-09 the National Archives of India proposes to
complete these efforts and to expand some of their existing schemes/programmes for which
enhanced allocation has been made. The expenditure incurred upto February 2008 is only
Rs. 1.44 crore.
37. The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry for reduction of
allocation at RE stage to the tune of Rs.2.00 crore. The Committee is further distress to
note that out of RE of Rs. 2.00 crore only an amount of Rs. 1.44 crore could be utilized
upto February, 2008. It seems the Ministry had not properly planned for the utilization
of Rs. 4.00 crore in the initial stage. The Committee is of the view that the Ministry
should restrain from reducing allocation at RE stage and NAI as the premier organization
safeguarding documents of archival value should complete all its schemes and programme
within the time specified. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should monitor
the progress of ongoing Plan/Scheme of National Archives of India so that it should not
suffer for reduction in allocation.
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE ARTS
38. Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA) is a premier National Institution
engaged in the pursuit of knowledge on arts and culture and in the exploration of relationships

10
of arts and culture with various disciplines of learning and diverse aspects of life. Established
in 1985 in the memory of the Late Prime Minister Smt. Indira Gandhi, it has multifarious
activities such as research, publication, training, documentation, dissemination and networking and
is poised to grow into a large repository of information pertaining to the arts in India. The
IGNCA seeks to place the arts within the natural and human environment by providing a forum
for creative and critical dialogue between the diverse arts, between the arts and sciences,
between the arts and the traditional and current knowledge systems. The IGNCA promotes
interaction and understanding between diverse communities, regions, social strata, and between
India and other parts of the world.
39. The Ministry informed the Committee that an amount of Rs. 45.00 crore allocated to
Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts in BE 2008-08 included Rs. 21.65 crore for the
completion of two incomplete buildings, namely, the Kala Nidhi/Kala Kosa and Sutradhara. The
Plan allocation made available for academic activities was Rs.23.35 crore. Due to reduction
in the Plan size of the Ministry of Culture, the Plan outlay of the IGNCA was reduced to
Rs. 37.00 crore in 2007-08. As a result, in the RE the allocation for building was reduced to
Rs. 20.00 crore and that of academic activities to Rs.17.00 crore. Against the proposed allocation
of Rs. 25.00 crore in the BE 2008-09, Rs. 17.00 crore will be utilized for academic activities
and the balance of Rs. 8.00 crore for completion of Buildings of Kala Nidhi/Kala Kosa and
Sutradhara.
40. The Committee notes that IGNCA was allocated Rs. 45.00 crore in BE 2007-08 that
was reduced to Rs. 37.00 crore at RE stage. Out of this the IGNCA could utilize only
Rs. 33.00 crore. The Committee has time and again expressed its displeasure on non-
utilisation of funds even at the reduced RE level. Some initiative is needed on the part
of the Ministry to take corrective action and utilize the resources. The Committee may
be apprised about the steps taken to utilize the entire budget allocation.
MUSEUMS
(a) National Museum
41. National Museum set up in 1960 is a subordinate office under the Ministry of Culture.
At present, there are more than 2 lakh art objects housed in the National Museum. The main
activities of National Museum pertain to Acquisition of artifact, art objects organizing of
exhibitions, conducting education and outreach programmes for the general public and students,
undertaking public relations, conservation of art objects and activities relating to publications.
During 2008-09, National Museum proposes to continue and strengthen its activities under the
schemes like re-organization of existing galleries; restoration and conservation of art objects;
organizing exhibitions; both in the country and abroad; computerized documentation/digitization of
the art objects; publication of books, catalogues, bulletin, picture, postcards etc., and
strengthening of educational programme through its two mobile vans mounted with exhibition.
42. The Ministry informed the Committee that some of the proposals of the National Museum
involving substantial amount of expenditure could not be processed/cleared up to the 3rd quarter
of the current financial year i.e. December, 2007 resulting in reduction in Plan allocation from
Rs. 10.00 crore in BE stage to Rs. 7.00 crore at RE stage. Provision kept for Digitization of
Manuscripts; Installation of Security Gadgets; Restoration/binding of rare and fragile Manuscripts
and proposal for procurement of Photographic equipment, Replacement/reinforcement of sound
system in Auditorium involving a total sum of Rs. 2.00 crore (approx) could not be used. In
addition, the amount kept for modernization/reorganization of museum could also not be utilized.

11
The BE 2008-2009 is at the same level as originally fixed for 2007-08 mainly for the
reorganization/Modernization of the Museum.
43. The Committee expresses its displeasure to note that the National Museum could
not utilize the plan allocation in time resulting in reduction of RE. Provision for critical
items such as Installation of security gadgets could also not be utilized thus keeping at
stake its valuable treasure stored in Museum. The Committee recommends that review of
the planning should be done to undertake all the unfinished task in the next financial
year and Ministry should try to utilize the maximum amount up to September, 2008 so
that in case more funds are required the same may be asked at RE stage.
(b) INDIAN MUSEUM, KOLKATA
44. Indian Museum, founded in 1840, is the oldest and largest institutions of its kind in the
country. It houses unique treasures of Indian and foreign art representing centuries of cultural
ethos and traditions. The Museum has a vast repository of paintings, sculptures, bronzes, metals,
coins, textiles and decorative art.
45. In the year 2007-08, plan allocation of Rs. 8.50 crore has been drastically reduced to
Rs. 3.98 crore at RE stage as the schemes, namely, modernization and reorganization of gallery;
restoration and maintenance of museum building; strengthening and modernization of security; and
programme of education & mass communication could not be implemented and the fund could
not be utilized. The allocation has been further stepped up to Rs. 8.50 crore in BE 2008-09. The
major programmes proposed to be implemented by the Museum during 2008-09 are,
(i) Strengthening and modernization of security arrangements in galleries, auditoriums and
Exhibition Halls, Building Campus, etc.; (ii) Modernization, Development and Reorganization of
Galleries and the reserve collections of the Art, Archaeology and Anthropology sections;
(iii) Development of digital documentation systems with photographs, Email and Website, etc.;
(iv) Procurement of education and mass communication; (v) Acquisition of Museum Objects;
(vi) Development of Library including computerization of library holdings; (vii) Organizing
exhibitions and museum workshops.
46. The Committee is distress to note plan outlay of Rs. 8.50 crore was reduced to
Rs. 3.98 crore at RE stage because of non-implementation of some schemes like
modernization and reorganization of gallery; restoration and maintenance of museum
building; strengthening & modernization of security; and programme of education & mass
communication. The Committee recommends that corrective measures should be taken by
the Ministry for utilization of allocated amount in BE 2008-09 with proper planning and
putting monitoring mechanism in place. The Committee may be apprised of the efforts
made in this regard.
(c) VICTORIA MEMORIAL HALL, KOLKATA
47. Victoria Memorial Hall (VMH) is a museum of contemporary art which is engaged in
collection of material and data relevant to a period depicting art history during the freedom
struggle. This Museum is also working as one of the Centres of the project of restoration of
oil painting of non-Indian origins, being coordinated by the National Museum, New Delhi. Major
activities undertaken under Plan by VMH are: modernization of galleries and storage of art objects
and installation of lighting, climate control, etc. organizing domestic Exhibitions, providing
assistance to organizations for preservation, restoration and conservation of art objects; work of
documentation, catalouging and photo documentation; acquisition of art objects; educational
programmes; and strengthening/modernization of security in VMH.

12
48. Plan allocation of Rs. 7.00 crore allocated in BE 2007-08 was reduced marginally to
Rs. 6.70 crore at RE stage out of which Rs. 4.90 crore could be utilized upto February, 2008.
For the year 2008-09 provision of Rs. 7.50 crore has been kept for modernization of galleries
and strengthening of security and construction of Annexe Building for Auditorium cum
Administrative Block.
49. The Committee is perturbed to note that Victoria Memorial Hall could incur expenditure
of only Rs. 4.90 crore upto February, 2008. Victoria Memorial Hall which is a landmark in
Kolkata deserves more efforts to keep its glory. The Committee, therefore, recommends that all
out effort should be made to utilize the funds so that Victoria Memorial Hall can retain its
grandeur status in Kolkata.
SECURITY OF IMPORTANT ART ITEMS
50. To a specific query regarding priceless treasures like antique statues of Gods and
Goddesses, invaluable sculpture being regularly smuggled abroad under the grab of replicas from
villages of Rajasthan, Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Tamil Nadu, the
Ministry informed the Committee that the available data is not indicative of any regular smuggling
activity of antiquities. The premier investigating agency Central Bureau of Investigation have also
informed that during the period between 2005 and 2007, no case has been registered by them
relating to smuggling of antiquities. There are number of smuggling cases reported before this
period. Of these, the bronze images of Nataraja from Tamil Nadu, terrocotta Yakshi, Tamluk
(West Bengal), Stone pillars from Amin (Haryana), Terracotta figures from Bhitargaon (U.P.),
Image of Lakulisa from Jageshwar (Uttarakhand) have been retrieved after due legal process in
the respective Courts of different countries and through the Indian diplomatic channels. Constant
interaction takes place between ASI, CBI and Custom authorities to share information on
smuggling of art objects and to contain these activities.
51. The Committee notes that drawing any conclusion that no regular smuggling
activity of antiquities is taking place on the basis of available data with regard to cases
registered, is misleading. The Committee feels that smuggling activities are taking place
systematically in connivance of the local people. Therefore, the Committee recommends
that the Ministry should take measures to generate sufficient awareness amongst the
public as well as the custodians of law to strengthen the mechanism available in the
public domain to punish the culprits of smuggling activities. The Committee recommends
that Museum security is an important area and it should be given adequate attention.
Moreover, stealing and pilferage of important items kept in the museum should also be
taken care of by installing latest gadgets and by framing suitable policies in this regard
as museums are the treasure of our culture.
SCHEME OF PROMOTION AND STRENGTHENING OF REGIONAL AND LOCAL MUSEUMS
52. Under this grants-in-aid scheme, financial assistance is given for professional development
of museums, managed by voluntary organizations, institutions, societies, trusts, local bodies, etc.
including universities and colleges registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 (XXI) or
under any law at present in force as well as those managed by the State Government, for the
purpose of (i) renovations/repairs/extension/modernization of galleries/augmentation of reserve
collections (ii) Publication programme, (iii) strengthening of Conservation laboratories/
Conservation projects (iv) Museum libraries (v) Equipments and (vi) Documentation programme.
53. Plan allocation in BE 2007-08 was Rs. 9.00 crore which was reduced to Rs. 7.00 crore
at RE stage. The expenditure incurred upto February, 2008 was Rs. 4.09 crore. In order to

13
provide more grants to eligible Musuems during 2008-09, the allocation has been increased to
12.00 crore this year as against the 7.00 crore (RE) of the last year.
54. The Committee observes that it is a welcome step and the scheme of promotion
and strengthening of regional and local museums need to be implemented with right
earnest. The Committee hopes that all the necessary steps for running the scheme should
be planned in advance and the allocation should be utilized judiciously.
NATIONAL GALLERY OF MODERN ART, NEW DELHI
55. The National Gallery of Modern Art (NGMA), founded in 1954, is the one and only
institution of its kind in the country representing evolution and pictorial transformation in Visual
Arts over the last 150 years. The main objectives of the NGMA are, to create an understanding
and sensitivity among the Indian public towards the visual and plastic arts in general and to
promote the development of contemporary Indian Art in particular. The NGMA has established
a functional branch at Mumbai to cater to the art loving public, particularly in the Western region
of the country. Another branch of NGMA in the Southern region, a premises called Manikyevelu
Mansion, has also been established at Bangalore. The collection of NGMA presently comprises
of 17813 works of art representing about 1742 contemporary Indian Artists, which include
Paintings, Sculptures, Graphics and Photographs.
56. During 2008-09, NGMA proposes to take up the work of modernization of galleries at
New Delhi and Mumbai at par with international standards, operationalization of new branch at
Bangalore and new wing at New Delhi by augmenting additional display and improvement of
facilities for the visitors; organizing 8 special exhibitions of eminent contemporary Indian artists
and holding of 4 exhibitions in various countries; organizing tr aveling exhibitions at Ahmedabad,
Patiala, Jaipur, Guwahati and Shillong; strengthening of the restoration laboratories; strengthening
of activities in the field of photographic documentation of art works, cataloging, computerization
and application of IT; conducting of educational programmes, seminars; etc.
57. The Plan allocation in BE 2007-08 of Rs. 4.50 crore was reduced to Rs. 4.00 crore at
RE stage. The Ministry informed that reduction at the RE is due to non-procurement of art
works during the current year. The Ministry also stated that the allocation in BE 2008-09 of
Rs. 5.00 crore is due to the opening of the new extension wing of the NGMA, New Delhi and
opening of the new branch of NGMA at Bangalore. There is also proposal to establish additional
galleries, provide better visitor facilities and organize special exhibitions with State of the-art
display technique etc. both at New Delhi as well as Bangalore.
58. The Committee appreciates the decision of the Ministry to open National Gallery at
Bangalore and hope that this will help in spreading the modern art culture of our country.
However, the Committee is concerned over the tendency of reduction of the allocation at
RE stage and even that allocation remains unutilized as the expenditure upto 29.2.2008 is
Rs. l.66 crore only. This shows the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry. The Committee
recommends that the allocated amount should be fully utilized by NGMA so that the
Government may not impose cuts in outlays at RE stage.
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENCE MUSEUMS, KOLKATA
59. The National Council of Science Museums (NCSM), an autonomous organization under
the Ministry of Culture, is primarily engaged in popularizing science and technology amongst the
students in particular and the masses in general, through a wide range of activities and interactive
programmes such as science demonstration lectures, Astronomy related programmes, Taramandal

14
shows, Science Quiz, Popular Lectures, Science film shows, etc. NCSM has developed a
network of 28 Science Centres. National Council of Science Museums imparts a 2-year Post
Graduate Course on Science Communication in collaboration with the Birla Institute of
Technology and Science (BITS), Pilani with additional faculty support from Smithsonian
Institution, Washington DC; IIT Mumbai; NID, Ahemdabad; IIM, Kolkata; and Jodhpur University
in the field of Science Museums.
60. Plan allocation of Rs. 17.00 crore was enhanced at RE 2007-08 to Rs. 19.19 crore.
Provision of Rs. 19.00 crore for 2008-09 includes for new projects like procurement of major
exhibits and exhibits-related equipments; an establishment of Regional Science Centres at Raipur
and Ranchi; setting up of three Sub-Regional Science Centres; and development of new 10
traveling exhibitions including Mobile Science Exhibition.
61. The Committee notes that out of the total plan allocation of Rs. 17.00 crore,
National Council of Science Museums could spend only Rs. 13.60 crore by February, 2008.
The Committee is of the view that proper planning for utilization of resources and
monitoring of the expenditure is the need of hour. The Ministry should take remedial
steps accordingly.
62. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry for popularizing science and
technology and the course being run on science communication. The Committee may be
apprised of the success of the two-years Post Graduate course on Science Communication.
MANAGING TREASURE AT LALIT KALA ACADEMY AND NATIONAL GALLERY OF
MODERN ART
63. Over the years, the Lalit Kala Academy and the National Gallery of Modern Art have been
buying art works from various artists. The Ministry informed the Committee that the Akademi
has already restored a majority of the paintings and prints in its collection from the normal
deterioration due to aging and temperature variations. The Akademi is also in the process of
making a world class storage facility for its collection. In addition to the storage facility, a
Restoration Lab for the works of art is also being conceived and executed for the New Delhi
office.
64. The Ministry further stated that the National Gallery of Modern Art has over 16500 art
works in its collection. These works of art are preserved properly under climate controlled
environment and the works of art, both in display and under storage, are periodically inspected
by a team of in-house technical experts. NGMA has a well equipped restoration laboratory and
technical personnel to take care of both prevention and curative restoration of the art works,
wherever necessary. The Secretary informed the Committee that out of 4600, they have
preserved/restored 1500 paintings.
65. The Committee is of the view that the art works valuing hundreds of crore should
be preserved in an effective manner. Hence it recommends that there is more scope for
managing the treasures since a large number of paintings are still to be preserved/
restored. State of the art facility may be used for this job and expert guidance from other
countries can be sought and if need arises voluntary organizations may also be engaged
to preserve the art works.
INTER-MINISTERIAL COORDINATION
66. Taking notes of cultural events being organized abroad, the Committee desired to know
the extent of inter-Ministerial coordination between Ministries of Culture, Tourism and External

15
Affairs, the Secretary, Ministry of Culture informed the Committee that there is no formal
mechanism for Inter-Ministerial coordination between Ministry of culture, Tourism, External
Affairs, etc. The Secretary further stated that—
‘‘When programmatic requirements come up, we work together. For example, there was
Incredible India Programme in the US last year. There is a programme in China to come
up. These are areas where our Ministry, Sangeet Natak Academy and others, if necessary,
in this case it is Kala Kshetra, is being involved. From all the way across Chennai, they
put together programmes and worked with the Tourism Ministry and made the
presentation on behalf of India. At the monuments side, at the local level particularly,
there is more coordination. But the point is that we do not have formalised coordination
system as of now. On the Consultative Committee on Tourism, I am a member now. To
that extent, there is a formal link, but there is no day-to-day or more closely related
relationship at the Ministerial level.’’
67. The Committee is surprised to know that there is no inter-ministerial coordination
between the Ministry of Culture and Tourism. For the promotion of tourism in India,
Culture is an important component and for the development of cultural sites and for
spreading our cultural values, tourism is an important component. The Committee is of
the view that our Missions abroad have an important role to play in spreading our culture
and its values. The Committee recommends that the three Ministries should work
together in coordination for better development of culture and tourism sector. The
Committee recommends that the Government may constitute an inter-Ministerial
mechanism for regular interaction with the Ministries of Tourism, Culture and External
Affairs.
PROMOTION AND DISSEMINATION OF  CULTURAL ACTIVITIES:
ZONAL CULTURAL CENTRES (ZCCs)
68. Seven Zonal Cultural Centres (ZCCs) were set up for the creative development of Indian
Culture in various regions. The essential thrust of these Centres has been to create a cultural
awareness among people and to identify, nurture and promote the vanishing folk art traditions in
the rural and semi urban areas of the States. The objectives of these centers are to provide local
creative support to folk and traditional artisans. They are:—
(a) Promotion of various art forms especially the folk art of the Zone.
(b) Setting up of Shilp Grams in each Zonal Cultural Centre to provide promotion and
marketing facilities to craftsman.
(c) National Cultural Exchanges Programme, exchange of artists, musicologists,
performers and scholars from one region to another within the country.
(d) Development of Infrastructural Facilities.
69. Two more activities have been entrusted to the Zonal Cultural Centres from the year 1993
viz. Republic Day Folk Dance Festival and Craft Fair; and Documentation of vanishing Folk Art
Forms. The zonal cultural centres will continue its major ongoing schemes during 2008-09 which
inter alia  includes national cultural exchange programme, documentation and publication, national
folk dance festival, shilpgram , guru-shishya parampara , theater rejuvenation, scheme for
recognition to young talented artists, crafts fare on republic day, Kurukshetra Utsav, training of
street children and slum area children and north-east festival. Plan allocation for Zonal Cultural

16
Centres in BE 2007-08 was kept at Rs. 13.00 crore. However, at RE stage Rs. 11.00 crore has
been allocated and expenditure upto February, 2008 is Rs. 10.88 crore.
70. The Committee is of the view that protection and promotion of vanishing folk art
tradition. is a very important mandate and in order to implement the mandate Zonal
Cultural Centre should enroll artists associated with different folk art tradition and
provide them adequate remuneration. For this purpose the amount allocated for the year
2008-09 may be fully utilized and if possible allocation may be enhanced next year for the
purpose. The Committee also recommends that the Zonal Cultural Centres should expand
their activity to include the use of culture as an effective tool of national integration.
SETTING UP OF MULTI PURPOSE CULTURAL COMPLEXES INCLUDING THOSE FOR
CHILDREN
71. Under the scheme, financial assistance is provided to an autonomous body created by
State Governments to set up art complexes. The objectives of the schemes are that the quality
of life of young people be made sensitive to what is aesthetically and morally good in our
society. This can be done by exposing them to the finest forms of creative expression from an
early age. Cultural complexes for children will provide these avenues for our young people.
Multipurpose cultural complexes of general nature foster and coordinate activities in the State in
the different cultural fields such as music, drama, dance, literature, fine arts etc. and promote
through them the cultural unity of the country. Under the present terms and conditions, there
will be two categories of MPCC.
Category I:  It will be an integrated complex consisting of auditorium, with green rooms and
toilets, library/documentation centers, museum, exhibition gallery, storage space, conference hall/
seminar room, guest room/dormitory, children’s activity corner, cafeteria etc. (It is only an
indicative list of facilities). The project cost shall be limited to Rs. 5.00 crore and only one
MPCC will be allowed in each State under this category.
Category II: It will be a smaller version which may include any or all of the facilities like
auditorium, library/reading hall, workshop facilities etc. The project cost of this category shall be
limited to Rs. 2.00 crores and there can be more than one such MPCC in a State.
72. From the year 2007-08, the scheme of Multi Purpose Cultural Complexes was
discontinued at the instance of Planning Commission. It was desired that by the Planning
Commission that the MPCC Scheme may be restructured as a central sector scheme. For the
Tenth Five Year Plan, tentative allocation of Rs.80.00 crore has been made and in RE 2007-08
Rs.3.60 crore has been provided and expenditure incurred is Rs. 2.25 crore. For 2008-09,
allocation of Rs. 2.00 crore has been made.
73. The Committee notes that ceiling of the project cost fixed for single cultural
complex of Category-I is Rs. 5.00 crore and for Category-II smaller version cultural
complex is Rs. 2.00 crore. Whereas, the total allocation made for MPCC in the BE
2008-09 is only Rs. 2.00 crore. The Committee is at a loss to understand the rationality
behind this less allocations as even for a Category II MPCC an amount of Rs. 2.00 crore
is required. The Committee feels that this kind of approach will promote only adhocism.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the modalities for running the scheme may
be worked out and the scheme may be widely publicized for utilization of allocated
resources. The Committee may be apprised about the details of the number of MPCCs
already established till the last financial year and the details of the proposed MPCCs. The
Committee would also like to know the benefits of converting it into a Central Sector
Scheme.

17
KALAKSHETRA FOUNDATION, CHENNAI
74. Kalakshetra has become the center of excellence especially in the field of dance, drama
and music. The Foundation aims to arrange for training, research, study, teaching and
development of art and science, music, dance, drama, fine arts and Bharat Natyam. Recognising
the importance of the institution, the Government of India took over the management of
Kalakshetra on 29 September, 1993 and declared it as an Institution of National importance. The
Foundation has the constituent units such as, College of Fine Arts; Craft Education and Research
Centre consisting of a weaving department and Kalamkari Unit; Besant Arundale Senior Secondary
School; Besant Theosophical High School; and Besant Cultural Centre Hostel.
75. The plan allocation in BE 2007-08 of Rs.2.50 crore was reduced at RE level to Rs.2.05
crore. Further allocation has been enhanced at BE 2008-09 to Rs.3.00 crore to strengthen and
widen the activities of Kalashetra. The expenditure reported upto 29th February, 2008 is Rs.1.26
crore which shows underutilization of funds in 2007-08.
76. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should monitor the utilization of
funds more closely for Kalashetra and help the organization in planning/executing the
allocated fund judiciously and evenly throughout the year. The Committee observes that
with the increased budgetary allocation the Kalakshetra Foundation and its constituent
units will be able to strengthen their activities. The details of fund utilizations for each
of the activity may please be furnished to the Committee.
NATIONAL MISSION FOR MANUSCRIPT
77. The National Mission for Manuscripts (NMM) is the first consolidated national effort for
reclaiming India's inheritance of knowledge contained in the vast treasure of manuscripts.
Manuscripts, which contained centuries of accrued knowledge in such areas as philosophy,
sciences, literature, arts and the pluralistic faith systems of India are more than just historical
records. They represent the collective wisdom and experience of generations of thinkers. The
Mission was established in 2003 with the objective of creating a national resource base for
manuscripts, scattered across the country. The Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts is the
nodal Agency for its implementation.
78. The Ministry informed the Committee that major achievement of the Mission since its
inception are total electronic data of manuscripts and total data stock and collection of 25,000
repositories from various institutions and private collections. The National Survey of Manuscript
has surveyed 16 States in total and survey preparation is underway in the States of Madhya
Pradesh, Sikkim Arunachal Pradesh, Pondicherry, Goa, Jammu and Kashmir (Laddakh) Uttrakand,
U.P., Bihar, and Jharkhand. Post survey documentation has been conducted only in 8 States,
namely Orissa, Bihar; Manipur, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh Tamil Nadu, Keral and Himachal
Pradesh.
79. The plan allocation in BE 2007-08 was Rs. 8.50 crore which was reduced to
Rs. 6.37 crore at RE stage. The allocation was stepped upto Rs. 9.00 crore in BE 2008-09. The
Mission was able to utilize the entire allocation of RE by 29th February, 2008.
80. The Committee notes that the pace of the Mission is very slow. The Committee
recommends that the Mission should augment its target to conduct post survey
documentation in all the States. The survey and documentation process should be
completed in a time-bound schedule. The Committee further recommends that the
exhibition of Indian Manuscript at various premier National and International fora should
also be given thrust and the mission should initiate proactive measures in this regard.

18
NATIONAL MISSION ON MONUMENTS AND ANTIQUITIES
81. The National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities was established for setting up a
National Mission on India's Tangible Heritage. The Mission was launched on 19 March, 2007.
The Archaeological Survey of India was identified as the nodal agency to execute the work
across India.
82. The National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities proposes to undertake major activities
like documentation of antiquities spread over site museums of ASI, museums under the control
of State Governments and Universities; compilation of data on unprotected monuments and sites;
digitization of archival drawings of various architectural institutions and organizations; arranging
training programmes to the State Departments, local bodies, NGOs, Universities, etc. as part of
the capacity building programmes; and organizing various outreach programmes in order to
sensitize the common people about the historical and cultural aspects of various heritage sites and
antiquities.
83. The Committee inquired from the Ministry about the details of Finance Committee's
approval on the decision taken by the Monitoring Committee on National Mission for Monuments
and Antiquities in its meeting held on 22nd November, 2007. The Ministry replied that in the
meeting held on 22nd November 2007, the Finance Committee concurred with the decisions
taken by the National Mission Monitoring Committee on National Mission on Monuments and
Antiquities. The details are as below.
Sl. Decision taken by the Monitoring Decision taken by Finance Committee
No. Committee on National Mission on on National Mission on Monuments
Monuments and Antiquities meeting Monuments and Antiquities meeting
held on 22nd November, 2007 held on 20th December, 2007
12 3
1. The documentation of antiquities, (a) As regards documentation of
compilation of Data on Monuments antiquities is concerned, National
and sites was agreed in principle Mission should come up with a detailed
subject to the approval of Finance proposal for approval.
Committee over the requirement of
manpower etc. (b) The proposal on compilation of data
on built heritage and sites was approved
in principle.
2. Digitization of documents of Considering the confidential nature and
registered antiquities was agreed in archival value of the documents, the
principle subject to approval by Finance Committee approved the
Finance Committee. proposal to be carried out by Indira
Gandhi National Centre for Arts
(IGNCA).
3. Digitization of Archival drawings on Specific proposal alongwith budgetary
built heritage and sites as available implications should be submitted for
with Archaeological Survey of India approval.
was agreed in principle.
4. Publication of biannual Newsletter of Approved 10 principle with the
the National Mission on Monuments condition to follow the codal formalities
and Antiquities was agreed in principle. as required in case of ASI publications.

19
12 3
5. Creation of separate Website for It was suggested that instead of having
National Mission was agreed in a separate website, all the data
principle. pertaining to National Mission could be
uploaded in the existing website of ASI.
6. Creation of Logo for National Approved.
Mission was agreed in principle.
84. The Committee recommends that since National Mission of Monuments and
Antiquities has been earmarked budgetary allocation of Rs. 10.00 crore during the year
2008-09, the Mission should come up with a detailed proposal immediately while
maintaining its confidentiality and further proceed in its implementation. The Committee
would like to know the latest status of the implementation of the decisions taken by the
Finance Committee on National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities.
ACADEMIES AND NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA
SAHITYA AKADEMI
85. Sahitya Akademi was set up on 12 March, 1954 by the Government of India as an
autonomous organization fully financed by the Government. The Sahitya Akademi is the premier
institution in the country for literary dialogue, literary publication and promotion. It is the only
institution in the country that undertakes publishing and promotion of literature in 24 Indian
languages including English and to promote through them the cultural unity of the country.
Sahitya Akademi proposes to undertake activities like purchase of books in 24 languages,
publishing around 300 books in all the 24 languages, providing travel grant to about 40 young
writers and to organize/participate in about 100 books exhibitions at National/regional/international
level during 2008-09.
86. Plan allocation for Sahitya Akademi of Rs. 9.75 crore was marginally reduced at RE
level to Rs. 9.60 crore and further enhanced to Rs. 10.50 crore in BE 2008-09. The increased
outlay is for of fice building of Akademi.
87. The Committee recommends that steps may be taken to popularize the activities of
Sahitya Akademi among the population and particularly the students of Universities and
premier institutions throughout India. At present its existence is known only to the
literary circles. More emphasis may be given to national integration and secularism
through literature. It has also a role to popularize our democratic values and rids cultural
heritage.
SANGEET NATAK AKADEMI
88. The Sangeet Natak Akademi is a national institution for promotion of performing arts. The
Akademi has three constituent units namely (i) Kathak Kendra, New Delhi (ii) Jawaharlal Nehru
Manipur Dance Academy, Imphal and (iii) Rabindra Rangshala, New Delhi. The Akademi is
devoted to the furtherance of the performing arts in India, and seeks to achieve this by arranging
performance by renowned artists as well as by young talented artists through training
programmes, awards of scholarships, documentation, etc. The Akademi has National Institutes
and centers for specialized fields such as Kutiyattam Centre at Kerala and Chhau Centre at
Baripada/Jamshedpur.

20
89. The Committee was informed that additional funds have been provided to augment the
scheme of organizing Music, Dance and Theatre festivals, seminars, work shops on music,
dance and theatre. Plan allocation in BE and RE 2007-08 was Rs. 10.50 crore. The expenditure
reported upto 29th February, 2008 is Rs. 12.36 crore.
90. The Committee notes that Sangeet Natak Akademi has been able to spend more
than the allocated amount. The Committee r ecommends that the Sangeet Natak Akademi
should endeavour to establish national institutes and centres for each of our dance forms
and performing arts, it need in association with the State Governments.
91. The Committee was informed that the Sangeet Natak Akademi has approached the Lt.
Governor of Delhi for allocation of 5 acres of land for the proposed National Museum for
Performing Arts in Delhi. The Delhi Development Authority is in correspondence with the
Akademi in this regard. It is expected that suitable land will be made available in 2008. The
construction of the proposed museum would be taken up soon after and would be completed
within 2-3 years.
92. The Committee hopes that efforts for securing land will be taken up with Delhi
Development Authority in a time bound manner and if need be the issue may be taken
up at Ministerial level. The Committee recommends to the DDA that they should speed
up the process of land allotment to the Sangeet Natak Akademi at the earliest. The
Committee may be apprised about any procedural or administrative delay in the allotment
of land and construction of the building.
LALIT KALA AKADEMI
93. Lalit Kala Akademi (the National Academy of Arts) was established in 1954 for promotion
of visual and plastic arts in India like Painting, Graphic, Sculpture, Ceramic, etc. The Akademi
organizes Regional, National and International exhibitions regularly and also participates in various
Biennial and Triennial being organized by other countries abroad. In the past 50 years of its
existence, the Akademi has provided invaluable contribution to the Promotion of visual arts in
India by organizing exhibitions artists camps, Kala Melas and bringing out art publications.
94. The Committee notes that the plan allocation of Rs. 5.50 crore was reduced to
Rs. 5.00 crore at RE stage and further step up to Rs. 6.00 crore in BE 2008-09. The
expenditure reported upto 29 February, 2008 is Rs. 5.57 crore.
95. The Committee hopes that with the enhanced allocation in BE 2008-09, the Lalit
Kala Akademi will be able to spread its activities in more effective manner and will utilize
all its available resources.
NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA
96. National School of Drama (NSD) is one of the foremost theatre training institutions in the
world and the only one of its kind in India. It was set up by Sangeet Natak Akademi in 1959
as one of its constituent units. In 1975, it became an independent entity and since then it is
functioning as an autonomous organization under Ministry of Culture. Since its inception, the
School has not only made great strides in the area of theatre training but has also diversified
its activities. Besides the training programme, which is of 3 years duration, the School has
explored new vistas in the areas of Children Theatre and decentralization of theatre training
through organizing workshops.
97. The Plan allocation of Rs. l1.00 crore in BE 2007-08 was enhanced at RE stage to
Rs. 13.50 crore and expenditure reported upto 29th February, 2008 is Rs. 14.00 crore. During
the year 2008-09, National School of Drama proposes to expand its activities in North East

21
Region by augmenting the scheme of National Theatre Festival and North East Region Theatre
Development. NSD proposes to organize Theatre workshops, to assist 15 theatre groups and to
organize part time courses during 2008-09, NSD will organize its Golden Jubilee Celebrations
during 2008-09. NSD also proposes to open 5 Drama Schools in different regions during
2008-09.
98. The Committee is pleased to note that National School of Drama is planning to
undertake lot of activities in the year 2008-2009. The Committee hopes that National
School of Drama will be able to fulfill its commitment in 2008-09 by planning its activities
in phased manner.
NEHRU MEMORIAL MUSEUM AND LIBRARY (NMML)
99. The Nehru Memorial Museum and Library was established in 1966 as a memorial to
Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, the first Prime Minister of Independent India. Besides maintaining a
personalia museum focussing on the life and times of Jawaharlal Nehru, the major objectives of
this autonomous institution which is under the Ministry of Culture are to acquire, maintain and
preserve the personal papers and other historical material pertaining to nationalist leaders and
institutions of Modern India; to establish and maintain an advanced library on the history of
Modern India in all its aspects and to promote research in the fields of Modern Indian History
and Society. The Nehru Memorial Museum and Library (NMML) all through these years has been
successfully pursuing the aims and objectives set out in its Memorandum of Association and in
the process has continued to sustain and improve upon a tradition of excellence and commitment
to historical scholarship.
100. Plan Allocation for Nehru Memorial Museum and Library in BE and RE 2007-08 was
Rs. 3.50 crore. Additional provision of Rs.20.00 crore was provided for development and
modernization of NMML in accordance with the Finance Minister’s Budget Speech. Expenditure
of Rs. 22.45 crore was made upto 29.2.2008. Allocation in BE 2008-09 is Rs. 4.00 crore.
101. The Director, Nehru Memorial Museum and Library informed the Committee that—
‘‘The main focus of this proposal, and half the money, Rs. 20 crores, is allocated for
a massive digitisation programme for the archival resources of the Nehru Memorial
Museum and Library. We have about Rs. 90 lakhs of archival documents. We have about
1000 collections of what are called private papers, beginning from Nehru to lot of
business papers, to Salim Ali and Mohammed Bashir. It is really now the largest non-
official archives in India. And this is really frontier work and it has not even happened
in many parts of the world. We plan to digitise this entire collection, put it on Internet
and hopefully, if there are no legal and other difficulties about certain papers, put it right
on to the Net and make it searchable down to the last word. That is the kind of
technological up gradation that we have been working on. So, I have been working with
people at various levels, technological and others, to put together this whole project. We
have done pilot studies and done the research. We have really put together what we
know. This would cost us about Rs. 3 crores and 50 lakhs to digitise about 35 lakh
documents in the first stage. Then, coming to newspapers, we have about 110 lakh pages
of newspapers in all Indian languages. Beginning with English and Hindi, we would like
to digitise 20 lakhs of pages out of these 110 lakhs and that would take us another
Rs. 5 crore. To set up the digital archival management system, the hardware, etc. it
would cost another one crore rupees and the personnel, etc. would cost us about half
a crore of rupees. So, we have a Rs. 10 crore budget for this. We will try to do most
of this over the next year, beginning now, but some of it may necessarily spill over. The
second part of this is the modernisation of the existing library and we have allocated
Rs. 2 crore for that.’’

22
102. During the deliberations, on 26th March, 2008, the Committee enquired from the
Secretary, Ministry of Culture about the selection of fellows for award of various fellowships in
Nehru Memorial Museum and Library in 2004-05. The Committee also brought to the notice of
the Secretary the specific complaint of Prof. S.P. Singh regarding the procedural irregularities in
the selection process for award of fellowships in Nehru Memorial Museum and Library. In
response to the points raised by the Committee, the Secretary, submitted that
‘‘We have looked at that case. We find there was a gap. I must admit that I am saying
this from memory at the moment. There was a period where the new committee was set
up and there was an accusation made that the NMML didn't follow procedures. But, Sir,
to my understanding, as an academic organization, they follow the norms of other
academic institutions. They are granting fellowships. They don’t go only by the
application method. It is a bit of a search committee approach and that has been there
in the past. It is not for the first time that this has happened. I believe that universities
like JNU also follow this approach. So, there has been no deviation in that sense from
the rules or systems of the organization.’’
103. The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Nehru Memorial Museum.
and Library for modernization and digitization. The Committee however, recommends that
the award of fellowships by the NMML must be transparent and beyond any criticism as
the fellows who apply for the fellowships are eminent scholars who never compromise any
type of nepotism or favouritism or procedural irregularities.
SCIENCE CITIES
104. Science Cities, at selected centres in the country were proposed to be set up during the
Ninth Five Year Plan. The Science Cities will be comprised of a Science Exhibition Hall, the
mass Science Area and a Science Park, The location of Science City should be either the State
Capital or one important city of the State having a sizeable population. Moreover, the state
Governments may provide the infrastructure facilities to these Centres free of cost. The total
cost of setting up of a Science City may be between Rs. 65-70 crores. The State Governments
and Societies/authorities promoting the setting up of Science Cities are eligible for financial
assistance from the Central Government under its Plan funds.
105. W ith the available funds during 2008-09, it is also proposed to set up Science Cities at
Ahmedabad, Allahabad, Hyderabad and Mangalore. Funds are also allocated for Regional Science
Centres at Raipur, Ranchi, Dharwad, Mangalore, Coimbatore, Jaipur and Science City, Bangalore
and sub-regional centres at Solapur and Kalimpong.
106. Plan allocation of Science Cities in BE 2007-08 was 13.00 crore which was reduced to
Rs. 10.89 crore at RE stage. The expenditure incurred upto February, 2008 was Rs. 7.89 crore.
Allocation in BE 2008-09 is Rs. 12.00 crore.
107. The Committee recommends that adequate plan outlay should be provided in the
Budget to ensure that science cities are set up in all the state capitals of the country and
while fixing priority every year parity should be drawn amongst the regions.
SPREADING INDIAN CULTURE ABROAD
108. Cultural Agreements and Cultural Exchange Programmes are concluded with various
countries, with a view to projecting India’s culture and promoting bilateral cooperation between
India and other countries in the field of art and culture, education and sciences, films mass
media, public health, sports agriculture etc. by way of exchange of scholars, exhibitions and
sport, teams, exchange of books and publications, exchange of Radio and T.V . Programmes,

23
award of scholarships and development of Institutions abroad through Indian Council for Cultural
Relations. Government of India have cultural agreements with 115 countries, out of which
specific biennial and triennial cultural exchange programmes have been entered into with 82
countries. For this purpose non plan allocation of Rs. 80 lakhs has been made.
109. The Ministry of Culture continued to provide funds towards meeting the annual
contributions to International Centre for Conservation, Rome (Rs.10.00 Lakh), World Heritage
Fund (Rs.7.00 lakh) and Contribution to UNESCO (Rs. 14.00 Lakh). The Ministry has been
given with Rs. 31.00 lakh as non-plan allocation for contribution to international bodies in BE
2008-09. The Festival of India abroad and reciprocal festivals of other countries in India was
started in 1982 with the objective of projecting India’s rich cultural heritage and contemporary
creativity abroad. The Festival of India has so far been held in UK, USA, Japan, Sweden,
Germany, China, Thailand and Bhutan. The Festivals of France, USSR, Japan, Sweden, China and
Germany were held in India on reciprocal basis. During the year 2008-09, it is proposed to
organize ‘‘India Week’’ in Brazil. It is also proposed to organize Festival of India in United
Kingdom during 2008-09. For conducting festivals of India Rs. 4.l0 crore has been granted to
the Ministry as non-plan budget in the BE 2008-09.
110. The Committee appreciates the efforts in spreading Indian culture abroad by
holding seminars, fairs and festivals. The Committee recommends that the festivals
should be highly focused and highlights every region of the country so as to promote
tourism and culture of all the States. The Committee also recommends that some
countries should be selected where these festivals should be held continuously for some
years so as to make an impact on the population there.
V ACANT POSTS IN V ARIOUS PREMIER INSTITUTIONS FUNCTIONING UNDER THE
MINISTRY OF CULTURE
111. The Committee has been expressing concern over the functioning of various institutions
and organizations under the Ministry of Culture. The Committee has drawn the attention of the
Ministry in the past that many of them are functioning without administrative heads for a long
time. The Committee has made its recommendations that the process of selection should be
changed, because the Committee firmly believes that if people of eminence are required for the
job, they will not apply for a job with the possibility of being rejected. The Committee also
suggested that the Ministry go through a process of Search Committee.
112. The Ministry informed the Committee that Ministry has two attached, six subordinate and
33 autonomous organizations under it. Of these institutions, 9 are without a regular head/chief
executive. These include 2 attached, 3 subordinate and 4 autonomous institutions under the
Ministry. Current status of process for regular appointments in these institutions/organizations is
detailed below:—
Institution Action taken to fill up the posts Rem arks
12 3
ASI The process of revision of Recruitment Post has been filled up for
Rules is at an advanced stage. Draft the time being under
recruitment rules have been prepared. Central Staffing Scheme
This has been recently sent to DoPT
for approval. The vacant post will be
filled up on the basis of the revised
Recruitment Rules.

24
12 3
NAI The process of revision of Recruitment Additional Charge of DG/NAI
Rules is at an advanced stage. Draft given to Shri Lov Verma,
recruitment rules have been prepared. Joint Secretary, Ministry of
This has been recently sent to DoPT Culture
for approval. The vacant posts will be
filled up on the basis of the revised
Recruitment Rules
Subordinate Offices
National The process of revision of Recruitment Additional Charge of DG/
Museum Rules is at an advanced stage. Draft National Museum given to
recruitment rules have been prepared. Shri Vijay Madan, ADG, ASI
This has been recently sent to DoPT
for approval. The vacant posts will be
filled up on the basis of the revised
Recruitment Rules.
National Library The process of revision of Recruitment Addition Charge is held by
Rules is at an advanced stage. Draft Shri Ramachandran, Principal
recruitment rules have been prepared. LIO, National Library.
This has been recently sent to DoPT
for approval. The vacant posts will be
filled up on the basis of the revised
Recruitment Rules.
Anthropological Approval has been received from PMO Charge being held by Dr.
Survey of India for adoption of search cum selection V .N. Rao, Deputy Director,
process for filling up the post and and Anthropological Survery
Recruitment Rules are under modification. of India.
However, prior to the above, approval,
the selection for a regular appointment
was made by UPSC and the same has
been stayed by CAT, Kolkata Bench.
Autonomous organizations
Allahabad On a petition filed by one of the Charge held by Shri S.K.
Museum employees of the Museum, the High Sharma, Curator, Allahabad
Court of Allahabad had given a stay Museum.
order against the filling up of the post
of the Director of the Museum. The
stay has been vacated in February, 2008,
and the process of selection of an
incumbent is being initiated.
Indian Museum Advertisement to fill up the post has Additional Charge given to
been re-advertised in February, 2008. Prof. C. Panda, Secretary and
Curator, Victoria Memorial hall
Rampur Raza Categorisation of the Rampur Raza Being looked after by Dr.
Library Library is being undertaken to Siddiqui, OSD
determine the pay scale of the Director

25
113. The Committee notes that inspite of Ministry’s attention being drawn to the fact
of delay in appointing administrative heads, no significant achievement has been made in
most of the organisations under the control of the Ministry. And in many cases some of
the officials of the Ministry had been given additional charge. The Committee is
constrained to note that the reply furnished relating to filling up post vacant in various
organization by the Ministry is similar to one which was sent to the Committee at the
time of consideration of Action Taken Report which indicates that there is no progress in
the matter. The Committee again recommend that process of revision of Recruitment
Rules may be completed at the earliest so that the Search-cum-Selection Committee is
constituted and vacant post are filled up.
NATIONAL CULTURE POLICY
114. The Ministry of Culture informed that an 18 member Committee has been constituted to
look into the framing of a National Culture Policy. The Committee held two meetings so far, the
most recent one was held on 15th February, 2008. The Committee's tenure is up till 30th April
2008 and it has yet to finalise its recommendation.
115. The Committee suggested that the framing of the National Culture Policy should
not be an unending process. The policy may be framed within the stipulated time frame.
The 18 Member Committee may be asked to meet frequently to finalise the policy. The
committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure the formulation of National
Culture Policy by April, 2008.
HERITAGE SITES COMMISSION BILL
116. The Committee was informed that the Government is considering to set up a Heritage
Sites Commission as part of measure for protection and conservation of cultural and natural
heritage. A Bill for the purpose is under preparation in consultation with the concerned Ministries/
Departments. The requirement of funds for functioning of the Commission would be known after
a final decision on its organizational structure etc. is arrived at.
117. The Committee welcomes the steps initiated by the Ministry for setting up the
Heritage Site Commission. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should expedite
the setting up of the Heritage Site Commission as more and more such sites are being
encroached or unauthorizedly occupied. Since the country is having a large number of
heritage sites which require immediate attention for conversation. The Commission is an
overdue measure.
NATIONAL CULTURE FUND
118. The National Culture Fund (NCF) was set up in November, 1996 as a trust under
Charitable Endowment Act, 1890 with the aim of inviting the participation of the corporate
sector, NGOs, State Governments, Public/Private Sectors and individuals in the task of
promoting, protecting and preserving India’s cultural heritage as well as creation of new galleries,
museums and imparting of training in cultural activities. The donations to the National Culture
fund are eligible for 100 per cent tax exemption under Section 10 23C (iv) and 80 G (ii) of
the Income Tax Act. The NCF is managed and administered by a Council and an Executive
Committee. NCF is required to propagate its objectives in a big way through advertisements and
massive public relation efforts to mobilise sufficient funds.
119. At the time of constitution of NCF, it was decided that a corpus of Rs. 19.25 crore
would be provided by Ministry of Culture.

26
120. The Committee notes that the plan allocation of Rs. 3.00 crore was the same at RE
stage and further step-up to Rs. 3.19 crore in BE 2008-09. The expenditure reported upto
29th February, 2008 is Rs. 3.00 crore. The Committee was informed that as on
31st March, 2007 the position of funds is as under:
(i) Corpus of the NCF Rs.19,67,85,853/-
(ii) Donations/ Contributions from Corporates and
other Organisations Rs.16,24,60,639/-
(iii) In addition Rs. 26 crores were received from Indian Oil Corporation which was
immediately transferred to Indian Oil Foundation for adoption of One Monument
in each State.
121. The Committee suggests that the PSUs and Private Industries which are directly or
indirectly using the monuments and sites of culture for their commercial motives have an
obligation to contribute to the National Culture Fund. The Committee recommends that
the Ministry should identify and enumerate those PSUs and Private Industries which are
using the Monuments and Cultural Sites and may be cajoled to contribute to the NCF.
The Committee further recommends that more PSUs/Organisations Corporate Houses
should be approached to donate for NCF. The Committee also recommends that the
utilization details of the NCF may be submitted to it.
NORTH EAST REGION
122. The States in the North Eastern Region are often considered to be at disadvantageous
position owing to their geographical isolation and poor infrastructure. The Ministry has been
taking many initiatives to highlight and popularize the rich and diverse art and culture of the
North Eastern States, including Sikkim. Various activities would be organized in North Eastern
States during the year 2008-09 through North East Zonal Cultural Centre at Dimapur and
Jawaharlal Nehru Manipur Dance Akademi at Imphal. In addition to their activities, the Ministry
and its attached/subordinate offices and autonomous organizations propose to undertake activities
in North East Region by extending their spectrum of activities to the North Eastern Region. In
order to implement the scheme effectively and utilize the funds allocated under North East to the
optimum level, many organizations have endeavoured to tie up their activities with local partner
organizations, like having tie up with NEHU by Sahitya Akademi and with local Akademies by
other National Akademies. Efforts are also being made by other organizations to tie up with their
respective local partners for improving their performance in North East.
123. An amount of Rs.60.00 crore has been allocated by the Ministry for various activities
during 2008-09. This amount has been allocated under various Divisions in respect of schemes
directly operated by them and the organizations (Attached/Subordinate Offices and Autonomous
Organizations) for taking up activities in North East during 2008-09, as proposed by them. The
Ministry of Culture also provides grants to Tawang Monastery, Arunachal Pradesh; Namgyal
Institute of Tibetology, Gangtok, Sikkim; and Buddhist Cultural Preservation Society, Arunachal
Pradesh. During 2007-08, adequate funds for development of Tawang monastery was provided.
During 2008-09, Central Institute of Higher Tibetan Studies (CIHTS), V aranasi has come up with
a proposal of an activity relating to development of medicinal plants in North Eastern Region.
A provision of Rs.30.00 lakhs has already been kept for this purpose under North East for
CIHTS. Last but not least, an institute called Central Institute of Himalayan Culture Studies at
Dahung in West Kameng District, in the State of Arunachal Pradesh is proposed to set up by
the Ministry of Culture. This institute is presently running courses for the Purva Madhyama

27
and Uttar Madhyama. The Institute is proposed to be established as an autonomous body. One
of the major objectives of the Institution would be to prepare students for higher learning and
research in the field of Buddhology, Bhoti language and literature and Himalayan studies with
adequate knowledge of modem research methodology and advanced techniques and to inculcate
awareness for ecological balance and preservation of natural resources. The budgetary provision
towards this institute would be for its overall development inclusive of adequate infrastructural
facility. A sum of Rs. 5.00 crore has, therefore, been kept during 2008-09 under North East for
funding this Institute.
124. On the recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee under Para 61 of
120th Report many autonomous organizations under the Ministry of Culture have tied up with
local partners like Universities, NGOs, State Akademis and State Government Departments in
order to implement their programmes effectively and to utilize the allocated funds for the North
East Region including Sikkim.
125. The Ministry informed that archaeologically speaking, the North Eastern States of India
are largely unexplored, and sites still lesser excavated, chiefly owing to non presence of a
dedicated field office for the purpose. Although, there is an ASI Circle Office in Guwahati, but
it is largely engaged in activities like preservation and conservation of archaeological monuments.
It being tough hilly terrain, and further difficult to access because of high rainfall zone, the
exploration and excavation objectives of the region defined by Assam and six sister states of the
east remain unrealized. The multitude of diverse ethnic tribes of these states are a major source
for anthropological and ethnographic studies to contribute to wide-ranging understanding of
human cultures and past societies of this region. Hence, there is ample scope for the rich
archaeological studies through a new Excavation Branch, with its headquarters at Guwahati. The
proposal of creating an Excavation Branch for the North-East States was also proposed in the
Tenth Five Year Plan document, but somehow this aspect remained unrealised.
126. Plan allocation for North Eastern region in BE 2007-08 of Rs. 55.70 crore was reduced
at RE stage to Rs. 47.00 crore. The allocation has been substantially increased in BE 2008-09
to Rs. 60.00 crore.
127. The Committee is anguished to note that despite its earlier recommendations,
Rs. 20.00 crore of the allocation remained unspent for the North-East Region. This shows
the neglected attitude towards the North Eastern region where even the reduced RE
allocation remained unutilized. The Ministry should make concerted efforts to utilize the
funds by proper implementation of schemes so that the North Eastern region which is still
unexplored gets its due share.
128. The Committee notes that the Excavation of Branch for the North East States
remains unrealized in the 10th Five Y ear Plan. The Committee recommends that the
Excavation Branch may be included as one of the items in the Eleventh Five Year Plan
and implemented within the presumed time frame. If required this matter may be taken
up at the highest level to sort out the issues involved in establishing the Excavation
Branch in the North East.
129. The Committee notes that lot of initiatives had been taken with huge fund
allocation by the Ministry to implement various activities in the North East. It is not
clear what are the benefits accrued to the North East due to such enhanced allocations
and whether the allocated money is really spent for the purposes it was allocated. The
Committee therefore recommends that a study or an inquiry may be conducted to see
what are the actual benefits of the enhanced allocation and whether the fund allocated

28
are utilized for the purposes for which these were allocated. The feed back of the study
may be furnished to the Committee.
GENERAL RECOMMENDATION
130. The Committee noted that the Ministry of Culture is having problem in incurring
expenditure upto September as a result, the Ministry of Finance has been imposing cuts at RE
stage.
131. The Committee however noted that last year almost in all the heads the allocated
funds even at RE stage remained under utilized because of one reason or the other. The
Committee therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Culture should try to
spend the allocated fund to the maximum extent possible so that additional funds may be
asked at RE stage.

29
OBSERV ATIONS/CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS — AT A GLANCE
BUDGET ALLOCATION AND OVERALL ASSESSMENT OF THE FINANCIAL
PERFORMANCE FOR THE YEAR 2007-08
The Committee notes that the expenditure trend during 2007-08 is not very
satisfactory. For the plan allocation, expenditure of Rs. 370.39 crore has been incurred out
of the RE of Rs. 520.00 crore. In the non-plan also, expenditure of Rs. 298.00 crore has
been incurred out of Rs.460.00 crore upto 29th February, 2008. Thus, Rs. 149.61 crore
in plan and Rs. 161.28 crore in non-plan remained to be utilized in the month of
March, 2008. (Para 8)
The Committee is unhappy to note that despite its concern and considered
recommendation, the Ministry of Finance has refused to review the budgetary allocations
in the month of December instead of in the month of September thereby subjecting the
Ministry of Culture to financial cuts at RE stage. The Committee observes that there is
a greater need and scope for scrutiny of entire exercise of Budgetary Process beginning
from budgetary proposals in September by the Ministry of Finance in respect of Ministry
of Culture because of its special needs. The Committee feel that the entire budgetary
process and procedure involving about eight months has actually given both to the evil of
mis-utilisation of funds in a hurried manner and apprehension of losing valuable but
scarce financial resources made available to them by Ministry of Finance at the fag end
of the financial year. It appears that given the rigidity in budgetary exercise the Ministry
of Finance has failed to assess actual requirements of the Ministry of Culture for funds
to be utilized for various developmental purposes. The Committee is of the firm belief
that the underutilization to a great extent in the Ministry of Culture is the result of rigid
financial practices and procedures. The Committee therefore, recommends the Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance for giving an active consideration through a rigorous
and rational scrutiny for reforming and rescheduling of the present Budgetary procedures
and practice as far the Ministry of Culture is concerned, so that the final plan and non-
plan allocations are conveyed to the Ministry and to respective Institutions/organizations
by the month of December every year for effective and fruitful utilization of scarce
financial resources. Alternatively, the Committee recommends that the possibility may be
explored for provision of budget allocations for various activities may be converted as non-
lapsable fund taking into account the seasonal nature of work and activities undertaken
by various institutions under the Ministry of Culture. (Para 12)
The Committee is happy to note that for the first time, allocation for the Ministry
of Culture has reached to four figures. The Committee feels that it is a good beginning
for this vital sector which has huge potential but yet to be explored. The Committee
hopes that all the new schemes and projects taken up by the Ministry during the financial
year 2008-09 will be completed in a time bound manner. (Para 13)
The Committee also recommends that possibility of organising off-season festivals
and organizing Dance/Cultural programmes throughout the year may be explored. The
Ministry should also explore for decentralization of some of the schemes which can help
the Zonal Centres in expediting their work. This will certainly help in providing much
needed relief to the Ministry. The Committee also recommends that in spite of the
29

30
constraints faced by the Ministry, there is need to spread the expenditure evenly and
making efforts for full utilization of the allocated amount through proper planning and
monitoring. Only then the desired result for Eleventh Five Year Plan can be achieved.
(Para 14)
The Committee notes the efforts made by the Ministry to improve its performance.
The Committee may be apprised of the findings of the three members Committee and the
steps proposed to be taken to improve the performance of various schemes being
implemented by the Ministry of Culture. (Para 16)
ARCHAEOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA (ASI)
The Committee notes that the cases of vanishing of our monuments is a dangerous
process which if not controlled in time, may lead to a situation where we will be left with
only a few monuments as symbols of our culture and tradition. The vanishing of
monuments should be stopped with all the resources at our disposal. The Committee notes
that the Ministry has already taken appropriate measures to prevent it. The Committee
may be apprised about the findings of the internal Committee to study the problems and
the steps taken to implement the findings with the result it achieved. (Para 19)
The Committee hopes that ASI will learn from its past experience on the reasons
for underutilizations of allocated funds and take appropriate steps to utilize the allocated
resources. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take immediate steps to
operationalise NMMA and expedite formation of State level implementation Committees
so that funds are utilized within the financial year. The Committee may be apprised
about the steps taken to operationalise NMMA and the status of its implementation.
(Para 21)
The Committee notes that more than 56 excavation reports are pending with ASI
since 2002. The Committee is of the views that this is a serious matter since there is
inordinate delay in the preparation of reports. The Committee hopes with the new system
in place, there will be no delay in preparation of reports on excavation in future.
(Para 24)
The Committee notes the steps taken by the Ministry to prevent encroachments.
The Committee desires that possibility of making financial provision to pay for the
rehabilitation of the encroachers who are removed from monuments may also be explored
in consultation with Ministry of Finance so that the Ministry is not dependent on
respective State Government for rehabilitation of encroachers. (Para 26)
The Committee also notes that more than 249 centrally protected monuments have
been encroached upon by various elements due to multifarious reasons. Some of the
reasons are historical whereas some others are socio-economic in nature. The Committee
observes that the problem needs to be addressed on a permanent basis with a lasting
solution wherever possible. Appropriate mechanisms may be evolved to rehabilitate the
encroachers and the Government should ensure the retrieved monuments are not illegally
occupied again. The Committee notes that an appropriate Committee may be constituted
to look into the various aspects of the encroachments with the mandate to recommend
appropriate mechanism for finding a solution. This may be done on a time bound basis.
(Para 27)
The Committee recommends that to preserve the national heritage from
defacement, penal punishment under the Act should be suitably revised to deter the

31
culprits along with other positive steps like generating awareness towards protection and
maintenance of beauty of the Monuments as valuable national heritage. (Para 29)
The Committee notes that the advertisements in the print and electronic media to
create awareness among the population about bad effects of defacement of monuments is
giving an impetus to the tourism sector. The Committee feels, the propaganda mechanism
needs to be more strengthened by introducing appropriate curriculum in the school
syllabus on the bad effects of defacement of our monuments. Moreover, the Committee
notes that a special campaign may be launched to educate the school children for the
preservation of our monuments. In addition to this, the media campaigns should also
focus the legal punishments involved in defacement of our national heritages. (Para 30)
The Committee appreciates the efforts of ASI for putting India on the world map
by undertaking conservation work in Cambodia and hopes that similar projects may be
taken up in other countries also. (Para 32)
ANTHROPOLOGICAL SURVEY OF INDIA
The Committee notes the plan allocation of Rs. 6.50 crore was reduced to Rs.6.00
crore at RE stage and enhanced allocation of Rs. 8.50 crore has been made for BE
2008-09. However, the expenditure incurred upto 29th February, 08 is Rs 4.79 crore only.
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should take corrective steps to utilise the
funds for the Anthropology which is very vital sector in today's world. (Para 34)
NATIONAL ARCHIVES OF INDIA
The Committee is not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry for reduction of
allocation at RE stage to the tune of Rs. 2.00 crore. The Committee is further distress
to note that out of RE of Rs. 2.00 crore only an amount of Rs. 1.44 crore could be
utilized upto February, 2008. It seems the Ministry had not properly planned for the
utilization of Rs. 4.00 crore in the initial stage. The Committee is of the view that the
Ministry should restrain from reducing allocation at RE stage and NAI as the premier
organization safeguarding documents of archival value should complete all its schemes and
programme within the time specified. The Committee recommends that the Ministry
should monitor the progress of ongoing Plan/Scheme of National Archives of India so that
it should not suffer for reduction in allocation. (Para 37)
INDIRA GANDHI NATIONAL CENTRE FOR THE ARTS
The Committee notes that IGNCA was allocated Rs. 45.00 crore in BE 2007-08 that
was reduced to Rs. 37.00 crore at RE stage. Out of this the IGNCA could utilize only
Rs. 33.00 crore. The Committee has time and again expressed its displeasure on non-
utilisation of funds even at the reduced RE level. Some initiative is needed on the part
of the Ministry to take corrective action and utilize the resources. The Committee may
be apprised about the steps taken to utilize the entire budget allocation. (Para 40)
MUSEUMS
The Committee expresses its displeasure to note that the National Museum could
not utilize the plan allocation in time resulting in reduction of RE. Provision for critical
items such as installation of security gadgets could also not be utilized thus keeping at
stake its valuable treasure stored in Museum. The Committee recommends that review of

32
the planning should be done to undertake all the unfinished task in the next financial
year and Ministry should try to utilize the maximum amount upto September, 2008 so
that in case more funds are required the same may be asked at RE stage. (Para 43)
INDIAN MUSEUM, KOLKATA
The Committee is distress to note plan outlay of Rs. 8.50 crore was reduced to
Rs. 3.98 crore at RE stage because of non-implementation of some schemes like
modernization and reorganization of gallery; restoration and maintenance of museum
building; strengthening and modernization of security; and programme of education and
mass communication. The Committee recommends that corrective measures should be
taken by the Ministry for utilization of allocated amount in BE 2008-09 with proper
planning and putting monitoring mechanism in place. The Committee may be apprised of
the efforts made in this regard. (Para 46)
VICTORIA MEMORIAL HALL, KOLKATA
The Committee is perturbed to note that Victoria Memorial Hall could incur
expenditure of only Rs. 4.90 crore upto February, 2008. Victoria Memorial Hall which is
a landmark in Kolkata deserves more efforts to keep its glory. The Committee, therefore,
recommends that all out effort should be made to utilize the funds so that Victoria
Memorial Hall can retain its grandeur status in Kolkata. (Para 49)
SECURITY OF IMPORTANT ART ITEMS
The Committee notes that drawing any conclusion that no regular smuggling
activity of antiquities is taking place on the basis of available data with regard to cases
registered, is misleading. The Committee feels that smuggling activities are taking place
systematically in connivance of the local people. Therefore, the Committee recommends
that the Ministry should take measures to generate sufficient awareness amongst the
public as well as the custodians of law to strengthen the mechanism available in the
public domain to punish the culprits of smuggling activities. The Committee recommends
that Museum security is an important area and it should be given adequate attention.
Moreover, stealing and pilferage of important items kept in the museum should also be
taken care of by installing latest gadgets and by framing suitable policies in this regard
as museums are the treasure of our culture. (Para 51)
SCHEME OF PROMOTION AND STRENGTHENING OF REGIONAL AND LOCAL MUSEUMS
The Committee observes that it is a welcome step and the scheme of promotion
and strengthening of regional and local museums need to be implemented with right
earnest. The Committee hopes that all the necessary steps for running the scheme should
be planned in advance and the allocation should be utilized judiciously. (Para 54)
NATIONAL GALLERY OF MODERN ART, NEW DELHI
The Committee appreciates the decision of the Ministry to open National Gallery at
Bangalore and hope that this will help in spreading the modern art culture of our country.
However, the Committee is concerned over the tendency of reduction of the allocation at
RE stage and even that allocation remains unutilized as the expenditure upto 29.2.2008 is
Rs. 1.66 crore only. This shows the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry. The Committee

33
recommends that the allocated amount should be fully utilized by NGMA so that the
Government may not impose cuts in outlays at RE stage. (Para 58)
NATIONAL COUNCIL OF SCIENCE MUSEUMS, KOLKATA
The Committee notes that out of the total plan allocation of Rs.17.00 crore,
National Council of Science Museums could spend only Rs.13.60 crore by February, 2008.
The Committee is of the view that proper planning for utilization of resources and
monitoring of the expenditure is the need of hour. The Ministry should take remedial
steps accordingly. (Para 61)
The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry for popularizing science and
technology and the course being run on science communication. The Committee may be
apprised of the success of the two-years Post Graduate course on Science Communication.
(Para 62)
MANAGING TREASURE AT LALIT KALA ACADEMY AND NATIONAL GALLERY OF
MODERN ART
The Committee is of the view that the art works valuing hundreds of crore should
be preserved in an effective manner. Hence it recommends that there is more scope for
managing the treasures since a large number of paintings are still to be preserved/
restored. State of the art facility may be used for this job and expert guidance from other
countries can be sought and if need arises voluntary organizations may also be engaged
to preserve the art works. (Para 65)
INTER MINISTERIAL COORDINATION
The Committee is surprised to know that there is no inter-ministerial coordination
between the Ministry of Culture and Tourism. For the promotion of tourism in India,
Culture is an important component and for the development of cultural sites and for
spreading our cultural values, tourism is an important component. The Committee is of
the view that our Missions abroad have an important role to play in spreading our culture
and its values. The Committee recommends that the three Ministries should work
together in coordination for better development of culture and tourism sector. The
Committee recommends that the Government may constitute an inter-Ministerial
mechanism for regular interaction with the Ministries of Tourism, Culture and External
Affairs. (Para 67)
PROMOTION AND DISSEMINATION OF  CULTURAL ACTIVITIES:
ZONAL CULTURAL CENTRES (ZCCs)
The Committee is of the view that protection and promotion of vanishing folk art
tradition is a very important mandate and in order to implement the mandate Zonal
Cultural Centre should enroll artists associated with different folk art tradition and
provide them adequate remuneration. For this purpose the amount allocated for the year
2008-09 may be fully utilized and if possible allocation may be enhanced next year for the
purpose. The Committee also recommends that the Zonal Cultural Centres should expand
their activity to include the use of culture as an effective tool of national integration.
(Para 70)

34
SETTING UP OF MULTI PURPOSE CULTURAL COMPLEXES INCLUDING THOSE FOR
CHILDREN
The Committee notes that ceiling of the project cost fixed for single cultural
complex of Category-I is Rs. 5.00 crore and for Category-II smaller version cultural
complex is Rs. 2.00 crore. Whereas, the total allocation made for MPCC in the BE
2008-09 is only Rs. 2.00 crore. The Committee is at a loss to understand the rationality
behind this less allocations as even for a Category II MPCC an amount of Rs. 2.00 crore
is required. The Committee feels that this kind of approach will promote only adhocism.
The Committee, therefore, recommends that the modalities for running the scheme may
be worked out and the scheme may be widely publicized for utilization of allocated
resources. The Committee may be apprised about the details of the number of MPCCs
already established till the last financial year and the details of the proposed MPCCs. The
Committee would also like to know the benefits of converting it into a Central Sector
Scheme. (Para 73)
KALAKSHETRA FOUNDATION, CHENNAI
The Committee recommends that the Ministry should monitor the utilization of
funds more closely for Kalashetra and help the organization in planning/executing the
allocated fund judiciously and evenly throughout the year. The Committee observes that
with the increased budgetary allocation the Kalakshetra Foundation and its constituent
units will be able to strengthen their activities. The details of fund utilizations for each
of the activity may please be furnished to the Committee. (Para 76)
NATIONAL MISSION FOR MANUSCRIPT
The Committee notes that the pace of the Mission is very slow. The Committee
recommends that the Mission should augment its target to conduct post survey
documentation in all the States. The survey and documentation process should be
completed in a time-bound schedule. The Committee further recommends that the
exhibition of Indian Manuscript at various premier national and international fora should
also be given thrust and the mission should initiate proactive measures in this regard.
(Para 80)
NATIONAL MISSION ON MONUMENTS AND ANTIQUITIES
The Committee recommends that since National Mission of Monuments and
Antiquities has been earmarked budgetary allocation of Rs. 10.00 crore during the year
2008-09, the Mission should come up with a detailed proposal immediately while
maintaining its confidentiality and further proceed in its implementation. The Committee
would like to know the latest status of the implementation of the decisions taken by the
Finance Committee on National Mission on Monuments and Antiquities. (Para 83)
SAHITYA AKADEMI
The Committee recommends that steps may be taken to popularize the activities
of Sahitya Akademi among the population and particularly the students of Universities
and premier institutions throughout India. At present its existence is known only to the
literary circles. More emphasis may be given to national integration and secularism

35
through literature. It has also a role to popularize our democratic values and rids cultural
heritage. (Para 86)
SANGEET NATAK AKADEMI
The Committee notes that Sangeet Natak Akademi has been able to spend more
than the allocated amount. The Committee r ecommends that the Sangeet Natak Akademi
should endeavour to establish national institutes and centres for each of our dance forms
and parforming arts, it need in association with the State Governments. (Para 89)
The Committee hopes that efforts for securing land will be taken up with Delhi
Development Authority in a time bound manner and if need be the issue may be taken
up at Ministerial level. The Committee recommends to the DDA that they should speed
up the process of land allotment to the Sangeet Natak Akademi at the earliest. The
Committee may be apprised about the any procedural or administrative delay in the
allotment of land and construction of the building. (Para 91)
LALIT KALA AKADEMI
The Committee hopes that with the enhanced allocation in BE 2008-09, the Lalit
Kala Akademi will be able to spread its activities in more effective manner and will utilize
all its available resources. (Para 94)
NATIONAL SCHOOL OF DRAMA
The Committee is pleased to note that National School of Drama is planning to
undertake lot of activities in the year 2008-2009. The Committee hopes that National
School of Drama will be able to fulfill its commitment in 2008-09 by planning its activities
in phased manner. (Para 95)
NEHRU MEMORIAL MUSEUM AND LIBRARY (NMML)
The Committee appreciates the initiatives taken by the Nehru Memorial Museum
and Library for modernization and digitization. The Committee however, recommends that
the award of fellowships by the NMML must be transparent and beyond any criticism as
the fellows who apply for the fellowships are eminent scholars who never compromise any
type of nepotism or favouritism or procedural irregularities. (Para 101)
SCIENCE CITIES
The Committee recommends that adequate plan outlay should be provided in the
Budget to ensure that science cities are set up in all the state capitals of the country and
while fixing priority every year parity should be drawn amongst the regions. (Para 105)
SPREADING INDIAN CULTURE ABROAD
The Committee appreciates the efforts in spreading Indian culture abroad by
holding seminars, fairs and festivals. The Committee recommends that the festivals
should be highly focused and highlights every region of the country so as to promote
tourism and culture of all the States. The Committee also recommends that some
countries should be selected where these festivals should be held continuously for some
years so as to make an impact on the population there. (Para 108)

36
V ACANT POSTS IN V ARIOUS PREMIER INSTITUTIONS FUNCTIONING UNDER THE
MINISTRY OF CULTURE
The Committee notes that inspite of Ministry's attention being drawn to the fact
of delay in appointing administrative heads, no significant achievement has been made in
most of the organisations under the control of the Ministry. And in many cases some of
the officials of the Ministry had been given additional charge. The Committee is
constrained to note that the reply furnished relating to filling up post vacant in various
organization by the Ministry is similar to one which was sent to the Committee at the
time of consideration of Action Taken Report which indicates that there is no progress in
the matter. The Committee again recommend that process of revision of Recruitment
Rules may be completed at the earliest so that the Search-cum-Selection Committee is
constituted and vacant post are filled up. (Para 111)
NATIONAL CULTURE POLICY
The Committee suggested that the framing of the National Culture Policy should
not be an unending process. The policy may be framed within the stipulated time frame.
The 18 Member Committee may be asked to meet frequently to finalise the policy. The
committee recommends that the Ministry should ensure the formulation of National
Culture Policy by April 2008. (Para 113)
HERITAGE SITES COMMISSION BILL
The Committee welcomes the steps initiated by the Ministry for setting up the
Heritage Site Commission. The Committee recommends that the Ministry should expedite
the setting up of the Heritage Site Commission as more and more such sites are being
encroached or unauthorizedly occupied. Since the country is having a large number of
heritage sites which require immediate attention for conversation. The Commission is an
overdue measure. (Para 115)
NATIONAL CULTURE FUND
The Committee suggests that the PSUs and Private Industries which are directly or
indirectly using the monuments and sites of culture for their commercial motives have an
obligation to contribute to the National Culture Fund. The Committee recommends that
the Ministry should identify and enumerate those PSUs and Private Industries which are
using the Monuments and Cultural Sites and may be cajoled to contribute to the NCF.
The Committee further recommends that more PSUs/Organisations Corporate Houses
should be approached to donate for NCF. The Committee also recommends that the
utilization details of the NCF may be submitted to it. (Para 119)
NORTH EAST REGION
The Committee is anguished to note that despite its earlier recommendations,
Rs. 20.00 crore of the allocation remained unspent for the North-East Region. This shows
the neglected attitude towards the North Eastern region where even the reduced RE
allocation remained unutilized. The Ministry should make concerted efforts to utilize the
funds by proper implementation of schemes so that the North Eastern region which is still
unexplored gets its due share. (Para 125)

37
The Committee notes that the Excavation of Branch for the North East States
remains unrealized in the Tenth Five Year Plan. The Committee recommends that the
Excavation Branch may be included as one of the items in the Eleventh Five Year Plan
and implemented within the presumed time frame. If required this matter may be taken
up at the highest level to sort out the issues involved in establishing the Excavation
Branch in the North East. (Para 126)
The Committee notes that lot of initiatives had been taken with huge fund
allocation by the Ministry to implement various activities in the North East. It is not
clear what are the benefits accrued to the North East due to such enhanced allocations
and whether the allocated money is really spent for the purposes it was allocated. The
Committee therefore recommends that a study or an inquiry may be conducted to see
what are the actual benefits of the enhanced allocation and whether the fund allocated
are utilized for the purposes for which these were allocated. The feed back of the study
may be furnished to the Committee. (Para 127)
GENERAL RECOMMENDATION
The Committee however noted that last year almost in all the heads the allocated
funds even at RE stage remained under utilized because of one reason or the other. The
Committee therefore, strongly recommends that the Ministry of Culture should try to
spend the allocated fund to the maximum extent possible so that additional funds may be
asked at RE stage. (Para 129)

MINUTES

40

41
XVI
SIXTEENTH MEETING
The Committee met at 11.00 A.M. on Wednesday, the 26th March, 2008 in Committee
Room ‘A’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Prof. Alka Balram Kshatriya
4. Shri M.V . Mysura Reddy
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Joachim Baxla
6. Shri Alok Kumar Mehta
7. Dr. K. Dhanaraju
8. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
9. Shri Dushyant Singh
10. Shri Prahlad Joshi
11. Shri Rakesh Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
I. ** * .
II. REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF CULTURE
1. Shri Abhijit Sengupta, Secretary (Culture)
2. Shri R.C. Misra, AS & FA
3. Shri R.C. Mishra, JS (M)
4. Shri N.C. Goel, JS (G)
5. Shri A.S. Chauhan, CCA
6. Shri A.K Singh, Director
7. Ms. Alka Jha, Director
8. Ms. Tanuja Pandey, Director
9. Ms. Roopa Srinivasan, Director
41
*** Relates to other matters.

42
10. Ms. M. Hingorani, Director
11. Shri Umesh Kumar, Director
12. Shri Radhey Shyam, Director
13. Prof. Rajeev Lochan, Director, NGMA
14. Dr. V .R. Rao, Director, Anth. SI, Kolkata
15. Dr. K.K. Chakravarty, Member Secretary, IGNCA
16. Shri A.N. Jha, Joint Secretary, IGNCA
17. Shri J.P Kastuar, Secretary, Sangeet Natak Akademi
18. Shri A. Krishnamurthy, Secretary, Sahitya Akademi
19. Dr. Sudhakar Sharma, Secretary, Lalit Kala Akademi
20. Prof. Mridula Mukherjee, Director, NMML
21. Prof. C. Panda, Secretary, Victoria Memorial Hall, Kolkata
2. * * *.
3. The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 1.00 
P.M. for lunch.
4. The Committee again assembled at 3.00 P.M. and took up the Demands for Grants
(2008-09) of the Ministry of Culture for examination. The Committee heard the views of the
Secretary, Ministry of Culture on the subject. The Secretary, while presenting his views, replied
to the points raised by the Chairman in his introductory remarks. To several other queries raised
by the Members, the Ministry representatives were requested to give written replies within four
days.
5. * * *.
6. The Committee then adjourned at 5.15 
P.M. to meet again on 27th March, at 11.00 A.M.
*** Relates to other matters.

43
43
XX
TWENTIETH MEETING
The Committee met at 3.00 P.M. on Thursday, the 24th April, 2008 in Committee Room
‘B’, Ground Floor, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
MEMBERS PRESENT
1. Shri  Sitaram Yechury — Chairman
RAJYA SABHA
2. Shri Naresh Gujral
3. Shri M.V . Mysura Reddy
4. Shri Shahid Siddiqui
LOK SABHA
5. Shri Anandrao Vithoba Adsul
6. Shri Sukhbir Singh Badal
7. Shrimati Priya Dutt
8. Shri P. Karunakaran
9. Dr. P.P. Koya
10. Shri Ramkrishna Kusmaria
11. Shri Akshay Pratap Singh
SECRETARIAT
Shrimati Agnes Momin George, Joint Secretary
Shri Jagdish Kumar, Joint Director
Shri Swarabji B., Deputy Director
Shrimati Nidhi Chaturvedi, Committee Officer
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the members of the Committee. Thereafter, the
Committee considered the following draft Reports:
(i) One Hundred thirty-fifth Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of the Department
of Road Transport and Highways;
(ii) One Hundred thirty-sixth Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of
Tourism;
(iii) One Hundred thirty-seventh Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of
Culture;
(iv) One Hundred thirty-eighth Report on Demands for Grants (2008-09) of Ministry of
Civil Aviation; and
(v) One Hundred thirty-ninth Report on the Motor Vehicles (Amendment) Bill, 2007.

44
3. After some discussion, the Committee adopted all the five Reports with minor
modifications. The Committee also authorized the Chairman and Shri M.V . Mysura Reddy to
present the Reports in Rajya Sabha and Dr. P.P. Koya and Shrimati Priya Dutt to lay the Reports
in Lok Sabha on the 28th April, 2008.
4. * * *
5. * * *
6. * * *
7. * * *
8. The meeting of the Committee then adjourned at 4.00 
P.M.
*** Relate to other matters.

Printed at : Bengal Offset Works, 335 Khajoor Road, Karol Bagh, New Delhi-110005.