 
 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY STANDING COMMITTEE 
ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
 
Rajya Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 
 
  
REPORT NO. 
 286 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred 
and Sixty Ninth Report on 'Cargo Handling at the Major Ports' 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on3rd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on3rd February , 2021) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Website :     https://rajyasabha.nic.in  
 E-mail :     rsc-tt@sansad.nic.in 
 

Hindi version of this publication is also available 
 
PARLIAMENT OF INDIA 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY  
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT,  
TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 
 
TWO HUNDRED EIGHTY SIXTH REPORT  
Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and 
Sixty Ninth Report on 'Cargo Handling at the Major Ports' 
 
 
(Presented to the Rajya Sabha on3rd February, 2021) 
(Laid on the Table of Lok Sabha on3rd February,2021) 
 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
February, 2021/ Magha, 1942 (Saka) 


C O N T E N T S 
 
PAGE S  
 
1. COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE     (i)-(iii) 
2. INTRODUCTION       (iv) 
3. ACRONYMS               (v)-(xii) 
4. REPORT         1-70 
CHAPTER-I-     RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE MINISTRY 
CHAPTER-II-  RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY  
CHAPTER-III- RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
CHAPTER-IV- RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE FINAL 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY ARE STILL AWAITED 
                               
5. RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS-AT A GLANCE   71-79 
    6. MINUTES         80-83 
         
        
         
        
        
      
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
(2019-20) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2019) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh   - Chairman 
 
Rajya Sabha 
s 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati  
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. *Kumari Selja 
8. **Shri Tiruchi Siva 
9. ***Shri K.C.Venugopal  
10. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
 11. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
 
Lok Sabha 
12.  Shrimati Sumalatha Ambareesh 
13.  Shri Anto Antony 
14.  Shrimati Veena Devi 
15.  Shri Tapir Gao  
16.  Shri Rahul Kaswan 
17.  Shri Saumitra Khan  
18.  Ms. Goddeti Madhavi  
19.  Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
20.  Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
21.  Shri K. Muraleedharan 
22.  Shri S.S. Palanimanickam  
23.  Shri Chhedi Paswan   
24.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan  
25.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
26.  Shrimati Mala Roy 
27.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
28.  Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
29.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
30.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
31.  Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
32.  Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav  
_________________________________________________________  
*Kumari Selja ceased to be Member w.e.f. 10th April, 2020 
**Shri Tiruchi Siva ceased to be Member w.e.f. 3rd April, 2020 and re-nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd 
July, 2020 
***Shri K.C. Venugopal nominated as Member w.e.f. 22nd July, 2020 
 
(i) 

COMPOSITION OF THE DEPARTMENT-RELATED PARLIAMENTARY 
STANDING COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORT, TOURISM AND CULTURE 
 (2020-21) 
 (Constituted on 13th September, 2020) 
 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh                          - Chairman 
 
    Rajya Sabha 
 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. *Shri Raj Babbar 
4. Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
5. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
6. Shri Derek O’Brien 
7. Shri Tiruchi Siva 
8. Shri Dharmapuri Srinivas 
9. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
10. Shri K.C.Venugopal 
11. **Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
12. Shri Anto Antony 
13. Shri Margani Bharat   
14. Shri Tapir Gao 
15. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
16. Shri Ramesh Chandra Majhi 
17. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
18. Shri K. Muraleedharan 
19. Shri S.S. Palanimanickam 
20. Shri Chhedi Paswan 
21. Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
22. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
23. Shri Prince Raj 
24. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
25. Shrimati Mala Roy 
26. Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
27. Shri Dushyant Singh 
28. Shri Rajbahadur Singh 
29. Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
30. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
31. Shri Krupal Balaji Tumane 
32. Shri Dinesh Chandra Yadav 
 
 
________________________________________________________  
*Shri Raj Babbar  ceased to be a Member w.e.f. 25th November, 2020 
**Shri Sushil Kumar Modi was nominated to be a Member w.e.f. 23rd December, 2020 
 
 
(ii) 

 
SECRETARIAT 
 Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
 Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
 Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
Shri Agam Mittal, Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iii) 
  

INTRODUCTION 
 
I, the Chairman, Department -related Parliamentary Standing Committee on 
Transport, Tourism and Culture, having been authorized by the Committee to present 
on its behalf, do hereby present this Two Hundred and Eighty Sixth                              
Report on Action Taken by the Government on the recommendations /observations of the 
Committee contained in its  Two Hundred and Sixty Ninth Report on 'Cargo Handling at the 
Major Ports'. 
2.  The Two Hundred and Sixty Ninth Report of the Department -related Parliamentary 
Standing Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture was presented on the  21st December, 
2018  to the Parliament. 
3.  The Action Taken Replies on the recommendations of the Committee contained in its 
Two Hundred and Sixty Nin th Report were received from the Ministry of Shipping on 5th 
November, 2019 and 14th October, 2020. 
4. The Committee considered and adopted the Report in its meeting held on the  29th 
December, 2020.   
 
 
 (T.G. VENKATESH) 
NEW DELHI;                                                      Chairman, 
December 29 , 2020                                           Department-related Parliamentary Standing 
8 Pausa, 1942 (Saka)                               Committee on Transport, Tourism and Culture, 
                                                                                                                                Rajya Sabha 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(iv) 
 

ACRONYMS 
 
 
A&N : Andaman and Nicobar 
 
ALHW : Andaman and Lakshadweep Harbour Work  
BDP : Best Demonstrative Performance 
 
BE : Budget Estimates 
 
BISN : British India Steam Navigation Company 
 
BIWTC : Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Corporation 
 
BoE : Bachelor of Engineering 
 
BOT : Build-Operator-Transfer 
 
BPCL : Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. 
 
BPS : Ballard Pier Station 
 
BPX : Ballard Pier Extension 
 
BSID : Biometric Seafarers Identity Document 
 
CAGR : Compound Annual Growth Rate 
 
CCA : Controller of Certifying Authorities 
 
CCEA : Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs 
 
CDC : Continuous Discharge Certificate 
 
CEZ : Coastal Economic Zone 
 
CFA : Central Financial Assistance 
 
ChPT : Chennai Port Trust 
 
CoE : Centre of Excellence 
 
CoPT : Cochin Port Trust 
 
(v) 
 

CRIF : Central Road Infrastructure Fund 
 
CRZs : Coastal Regulation Zones 
 
CSD-DR : Cutter Suction Dredger 
 
CSSC : Cargo Ship Safety Construction 
 
CSE : Central Sector Expenditure 
 
CSl : Cochin Shipyard Limited 
 
DBFOT : Design-Build-Finance-Operate-Transfer 
 
DCI : Dredging Corporation of India 
 
DFC : Dedicated Freight Corridor 
 
DGLL : Directorate General of Light Houses and Lightships 
 
DGPS : Differential Global Positioning System 
 
DGS : Directorate General of Shipping 
 
DoPT : Department of Personnel and Training 
 
DPC : Departmental Promotion Committee 
 
DPR : Detailed Project Report 
 
   DPT : Deendayal Port Trust 
 
   DTPC : District Tourism Promotion Councils 
 
   DWT : Deadweight Tonnage 
 
   EAP : Employee Assessment Program 
 
EAT : Expenditure Advance Transfer 
 
EBRs : External Budgetary Resources 
 
ECB : External Commercial Borrowings 
 
E-DO : Electronic Delivery Order 
(vi) 
 

EIA : Environmental Impact Assessment 
 
EJC : East Junction Dock 
 
EPC : Engineering Procurement Construction 
 
ERP : Enterprise Resource Planning 
 
EQ : Eastern Quay 
 
ETV : Emergency Towing Vessel 
 
EXIM : Export Import 
 
FRM : Fertilizer Related Material 
 
FY : Financial Year 
 
GBS : Gross Budgetary Support 
 
GRT : Gross Registered Tonnage 
 
GSPCB : Goa State Pollution Control Board 
 
HDC : Haldia Dock Complex 
 
HDPEL : Hooghly Dock and Port Engineers Limited 
 
HPCL : Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. 
 
HCSL : Hooghly Cochin Shipyard Limited 
 
I&EBR : Internal and Extra Budgetary Resources 
 
IAC : Indian Aircraft Carrier 
 
ICTT : International Container Transshipment Terminal 
 
IIT : Indian Institute of Technology 
IMG : Inter Ministerial Group 
 
IMO : International Maritime Organization 
 
IMT : Inter-Modal Terminal 
 
(vii) 
 
 

IMU : Indian Maritime University 
 
INR : Indian Rupees 
 
INS : Indian Navy Ship 
 
IOPP : International Oil Pollution Prevention 
 
IPDS : Integrated Power Distribution System 
 
IPRCL : Indian Port Rail Corporation Limited 
 
IT : Information Technology 
 
ITDC : Indian Tourism Development Corporation 
 
ITL : International Transportation and Logistics Management 
 
IV : Inland Vessels 
 
IWAI : Inland Waterways Authority of India 
 
IWT : Inland Water Transport 
 
IWTA : International Water Technology Association 
 
JVMP : Jal Marg Vikas Project 
 
JNPT : JawaharLal Nehru Port Trust 
 
KDS : Kolkata Dock System 
 
KLPL : Konkan LNG Private Limited 
 
KPT : Kamarajar Port Trust 
 
KoPT : Kolkata Port Trust 
 
LNG : Liquefied Natural Gas 
 
LRIT : Long Range Identification Tracking 
 
MACP : Modified Assured Career Progression Scheme 
 
(viii) 
 

MARPOL : Marine Pollution 
 
MBA : Master of Business Administration 
 
MCA : Model Concession Agreement 
 
MDF : Maritime Development Fund 
 
MEO : Marine Engineer Officer 
 
MHA : Ministry of Home Affairs 
 
MIS : Management Information System  
 
MLT : Marine Liquid Terminal 
 
MM3 : Million Cubic Meters 
 
MMT : Multi-Modal Terminal 
 
MoEF&CC : Ministry of Environment Forests and Climate Change 
 
MoPT : Mormugao Port Trust 
 
MoU : Memorandum of Understanding 
 
MPT : Mumbai Port Trust 
 
MT : Metric Tonnes 
 
MTPA : Million Tonnes Per Annum 
 
NAVTAX : Navigational Text Messaging System 
 
NCB : North Cargo Berth 
 
NCLT : National Company Law Tribunal 
 
NCVTS : National Coastal Vessel Traffic System 
 
NER : North East Region 
 
NGT : National Green Tribunal 
 
NHAI : National Highways Authority of India  
(ix)  

 
NHMC : National Maritime Heritage Complex 
 
NIC : National Informatics Centre 
 
NINI : National Inland Navigation Institution 
 
NLS : Noxious Liquid Substance 
 
NMPT : New Mormugao Port Trust 
 
NOSDCP : National Oil Spill Disaster Contingency Plan 
 
NTCPWC : National Technology Centre for Ports, Waterways and Coasts 
 
NWs : National Waterways 
 
ODC : Over Dimensional Cargo 
 
OSTT : Off-Shore Tanker Terminal 
 
OTSS : One Time Settlement Scheme 
 
PARIVESH :  Pro-Active and Responsive facilitation by Interactive, 
Virtuous and Environmental Single window Hub 
 
PAT : Profit After Tax 
 
PBT : Profit Before Tax 
 
PCS : Port Community System 
 
PG : Post Graduation 
 
PGLM : Policy Guidelines for Land Management 
 
PIB : Press Information Bureau 
 
POL : Petroleum, Oil and Lubricants 
 
PPP : Public Private Partnership 
 
PSCO : Port State Control Officer 
 
PSU : Public Sector Undertaking 
(x) 

RBI : Reserve Bank of India 
 
RCC : Reinforced Concrete Cement 
 
RE : Revised Estimates 
 
REC : Regional Empowered Committee 
 
RFID : Radio Frequency Identification Document 
 
RFP : Request for Proposal 
 
RIS : River Information System 
 
RoB : Rail over Bridge 
 
ROCE : Return on Capital Employed 
 
RoFR : Right of First Refusal 
 
Ro-Ro : Roll on-Roll off 
 
   SCI : Shipping Corporation of India 
 
SCL : Sethusamudram Corporation Limited 
 
SDCL : Sagarmala Development Company Limited 
 
SEIAA : State Level Environment Impact Assessment Authority 
 
SFC : Standing Finance Committee 
 
SIPC : Smart Industrial Port City 
 
SOP : Standard Operating Procedure 
 
SPV : Special Purpose Vehicle 
 
SSCP : Sethusamudram Ship Channel Project 
 
STCW : Standards of Training, Certification and Watch keeping 
 
TBES : Tablet Based Examination System 
 
(xi) 
 

TEFR : Techno -Economic Feasibility Report 
 
TEU : Twenty-foot Equivalent Unit 
 
TRT : Turn Around Time 
 
TSHD : Trailing Suction Hopper Dredger 
 
USA : United States of America 
 
VGCB : Vizag General Cargo Berth 
 
VLCC : Very Large Crude Carrier 
 
VoCPT : V.O.  Chidambaranar Port Trust 
 
VPRCL : Visakhapatnam Port Road Company Limited  
 
VPT : Visakhapatnam Port Trust 
 
VTMS : Vessel Traffic Management System 
 
VTS : Vessel Traffic Service 
 
WBM : Water Bound Macadam 
 
WC : Workmen Compensation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(xii) 

1 
 
REPORT 
The Report of the Department -Related Parliamentary Standing Committee on Transport, 
Tourism and Culture deals with the Action Taken by the Ministry of Shipping on the 
observations / recommendations as contained in its Two Hundred and Sixty Ninth Rep ort on 
Cargo Handling at the Major Ports of the Ministry of Shipping which was presented to both the 
Houses of Parliament on 21st December, 2018. 
2. The Action Taken Replies were received from the Government on 5th November, 2019 and 
14th October, 2020 in res pect of all the observations/recommendations contained in the 269 th 
Report. The replies have been categorized as follows:— 
Chapter-I:  
Recommendations / Observations which have been accepted by the Ministry:  
Paragraph Nos.:  64, 67, 98, 124, 127, 148, 171A, 246, 247, 252, 261, 267, 280, 
282.                                                                                                
Total: 14 
Chapter-II:  
Recommendations / Observations which the Committee does not desire to pursue in 
view of the Ministry’s replies: 
Paragraph Nos.: 11, 41, 58, 78, 88, 116, 117, 137, 155, 189, 2 00, 215, 219, 225, 
231, 241, 250, 253, 259.                                                                                                
Total: 19 
Chapter-III:  
Recommendations / Obs ervations in respect of which replies of the Ministry have 
not been accepted by the Committee: 
Paragraph Nos.: 12, 15, 17, 20, 59, 71, 75, 94, 106, 111, 123, 126, 132, 135, 145, 
171, 190,  191, 201, 202, 205, 206, 207, 208, 216, 223, 224, 227, 229, 234, 245, 251, 
264, 265, 269, 276, 279, 286, 287.  
Total: 39 
Chapter-IV:  
Recommendations / Observations in respect of which the final replies of the Ministry 
are still awaited: 
Paragraph Nos.: 271  
Total: 01 
3. The Committee desires that final replies in respect of  those 
recommendations/observations which have been categorized as interim replies by the 
Committee should be furnished at the earliest.  
 

2 
 
CHAPTER I 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
MINISTRY 
Jawaharlal Nehru Port 
PORT PERFORMANCE 
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee notes the increased efficiency of the Port in terms of containers handled 
at 0.43% and the increase in average output per ship Berth day overall at 1.50% over the 
previous years.  The Committee commends the ef ficient management of the Port authorities in  
improving the efficiency parameters of the Port in order to make it as competitive as some of the 
best ports in the world.                           (Para 64)              
2. The Committee applauds the steps ta ken to improve the infrastructure facilities of JNPT 
and would urge upon the Government to further upgrade and modernize the Port to assure 
improved performance benchmarking against global standards.           (Para 67) 
Reply of the Ministry 
2.1 The improv ement in the performance has continued in the year 2018 -19 also. During 
Apr.-Dec., 2018, the total traffic handled at port was up by 7.39% as compared to same period of 
last year. The Output Per Shipberth day was also up by 3.7%. The vessel pre -berthing detention 
and turnaround time have come down by 18.5% & 5.75% respectively.  
2.2 The Port has undertaken series of projects to enhance the capacity and upgrade facilities 
to ensure improved performance. The project under implementation stage includes:  
 Construction of Coastal Berth: Dedica ted facility for coastal cargo out of custom bound area 
with separate approach road.   
 Capital Dredging work: To facilitate berthing of larger container vessels with deeper draft.   
 Construction of SEZ: To provide impetus for development of port based industry. 

3 
 
 Parking Plaza: The facility for direct entry of factory stuffed containers with in Customs 
Processing Zone.  
 Dry Ports at Jalna & Wardha: To connect hinterland directly with Port. 
 Widening of roads:  widening of Port roads connecting national highways. 
Vishakhapatnam Port Trust 
PROFITABILITY 
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The Committee takes note of the profit after tax to the tune of Rs. 189.46 crores. 
However, in order to assess the operational efficiency of the Port a nd its competitiveness 
as also to suggest measures to improve its productivity, the Committee desires to be kept 
apprised of the Return on Capital Employed (ROCE) for the Port.         (Para 98) 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1. It may be noted that the profit after tax is to the tune of Rs.195.87 crores and VPT 
has registered 19.69% return on Capital employed during 2017-18. 
VOC Port Trust 
TRAFFIC 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. Moreover, the Committee feels that the proximity of P orts, both private and major, alon g 
the coast, cater to the same hinterland. The number of P orts is far larger than the demand for 
them. The supply exceeds the demand and this has resulted in the underutilization of the 
economies of scale. The Committee fails to understand the lack of plan ning and foresight in the 
operation of this port and the neglect of the Port by the Ministry of Shipping  and the State 
Government.  The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Shipping must focus its 
attention on the development of the Port a s a transshipment hub. The Committee recommends 
that the Port must reduce its reliance on bulk cargo in terms of coal etc. and change its business 
model in order to attract more varied traffic.            (Para 124) 

4 
 
Reply of the Ministry  
4.1 VOCPT has tak en a number of steps to develop the Port as a Transshipment Hub given 
its proximity to East –West Sea Trade Route for which the following short term initiatives have 
been taken: 
 Increase in Permissible draft, LOA and Beam at Container Terminals upto 14.2m, 310m 
& 48m respectively. 
 67% Concession in Vessel Related Charges offered for mainline vessels. 
 Mv. Wan Hai, First Mainline vessel connecting Far East is calling VOCPT since 
12.12.18. 
4.2 As of December, 2017, VOC P ort was able to handle 12.8m draft vessel s inside the Port. 
Considering the increase in the traffic and to handle bigger size vessels the port has increased the 
draft from 12.8 to 14.2m at berths 8, 9, NCB I, CJ I and CJ II. Taking advantage of the P ort is 
now handling vessels upto 14.2m at berth no.9 and NCB I for handling of bulk cargoes. 
4.3 In respect of conversion of VOC P ort as transshipment hub MoS engaged consultants 
(AECOM) to study the traffic forecast and for development of infrastructure facilities. Now as 
per the suggestion of MoS , Port engaged NTCPWC, I .I.T. Chennai to prepare a master plan for 
strengthening of the berths and to propose new container terminal for handling of bigger size 
container vessels. 
4.4 As per this plan it is proposed to modernize the existing infrastructure and  to develop 
new container terminal in four phases from 2019 -20 to 2034 -35. In the master plan there is 
proposal for development of 2 container terminals for a quay length of more than 1000m at the 
outer harbour and dredging upto ( -) 15.5m in first phase ba sed on the traffic and size of the 
vessels. 
4.5 As an immediate step P ort has taken steps to convert the existing berth no. 9 into a 
container berth and subsequently the berths VOC 1,2,3,4 will be converted into container berths. 
CONTAINERIZATION 
Recommendation/Observation  

5 
 
5. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Shipping must go back to the 
drawing board and prepare a DPR for the future course of the Port. If it is intent on developing 
it as a transshipment hub, then it must look into the shortcomings of the Port with regards to a 
transshipment hub. If not, it must restructure itself as a bulk port or structure it otherwise. The 
Port is neither here nor there and the Committee strongly feels that this is a waste of the massive 
potential of the VOCPT as a major Port in India.            (Para 127) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Currently the Port is handling more than 7 Lakh TEUs of containers and is among the top 
4 container handling major ports in India. As mentioned above, during the variou s traffic studies 
conducted by the Port engaging consultants and considering the increase of container traffic in 
VOCPT, it is planned to modernize the existing infrastructure and to create new infrastructure at 
outer harbour able to handle transshipment containers at VOCPT. 
5.2 In this regard VOCPT has engaged NTCPWC for preparing a Detailed Project Report for 
development of infrastructure facilities to handle bigger size container vessels. The DPR is in the 
final stage. Action for conversion of berth no. 9 into a container terminal has already been 
initiated by the Port.  The infrastructure development is proposed in phases as follows:- 
 Proposed Development  
Phase I 
(2019-22) 
 I-A: Conversion of Berth 9 into container Berth to handle 14.20m draught 
vessels (0.5 MTEUs) 
I-B: Dredging in front of Berth 9 to handle 14.50m draught vessels (0.5 MTEUs) 
Phase II 
(2022-24) 
Conversion of Berths 3 & 4 into Container Terminal with 15.5m draft (0.9 
MMT). 
 

6 
 
Phase III 
(2024-26)  
Conversion of Berth 1 & 2 into container terminal and Berth 5& 6 into General 
cargo Berth, Creation of Berth 10 for multi-purpose Berth. 
Phase IV 
(2026-35) 
Conversion of Berth 7 into deep draught container terminal and Proposed two 
container terminals at outer harbor. 
Chennai Port Trust 
POLICY INITIATIVES 
Recommendation/Observation 
6. Chennai Port, given its location, is suitable for the purposes of tourism as it has been a 
gateway to the South.  The Committee further recommends that the Port should follow the 
example of the Mumbai Port Trust a nd re -design and develop cruise terminals for                
tourists/passengers.                (Para 148) 
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 A State of Art Cruise Passenger Facilitation Centre with all mandatory clearance viz.,  
customs, immigration , PHOs and ame nities like passenger lift ,escalators, electrification, cctv, 
public address system, baggage scanner, food court  and fire fighting system , was inaugurated at 
Chennai Port on 12.10.201 to attract International cruise vessels. At Chennai Port, cruise vessels 
are accorded priority berthing on arrival. Further to facilitate quicker immigration and customs 
clearance for cruise passenger s, an IT enabled RFID based Port Clearance System was 
implemented. As per Government Policy to promote cruise tourism in India , Tariff 
Rationalization for cruise vessels and waiver off the requirement of biometric enrolment for the 
cruise passengers arriving on e -visa for a period of three years till 31.12.2020 has been 
implemented at Chennai Port. During the year 2018 , two International cruise vessels called at 
Chennai Port and 6 vessels are expected during the year 2019.  Similarly , proposals are received 
from cruise vessel operators for domestic cruise operations at Chennai Port. 
Cochin Port Trust 

7 
 
CRUISE TERMINAL 
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee is pleased to note the steps taken by the Port in developing a 
passenger cruise terminal. This is a neglected aspect of shipping in India and is a major 
source of revenue in other nations. Cruise Tourism must be pursued with greater vigor 
and the Committee is pleased to know that the Ministry of Tourism is cooperating with 
the Ministry of Shipping to develop Cruise Terminals.             (Para 171 A) 
Reply of the Ministry 
  7.1. Cochin Port is one of the most preferred cruise destinations on the western coast of 
India and figures on the itinerary of most of the cruise lines that visit the Indian coast. 
Cochin Port has pioneered several initiatives to promote cruise shipping and to position 
itself as a preferred port of call. 
  7.2. Cochin Port handles cruise ships complying with the Standard Operating 
Procedure (SOP) issued by the Ministry of Tourism . Cochin Port has already in place a 
full air conditioned cruise terminal measuring 1800 sq.m area with dedicated counters for 
Customs and Immigration, scanner etc. In ad dition to this, in order to cope  up with the 
potentials of the growth in the cruise business, a new cruise terminal with 2253 sq.m area 
with all facilities has been constructed at a cost of Rs.25.72 Cr funded by the M inistry of 
Tourism. In 2018 -19, CoPT handled 49 cruise ships and in 2019 -20, 44 ships were 
facilitated.   
7.3. Major steps taken by the Cochin Port in developing a passenger cruise terminal 
are: 
1)       Introduction of rationalized tariff for cruise ships 
2) New initiatives like e -visa and e -landing card have been introduced by 
Immigration Department for the easy facilitation of cruise passengers. 
3) Substantial discounts in Vessel related charges are granted to cruise ships. 

8 
 
4) Spaces for Kiosks are allotted to promo te local trade offering souvenir, 
local cuisine, ethnic apparels, local artisan etc.  
5) ITDC operates duty free shops inside the Customs bonded area. 
6) Prepaid auto/taxi services operated by DTPC duly verifying the credentials 
of the drivers. 
7) Free WiFi to Cruise passengers is available at the terminal. 
8) Battery operated Buggies for passengers are also available. 
9) Sufficient Parking area for Tourist coaches. 
10) Helicopter service was operated on trial basis from the terminal to various 
tourist destinations of Kerala during the last financial year. 
7.4. Cochin Port recognizes cruise tourism as a potential area of growth and shall 
endeavor to take on board all the stakeholders to promote Cochin Port as a preferred 
cruise destination. 
Emerging Constellation of Container Terminals in South India 
Recommendation/Observation  
8. Investment in smaller new Ports in India can yield much better returns as they would 
service vessels on coastal and inland waterway. The Committee feels that the three ports coming 
up within a distanc e of about 130 nautical miles need to be developed and strategized in such a 
manner that all the three receive sufficient cargo to ensure profitable operations. The Committee 
thus recommends that infrastructure development of one port should not be at the cost of the 
development of another nearby port.             (Para 246) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 Observations of the Committee have been noted. 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee recommends that efforts must be concentrated on the development and  
expansion of infrastructure that would make water transport more attractive, instead of 
prioritizing road transport and turn already over -crowded highways into death traps. More 

9 
 
emphasis must be placed on the coast route and inland waterways as a mode of transport for 
hinterland cargo connectivity and its development must be made a priority.       (Para 247) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 Government declared 111 (including 5 existing and 106 new) National Waterways 
(NWs) spread over 24 states under the National  Waterways Act, 2016, which came into effect 
from 12 April, 2016 to promote Inland Water Transport (IWT) in the country.  
9.2 Out of these 111 waterways, NWs – 1, 2 and 3 are operational and cargo and passenger 
vessels are moving on them. The development works on NW-4 under Phase-I had commenced in 
2017 and pre-project activities have been initiated on NW-5.   
9.3 In addition, Government is implementing the Jal Marg Vikas Project (JMVP) at an 
estimated cost of Rs. 5369.18 crore for capacity augmentation of navigation on National 
Waterway-1 (NW -1) on the Haldia – Varanasi stretch of Ganga -Bhagirathi- Hooghly River 
System with the technical and financial assistance of the World Bank. The salient features of the 
project are construction of three multimodal term inals at Haldia (West Bengal), Sahibganj 
(Jharkhand), Varanasi (U.P.) and two intermodal terminals at Kalughat (Bihar), Ghazipur (U.P.); 
five pairs of Ro -Ro terminals at Rajmahal (Jharkhand) -Manikchak (West Bengal), Samdaghat 
(Jharkhand)-Manihari (Bihar), Kahalgaon-Tintangha (Bihar), Hasnapur -Bakhtiyarpur (Bihar),  
Buxer (Bihar)-Saraikota (U.P.); and  one new navigational lock at Farakka (West Bengal). JMVP 
is scheduled to be completed in March, 2023. 
9.4. Based on the outcome of techno -economic feasibility and Detailed Project Reports 
(DPRs) prepared for new 106 NWs, technical interventions are being planned for safe navigation 
and shipping on technically viable NWs. As per the DPRs completed so far for the new NWs, 36 
NWs have been found to be technically viable.  
Cargo Evacuation from Indian Ports in Terms of Transport Mode 
Recommendation/Observation  
10. Furthermore, the Committee recommends that evacuation of cargo to and from the port 
areas have to be properly synchronized so that the inter -modal network  functions smoothly. 
Road and rail connectivity form an integral part of the port infrastructure as inefficient 

10 
 
evacuation of cargo can undermine the entire operation of a port. In particular, containerization 
of cargo presupposes a seamless link with the road and rail network in an ‘end to end’ transport 
system. Congestion at ports results in delayed evacuation of cargo due to inadequate road and 
rail capacity. This adversely impacts the competitiveness of Indian industry. Port connectivity 
has ramifications that go beyond the operation of a port per se.          (Para 252) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 Observations of the Committee have been noted. 
Cabotage Laws 
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee recommends that a study must be conducted on the eff ects of Cabotage 
Laws in the shipping sector of the country. The Committee feels that research must be conducted 
as to why, given the reduction of the Cabotage laws, the Ports have witnessed a paltry level of 
transshipment. The policy of the Ministry in th is regard must be scientifically monitored and 
solutions to the same must be devised. The Committee extends its full cooperation in this matter 
as it feels that the success of transshipment hubs in the country is essential for the growth of 
Ports in India.                (Para 261) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Effects of relaxation of Cabotage laws are regularly being monitored particularly impact 
on transshipment. As per the recent trends (u pto December, 2018), the transshipment details are 
given as under: 
a.   The number of Indian EXIM containers handled in India has increased from 6.4 Million 
TEUs in April – December FY16 TO 7.9 Million TEUs in April – December FY19. 
b.  The overall container traffic in Indian ports has increased from 99 MMT in April – 
December FY16 to 126 MMT in April – December FY19 at a CAGR OF 8% in the backdrop of 
this, the growth of containers transshipped in Indian ports has increased by 33% CAGR in the 
same period indicating a significant increase in share of Indian ports in transshipment. 

11 
 
c.  The growth in container transshipment through Indian ports was 26% in tonnage terms 
and 25% in TEUs terms during April – December, 2018 against the corresponding period of last 
year. 
11.2 Overall, India aims to reduce transshipment of its contai ners at foreign ports such as 
Colombo, Singapore, Jebel Ali, etc, in order to reduce logistics costs for Indian traders and time 
and conserve valuable foreign exchange for the country, while simultaneously supporting 
economic growth and jobs in India that would otherwise be lost to other countries that handle 
Indian cargo during transshipment. 
11.3 Shipping lines do their route planning on an annual basis at the very least and changing 
schedule of services along with accompanying partners requires careful p lanning and operational 
management by them. It takes 2 to 3 years from commencement to firmly establish 
transshipment and hence the effect of recent cabotage relaxation by India coupled with an 
infrastructure push, rationalization of tariffs, procedure sim plification (such as inter -terminal 
transfer), etc, is expected to take some time to manifest.   
Environmental Issues with regards to Coastal Regulatory Zones (CRZ ) and National 
Green Tribunal (NGT) 
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee, however, f eels that coastal infrastructural projects involving wetlands 
include various players whose interests will be affected in one way or another. The Committee, 
in this regard, recommends that the stages included by the MoEF&CC whilst granting 
environmental clearance, eg. Expert Appraisal Committee, Public hearings, Term of Reference 
etc. are speeded up to ensure that ports are getting necessary clearances without hindrances. 
Given the development in science and technology, the Committee is of the opinion that effective 
solutions can be found for the developmental needs of the Ports.          (Para 267) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 The Ministry has taken several steps to expedite the process of environmental and forest 
clearances which inter -alia include delegatio n of powers to State Level Environment Impact 
Assessment Authority (SEIAA), introduction of system of online filing of applications for 

12 
 
Environment Clearance in the Ministry of Environment Impact Assessment Authority (SEIAA) 
from 03.07.2015, introduction o f single window clearance portal PARIVESH (Pro -Active and 
Responsive facilitation by Interactive, Virtuous and Environmental Single window Hub), online 
system of processing of environmental clearances, developing standard terms of reference for 
EIA Reports in 39 sectors, introduction of Short Message Service (SMS) functionality delegation 
of powers to Regional Empowered Committee (REC) to finally dispose of proposals seeking 
forest clearance to linear projects, etc. 
Development/ Promotion of Cruise Facilities at Ports 
Recommendation/Observation  
13. The Committee was informed that charging cruise ships on the basis of their tonnage, 
rather than on the number of passengers, is a dampener. The Committee recommends that cruise 
terminals may be d eveloped in all the city based P orts to attract foreign licenses and promote 
cruise tourism.               (Para 280) 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 A report was submitted by Indian Ports Association and on the issues raised by Indian 
Cruise liners and the following instructions were issued to all Major Ports of India: 
i. The Port charges have been reduced and all Major Ports are to charge a uniform single 
rate of $0.35 per GRT for first 12 hrs of stay.   Ports will not charge a ny other rate like 
berth hire, P ort dues, pilotage, p assenger fee etc from cruiseliners.   The above rate has 
been made effective from 3 rd November, 2017 and will remain in force for a period of 
three years. 
ii. Composite concession of 40% is given for domestic cruise vessel for calls between 75 -
100 in a year and  composite concession of 50% is given for domestic cruise vessels for 
calls exceeding 100 in a year for a period of three years i.e. up to 3-11-2019. 
13.2 Infrastructure status at Ports: 
 •           Cruise terminal at Chennai developed with ultramodern facilities. 

13 
 
 •           Mormugao Port has constructed state -of-the-art, three storied new cruise terminal 
building having the facility for custom, immigration and duty free shop for the passengers. 
 •           Mumbai Port is building a new cruise terminal at an estimated cost of USD 50 million 
and is likely to be completed by December, 2019. 
 •           Construction of a new cruise  terminal of i nternational standards is under progress at 
Cochin Port. The terminal is expected to operational by February, 2020. 
 •           New Mangalore Port- a full-fledged cruise terminal is functioning with all facilities for 
the cruise ships and passengers. 
 •           Ministry of Shipping  has provided 65 counters at five ports i n the immigration halls of 
the P orts to fac ilitate e -visa (15 each for Mumbai, Cochin and Mormugao and 10 each for 
Mangalore and Chennai). 
13.3 Also, The Ministry of Tourism provides Central Financial Assistance (CFA) under 
relevant schemes to State Governments/Union Territory Administrations and to Central Agencies 
for various tourism projects including cruise terminals and cruise vessels , subject to availability 
of funds. 
Promotion of Ro-Ro Operations 
Recommendation/Observation  
14. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the Ministry of Shipping  in developing RoRo 
operations and services in the country. The Committee, however, feels that more needs to be 
done as Ro -Ro services are integral to the economic prosperity of the nation and serve as a 
wonderful means of transport by utilizing the inland waterways in the country. In this regard, the 
Committee recommends that the Ministry must pick up the speed of the Sagarmala Project in 
order to make it viable and operational in the country. This will go a long way in improving the 
hinterland connectivit y, reducing transport costs and reducing travel time in terms of cargo 
management in the country.               (Para 282) 
Reply of the Ministry 

14 
 
14.1 Ministry of Shipping / IWAI has developed the following Ro-Ro terminals/ facilities in 
National Waterways (NWs). 
1. NW-1 (Ganga-Bhagirathi-Hugli river system): 
Government is implementing the Jal Marg Vikas Project (JMVP) for capacity augmentation 
of navigation on National Waterway -1 (NW-1) on the Haldia -Varanasi stretch with the 
technical and financial assistance of the World Bank to provide an assured depth of 2.2 to 3.0 
metres and a bottom width channel of 45 meters for at least 330 days in a year to make it 
navigate  for vessels upto 2000 Dead Weight Tonnage ( DWT). The salient features of the 
project are con struction of three multimodal terminals at  Haldia ( W.B), Sahibganj ( 
Jharkhand), Varanasi ( U.P) and two inter -model terminals at Kalughat ( Bihar), Ghazipur ( 
U.P.), five pairs of  Ro -Ro terminals at Rajmahal (JH) -Manikchak (WB),Samdaghat (JH) -
Manihari (B H) Kahalgaon -Tintangha ( Bh), Hasnapur -Bakhtiyarpur (Bh),Buxer (Bh) -
Saraikota (U.P); and one new navigational lock at Far akka (WB) alongwith other projects. 
Cabinet approved the JMVP on 3rd January, 2018 and loan agreement with the World Bank 
was signed on 2nd February, 2018. JMVP is scheduled to complete in March, 2023. 
2. NW-2 (river Brahmaputra in Assam):  
Ro-Ro service for providing connectivity  between North bank (Dhubri) and South bank 
(Hatsingimari) of river Brahmaputra. The Ro -Ro service has created a direct link between 
Assam and Meghalaya enabling trucks/ vehicle to avoid circuitous road route of approx.220 
km through Jogighopa Bridge. The regular Ro-Ro services between Dhubri and Hatsingimari 
are carried out w.e.f. 01.07.2017. 
On NW -2, a new Ro -Ro facility connectivity Neamati -Majuli island in Assam has be en 
launched by the IWAI on 12 th October, 2018. The Ro -Ro facility is provided on  IWAI 
vessels, Bhupen Hazarika having a capacity to carry 8 trucks and 100 passengers. It traverses 
a distance of 12. 7 Km on the river road route of 423 K m that trucks take from Neamati -
Majuli Island via Tezpur road bridge. 
3. NW-3 (West Coast Canal in Kerala):  

15 
 
 There are  2 nos. terminals viz., Bolghatty & Willingdon island developed in Cochin Port 
Trust limit for conta iner traffic through Ro -Ro/Lo-Lo service. This Ro -Ro service of 3.5 km 
waterway travel saves 18 km congested roads travel for container trucks  through Kochi city 
limits. 
NW-4 ( river Godavari, Krishna & Buckingham Canals in A.P. & T.N): Under Phase -I 
development, Ro-Ro services between Ibrahimpatnam and  Lingayapalam, for transportation 
of construction materials on NW -4 ( river Krishna) is already under operation, which is  on 
similar lines to  that of Dhubri and Hatsingimari. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

16 
 
CHAPTER II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DOES NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY 
Paradip Port 
PORT PERFORMANCE 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee notes that in order to improve berthing facilities, Eastern Quay -
I,II & III berthing projects have been taken up for capacity augmentation with an 
investment of Rs. 3500 Crores and execution timeline of December , 2019. The Committee 
is not aware of the initially approved cost of the project and original tim eline for its 
completion. It has often been seen that infrastructure development projects experience 
time and cost overruns. The Committee would , therefore, like to be apprised whether the 
Eastern Quay-I, II and III projects have witnessed any time overrun  and concurrent cost 
escalation as compared to the initially estimated project costs.       (Para 11) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1. The Estimated cost of the project viz., Mechanization of EQ -1, 2, 3 berths at 
Paradip Port on BOT basis stands at Rs. 1437.76 crores and the capacity is 30MTPA. The 
stipulated date of completion is 13.12.2020 and not December, 2019.  As such, there is no 
time and cost overrun.  A tabular statement regarding details of the project is given 
below:- 
 
Estimated 
Cost 
(Rs.Cr.) 
Cost as per 
Concession 
Agreement 
(Rs.Cr.) 
Signing of 
Concession 
Agreement 
Date of 
Award of 
Concession* 
Concession 
Period 
Construction 
Period 
1437.76 1412.76 02.05.2016 14.12.2017 14.12.2017 –
13.12.2047 
36 months 
(14.12.2017 – 

17 
 
(30 Years) 13.12.2020) 
 
*N.B. 1) Date of Award of Concession is the date in which all Conditions  Precedent are 
 fulfilled by the concessioning authority and concessionaire (including financial 
 closure). 
 2) As per the Concession Agreement, the Concession Period of 30 years 
 commences from th e Date of Award of Concession, which includes 36 months 
 construction period. 
Kolkata Port Trust and Haldia Dock Complex 
CONNECTIVITY 
Recommendation/Observation 
2. The Committee understands that these pre -independence era ports could not have 
envisioned the great strides in shipping during their inception. The infrastructure of the ports 
needs constant upgradation. Considering the fact that this was part of the mandate of 
modernization of Major Ports in India, the Committee notes the efforts made by the Por t 
authorities. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ports may be upgraded and 
modernized to suit the present needs, but with an outlook on future growth as well. The 
Committee hopes that work related to modernization of rail network, Ro -Ro service  between 
Kolkata and Howrah side, proposed ship repairing facility, development of parking area, 
modernization of container berths, development of outer terminals and the doubling of railway 
line between Haldia and Durgachak would be completed within the t argeted time frame. The 
decision on the Lock -gates and other constrains must be taken up with urgency and trials must 
not be delayed. Moreover, the modernization projects must have fixed target dates and efforts 
must be made to complete them within the tim e frame. Failure to do so will lead to increased 
costs and also affect the productivity and growth of the Port.          (Para 41) 
Reply of the Ministry 

18 
 
2.1 A well diversified shelf of investment, comprising various schemes is aimed at 
improvement of opera tional efficiency/capacity augmentation. The  schemes which include 
integrated development of infrastructure including road/rail connectivity/storage and yard 
logistics for faster aggregation/dispersal o f cargo traffic, setting up of r iverine terminals and 
floating Barge Jetties outside the impounded docks of HDC and floating cranes at sand heads to 
handle barge traffic emanating from/destined to the transshipment anchorages, setting up of 
LNG handling facilities, mechanization of berths,  integrated contain er handling at KDS and 
HDC, new VTM System alongwith AIS with interfacing/ integration, installation of RFID, 
augmentation of IT & IT enabled services, introduction of ERP and data logistics bank to 
facilitate ease of business, have been/are being taken up  through DBFOT /non -
PPP/IEBR/Contract/ mode etc. Some of these are already commissioned/under implementation, 
while the rest are in various stages of tendering etc.  
Mumbai Port Trust 
DEVELOPMENT OF CRUISE TOURISM 
Recommendation/Observation  
3. The Committee understands the constraints of Major Pots that are centered around 
major cities and their limitations caused by various factors such as population, traffic etc. The 
Committee notes various modernization projects initiated by the Mumbai Port Trust. The 
Committee recommends that a detailed a comprehensive study may be conducted to augment the 
cargo capacity of Mumbai Port while addressing the various constraints faced by the Mumbai 
Port at present. The Committee appreciates the efforts of the MbPT with reg ard to moving to 
Cruise terminals due to their capacity constraints in cargo handling. The Committee notes that 
the country has great potential for cruise tourism. In this regard, the Committee recommends 
that the Ministry of Shipping must take steps to en sure that process related to immigration, ease 
of business in terms of Cruise shipping, licenses etc. are simplified; Standard Operating 
Procedures (SOP), taxation etc. are in place and processes and permissions required in relation 
with PGA’s are simplifi ed. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Shipping  must 
pursue these with the Ministry of Home Affairs, Ministry of Finance etc. and every effort must be 
made to modernize and expand the cruise terminals.             (Para 58) 

19 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
3.1 Mumbai Port has been facing certain constraints in capacity augmentation like 
(i) Draft restrictions and Lock Gate at Indira Dock due to which larger vessels cannot be 
handled. 
(ii) Difficulty in mechanization is not possible due to more than 100 years old berth structure. 
(iii) Affection of Berthing and Un -berthing movements due to  presence of reef at Harbour 
wall. 
(iv) Evacuation of cargo by road being affected due to traffic problems in the city. 
3.2 A leading consultant has conducted the study of calculation of capacity augment action of 
Mumbai Port. In January, 2016, capacity of Mumbai Port was augmented by 2.5 MTPA by 
creation of Second Chemical Berth at Pir Pau. The present capacity of Mumbai Port is assessed 
by M/s. Mckinsey & Co. as 78.40 MTPA.  A new berth is being constructed at Jawahar Dweep 
for handling of Crude Oil. The capacity of this berth will be 22 MTPA. 
3.3 Regarding simplification of process for Cruise Tourism in Mumbai Port, there have been 
major concerns over the issues of GST/ customs duty/immigration etc of the cruise fraternity and 
necessary steps are being taken to address these concerns as below: 
(i) Custom Duty on consumables like food, cigarettes, alcohol and bunkers: 
3.4 International cruise ships with foreign passengers on -Board, call on Indian Ports enroute 
from one foreign Port to another foreign P ort. On such cruise ships, food, cigarettes, alcohols, 
etc. are consumed on -Board the ship by passengers/ tourists. Besides, ship also use fuel 
(bunkers) and lube oil, etc. while e ntering from international waters to Indian Custom waters for 
visiting Indian ports. Customs have issued a Circular dated 04.10.2018 clarifying that Cruise 
Ships have the legal obligation to pay the Customs Duty regarding con sumption of products 
including alcohol on payment of appropriate duty thereon. The cruise ship operators have 
expressed their deep resentment over this duty. Further , Cochin customs also issued notice dated 
08.08.2018 for payment of duty for the year 2016-17 and 2017-18 within 15 days. 

20 
 
3.5 It is proposed to approach Ministry of Finance keep the aforesaid notice under abeyance 
as Govt. of India is considering waiver/exemption of custom duty. 
(ii) GST exemption issue: 
3.6 Secretary (Finance) has been requested by Secretary (Shipping) to co nsider waiver/ 
exemption for certain period. 
(iii) Immigration clearance enroute: 
3.7 When two or more cruise vessels with more than 3000 passengers are scheduled to arrive 
at any port, the Immigration process takes too much time even with e -Landing Card ( eLC). 
Hence bureau of Immigration has been requested for considering deputing Immigration Officers 
for last foreign Port for organizing i mmigration clearance on board the cruise ve ssel by boarding 
from previous Port for seamless and timely immigration clearance. 
JawaharLal Nehru Port 
IMPROVEMENT OF INFRASTRUCTURE 
Creation of Customs Processing Zone 
Recommendation/Observation  
4. JNPT created parking yards for undocumented exports containers for all 
terminals of JNPT. These parking yards were converted to cu stoms processing areas 
w.e.f. 05.12.2016 as facility for Customs clearance and port documentation. The parking 
yard operation ensures that only containers that have received approval from Customs 
and are fully documented proceed to the terminal gate. This has brought in discipline at 
the port roads and contributed significantly in removing congestion and smooth entry for 
export containers.              (Para 78) 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1. The Para 78 gives details of initiative regarding ‘Creation of Custom s Processing 
Zones’ implemented by JNPT w.e.f. 05.12.2016. This initiative was implemented by 

21 
 
creating three separate Customs Processing Zones for three terminals viz., JNPCT, GTI 
and DP World. Subsequently port has developed ‘Centralized Parki ng Plaza’ me ntioned 
in Para 76 and  77 where the above mentioned three customs processing zones will be 
merged and a single custom processing facility will be made available. This new facility 
is expected to be fully operational by October, 2020. 
SIMPLIFICATION OF PROCESS 
Direct Entry 
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee appreciates the quantum leaps taken by JNPT in simplifying the 
processes of the Port ad its functioning.  These changes have been long pending and overdue.  
The Committee recommends that DPD and  DPE related pending projects are completed within 
the given schedule.  The systems employed by the Port may be carefully studied by the Ministry 
of Shipping  for using the same as a base for pilots in other Major Ports in the country, after 
tailoring them to suit individual port’s need.              (Para 88) 
Reply of the Ministry  
5.1 JNPT has taken several initiatives to promote DPD which are as under: 
i) Removed threshold of minimum volume criteria of 300 TEUs.  Importers with smaller 
volume can avail DPD. 
ii) Stopped the practice of high deposits demanded earlier by the PPP terminals. The DPD 
charges by the PPP terminals have been reduced to one shifting charge. 
iii) Simplified the registration process.  Registration at terminals now given based on only 
Customs permission. 
iv) DPD cell created in all terminals. 
v) All terminals started allotting a Common Uniform Code for DPD client to simplify the 
process from September 2018. 
vi) Facility for On -Wheel drawl of samples was created for DPD containers in the terminals   
leading to evacuation directly from terminals even for cargo requiring PGA NOC from June 
2018. 

22 
 
5.2 All terminals in JNPT are geared up to 80% DPD. 
5.3 JNPT has taken following initiatives to increase the percentage of Direct Port Entry 
(DPE) at JNPT:- 
(i)  Creation of Customs Processing Zones: JNPT created parking yards for undocumented 
export containers for all terminals of JNPT. These parking yards were converted to processing 
areas w.e.f. 05 -12-2016 as faci lity for Customs clearance and P ort documentation. The par king 
yard operation ensures that only containers that have received approval from customs and are 
fully documented proceed to the terminal gate.  
(ii)  Development of Centralized parking Plaza: In addition to the existing parking areas at 
JN Port, Port is developing Centralized Parking Plaza, measuring 45 ha. It is a ‘state of the art’ 
integrated facility which includes Customs clearance, parking for undocumented container 
trailers, dormitories for truck drivers and auto repairs zone . The facility will ensu re better 
facilitation to increase percentage of DPE. 
CARGO HANDLING FACILITIES 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee is pleased to note that steps and initiatives taken by the Visakhapatnam 
Port in order to improve its efficiencies. Furthermore, be ing with sufficient draft, the Committee 
is of the opinion that the hinterland connectivity must be improved via dry docks/ Ports, which 
will serve as assembly and stuffing units. The Committee also recommends that the Ministry of 
Shipping must encourage t he State Government to create SEZs around these dry docks to 
promote an environment of creating manufacturing units with easy access to the Port. The 
Committee is also of the opinion that these are essential to encourage and promote the growth of 
trade and  industry in the country and also a necessary input for the success of the “Make in 
India’ programme launched by the Government.                     (Para 116)          
Reply of the Ministry 
6.1 The primary hinterland of Port of Visakhapatnam is Ch hattisgarh, Jharkhand, Odisha and 
some areas of the National Capital Region (NCR Region). Cargo to these areas is moved by Rail 
which is moved through the Raipur Vizianagaram line (RV Line). Capacity augmentation of the 

23 
 
RV line by way of doubling and electrificati on is already taken up by the Railways 
commensurate to the demand from Port of Visakhapatnam. 
6.2 Cargo movement relating to the service centres located in other hinterland areas currently 
do not necessitate development of a dry port. 
6.3 An SEZ- Visakhapatnam Special Economic Zone (VSEZ) established in an area of 360 
acres of land in 1989 under the Ministry of Commerce is already functioning at Duwada in 
Visakhapatnam. 
6.4 Port of Visakhapatnam is contemplating development of a Free Trade Warehousing Zone 
(FTWZ) in an area of about 100 acres of land for which the feasibility study is already entrusted 
to IPA. 
Recommendation/Observation  
7. The Committee notes that the Visakhapatnam Port is a city port. While the rapidly 
increasing city limits points to the rising economic prosperity of the city, it becomes a bottleneck 
for the growth of the Port and reduces its efficiency. In this regard, the Committee feels that 
adequate steps must be taken and a blueprint must be made to ensure that the growth of the city 
limits does not impinge on the Port and its capacities. Moreover, the Port must devise exit roads 
and inroads to service the Port, which are independent of city traffic. These are plans for the 
foreseeable future which must be envisioned in order to ensure  that the Port is not encumbered 
by growing urbanization as is rampant in other major port cities.          (Para 117) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 Port of Visakhapatnam already developed detailed plan for development of integrated 
road and rail connectivity projects commensurate with the cargo handling capacity for hassle free 
movement of cargo without infringing the city traffic. 
7.2 An exclusive 4 lane Port connectivity road of 12.5 Km. connecting the Port to the NH- 16 
7 was developed through a JV with NHAI and in operation since 2007.   

24 
 
7.3 A Grade Separator from H-7 area of VPT to the port connectivity road bypassing the city 
traffic at convent junction is taken up at a cost of Rs.60 crores with Rs.30 crores funding from 
Sagarmala programme and work is in progress. 
7.4 Development of Flyover Bridge from sea horse junction area to dock area is proposed to 
be taken up under Sagarmala by IPRCL. 
7.5 The following road connectivity projects are approved under Bharatmala Programme for 
enhancing cargo evacuation and improve efficiency: 
7.6 Development of 4 to 6 lane road connecting VPT East Break Water to Sheelanagar 
Junction for effective evacuation of the cargo and connectivity to NH-16. 
7.7 Development of outer ring road from East Breakwater to Sheelanagar. 
7.8 Construction of Fly Over Bridge at Nathayyapalem (Mindi) on NH -16 to have direct rail 
connectivity to East Coast Railway from VPT Mindi Yard. 
1. Construction of fly over/under pass at Vizag Airport Junction to ensure smooth and 
continued free flow of container trawlers to/from MMLP (CONCOR). 
2. Port connectivity road – 4 lane road from East Break Water to convent junction. 
 
MODERNIZATION OF THE PORT 
Recommendation/Observation 
8. Given the mandate of the Port and its strategic position, the Committee is dismayed at the 
level of modernization in the Port over the years. The Port is a far cry from its optimum 
utilization. The underutilization of this port is a great loss to the country. The Committee 
recommends that a detailed study must be conducted, to evaluate th e needs and the requirements 
of the P ort in order to ensure that t he Port is efficiently utilized. Keeping in view the restricted 
hinterland and the numerous ports that compete for the same cargo, it is essential that VOCPT 
should devise its own business strategies.             (Para 137) 
Reply of the Ministry 

25 
 
8.1 The Port has taken several steps for modernization of the equipment and berth through 
PPPs. Consequently both the capacity and the productivity of the port have improved.  Container 
cargo handling in the Port is steadily increasing every year. 
8.2 Presently the Port is provided with 2 container berths of  1.1 MTEUs capacity. Since the 
Port has planned to become a transshipment hub , various steps have been taken as highlighted in 
reply to Para No. 126. 
8.3 Considering the need to handle bigger size vessels  the Port has also taken steps to widen 
the port entrance from 153m to 230m and the work will be completed by June, 2020. 
Kamarajar Port Limited 
CONNECTIVITY AND EVACUATION 
Road Connectivity 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee is of the opinion that the development of infrastructure must be a joint 
effort of the State Governments, the Ports and the Ministry of Shipping , including the Central 
Government, as it is integral to the development an d growth of the nation and integral to the 
economic prosperity to the States concerned and the nation at large. In view of this, the 
Committee applauds the efforts of the KPL authorities in bringing the various stakeholders to the 
table and is an example t hat must be followed by other Major Ports in developing their 
hinterland connectivity.               (Para 155) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. The Port will continue to focus 
on the development of port infrastructure. 
Deen Dayal Port Trust 
 
PROBLEMS AND BOTTLENECKS 
Recommendation/Observation  

26 
 
10. The Committee takes note of the hurdles faced by the Port and desires that the Port must 
take up the issues of connectivity projects with the NHAI and the State Govern ment in order to 
ensure that projects are completed on time without delays.           (Para 189) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 As per the Guideline issued by Ministry of Shipping, the work of Construction of R.O. B. 
at existing r ailway crossing at Km. 363/625  on NH -8A) (K.F.T.Z - Kandla road) is being 
executed by National Highway division. 
10.2 Deendayal Port Trust has deposited an amount of Rs. 50 lakhs to NHD for the 
engagement of a Consultant for feasibility study and preparation of Detailed Project Report. 
10.3 A work order for the work of "Consultancy Service for feasibility study and preparation 
of Detailed Project Report for the construction of ROB in lieu of existing Railway crossing at 
Km. 363/625 on NH -8A (K.F.T.Z. -Kandla road) in State of Gujarat" ha s been issued to DELF 
Consulting Engineers (India) Pvt. Ltd., Ahmedabad by the office of Executive Engineer, 
National Highway Division, Adipur vide Letter No. NH/AB/RPP/1406/2018 dated 14/12/2018. 
10.4 The work is on preliminary stage and a joint meeting w ith the officials of NHD, Adipur 
was held in regards of the work in the office of CE, DPT on 6/2/2019. 
10.5 After the commencement of work, hurdles, if any  faced by DPT or NHAI will be 
resolved mutually. 
New Mangalore Port Trust 
MODERNIZATION OF CARGO HANDLING MECHANISM 
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee takes note of the efforts taken by the NMPT to improve and modernize the 
infrastructure of the Port in order to increase the efficiency of the Port. The Committee 
understands that the infrastructure projects of the Port such as creating additional storage area 
got affected due to limited land availability within the specified area of the Port.        (Para 200) 
Reply of the Ministry 

27 
 
11.1 Port proposes to construct two additional godowns of approximate area of 5000 sqm each 
in the financial year 2019-2020 and also 10 acres of cement concrete pavement to store the clean 
cargo. 
Mormugao Port Trust 
 
PERFORMANCE 
Recommendation/Observation  
12. The Committee notes the efforts of the MPT in increasing the  efficiency of the Port, given 
the constraints imposed on the Port. The Committee understands the need for develo pment of 
infrastructure of the P ort. The Committee was informed by various stakeholders of the shipping 
industry in Goa that there is an urgent  need for improvement in the rail and road connectivity in 
MPT in order to ensure faster evacuation of cargo, better connectivity to the hinterland and 
avoid the movement of vehicles carrying cargo through congested city roads. They emphasized 
the need to make the amenities given to cruise tourists at par with global standards. They 
stressed on the need for doubling of railway line in Mormugao Port. The stakeholders also 
highlighted the need to compensate the Port for any monetary loss that the Port might i ncur for 
the grant of any concessional tariff for the promotion of cruise tourism. They impressed upon the 
need to ensure that the facilities provided with regards to Cruise Tourism are made world class 
so as to imprint a good image of Goa in the minds of the tourists.        (Para 215) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 There is an urgent need for improvement in the rail and road connectivity to hinterland in 
order to insure faster evacuation of cargo, better connectivity to the hinterland and avoid the 
movement o f vehicles carrying cargo through congested city roads. They (trade fraternity) 
stressed on the need for doubling of railway line in Mormugao Port. 
 
12.2 Doubling of Railway Line from Goa to Hospet - CRS senctions for easing restrictions on 
Castle-Rock-Kulem are being followed up vigorously. Majorda to Madgaon considered for 
automatic signaling. Work of By-Pass between Konkan Railways and Majorda to be initiated. 

28 
 
12.3 Construction of 4 Lane Road from Verna Junction on NH -17 to the Port (road 
connectivity to hinterland): work is expected to be completed by October, 2019. 
12.4 They (trade fraternity) emphasized the need to make amenities given to the cruise tourists 
at par with global standards. 
12.5 They (trade fraternity) impressed upon the need to ensure th at the facilities provided with 
regards to cruise tourism are made world class so as to imprint a good image of Goa in the minds 
of the tourists. Necessary infrastructural requirements must be developed in order to harness the 
full potential of the Port as a passenger port. 
12.6 MoPT has built a dedicated cruise terminal with the financial assistance from the 
Ministry of Tourism. Cruise vessels are berthed at dedicated cruise berth which is 450 mtrs long 
and has an alongside draft of 8.5 mtrs. 
12.7 The stakeholders also highlighted the need to compensate the Port for any monetary loss 
that Port might incur for the grant of any concessional tariff for the promotion of cruise tourism. 
 
12.8 Ministry of Shipping has directed all Major Ports to charge a composite rate of US $ 0.35 
per GRT for the first 12 hrs to the Cruise Vessels (Foreign or Coastal). 
 
12.9 Reduction in revenue on account of revision of charges for cruise vess el is approximately 
Rs 10 crores per annum which may be compensated.  
Major Issues Ailing Cargo Management In The Major Ports 
CONTAINER TRAFFIC 
Recommendation/Observation  
13. The Committee is of the opinion that existing and new ports should align their capacity 
expansion in line with p rojected increase in coastal shipping volumes. Provisio n of a dedicated 
berth for coastal shipping should also be looked into in order to promote coastal                  
shipping.               (Para 219) 
Reply of the Ministry 

29 
 
13.1 The Government has extended the period of Coastal Berth Scheme beyond 12th Fiv e 
Year Plan i.e., from 1st April, 2017 to 31 st March, 2020. The scope of the scheme has also been 
enlarged to cover the cost of preparation of Detail Project Report (DPR) and ca pital dredging at 
Major Ports. The coastal Berth Scheme provides financial assi stance to Major/Non-Major Ports/ 
State maritime Board/ State Governments for creation of infrastructure to promote m ovement of 
cargo/passengers by s ea/National Waterways. Sagarmala Programme aims to double share of 
domestic waterways (coastal and inland) b y 2025. The Coastal Berth Scheme is one of the key 
enablers towards this objective. The projects sanctioned under the scheme will create  
approximately 10 MMTPA capacity  for handling coastal cargo. In order to promote coastal 
shipping, almost all Major Port s ha ve initiated action towards providing dedicated berthing 
facilities for handling coastal cargo. 
DRAFT LIMITATIONS 
Recommendation/Observation  
14. The Committee recommends that new terminals at Tuticorin, Ennore etc. must be 
developed with a renewed zeal and vigour in a careful and strategic manner, so that they will act 
as active competitors to operational container Ports in Sri Lanka.          (Para 225) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 VOC Port is strategically located close to the East West International s ea route. 
Considering that it is close to the International sea route at the Southern tip of Indian sub 
continent and to the great East West international shipping route, the port has great potential to 
attract transshipment containers.  Accordingly the P ort is taking all necessary steps to become a 
transshipment Port. 
14.2 Consultants were appointed to study the traffic and forecast the requirements of 
infrastructure development. The Consultant has mentioned in their report that there is a good 
potential f or transshipment of containers in VOCPT while another Consultant has studied the 
traffic projection and provided the forecast for transshipment. Based on these studies and further 
report from IIT, VOCPT has also proposed to develop an outer harbour for pro viding 2 
containers terminals with a quay length of more than 1000m with dredging upto (-) 15.5m in first 
phase. 

30 
 
Efficiency of the Port Sector Operations 
Recommendation/Observation  
15. The Committee feels that low productivity and high vessel turnaround t ime at Indian 
ports are due to: (i) Low level of mechanization and insufficient draft; (ii) Skewed handling 
capacity for different types of cargo; and (iii) Infrastructure constraints in hinterland 
connectivity. It has been observed that lagging behind oth er countries on performance 
parameters pushes up the cost of trade and renders Indian ports less competitive. Non -Major 
Ports have fared well, ensuring quicker turnaround by investing in the infrastructure to handle 
larger vessels. Considering the strategic location of India’s Major Ports and their importance to 
trade, there is an opportunity to improve their performance to meet global benchmarks. Most of 
the Major Ports have high Turnaround Time  even while the utilization level is low and only a 
few have the ability to handle bigger cape -size vessels. The shipping industry is moving towards 
cape-size vessels. So, it is important that India develops cape handling capability at its key ports 
to ensure economics of scale for the trade.             (Para 231) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 While increasing the capacity of major ports, Ministry of Shipping  has been striving to 
improve the operational efficiencies through mechanization, digitization and process 
simplification. The Average Turnaround Time during 2018 -19 improved to 59.85 Hrs from 
96.00 Hrs during 2014 -15. The Average Output Per Ship Berthday has increased from 12458 
Tonnes in 2014-15 to about 16434 Tonnes during 2018-19.   
15.2 Ministry of Shipping had identified various parameters under Ease of Doing B usiness for 
reducing dwell time and transaction costs in the Major Ports. These include elimination of 
manual forms, accommodation for laboratories to Participating Government Agencies (PGAs), 
Direct Port Delivery, Installation of Container Sca nners, e -delivery orders, RFID based g ate-
automation System, etc. These initiatives have already been implemented at Jawaharlal Nehru 
Port Trust (JNPT) and are being taken up in other Major Ports. 
15.3 Lack of draft in some of the Major Ports has been an area of concern, which is hampering 
handling of larger vessels and consequently affecting the growth in cargo traffic. A great focus is 
being given on the issue of enhancing the draf t of ports. 10 of the 12 Major P orts have already 

31 
 
achieved a draft of 14 mtrs or above.  Steps are being taken to further increase the draft in the 
Major Ports so that they are able to handle larger vessels and are in a position to compete wi th 
major international leading Ports.  
Automation / Digitization of Port Management 
Recommendation/Observation  
16. The Committee feels that traffic congestion at port gates is another critical problem as it 
presently has little or no automation. The entry and exit of vehicles and drivers through the gates 
of container terminal should be automated. In this  regard, the Committee recommends that 
Optical Character Recognition (OCR) system can be installed at the terminal gates and driver’s 
biometric identity and their authentication documents could be stored in a smart card which he 
can flash at the counter to  gain entry. Furthermore, it would also be useful to implement 
Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) solutions which are driven by an integrated suite of 
software that supports the basic internal business process of any organization. More 
importantly, a Port Community System (PCS), in terms of a single technology -based platform, 
which will bring together all stakeholders and shares information is essential. An -‘e-custom’ 
solution could also be developed later. While implementation of PCS has been already initi ated, 
its rollout has not been very successful. Thus, before embarking on such plans, focus should be 
on building the foundation and developing stakeholder capabilities.        (Para 241) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) sys tem installed in most of Major Ports to 
enhance security, remove bottlenecks for seamless movement of traffic across Port gates. The 
RFID system automatically identifies the trucks and drivers without the need to stop at the Port 
gates for manual checking. 
16.2 Enterprise Resource Planning (ERP) implementation will improve the port operations as 
well as flow of information across all levels. Proposed system would aid in building a holistic 
port ecosystem that would improve the decision making process, help planning realistic future 
scenarios and increase performance and return-on-investment in the long run.  

32 
 
16.3 Upgradation of the c entralized web based -Port Community System (PCS) to a new 
version PCS1x has been done.  It will make available robust message e xchange platform that 
unites trade on a single platform. It will bring in industry specific functionality such as cargo 
booking, vehicle booking system, e -seal, e -VGM, e -Payment, e -Invoice, custom clearance, 
warehousing, etc as latch on solutions. This wil l lead to reduction of dwell time, cost and 
facilitate ease of doing business. 
Cargo Evacuation from Indian Ports in Terms of Transport Mode 
Recommendation/Observation  
17. The Committee, in this regard, recommends that ports must continuously take measure s 
to help their shipping lines and other partners within the port system to battle increased 
competition and adjust to new trends in world trade. Dedicated Freight Corridors hold key to 
intermodal transport and hence need to be completed on priority basis.  Moreover, the inland 
waterways system needs to be renovated as cargo evacuation by water is cheaper and cleaner, 
which reduces costs and port congestion and brings in efficiency. The shifting of cargo from 
road to train waterways will be environment -friendly and will also help to lower carbon 
emissions.                 (Para 250) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 Government is implementing the Jal Marg Vikas Project (JMVP) for the capacity 
augmentation of navigation on National Waterway-1 (NW-1, Haldia-Varanasi) with the technical 
and financial assistance of the World Bank. The waterway (NW -1) has an interface with Kolkata 
Port and Haldia Dock Complex and could help in decongestion of port area facilitating IWT 
from the port zone. Under JMVP, multimodal terminals (MMTs) are being constructed at 
Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh), Sahibganj (Jharkhand) and Haldia (West Bengal) and intermodal 
terminals (IMTs) at Ghazipur (Uttar Pradesh) and Kalughat (Bihar). Inland Waterways Authority 
of India (IWAI) under the Ministry of Shipping is the implementing agency. 
17.2 While the work on the multimodal terminal at Varanasi has been completed as per 
schedule and the terminal was inaugurated by the  Hon’ble Prime Minister on 12 th November, 
2018. Land acquisition process for Ghazipur intermodal terminal is ongoing and out of the 8.917 

33 
 
ha of land required for the terminal, 5.103 ha has been acquired by the State Government and 
handed over to IWAI.   
17.3 Similarly, NW-3 in Kerala has an interface with Cochin Port and IWT could be utilized 
for decongestion of Cochin Port. 
Recommendation/Observation  
18. There is a need to allocate the regional distribution of cargo to different modes of land 
transport. Though in certain cases of bulk cargo, it is easy to identify the mode for a particular 
cargo at a particular port and assumptions regarding percentage split have to be made in 
respect of cargo such as POL, LPG, fertilizer, fertilizer raw material, other bulk cargo, 
containers and break -bulk cargo. These assumptions need to be made depending upo n the 
features of the respective regions, nature of cargo, quantum of cargo and the spread of 
hinterland.                  (Para 253) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 Observations of the Committee have been noted. 
Containerization 
19. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the need of the hour is to have infrastructure 
that can support seamless movement of cargo across all modes without any delay. We need to 
create common user facilities where these models can be executed efficiently at a competitive 
price. To  harness the full potential of inter modal transport, a legal framework and 
financial/regulatory incentives need to be put in place.          (Para 259) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 A new Special Purpose Vehicle, namely Indian Port Rail Corporation Limited h as been 
set up as a public limited company to undertake last mile connectivity projects in Major Ports so 
as to improve their handling capacity and efficiency.  Connectivity issues have been a major 
stumbling block to the sector as it involves integrated p lanning and co -ordination with various 
governmental agencies at various levels ( State, Centre , local authorities for land, etc). The 

34 
 
existing connectivity may be analyzed by using Geographic Information System (GIS) and the 
constraints may be removed structurally so that the cargo movement becomes seamless. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

35 
 
CHAPTER III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF 
THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Paradip Port 
PORT PERFORMANCE 
Recommendation/Observation 
1. The Committee also recommends that a stringent monitoring mechanism be put in place 
so that there are no instances of tardiness and inefficiency in execution and the project is 
executed within the approved cost and designated time frame.                             (Para 12) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1. The recommendation of the Committee has been noted. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
1.2. Mere noting  the Committee’s recommendation for putting in place a stringent 
monitoring mechanism will not suffice. The Ministry should have mentioned specific action 
taken in this regard. The Committee desire s details of the  concrete steps taken to address 
the recurring problem of delay and cost escalation in implementation of projects.  
Recommendation/Observation  
2. The Commi ttee understands that the world is moving increasingly towards renewable 
energy and it is now popular practice to attempt to reduce the dependency on fossil fuels and 
coal. Renewable energy is the call of hour. Whilst applauding the efforts of industries t o go 
green, its effect on cargo movement and traffic movement cannot be ignored. In this regard, the 
Committee desires that the Paradip Port must find a way to move away from old business models 
and try and cater to a new market that is garnered to creatin g and using clean and efficient 
energy.                       (Para 15) 
Reply of the Ministry 

36 
 
2.1 PPT has taken initiative to move away from the old business models and is trying to cater 
to a new market that is garnered to creating and using clean and efficient energy. 
2.2 As a step towards this initiative, a BOT berth has been commissioned on May, 2018 with 
a capacity of 5 MMTPA to handle clean cargo including containers. PPT is trying to handle more 
of value added products and to reduce its dependency on fossil fuels and coal. 
 
Further recommendation/observation: 
2.3 The Committee would urge upon the Ministry to devise a tariff incentive scheme for 
the green ships visiting the Port and implement the scheme through the Environmental 
Shipping Index Administration. 
2.4 The Ministry of Shipping in coordination with Ministry of Renewable Energy 
should also work towards establishment of Wind Farms  and Solar Panels, wherever 
possible near the harbors to reduce the burden on non-renewable resources of energy. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
3. The Committee takes note of the efforts made by the Paradip Port to create a synergized 
unit of economic activity in the Port. However, for the modernization to succeed these must be 
completed within a stipulated timeframe and th e economics of scale must also be considered in 
order to ensure the cost effectiveness for all the stakeholders involved. Connectivity is an issue 
which must be given utmost importance and must be taken into serious consideration. Increased 
State-Centre Co ordination, along with Inter -Ministerial coordination, with the Ministry of 
Railways and Ministry of Road Transport & Highways is the need of the hour.          (Para 17) 
Reply of the Ministry  
3.1 All the modernization projects of the Port like Multipurpo se clean cargo berth on BOT 
basis, New Iron Ore Berth on BOT basis, Mechanization of EQ -1,2 & 3 for handling export coal 
cargo, Development of new Coal berth for hand ling import Coal cargo, Optimization of Inner 
Harbour and construction of Western Dock hav e been taken up. The Port is taking initiative to 
complete these projects within the scheduled period to ensure the c ost effectiveness for the 
stakeholders involved. 
Further recommendation/observation: 

37 
 
3.2. The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of completion of modernisation 
projects alongwith the details of funds released and utilized so far. The Ministry should 
also elaborate upon the initiatives taken to complete these projects within scheduled time 
period. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
4. The Committee takes note of the steps taken by the P ort to i ncrease its evacuation  
capacities. Ports are integral to the increased economic activity of an area and play a major role 
in the prosperity of a region. In this respect, the connectivity of Port t o and from the various 
industrial units in the hinterland is an issue of grave importance. The Committee recommends 
that the Ministry of Shipping  should take up the issues pertaining to 42 -82 kms of H aridaspur-
Paradip line with the State Government of Odis ha and Ministry of Railways for removing the 
local level obstacles. The Committee desires that a dedicated mechanism be put in place for 
coordination and expeditious completion of 42 -82 Km of Haridaspur -Paradip railway line. The 
Committee hopes that the An gul-Sambalpur Railway line doubling work will be completed on 
time. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Shipping  must strive for greater 
coordination between the State Government concerned and the Ministry of Railway to ensure 
seamless connectivity with regards to maintenance of the railway lines and regular up gradation 
of the lines.                      (Para 20) 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
4.1 Haridaspur-Paradip Railway line is nearing completion. Physical progress of the work is 
85% and this projec t is being monitored at all levels. There has been substantial progress on the 
Angul-Sambalpur railway doubling line, which is being constructed by East Coast Railways. 
 
Further recommendation/observation: 
4.2. The reply does not indicate the progress of Angul-Sambalpur railway doubling line. 
The Committee therefore, recommends that, a detailed report of the progress be provided 
with the details of funds released and utilized so far alongwith the timeline for completion  
of the project. 

38 
 
4.3. The Committee also recommends  that detailed N ote indicating  the evacuation 
capacities of other Major ports alongwith the steps being taken to upgrade such capacities 
be provided to it. 
Mumbai Port Trust 
DEVELOPMENT OF CRUISE TOURISM 
Recommendation/Observation  
5. The Committee takes cognizance of the fact that MbPT has large land holdings which 
have been encroached upon. The Committee is of the opinion that these land holdings are prime 
real estate especially in a city like Mumbai which is subject to scarcity of space and such large 
holdings are rare. The Committee recommends that the MbPT should take affirmative steps to 
repose the encroached land and utilize the said land holdings to construct schools, state -of-the-
art hospitals and specialty hospitals etc., to cater to the employees as well as the general public.    
                  (Para 59) 
Reply of the Ministry 
5.1 Mumbai Port Trust has about 20 hectares of encroached land with about 20,000 of slum 
dwellers scattered around MbPT’s water front operational areas and aro und the Roads and 
Infrastructure land of Mumbai Port Trust. The prime land holding of Mumbai Port is being 
cleared of encroachment. For prevention of encroachments on MbPT land, all vacant plots are 
protected by private security guards and also compound wa ll have been erected to protect most 
of vacant plots. Further, about 9.06 ha. o f land has been made encroachment-free by undertaking 
removal programs in the last two years and th ese vacated areas are also being protected by 
private security to prevent re-occurrence of encroachment. 
5.2 The Government of Maharashtra by Notification No. TPB -4317/492/CR-289/2017/UD-
11 dated 23.04.2018, has declared Mumbai Port Trust as Special Planning Authority (“the SPA”) 
for its area 966.30 Hectare along the Eastern Waterfront of Mumbai as specified therein. 
Further recommendation/observation: 

39 
 
5.3.   The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry that about 20 hectares of land 
belonging to Mumbai Port Trust has been encroached upon and the prime land holding of 
Mumbai Port is being cleared of encroachment. However, the Ministry has not mentioned 
the time frame within which the encroached land would be cleared and  the manner in 
which the land would be put to use for the development of various facilities to cater to the 
needs of general public. The Committee therefore, desires to be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard. 
JawaharLal Port Trust 
IMPROVEMENT IN INFRASTRUCTURE 
Dry Port 
Recommendation/Observation  
6. The Committee appreciates the efforts of JNPT in increasi ng hinterland connectivity.  
The Committee strongly feels that this connectivity must also be extended to other States, 
especially the landlocked states in the North and North West of India and State in Peninsular 
India for e.g. Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh, and Chhattisgarh.  This is integral to the ‘Make in 
India’ programme of the Government.  The Committee emphasizes the need for ensuring 
connectivity of the hinterland to Major Ports in India via road and rail in a cost -efficient 
manner.  This is made possi ble through dry ports and docks which act as an aggregation site of 
manufactured commodities.  This will also promote economic activities throughout the country, 
instead of concentrating economic activities to a particular region.  Dry Ports are also a 
solution to the problem of transportation of perishable agricultural produce in the country. This 
will ensure increased economic activity in the remotest corners of the country.  The Committee, 
therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Shipping , along with t he JNPT, Ministry of Road 
Transport & Highways and the Ministry of Railways and the State Governments to work on 
increasing hinterland connectivity via Dry Ports.  This will go a long way in increasing 
containerization and trade activities of the Port, all  the while increasing employment 
opportunities in the hinterland.                (Para 71) 
7. The Committee notes that Railways have the widest range of connectivity in the country.  
The Committee feels that the Ministry of Shipping  must make more concerte d efforts with the 

40 
 
Ministry of Railways and State Governments in order to ensure that Railway lines are upgraded 
to be able to carry the cargo load.  Moreover, efficiency must be maintained in order to ensure 
client trust in the Railways.  The Committee takes notes of the proactive efforts made by JNPT 
and the Ministry of Shipping in developing the Direct Freight Corridor.  The Committee desires 
that there should be fixed completion date which must be adhered to.  This is necessary in order 
to ensure the viability of the project and to prevent the project from running over the budget and 
ensure that the funding is sufficient.               (Para 75) 
Reply of the Ministry 
7.1 JN Port is presently well connected with hinterland through 46 ICDs, situated through the 
country. The construction of western corridor of DFC will further ease the access to western and 
northern regions of country. The r ailways have informed that DFC connectivity to JNPT will be 
completed by March, 2020.  
7.2 By developing the two hubs, all low volume destination containers would be evacuated 
immediately from the Port on a single train and then further moved on to their final destinations.  
7.3 A hub at Khatuwas (Rajasthan) would cater to 17 ICD destinations around 100 kms 
vicinity in Nor th India and a hub at Jakhawada (Gujarat) would cater to 4 ICD destinations in 
Western India. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
7.4    The Committee recommends that the  connection from P ort to hinterland through 
corridor must be seamless, and this can be  achieved through integrated planning  of the 
road, water and rail  hinterland connections in the P ort area. Transport corridors to the 
hinterland should be multimodal with developed inland logistics zones including 
appropriate warehouses and other services. 
7.5 The Ministry’s reply is not clear about the status of development of dry P orts in the 
country and therefore, the Committee  desires to be apprised of the details of operational 
dry Ports. 

41 
 
7.6  The Committee would like the Ministry to apprise it of the steps taken state-wise to 
address the challenges faced by landlocked states in the country while transporting goods 
and cargo from railways to the Ports. 
DIGITIZATION OF ACTIVITIES: 
(d) E-Delivery Orders (E-DO) 
Recommendation/Observation  
8. The Committee lauds the effort of the JNPT towards digitization of its activities.  Lack of 
digitization was a major bottleneck to the increased productivity of the Port and often cited as an 
area which needs greater implementation.  The digitization of Form -13, e -delivery, container 
tracking and RFID based gate -entry and exit has been integral to the success of the digitization 
and the Port has reaped dividends stemming from this exercise.  The Committee feels that the 
digitization of Ports and its allied services is in tegral to ensure the growth of the sector and 
ensure the confidence of major ship-liners.               (Para 94) 
Reply of the Ministry 
8.1 Port is well connected electronically with all its stakeholders and all transactions are done 
online without any pap er work. Import Advance List (IAL) & Export Advance List (EAL) from 
shipping lines are received through mail.  The messages exchange with Customs is through PCS -
ICEGATE link. The system is robust enough to take the transactions load and is maintained and 
reviewed from time to time. The entry of container vehicles in to the Terminal is through a fully 
digitalized “Automated Gate Solution”. In order to reduce the delivery time of import containers 
JNPT has facilitated the E -invoice from shipping lines, E -payment from importers and E -
Delivery orders from shipping lines. The Port will continue with its efforts to reduce time and 
cost in EXIM transactions in association with Government agencies & other stakeholders. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
8.2   The C ommittee though appreciates the efforts of the Ministry but the Port 
congestion, shipping line issues and charges, regulatory clearances, customs clearances, 
documentation and paperwork  are the major issues that result in detention and 
demurrage charges in curred by importers . Therefore, instead of looking at these 

42 
 
parameters separately, it would be better if the Ministry frames a policy by looking at the 
entire trade activity holistically – which includes documentation, shipping lines, port 
operations, traders, policies and laws of trade, and service providers like CFS, stevedores, 
rail and road transporters, and terminal operators.  
Visakhapatnam Port Trust 
NEW INITIATIVES 
Recommendation/Observation  
9. The Committee notes that Visakhapatnam Port faces inte nse competition from 
neighboring private ports like Gangavaram which employs predatory pricing and that it is an 
issue which needs careful study and consideration. Tariff for the services rendered at Major 
Ports and the terminals are regulated by the Tarif f Authority at Major Ports (TAMP), where as 
private ports are not bound by the same regulations and are thus free to determine their tariff 
rates. This robs the Major Ports of a level playing field in order to compete with the private 
ports. The Committee, therefore, recommends that Government should intervene to create a level 
playing field for the Major ports and a supportive environment must be created in order to 
ensure that our Major Ports like Vishakhapatnam Port can withstand the stiff competition. 
     (Para 106) 
Reply of the Ministry 
9.1 Tariff for the services rendered by Major Ports as well as private terminals operating 
therein are governed by different Guidelines formulated by the Tariff Authority for Major Ports 
from time to time under Section 1 11 of MPT Act 1963.  The following measures are taken by 
VPT to have competitive advantage over neighboring ports: 
i). Deepening of outer harbour to ( -)20.1 meters enabling handling of Supercape vessels 
with a draft upto 18.1 meters and inner harbour to ( -)16.1 meters enabling handling of 
fully laden Panamax vessels of 14.5 meters draft. 
ii). Development of state-of-the art mechanized handling facilities to handle dry bulk cargoes 
like iron ore and coal  

43 
 
iii). Undertaking complete end to end logistic services for transpor tation of cargo as per 
users’ requirement.  VPT has taken up providing total logistic solution for transportat ion 
of approximately 2 Million tonnes of Thermal coal from mine heads in MCL/Ib Valley to 
the power plant of TANGEDCO in Tamil Nadu.  Similar serv ice of providing total 
logistic solution for import of 2 MMTPA coking coal to the Nagarnar Steel Plant of 
NMDC is being pursued. 
iv). Rationalized the storage schedule by increasing the free time for storage of cargo at the 
two stressed private terminals viz., VGCB and AVCTPL to obviate telescopic storage 
charges as compared to the neighboring private port based on the recommendations of the 
Committee cons tituted by Ministry of Shipping,  duly adhering to the provisions of the 
respective Concession Agreements. 
v). Providing discount on terminal charges and waiver of storage charges in respect of iron 
ore traffic. 
vi). Providing concessions in vessel related charges in respect of Container vessels. 
vii). Reducing Port costs by removing cargo handling levy in respect of certain cargoes. 
 
Further recommendation/observation: 
9.2   The Committee takes note of the measures taken to enhance competitive advantage 
of VPT. However, the reply of the Ministry does not address the concerns of the 
Committee about lack of a level playing field in terms of tariff fixing. The Committee 
would therefore like the Ministry to c ommission a detailed study to ass ess the extent of 
competition prevailing for provision of P ort services by VPT vis-à-vis the private P orts 
alongwith base tariff fixation on the  standard capacity created and also efficient cost of 
operating such facilities thereon. 
MODERNIZATION OF PORT FACILITIES 
Recommendation/Observation  
10. The Committee is, however, constrained to note that the inflexible and rigid regulatory 
framework viz., tariff and Concession Agreements in respect of the PPP projects do not facilitate 
adaptation with the changing market environment. There are no provisions to cater and adapt to 
measures such as changing the cargo profile, restructuring of tariffs at the PPP terminals etc. In 

44 
 
this regard, the Committee feels that the atmosphere around PPP needs to be more conducive to 
this form of investment to encourage growth in terms of capital infrastructure without stressing 
on the Government resources. The Committee, therefore, recommends that an environment to 
nurture and encourage PPPs must be set in place. This is necessary to ensure that the Major 
Ports are able to come into their own as profitable units. Whilst there is legislation in place to 
encourage PPP, the present laws must be amended to keep room for changing circumstances in 
the shipping sector and in the global scene.             (Para 111) 
Reply of the Ministry 
10.1 As already stated in reply to Para No.106 of the above, VPT has rationalized the storage 
schedule by increasing the free time for storage of cargo at the two stressed PPP terminals viz., 
VGCB and AVCTPL to obviate telescopic storage charges as compar ed to the neighbouring 
private Port based on the recommendations of the Committee constituted by MoS; duly adhering 
to the provisions of the respective Concession Agreements. 
10.2 The Union Cabinet has approved  amendments in the Model Concession Agreement 
(MCA) in January , 2018 for new PPP projects in Major Ports to make the  Port Projects more 
investor-friendly and make investment climate in the Port Sector more attractive duly addressing 
some of the intricate issues relating to divesting equity by the developers, reducing land rents, 
royalty payment etc. among other things. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
10.3   With the opening up of the Indian economy, private sector participation in Major 
Ports ha s played an important role in  terms of  infusion of funds, induction of latest 
technology and addition of capacity and therefore successful working of  the PPP model is 
essential for construction and maintenance of Ports and harbours and improved 
management practices therein. However, the logistics industry and the global economy are 
dynamic. The Committee in P ara 111 of its 269 th Report, had recommended  that there 
should be flexibility in the PPP model in order to effectively respond to the changes taking 
place in such dynamic situation. Though the Ministry in its reply has stated that the Union 
Government has approved amendments in the Model Concession Agreement for the new 
PPP projects in the Major Ports to make the Port projects more investor - friendly and the 
investment climate in the Port sector more attractive, it has not provided crucial 

45 
 
information to the Committee on key aspects of the flexibilit y for decision making in the 
PPP model. The Committee, therefore, desires to be updated in this regard.  
VOC Port Trust 
TRAFFIC 
Recommendation/Observation  
11. The Committee feels that the Port which was planned as a transshipment hub, to 
facilitate container shipment, has now been reduced to a port which deals with bulk cargo. It is 
disheartening to learn that at present the Port subsists on the cargo of a small Company, the 
traffic of which is far below the potential of the Port.          (Para 123) 
Reply of the Ministry 
11.1 Cargo handled by VOC Port Trust in the last 5 years from 2012-13 to 2016-17 has shown 
an increasing trend. The main cargoes are thermal coal which was supplied to thermal Power 
Plants and containers. There was a decline in overall car go handling in the last two years but this 
year there is growth.  However, Container handling by the Port is steadily increasing each year at 
a rate of 7.2% (CAGR). 
Further recommendation/observation: 
11.2   The Committee had underlined the need for taking corrective measures to improve 
productivity parameters of VOC Port but the Ministry in its reply has merely spelled  out 
the trends of cargo volume handled by VOC Port Trust over the last five years. The 
Committee, therefore, desires to be apprised of the specific policy measures proposed to be 
taken for making VOC Port a transshipment hub and to make it realize its full potential.  
CONTAINERIZATION 
Recommendation/Observation 
12. The Committee notes that the Zone B in VOCPT was planned as a transshipment hu b, 
given its favorable geographical position and deep draft levels. Moreover, being a coastal port, 
it does not face the challenges of silting and dredging whic h is a major drawback for most P orts 

46 
 
in the country. However, after careful study, the Committee is of the opinion that the Port has 
largely failed to attract container cargo shipments.            (Para 126) 
Reply of the Ministry 
12.1 Perhaps reference is to Zone  A. At present (2019), the VOC P ort (Zone A) is able to 
handle (-) 14.2m draft vessel inside the Port taking tidal advantage at berth no. 8, 9, NCB I,  CJ I 
and CJ II. Moreover, the Port can handle 13.5 draft vessels around the clock throughout the year. 
12.2 It is a fact the seabed comprises calcareous rock/ weathered rock of limestone variety , 
Hence capital dredging is necessary to deepen the harbour channel and inside harbor area. 
Maintenance dredging is not required, as there is no siltation in the channel and harbor area. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
12.3   The Committee had expressed its concern that the VOC Port had failed to attract 
container cargo shipments. Instead of elaborating upon the plan of the Government to 
enhance the movement of container cargo shipments, the action taken reply only highlights 
the ability of the Port to handle 14.2 meters draft vessels and 13.5 meters draft vessels and 
the necessity of capital dredging to deepen the harbor channel. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should address the critical issues central to increasing the 
share of containerized cargo in the Port with a view to capture a higher share of 
international trade. 
CONNECTIVITY 
Rail Connectivity 
Recommendation/Observation 
13. Railway fare for short distance operation is not viable for major users operating around 
the Port. The issue has been taken up with the Ministry of Railways to reduce the fare for Short 
Distance operation. The Committee desires that necessary follow up action may be taken in this 
regard and the final outcome reported to the Committee in the Action Taken Reply. The 
Committee recommends that the issue of Short Distance Operation costs must be taken up on a 
priority basis with the Ministry of Railways.                     (Para 132) 

47 
 
Reply of the Ministry 
13.1 In this regard, the following suggestions have been made to Ministry of Railways:-  
a)  Rationalize short haul rake pricing by reducing minimum fre ight slab to 25 Kms from 50 
Kms to encourage transport of coal and other raw materials to captive power plants and industry. 
b)  Rail freight to be reduced on par with road freight to promote rail movement. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
13.2   The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the final outcome in the matter 
be reported to it. 
 
Recommendation/Observation 
14. The Committee notes that the VOC PT is one of the better connected Major Ports in the 
country. The Committee hopes that the issues with regards to highway construction and 
broadening of existing roads are completed according to schedule and reinforces its suggestion 
that a timeline must b e fixed for the same. The Committee feels that the Port must also envision 
the urbanization of its surrounding areas and must ensure the provision of planned evacuation 
channels.                (Para 135) 
Reply of the Ministry 
14.1 VOC Port is presently we ll connected by 4 lane roads from Madurai (45B) and 
Tirunelveli (7A). Now, Port is widening the existing Korampallam surplus bridge from 4 lane to 
6 lane able to evacuate the cargo to and fro the port in speedy manner. 
14.2 Further Port has requested NHAI to widen the existing 4 lane to 6 lane road from Check 
post no 1 of VOCPT till the junction point of 7A and NH 45. It is understood that NHAI has 
taken initiative for submitting the estimate to NHAI for approval and executing the work. 
14.3 It is expected NHAI may complete the work by March, 2021. 
14.4 VOCPT has already appointed a consultant for preparation of DPR for Coastal 
Employment Unit (CEU), which covers development of port based industries in the Port land.  

48 
 
There is provision in the CEU proposal f or planned layouts and social infrastructure within the 
CEU. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
14.5   The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made towards 
implementation of Coastal Employment Unit and creation of social infrastructure w ithin 
the CEU. 
Chennai Port Trust 
POLICY INITIATIVES 
Recommendation/Observation  
15. The Committee notes the efforts made by the Chennai Port and lauds the steps taken by 
them.  The Committee feels that Puducherry Port must be developed as a Satellite Port    which 
can take over the load of Chennai Port. This makes complete sense considering the rapid 
urbanization of Chennai City.  Investments must be made in the infrastructure of the Port, with 
an eye for the future coastal traffic development.            (Para 145) 
Reply of the Ministry 
15.1 Puducherry Port is being developed as a satellite port of Chennai Port to facilitate 
transshipment of containers by sea to and from Chennai to Puducherry. Towards development of 
the Pondicherry Port, Rs 44 crores have b een sanctioned under the Sagarmala Scheme. It was 
ascertained from the Pondy Port officials that currently  Rs 18 crores has been released from the 
above fund. A team from IIT was appointed to conduct an Environment Impact Analysis (EIA) 
study on dredging and to prepare a tender document for dredging. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
15.2   The Committee desires the Ministry to give a clear picture of the funds released and 
utilized so far alongwith the status of completion of the ongoing project. Also, a  detailed 
report of Environmental Impact Assessment should be presented to the Committee.  
 
15.3 The Committee would also like the Ministry to share its future plan of action  
towards achieving better connectivity through rail and road from Chennai Port to 

49 
 
Puducherry port to create better hinterland for increased cargo movement and reduce the 
extra burden on Chennai Port, to make it a more efficient and more profitable one.  
Cochin Port Trust 
CRUISE TERMINAL 
Recommendation/Observation  
16. The ICTT i-e Inter nation Container Transshipment Terminal was described as a 
milestone in logistic infrastructure development. But what followed in the years to come has 
proven to be problems replete with negative consequences. The Committee feels that the terminal 
has not lived up to the perceived expectations which subsequently ran aground since the 
projections were so full of loopholes that they have failed to hold water. First and foremost was 
the inability of the terminal to accommodate large cargo vessels due to chroni c siltation. At 
present, very little business is taking place at the ICTT, with the terminal functioning at 35% of 
its capacity. On the contrary, it has proved to be a drain on Cochin Port’s exchequer which is 
already cash strapped with huge debts, running  to the tune of over Rs. 700 crore to be repaid. 
The Committee is pleased to note the steps taken by the Port in developing a passenger cruise 
terminal. This is a neglected aspect of shipping in India and is a major source of revenue in 
other nations. Cruise Tourism must be pursued with greater vigor and the Committee is pleased 
to know that the Ministry of Tourism is cooperating with the Ministry of Shipping  to develop 
Cruise Terminals.                                               (Para 171) 
Reply of the Ministry 
16.1 In the year 2016-17, ICTT handled 4, 91,087 TEU’s. It went up to 5, 55,812 TEU’s in the 
year 2017 -18, registering a growth of 13.18%. In the current financial year (2018 -19) up to 
31.12.2018, ICTT has handled 4, 26,927 TEU’s which is 4.60% mo re than the corresponding 
period of 2017-18. The current capacity utilization is 41.97%. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
16.2   The Committee notes with satisfaction the improved performance of ICTT in its 
capacity to handle  cargo over the years. However, the current 41.97% capacity utilization 
of ICTT still leaves too much to be desired . The Committee observes that ICTT , the only 

50 
 
transshipment terminal in India is seen as a long -term strategy to reduce transshipment 
volume because transshipment operations burden the trade with high extra costs which is a 
net drag on the country’s economy. Although , revenue loss is decreasing due to improved 
coastal shipping networks and liberalized cabotage rules, a sizeable portion of Indian 
container cargo continues t o be relayed over foreign hub Ports. It is therefore imperative 
that the growth momentum of ICTT is accelerated further to expand the terminal capacity  
utilization. ICTT is located close to global trade lines (Asia -Europe, Asia-U.S.A, Far East - 
Middle East ) and thus has an inherent geographical advantage. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should take measures to increase the draft of the Port from 
14.5 m to 16 m to accommodate larger ships by exploiting this geographical advantage. The 
Committee would like  the Ministry to implement policies to enhance the capacity 
utilization of ICTT.  
Deen Dayal Port Trust 
PROBLEMS AND BOTTLENECKS 
Recommendation/Observation  
17. The Port, being on a creek, will suffer from issues of siltation. The Committee observe s 
that this is an issue that the Port must deal with regularly in order to ensure the smooth 
functioning of the Port.               (Para 190) 
Reply of the Ministry 
17.1 DPT is carrying out the maintenance dredging of the creek regularly.   In addition to this, 
IIT- Chennai and  Mumbai have been appointed to carry out a Technical Study regarding the 
siltation issues in the creek.  As soon as the report is received, action will be taken accordingly. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
17.2   The Committee desi res to be kept apprised of the findings of the technical study 
commissioned to examine the siltation issues and action taken thereon. 
Recommendation/Observation  

51 
 
18. The Committee takes note of the issues of the Environmental Clearance Certificates with 
regards to the projects of the Port.   The Committee feels that the developmental needs of the 
Deendayal Port should not be ignored while considering Coastal Regulations.   The Committee 
recommends that the required concessions and permissions may be given to the Port as it is in 
the larger economic interest of the nation and its people.           (Para 191) 
Reply of the Ministry 
18.1 DPT has been constantly pursuing for the Environmental Clearance Certificates for the 
projects of DPT, with MoEF&CC, NGT etc. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
18.2   The reply from the Ministry does not give a clear picture of the existing permission 
mechansim regarding Environmental Clearances. The Committee observes that in absence 
of Environmental Clearance certificate , the P rojects of Deen Dayal Port Trust have 
witnessed delay in implementation.  The Committee would like to have  a factual note 
detailing the reasons for continued delay and inability in obtaining the mandatory 
environmental approvals for implementing the projects of DPT.   
New Mangalore Port Trust 
MODERNIZATION OF CARGO HANDLING MECHANISM 
Recommendation/Observation  
19. The Committee understands that the Port has a draft restriction which becomes a major 
cause of concern with regard to handling new generation ve ssels. Deep drafts with a minimum 
depth of 14 meters are the prescribed global standards. The Committee, therefore, recommends 
that the NMPT, along with the Ministry of Shipping, must work together to ensure that the Draft 
level is maintained, if not impro ved upon, in order to ensure that the Port maintains its viability.   
                                      (Para 201) 
Reply of the Ministry 
19.1 Port has entrusted IIT, Madras for conducting the study to ensure the draft level is 
maintained throughout the year and also to recommend the cost benefit analysis. 

52 
 
Further recommendation/observation: 
19.2   The Committee recommends that the New Mangalore Port should maintain a depth  
of 14 meters at mean low tide throughout the main shipping channel and near 15 me ters at 
the entrance channel. The Committee also desires to be kept apprised of the findings of IIT, 
Madras and action taken thereon. 
Recommendation/Observation  
20. The Committee was also informed that the limited water front is an impediment to the 
future expansion of the Port. The Port, with a total land area of 2,290 acres, presently has a 
capacity of 15 berths and one SPM is already saturated. This greatly limits the ability of the Port 
to expand in terms of infrastructure. The Committee recommends that studies must be conducted 
to find a solution to the logistical and infrastructural bottlenecks that the Mangalore Port  faces, 
to ensure that the future growth and expansion of the Port is done in a scientific and systematic                    
manner.                 (Para 202) 
Reply of the Ministry 
20.1 The present capacity of the Port is 68.90 MTPA. However the cargo handled is about 
42.0 MTPA. Since the spare capacity is available, in future port would appoint consultants to 
suggest solutions to the logistical and infrastructural bottlenecks. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
20.2  The Committee expresses its  concern that the Ministry has not addressed the issue 
of limited water front and  the removal of infrastructural bottlenecks within a definite 
timeframe. Ministry’s response that in future the Port will appoint consultants to suggest 
solutions to the logistical and infrastructural bottlenecks is inadequate and rather reflects 
lackadaisical approach towards resolving the hurdles. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to take both statutory as well as administrative  measures, to 
ensure that the consultants of proven track record are appointed and mandated to furnish 
their Report within a defined timeframe. 
 
CRUISE TERMINAL 
Recommendation/Observation  

53 
 
21. The Committee notes the steps taken by the Port to augment the facilities in terms of 
Cruise tourism. Mangalore, with its beautiful coast and pristine beaches, is ideal as a cruise 
destination. The Committee recommends that more must be done  to fulfill the potential of the 
Port as a major cruise terminal and a gateway to Peninsular India. In terms of infrastructure, 
draft levels must be maintained to facilitate the participation of major cruise liners. The 
Committee further recommends that th e Ministry of Shipping and the NMPT should work 
together with the Ministry of Tourism, tour operators and the respective State Tourism Boards to 
promote New Mangalore Port as a cruise terminal. Simultaneously, the Ministry of Shipping and 
NMPT must ensure that the facilities at the passenger terminals must be at par with global 
standards.               (Para 205) 
Reply of the Ministry 
21.1 The Port has taken up modernization of existing Cruise terminal by providing facilities of 
global standards. Further af ter discussion with the Karnataka state tourism department and   the 
tour operators, the Port has taken steps to construct the comfort stations at prominent tourist 
destinations in and around Dakshina Kannada and also it is suggested that New Mangalore Por t 
should be declared as Home Port on par with Mumbai and Cochin Ports. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
21.2 The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Shipping in consultation with 
Ministries of External Affairs and Finance should arrange simplified immigration process 
for foreign cruise tourists for easy Customs clearance and to have a conducive fiscal regime 
for cruise ships through development of cruise terminals and related infrastructure. 
21.3  The Committee is aware that investments are require d to develop requisite 
infrastructure at ports. The Committee , therefore, desires to know of fiscal deterrents, if 
any, that have demotivated the Cruise liners from operating at the NMPT so far.  
21.4 The Committee also recommends that to boost cruise tour ism at NMPT, a separate 
Task Force on Cruise Tourism should be formed jointly by the Ministry of Tourism and 
Ministry of Shipping with representatives of all major stakeholders. The Committee would 
like the Ministry to furnish  the details of cruise termina l projects and related 
infrastructure projects sanctioned to the Mangalore Port. 

54 
 
Recommendation/Observation  
22. Nestled amidst the Western Ghats in peninsular India, construction of roads and railway 
lines to connect the Port, is fraught with geographical obstacles. As a result, this has reduced the 
popularity of the Port due to the relatively high transportation costs and time taken. The 
Committee recommends that given the availability of advanced technology, new technology and 
research must be harnessed to devise a very way to circumvent the geographical bottlenecks that 
ail the Port.                   (Para 206) 
23. While most Major Ports in India are suffering from congestion, the New Mangalore Port 
is struggling to achieve even 50 per cent of its capac ity utilization. The only lifeline between the 
New Mangalore Port and its hinterland is the rail line provided by the Hassan - Mangalore Rail 
Development Company Ltd. (HMRDC). Rail cargo has remained consistent at 7 lakh MT in the 
last two financial years, indicating a case of stagnancy. The Committee recommends that the 
Government may consider improving rail connectivity with NMPT.          (Para 207) 
Reply of the Ministry 
23.1 The proposal for doubling of Hassan - Mangalore railway line is being taken up b y the 
railway authorities through HMRDC. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
23.2   The Committee would like the Ministry to furnish a factual Note on the status of the 
Hassan- Mangalore Railway line alongwith amount of fun d released and utilized so far  
including the deadline for its completion. 
Recommendation/Observation  
24. Karnataka has 8 minor Ports - Kundapura, Honnavar, Belekeri, Tadrim Bhatkal, 
Hangarakatta, Malpe and Padubidri. These are located on the State’s 300 km coastline. Hence, 
coastal shippi ng would and should be an ideal alternative to the lack of proper road 
connectivity. However, the shared hinterland implies competition for the same cargo. Also, this 
mode of transp ortation continues to remain unexplore d. Coast-to-coast mode of transp ortation 
can change the fortunes of Indian marine logistics. It is a pity that its potential remains 
untapped. The example of China may be studied, where the Chinese Government is using its 

55 
 
coastline to connect one city to another. This mode of transportation h as proven to be cost 
effective and can result in faster movement of consignments.         (Para 208) 
Reply of the Ministry 
24.1 Port has initiated action to conduct feasibility study through M/s. IPRCL to develop a 
major Port at Belekeri and the study is under progress. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
24.2  The Committee w ould like the  Ministry to create policies and guidelines for 
promotion of infrastructure and economic operations of other minor ports of Karnataka 
too. Since there are several advantag es of routing cargo by sea in the form of  reduction of 
road conjunction, reduction of loss of life due to road accidents, environment friendly and 
fuel efficient alternative to road and rail transport, detailed analysis of the model adopted 
in China should also be taken up for its replication in the country. 
Mormugao Port Trust 
PERFORMANCE 
Recommendation/Observation  
25.  Given the popularity of Goa as an international tourist destination, the Committee 
recommends that the MPT should realign its focus at de veloping itself as a Passenger Port, 
catering to Cruise Ships. Tours and Packages for the same must be worked out with the Ministry 
of Tourism and the Ministry of Shipping. Necessary infrastructural requirements must be 
developed in order to harness the fu ll potential of the Port as a Passenger Port. This will ensure 
that the Port is maintained as a profitable and viable venture whilst ensuring the preservation of 
the environment in keeping with the orders of the Supreme Court.          (Para 216) 
Reply of the Ministry 
25.1 Observations of the Committee have been noted. 
There has been increase in the calls of cruise ships at MoPT.  

56 
 
Financial Year Cruise ship calls 
2017-18 30 
2018-19 38 
2019-20 42 (Expected) 
 
25.2 A coastal cruise ship M.V. Angriya has already commenced operation from October 2018 
and commutes Goa and Mumbai. Further, a new cruise service M.V. Karnika operated by Zen 
Cruise Pvt. Ltd.is scheduled to commence its operations tentatively from the month of April 
2018. 
 
Further recommendation/observation: 
25.3   The Committee also recommends the M inistry to provide simplified immigration 
process for foreign cr uise tourists  to provide easy c ustoms clearance and to have a 
conducive fiscal regime for cruise ships through development of cruise termin als and 
related infrastructure. Since the increase in number of cruise ships is not commensurate to 
hike in funding of cruise tourism projects, the Ministry should focus on involving more 
cruise ships for development of tourism in Goa and nearby states and islands. 
Major Issues Ailing Cargo Management in The Major Ports 
Draft Limitations 
Recommendation/Observation  
26. The Committee has observed that the relatively low draft at Indian P orts do not measure 
upto internationally set standards. Presently, vesse ls greater than 11,000 TEU are in service. 
The movement towards larger ships is driven by economics of scale. It follows that in case of 
containership for 1,000 TEU capacities, the average draft is 8.3 meter, which increases to 15.5 
metres for ships above 11,000 TEU capacities. Container vessels with a capacity of 4,000 TEU 
require a minimum draft of 12.5 meters.            (Para 223) 
27. The Committee feels that there is a need to maximize the utilization of these vessels, 
which will in turn lead to reduct ion in the number of port calls on major routes and push for the 
development of global mega ports served by fully integrated global network. Most Major Ports 

57 
 
in India have minimum draft under 12m, except for a few of the younger ports which have draft 
of more than 14m. Insufficient draft at Indian Ports leads to increased costs and time taken as 
cargo originating fro m and those that are bound for I ndia gets routed through tr ansshipment 
ports like Colombo and Singapore. The Committee feels that as vessels ke ep getting bigger, 
Indian ports need deeper drafts, which call for increased and greater investments in capital 
dredging.                 (Para 224) 
Reply of the Ministry 
27.1 Major capital dredging projects are proposed to be undertaken for increasing dra fts in 
Major Ports. In most of the Major Ports, 14 meters draft has been achieved except Kolkata Port 
where it is not feasible. Mormugao Port and Kamarajar Port Ltd. are b eing dredged to handle 18 
meter draft vessels, which are largest available  globally. At present, 18 meter d raft is available 
only in outer harbour of Visakhapatnam Port. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
27.2 The Committee is aware that drafts at Indian Ports have historically been low both 
in the channel and at berths. The Committee not es from the reply of the Ministry  that 14  
meter draft has been achieved in most of the Major Ports . C onsidering the fact that top 
container Ports in the world have achieved draft depth ranging from 14 m to 16 m long 
back and some Ports have enhanced this still further, there is a  need that draft for our 
Major Ports should be beyond 14 m in order to cater to the requirement of new generation 
ships. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Shipping should ensure 
that the Major Ports underta ke the dredging work to increase their draft dep th to 18 
meters within a definite  timeline. Since the dredging is highly capital intensive, the 
Committee would like to know as to how the Major Ports would meet their expenditure 
towards the capital and main tenance dredging and whether the dredging, if funded 
through internal resources and borrowings would entail the increase in their overall Port 
cost and consequently tariff.   
27.3 The Ministry should also provide reasons for the non -feasibility in implemen tation 
of major capital dredging p rojects at Kolkata Port. T he Committee would also like  the 

58 
 
Ministry to provide port-wise details alongwith the status of implementation of the projects 
undertaken or those to be undertaken to deepen port draft.   
Role of Tariff Regulations at India’s Major Ports 
Recommendation/Observation  
28. The Committee feels that the Port sector in India is facing certain tariff - related 
uncertainties due to multiplicity of regimes. The non -Major Ports do not come under any tariff 
jurisdiction and price their services based on market and competition. But the major ones 
(including private terminals therein) fall under the jurisdiction of a regulator viz, Tariff 
Authority for Major Ports (TAMP). This anomaly and the lack of a level playin g field have long 
been debated issue.                  (Para 227) 
Reply of the Ministry 
28.1 The Major Port Trusts and the BOT Terminals operating there were initially covered by 
the Tariff Guidelines of 2005. The Tariff Guidelines of 2005 did not provide flexibility to the 
Port Trusts and the BOT Terminals in pricing of their services. The Port Trusts and the BOT 
Terminals operating there have been taken out of the Tariff Guidelines of 2005 and now are 
covered under the Tariff Policy, 2018 (Major Port Trus ts) and the Tariff Guidelines, 2019 (BOT 
Terminals), which give them flexibility to price their services within their Annual Revenue 
Requirement. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
28.2 The Committee notes the reply. The Committee, however, desires to kno w whether 
tariff has been left entirely to the market forces or a norm based tariff is fixed by the 
regulator. 
Recommendation/Observation  
29. In view of the considerable loss of business opportunities for the Major Ports due to the 
provision of certain ta riff related uncertainties as ascertained by TAMP, the Committee 
recommends that the anomalies in the TAMP rules must be made reasonable in order to make it 
lucrative for ships to call on Major Ports against private ports. The Committee further 

59 
 
recommends that the role of the TAMP must be redefined and that a strategic and market 
oriented system of tariff must be set in place.                       (Para 229) 
Reply of the Ministry 
29.1 The Major Port Trusts and the BOT operating there were initially covered  by the Tariff 
Guidelines of 2005. The Tariff Guidelines of 2005 did not provide flexibility to the Port Trusts 
and the BOT Terminals in pricing of their services. The Port Trusts and the BOT Terminals 
operating threat have been taken out of the Tariff Gui delines of 2005 and now are covered under 
the Tariff Policy, 2018 (Major Port Trusts) and the Tariff Guidelines, 2019 (BOT Terminals), 
which give them flexibility to price their services within their Annual Revenue Requirement. 
29.2 Regarding redefining ro le of TAMP it is stated that steps have already been initiated by 
the Government in this direction. A Major Port Authorities Bill, 2016 was introduced in the Lok 
Sabha in December, 2016, inter -alia, envisaging setting up an Adjudicatory Board, which will 
carry out other than tariff setting functions of TAMP and will adjudicate and look into any 
disputes, claims arising between Major Ports, BOT operators to revive stressed projects. 
29.3 The Committee has also recommended that a strategic and market oriented  system of 
tariff must be set in place. In this regard, it is stated that the Traffic Policy, 2018 of Major Port 
Trusts and Tariff Guidelines of 2019 for BOT Terminals which were earlier governed by 2005 
Tariff Guidelines provide for market oriented system  of tariff fixation which will make it 
lucrative for more ships to call on Major Ports. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
29.4 The Committee observes that the Major Port Authorities Bill was introduced in the 
Lok Sabha in December 2016 but no further progress has been reported since then, which 
is indicative of the Ministry’s inertia in the matter. The Committee would expect the 
Ministry to take an early decision to thrash out all the lingering issues once for all and 
carry out a comprehensive review of the various provisions of the aforesaid Bill, so that the 
necessary changes which are in tune with the present needs are accommodated and those 
provisions which are no longer required, are eliminated. The Committee desires to be kept 
apprised of the action taken in this regard.  

60 
 
Efficiency of the Port Sector Operations 
Vessel Turnaround Time 
Recommendation/Observation  
30. The Committee feels that the seaports are the interface between two modes of transport 
viz., land and sea and recommends that its efficie ncy is directly related to the connectivity 
covering both the modes of transport and as such, Container terminals should provide rapid 
transit facilities for containerized cargo (similar to an Airport where passengers arrive and 
depart with ready luggage/cargo). This would enable the Ports to plan and utilize land optimally 
for the benefit of the ships and not for storage for which CFS/ICD are planned.        (Para 234) 
Reply of the Ministry 
30.1 Direct Port Delivery (DPD) and Direct Port Entry (DPE) enable  direct movement of 
containers from factories / port without intermediate handling requirement, thus saving cost & 
time.  This facility is provided at JNPT Port and is being implemented at other container 
handling ports. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
30.2 The Committee would like the Ministry to provide details of the Port-wise measures 
taken to improve connectivity  which is the key for development of any Port and  more and 
more initiatives should be connectivity focused. The Ministry should facilitate  the 
development of corridors that provide rapid transit faci lities for containerized cargo which 
would ensure utilization of land of Ports and in turn, increase the efficiency of the Ports.  
Emerging Constellation of Container Terminals in South India 
Recommendation/Observation  
31. The Committee is of the view that more ports do not necessarily bring in more cargo. The 
extent of a country’s EXIM trade is a function of its policies and its openness to international 
commerce. A cost -effective way of augment ing port capacity to meet demand is t o upgrade 
capacity of existing P orts. Certainly, public investment is needed to augment port capacity. But, 

61 
 
a careful choice needs to be made in choosing investment between Major and non-Major Ports.     
                 (Para 245) 
Reply of the Ministry 
31.1 Observations of the Committee have been noted. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
31.2  The c ountry’s international trade is growing at a fast pace which warrants the 
creation of adequate port capacity. With the ope ning up of the Indian Economy and given 
the limitation of public resources, the investment has to be supplemented by private sector . 
The Committee  therefore, desires to know the share of private sector contribution in 
investment in the Major Ports and non- Major Ports respectively. 
Cargo Evacuation from Indian Ports in Terms of Transport Mode 
Recommendation/Observation  
32. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Road Transport & Highways and the 
Ministry of Railways should ensure that all the project s linked to port connectivity be given the 
highest priority and projects should be executed within the scheduled time period to make the 
port operations viable and profitable.             (Para 251) 
Reply of the Ministry 
32.1 There are 100 Sagarmala road c onnectivity projects (Rs. 1,74,328 Cr. 8100 Km) 
undertaken by MoRTH and its’ nodal autonomous agency NHAI. Of these, 3 projects (Rs. 217 
Cr, 22 Km) completed and 97 projects (Rs. 1 ,74,111, 8078 Km) are under various stages of 
implementation and development. 60 projects (Rs. 19,916 Cr, 1164 Km) are being implemented 
under Bharatmala Pariyojana. 
32.2 There are 59 Sagarmala rail connectivity projects (Rs. 59,845 Cr, 7199 Km) undertaken 
by Ministry of Railways. Of these, 7 projects (Rs. 2,491 Cr, 405 Km) comple ted and 52 projects 
(Rs. 57,354 Cr, 6,794) are under various stages of implementation and development. 
32.3 The Ministry of Shipping  endeavors to interact regularly with the Ministry of Road 
Transport and Highways (MoRTH), NHAI and the Ministry of Railways  through meetings with 

62 
 
officials and correspondence at various levels in order to update the status of these port 
connectivity projects and provide any support towards their expeditious completion. 
32.4 However, the comments from MoRTH and MoR may be obtai ned regarding expeditious 
completion of these projects within stipulated time. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
32.5 The status of projects as s hared by the Ministry is not clear. Therefore, the 
Committee would like to know the status of completion and amounts of funds released for 
and utilized so far by  each project. The reasons for delay , if any, in above projects  should 
be specified so that a policy prescription can be recommended. 
Environmental Issues with regards to Coastal Regulatory Zones (CRZ) and National 
Green Tribunal (NGT) 
Recommendation/Observation  
33. The Committee feels that the development of Port infrastructure is necessary to the 
economic health of the nation. Steps need to be taken to obviate the adverse impact of the order 
of NGT on t he port projects pending approval of the Coastal Zone Management Plan of the 
States by the MoEF&CC. The Committee further recommends that the MoEF&CC must take 
steps to ensure that the States/ Union Territories must take it upon themselves to prioritise th e 
CZMPs and submit the same to the MoEF&CC at the earliest, in order to ensure that necessary 
rules and regulations may be instituted for the same.          (Para 264) 
Reply of the Ministry 
33.1 The coastal state governments/Union territory administrations  except in respect of Goa 
and two districts in Gujarat, have submitted their respective CZMPs prepared and finalized based 
on CRZ Notification, 2011, for approval of the Central Government in the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest & Climate Change. The CZMPs thus prepared have been approved by the 
Central Government and clearances for development projects held up due to the injuction by the 
order dated 22.11.2017 of the NGT have been thus addressed/resolved. 
Further recommendation/observation: 

63 
 
33.2 It is a mat ter of serious concern for the Committee to note that the information 
given by the Ministry with regard to recommendation contained in Para 264 of the 269 th 
Report is at variance with that furnished vide Para 265 of the Report . The Committee  
would, therefore, like the Ministry to explain this dichotomy in the above replies and clear 
the confusion. 
Recommendation/Observation  
34. The Committee recommends that an advisory be issued by the MoEF&CC to the States/ 
UTs that have not yet submitted their CZMPs to the MoEF&CC, impressing upon them to submit 
them immediately and get the same approved. The Ministry of Shipping may also take it upon 
itself to ensure that it keeps a track of the same and impress upon the respective State 
Governments and their correspondi ng ports to submit their plans at the earliest. The delay may 
cost huge economic loss to the country’s Shipping sector and such policy related delays should 
be avoided.                 (Para 265) 
Reply of the Ministry 
34.1 The Ministry has been taking up t he matter regarding finalization of CZMPs regularly 
with the coastal state governments /Union territory administrations. CZMPs for all coastal States/ 
Union Territories except in respect of Goa and two districts viz., Kutch and Morbi, in Gujarat are 
yet to be received in the Ministry for final approval. 
Further recommendation/observation: 
34.2 The Committee notes with concern that except for Goa and two districts in Gujarat, 
no other State and Union Territory have submitted  their CZMPs for final approval.  The 
Committee recommends that a dedicated mechanism be set up in the Ministry to oversee 
the submission of CZMPs for final approval as early as possible. 
Recommendation/Observation  
35. The Committee is of the opinion that many of the Major Ports are suffer ing due to the 
absence of a Standard Operating Procedure. The Committee is dismayed to note that many of the 
projects of the Major Ports have been stalled due to the same reason, while operations in some 
Ports have been shut down as a result of Court order s, which could have been avoided had these 

64 
 
guidelines been set in place. The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Shipping must 
coordinate with the concerned States, the respective State Pollution Control Boards and the 
MoEF&CC to formulate a set of p rocedures/ process that are largely uniform across all the 
States, keeping room for modifications according to the special requirements that are State or 
Region specific.               (Para 269) 
Reply of the Ministry 
35.1 The observations of the Committee  have been noted. However, comments on the para 
above are also relevant.  
Further recommendation/observation: 
35.2 The Committee notes that though the Ministry has noted the recommendation of the 
Committee regarding formulating a set of the uniform procedu res for resolution of 
environmental issues, it has not outlined any roadmap for targeted action in this regard. 
The Committee therefore, expects the Ministry to share with it the action plan in respect of 
regulatory enforcement of environmental  issues and development of the P orts can be  
achieved for a cleaner and greener environment. 
PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS (PPP) 
Recommendation/Observation  
36. The Committee notes the efforts of the Ministry of Shipping  towards the development of 
port infrastructure through the PPP model. The Committee recommends that as far as possible, 
the same model must be utilized in all the Major Ports to ensure the development of Port 
infrastructure in the country. Steps must be taken in tandem with the State Governments 
concerned in order to ensure smooth and speedy implementation of the PPP projects.  (Para 276) 
Reply of the Ministry 
36.1 Observations of the committee have been noted. 
Further recommendation/observation: 

65 
 
36.2 The Committee feels that while seeking to expand P ort infrastructure through 
Public-Private Partnership , Government should offer  an option which lies somewhere 
between public procurement and privatization. Needless to say, such option  brings private 
sector competencies, efficiencies, and capital to improv e public assets or services when 
governments lack the upfront cash. On the other hand, the c ompanies agree to take risk 
and management responsibility in exchange for profits linked to performance. Such an 
environment will help putting  a speedy mechanism congenial for the P ort output and 
efficiency. The Committee would, however, like the Ministry to exercise caution while 
implementing the PPP model in the P ort sector in order to ensure that healthy competition 
is promoted because private monopolies tend to abuse their dominant market position.  
Development/ Promotion of Cruise Facilities at Ports 
Recommendation/Observation  
37. The Committee is pleased to note that proactive steps taken by the Ministry of Shipping in 
tandem with the Major Ports to promote Cruise tourism in the nation. With the growing 
population and infrastructure constraints especially in city based Major Ports, the Committee is 
of the view that Cruise Shipping is an important and viable alternative to help promote the 
growth of the economy by wa y of tourism in the country. The Committee further recommends 
that given the nascent stage of its development, the policies with regards to Cruise Shipping in 
the country must be regularly updated and modified to keep in tune with the changing global 
economic scenario. The Committee further recommends that taxation policies in this regard must 
be formulated in a manner which helps facilitate its growth.         (Para 279) 
Reply of the Ministry 
37.1 The Ministry has taken following steps for promotion of cruise shipping in India: 
37.2 A Task Force was constituted in November, 2015 with Secretary (Tourism) as the 
Chairman and Secretary (Shipping) as the Co -chairman for coordinated efforts to create an 
enabling eco-system for the development of cruise tourism in India. 
i. Foreign flag vessels carrying passengers have been allowed to call at I ndian Ports for a 
period of 10 years with effect from 6th  February, 2009 without obtaining a license from 

66 
 
Director General of Shipping.   This facility has been extended  for a period o f further 5 
years i.e., upto 5th February, 2024. 
ii. Standardized Operating Procedures (SOPs) for cruise vessels have been revised and 
operationalised w.e.f. November, 2017 at all Major Ports. 
iii. E-visa facility has been extended to five sea ports namely Mumbai Port, Mormugao Port, 
New Mangalore Port, Cochin Port and Chennai Port. Immigration counters have been set 
up at aforesaid five Major Ports, which are primarily the Ports of call of cruise ships.  
iv. To make India attractive to Cruise passengers and to promote cruise tourism in the 
country, Ministry of Home Affairs has, at the request of Ministry of Shipping, exempted 
cruise tourists arriving with e -visa from the requirement of bio -metric enrolment for a 
period of three years i.e., till 31.12.2020 vide order dated 20th December, 2017.  This will 
facilitate expeditious immigration clearance of cruise passengers with e -visa   enabling 
them to spend more time on shore. 
v.  The port charges have been reduced and all Major Ports are to charge a uniform single 
rate of $0.35 per GRT for first 12 hrs of stay.   Ports will not charge any other rate like 
berth hire, port dues, pilotage, passenger fee etc from cruise liners.   The above rate has 
been made effective from 3 rd November, 2017 and will remain in force for a pe riod of 
three years. 
vi. Composite concession of 40% is given for domestic cruise vessels for calls between 75 -
100 in a year and composite concession of 50% is given for domestic cruise vessels for 
calls exceeding 100  in a year for a period of three years i.e., up to 3-11-2019. 
vii. The Ports do not levy any priority/ousting/shifting charges for berthing the cruise vessel. 
viii. Walk-in berthing/preferential berthing offered to Home Port cruise vessels without any 
extra charge. 
  x. To address manpower, coordination and logistic issues for handling cruise vessels at 
Ports, Port Level Committees with Chairman of the respective Major Port Trusts as 
Chairman, Secretary of Tourism of the concerned state as Vice -Chairman and Regional Director 
of the respective region of Ministry of Tourism as Convener have been constituted. 

67 
 
37.3 The impact of policy decisions taken will be monitored and policy modified with 
changing economic scenario. 
37.4 Secretary (Shipping) vide his DO letters dated 12.04.2018, 11.06.2018, 08.08.2018 and 
05.09.2018 addressed to Revenue Secretary  stated that shipping is  fast growing  component of 
the tourism industry  both worldwide and in India. Huge amount of foreign exchange can be 
earned with a sizeable direct and indirect employment on shore by providin g the right policy 
environment, infrastructure and tax incentives. Secretary (Shipping) has further stated that with 
the efforts made by the Ministry of Shipping, there is a substantial growth in the cruise calls at 
the Indian Ports but still there is huge  untapped potential for this sector provided appropriate 
incentives are given. Hence, Secretary, Shipping underlined the need for exemption of levy of 
customs duty on stores consumed by the foreign tourist on board cruise  vessels arriving from 
foreign Port and calling more than one Indian Port i.e., on coastal run. The matter is pending for 
action with Ministry of Finance.” 
 Further recommendation/observation: 
37.5 The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the final decision taken by the 
Ministry of Finance on exemption of levy of customs duty on stores used by foreign tourists 
on cruise vessels. 
Promotion of Solar Energy Generation 
Recommendation/Observation  
38. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Major Ports should make use of the large 
tracts of unused land available to them in order to ensure the implementation of the Green Port 
Initiative. Apart from being an efficient way of utilizing the space available, the income 
generated from the sale of the energy generated can be used to further aug ment the development 
of the Port and its ancillary services.              (Para 286) 
Reply of the Ministry 
38.1 An advisory has been issued by the Ministry on 26.06.2019 to all the Major Ports to take 
necessary actions for implementation of the recommendat ion of the Committee for promotion of 
Solar Energy Generation. 

68 
 
Further recommendation/observation: 
38.2 The Committee desires to be updated on the follow -up action taken by the Major 
Ports on the recommendation of the Committee for promotion of Solar energ y Generation. 
The Committee further recommends that t he Ministry of Shipping  in consultation with 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy should explore the possibility of establishing a 
wind farm/ solar farm on the vacant land lying close to the P orts. This will benefit the Port 
Authority in two w ays- viz, for supplying power to the P ort for operation by reducing the 
dependency on non-renewable sources of energy and secondly by generating profits by sale 
of extra power generated in the solar farm. 
Ecological Considerations 
Recommendation/Observation  
39. The Ports also have a certain responsibility to ensure the sustainability of the ecological 
resources that surround them. The Committee strongly feels that it is the responsibility of the 
Port Authorities and the Ministry of Shipping by extension to nurture and preserve the 
environment. The recent reports of recurrent oil spills are a cause of concern for the flora and 
fauna and the environment in general. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry 
of Shipping must ensure that the Ports have set guidelines to prevent incidents of oil spills in the 
future and steps must be taken to ensure that the oil spills are cleaned up. Promotion of eco - 
friendly business is the need of the hour and must be consid ered an important parameter when 
considering the annual performance of a Port. This must extend to the private and small Ports as 
well, as a matter of policy.                       (Para 287) 
Reply of the Ministry 
39.1 A Centre of Excellence to proactively  handle environmental issues has been created 
under Indian Ports Association. The Government is taking proactive steps to prevent any such 
mishaps and for which Quantitative Risk Assessment of each major port is being carried out so 
that affective, preventive and corrective actions can be implemented. 
Further recommendation/observation: 

69 
 
39.2 Environment is no more a negotiable domain and it is imperative that Ports operate 
in harmony with environment and nature and remain self commit ted to environmental 
issues. The Ministry should, therefore, prepare an alysis report of all the Major P orts and 
also those Minor P orts which are situated near the ecologically sensitive areas like 
Protected areas, Wildlife Sanctuaries, Ecological hotspots and marine ecosystems. T he 
study should focus on  causes and remedial steps taken by the concerned authorities to 
tackle oil spillage, hazardous cargo, dirty and dusty cargo, etc. On the basis of such report, 
an Action Taken Plan must be prepared to prevent such unforeseen situati ons in future so 
as to protect the environment.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

70 
 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE 
MINISTRY IS STILL AWAITED 
Environmental Issues with regards to Coastal Regulatory Zones (CRZ) and National 
Green Tribunal (NGT) 
Recommendation/Observation  
1. The Committee is of the opinion that this is a major shortcoming in the port sector. The 
Consent to Operate for Ports is a necessary instrument. With the expansion of the Sagarmala 
Project, this will be a necessity for small riverine docks that will come up as result of the project. 
This is a flow that must be remedied at the earliest as it leaves the Ports vulnerable to 
unnecessary litigation and suits. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of 
Shipping must coordinate with the concerned Ministries & Agencies and format a ‘Consent to 
Operate’ specifically for Ports at the earliest.           (Para 271) 
Reply of the Ministry 
1.1 Observations of the Committee are noted. Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change and also Central Pollution Control Board are being requested to suggest suitable format 
for consent to operate specific to the Ports. Thereafter the format shall be communicated to 
concerned State Governments and State Pollution Control Boards for implementation.   
Further recommendation/observation: 
1.2 The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the response of the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Central Pollution Control Board in the 
matter. 
 
 
 

71 
 
 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS — AT A GLANCE 
 
CHAPTER-III 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE MINISTRY HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE 
COMMITTEE 
 
Paradip Port 
PORT PERFORMANCE 
Mere noting the Committee’s recommendation for putting in place a stringent 
monitoring mechanism will not suffice. The Ministry should have mentioned specific action 
taken in this regard. The Committee desires details of the concrete steps taken to address 
the recurring problem of delay and cost escalation in implementation of projects. (Para: 1.2) 
The Committee would urge upon the Ministry to devise a tariff incentive scheme for 
the green ships visiting the Port and implement the scheme through the Environmental 
Shipping Index Administration.              (Para: 2.3) 
 
The Ministry of Shipping in coordination with Ministry of Renewable Energy should 
also work towards establishment of Wind Farms and Solar Panels, wherever possible near 
the harbors to reduce the burden on non-renewable resources of energy.        (Para: 2.4) 
 
The Committee would like to be apprised of the status of completion of modernisation 
projects alongwith the details of funds released and utilized so far. The Ministry should 
also elaborate upon the initiatives taken to complete these projects within scheduled tim e 
period.                 (Para: 3.2) 
The reply does not indicate the progress of Angul -Sambalpur railway doubling line. 
The Committee therefore, recommends that, a detailed report of the progress be provided 
with the details of funds released and utilized  so far alongwith the timeline for completion 
of the project.                     (Para: 4.2) 
 
The Committee also recommends that detailed Note indicating the evacuation 
capacities of other Major ports alongwith the steps being taken to upgrade such capaci ties 
be provided to it.                 (Para: 4.3) 
Mumbai Port Trust 
DEVELOPMENT OF CRUISE TOURISM 
 The Committee notes the submission of the Ministry that about 20 hectares of land 
belonging to Mumbai Port Trust has been encroached upon and the prime lan d holding of 
Mumbai Port is being cleared of encroachment. However, the Ministry has not mentioned 

72 
 
the time frame within which the encroached land would be cleared and the manner in 
which the land would be put to use for the development of various faciliti es to cater to the 
needs of general public. The Committee therefore, desires to be apprised of the progress 
made in this regard.                (Para: 5.3) 
JawaharLal Port Trust 
IMPROVEMENT IN INFRASTRUCTURE 
Dry Port 
 The Committee recommends that the  connection from Port to hinterland through 
corridor must be seamless, and this can be achieved through integrated planning of the 
road, water and rail hinterland connections in the Port area. Transport corridors to the 
hinterland should be multimodal with deve loped inland logistics zones including 
appropriate warehouses and other services.             (Para:7.4)
  
The Ministry’s reply is not clear about the status of development of dry Ports in the 
country and therefore, the Committee desires to be apprised of t he details of operational 
dry Ports.                  (Para: 7.5)  
The Committee would like the Ministry to apprise it of the steps taken state -wise to 
address the challenges faced by landlocked states in the country while transporting goods 
and cargo from railways to the Ports.              (Para: 7.6) 
         
DIGITIZATION OF ACTIVITIES: 
(d) E-Delivery Orders (E-DO) 
 The Committee though appreciates the efforts of the Ministry but the  Port 
congestion, shipping line issues and charges, regulatory clearance s, customs clearances, 
documentation and paperwork  are the major issues that result in detention and 
demurrage charges incurred by importers . Therefore, instead of looking at these 
parameters separately, it would be better if the Ministry frames a policy b y looking at the 
entire trade activity holistically – which includes documentation, shipping lines, port 
operations, traders, policies and laws of trade, and service providers like CFS, stevedores, 
rail and road transporters, and terminal operators.           (Para: 8.2) 
Visakhapatnam Port Trust 
NEW INITIATIVES 
 The Committee takes note of the measures taken to enhance competitive advantage 
of VPT. However, the reply of the Ministry does not address the concerns of the 
Committee about lack of a level playin g field in terms of tariff fixing. The Committee 

73 
 
would therefore like the Ministry to commission a detailed study to assess the extent of 
competition prevailing for provision of Port services by VPT vis-à-vis the private Ports 
alongwith base tariff fixatio n on the standard capacity created and also efficient cost of 
operating such facilities thereon.              (Para: 9.2) 
 With the opening up of the Indian economy, private sector participation in Major 
Ports has played an important role in terms of infus ion of funds, induction of latest 
technology and addition of capacity and therefore successful working of the PPP model is 
essential for construction and maintenance of Ports and harbours and improved 
management practices therein. However, the logistics in dustry and the global economy are 
dynamic. The Committee in Para 111 of its 269 th Report, had recommended that there 
should be flexibility in the PPP model in order to effectively respond to the changes taking 
place in such dynamic situation. Though the Mi nistry in its reply has stated that the Union 
Government has approved amendments in the Model Concession Agreement for the new 
PPP projects in the Major Ports to make the Port projects more investor - friendly and the 
investment climate in the Port sector m ore attractive, it has not provided crucial 
information to the Committee on key aspects of the flexibility for decision making in the 
PPP model. The Committee, therefore, desires to be updated in this regard.       (Para: 10.3) 
VOC Port Trust 
TRAFFIC 
The Committee had underlined the need for taking corrective measures to improve 
productivity parameters of VOC Port but the Ministry in its reply has merely spelled out 
the trends of cargo volume handled by VOC Port Trust over the last five years. The 
Committee, therefore, desires to be apprised of the specific policy measures proposed to be 
taken for making VOC Port a transshipment hub and to make it realize its full potential.     
                           (Para: 11.2) 
CONTAINERIZATION 
The Committee had expre ssed its concern that the VOC Port had failed to attract 
container cargo shipments. Instead of elaborating upon the plan of the Government to 
enhance the movement of container cargo shipments, the action taken reply only highlights 
the ability of the Port to handle 14.2 meters draft vessels and 13.5 meters draft vessels and 
the necessity of capital dredging to deepen the harbor channel. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends that the Ministry should address the critical issues central to increasing the 
share of containerized cargo in the Port with a view to capture a higher share of 
international trade.               (Para: 12.3) 
CONNECTIVITY 
Rail Connectivity 
 
The Committee reiterates its recommendation that the final outcome in the matter be 
reported to it. (Para: 13.2) 

74 
 
 
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the progress made towards 
implementation of Coastal Employment Unit and creation of social infrastructure within 
the CEU. (Para: 14.5) 
Chennai Port Trust 
POLICY INITIATIVES 
The Committee desires the Ministry to give a clear picture of the funds released and 
utilized so far alongwith the status of completion of the ongoing project. Also, a detailed 
report of Environmental Impact Assessment should be presented to the Committee.      
                (Para: 15.2) 
 
The Committee would also like the Ministry to share its future plan of action 
towards achieving better connectivity through rail and road from Chennai Port to 
Puducherry port to create better hinterland for increased cargo movement and reduce t he 
extra burden on Chennai Port, to make it a more efficient and more profitable one.      
                (Para: 15.3) 
Cochin Port Trust 
CRUISE TERMINAL        
The Committee notes with satisfaction the improved performance of ICTT in its 
capacity to ha ndle cargo over the years. However, the current 41.97% capacity utilization 
of ICTT still leaves too much to be desired. The Committee observes that ICTT, the only 
transshipment terminal in India is seen as a long -term strategy to reduce transshipment 
volume because transshipment operations burden the trade with high extra costs which is a 
net drag on the country’s economy. Although, revenue loss is decreasing due to improved 
coastal shipping networks and liberalized cabotage rules, a sizeable portion of Indian 
container cargo continues to be relayed over foreign hub Ports. It is therefore imperative 
that the growth momentum of ICTT is accelerated further to expand the terminal capacity 
utilization. ICTT is located close to global trade lines (Asia -Europe, Asia-U.S.A, Far East - 
Middle East) and thus has an inherent geographical advantage. The Committee 
recommends that the Ministry should take measures to increase the draft of the Port from 
14.5 m to 16 m to accommodate larger ships by exploiting this geographical advantage. The 
Committee would like the Ministry to implement policies to enhance the capacity 
utilization of ICTT.                          (Para: 16.2) 
Deen Dayal Port Trust 
PROBLEMS AND BOTTLENECKS 

75 
 
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the finding s of the technical study 
commissioned to examine the siltation issues and action taken thereon.       (Para: 17.2) 
The reply from the Ministry does not give a clear picture of the existing permission 
mechansim regarding Environmental Clearances. The Commit tee observes that in absence 
of Environmental Clearance certificate, the Projects of Deen Dayal Port Trust have 
witnessed delay in implementation. The Committee would like to have  a factual note 
detailing the reasons for continued delay and inability in obta ining the mandatory 
environmental approvals for implementing the projects of DPT.           
(Para: 18.2) 
New Mangalore Port Trust 
MODERNIZATION OF CARGO HANDLING MECHANISM 
The Committee recommends that the New Mangalore Port should maintain a depth  
of 14 meters at mean low tide throughout the main shipping channel and near 15 meters at 
the entrance channel. The Committee also desires to be kept apprised of the findings of IIT, 
Madras and action taken thereon.             (Para: 19.2) 
 
The Committee expresse s its concern that the Ministry has not addressed the issue 
of limited water front and the removal of infrastructural bottlenecks within a definite 
timeframe. Ministry’s response that in future the Port will appoint consultants to suggest 
solutions to the logistical and infrastructural bottlenecks is inadequate and rather reflects 
lackadaisical approach towards resolving the hurdles. The Committee, therefore, 
recommends the Ministry to take both statutory as well as administrative measures, to 
ensure that the consultants of proven track record are appointed and mandated to furnish 
their Report within a defined timeframe.            (Para: 20.2) 
 
CRUISE TERMINAL 
The Committee recommends that the Ministry of Shipping in consultation with 
Ministries of External  Affairs and Finance should arrange simplified immigration process 
for foreign cruise tourists for easy Customs clearance and to have a conducive fiscal regime 
for cruise ships through development of cruise terminals and related infrastructure.  
     (Para: 21.2) 
The Committee is aware that investments are required to develop requisite 
infrastructure at ports. The Committee, therefore, desires to know of fiscal deterrents, if 
any, that have demotivated the Cruise liners from operating at the NMPT so far.  
     (Para: 21.3) 

76 
 
The Committee also recommends that to boost cruise tourism at NMPT, a separate 
Task Force on Cruise Tourism should be formed jointly by the Ministry of Tourism and 
Ministry of Shipping with representatives of all major stakeholders. The Co mmittee would 
like the Ministry to furnish the details of cruise terminal projects and related 
infrastructure projects sanctioned to the Mangalore Port.         (Para: 21.4) 
 
The Committee would like the Ministry to furnish a factual Note on the status of  the 
Hassan- Mangalore Railway line alongwith amount of fund released and utilized so far 
including the deadline for its completion.            (Para: 23.2) 
 
The Committee would like the Ministry to create policies and guidelines for 
promotion of infrastru cture and economic operations of other minor ports of Karnataka 
too. Since there are several advantages of routing cargo by sea in the form of reduction of 
road conjunction, reduction of loss of life due to road accidents, environment friendly and 
fuel efficient alternative to road and rail transport, detailed analysis of the model adopted 
in China should also be taken up for its replication in the country.        (Para: 24.2) 
Mormugao Port Trust 
PERFORMANCE 
The Committee also recommends the Ministry to provide simplified immigration 
process for foreign cruise tourists to provide easy customs clearance and to have a 
conducive fiscal regime for cruise ships through development of cruise terminals and 
related infrastructure. Since the increase in number of cru ise ships is not commensurate to 
hike in funding of cruise tourism projects, the Ministry should focus on involving more 
cruise ships for development of tourism in Goa and nearby states and islands.    (Para: 25.3) 
Major Issues Ailing Cargo Management in The Major Ports 
Draft Limitations 
The Committee is aware that drafts at Indian Ports have historically been low both 
in the channel and at berths. The Committee notes from the re ply of the Ministry that 14  
meter draft has been achieved in most of the Major P orts. Considering the fact that top 
container Ports in the world have achieved draft depth ranging from 14 m to 16 m long 
back and some Ports have enhanced this still further, there is a  need that draft for our 
Major Ports should be beyond 14 m in order t o cater to the requirement of new generation 
ships. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the Ministry of Shipping should ensure 
that the Major Ports undertake the dredging work to increase their draft depth to 18 
meters within a definite timeline. Sin ce the dredging is highly capital intensive, the 
Committee would like to know as to how the Major Ports would meet their expenditure 
towards the capital and maintenance dredging and whether the dredging, if funded 

77 
 
through internal resources and borrowings would entail the increase in their overall Port 
cost and consequently tariff.              (Para: 27.2) 
The Ministry should also provide reasons for the non -feasibility in implementation 
of major capital dredging projects at Kolkata Port. The Committee wou ld also like the 
Ministry to provide port-wise details alongwith the status of implementation of the projects 
undertaken or those to be undertaken to deepen port draft.          (Para: 27.3) 
Role of Tariff Regulations at India’s Major Ports 
The Committee n otes the reply. The Committee, however, desires to know whether 
tariff has been left entirely to the market forces or a norm based tariff is fixed by the 
regulator.                (Para: 28.2) 
The Committee observes that the Major Port Authorities Bill was  introduced in the 
Lok Sabha in December 2016 but no further progress has been reported since then, which 
is indicative of the Ministry’s inertia in the matter. The Committee would expect the 
Ministry to take an early decision to thrash out all the lingeri ng issues once for all and 
carry out a comprehensive review of the various provisions of the aforesaid Bill, so that the 
necessary changes which are in tune with the present needs are accommodated and those 
provisions which are no longer required, are elim inated. The Committee desires to be kept 
apprised of the action taken in this regard.           (Para: 29.4) 
Efficiency of the Port Sector Operations 
Vessel Turnaround Time 
The Committee would like the Ministry to provide details of the Port -wise measures 
taken to improve connectivity which is the key for development of any Port and more and 
more initiatives should be connectivity focused. The Ministry should facilitate the 
development of corridors that provide rapid transit facilities for containerized car go which 
would ensure utilization of land of Ports and in turn, increase the efficiency of the Ports.  
                (Para: 30.2) 
Emerging Constellation of Container Terminals in South India 
 
 The country’s international trade is growing at a fast pace w hich warrants the 
creation of adequate port capacity. With the opening up of the Indian Economy and given 
the limitation of public resources, the investment has to be supplemented by private sector. 
The Committee therefore, desires to know the share of pri vate sector contribution in 
investment in the Major Ports and non- Major Ports respectively.        (Para: 31.2) 
Cargo Evacuation from Indian Ports in Terms of Transport Mode 
The status of projects as shared by the Ministry is not clear. Therefore, the 
Committee would like to know the status of completion and amounts of funds released for 

78 
 
and utilized so far by each project. The reasons for delay, if any, in above projects should 
be specified so that a policy prescription can be recommended.         (Para: 32.5) 
Environmental Issues with regards to Coastal Regulatory Zones (CRZ ) and National 
Green Tribunal (NGT) 
It is a matter of serious concern for the Committee to note that the information 
given by the Ministry with regard to recommendation contained in Pa ra 264 of the 269 th 
Report is at variance with that furnished vide Para 265 of the Report. The Committee 
would, therefore, like the Ministry to explain this dichotomy in the above replies and clear 
the confusion.               (Para: 33.2) 
The Committee notes with concern that except for Goa and two districts in Gujarat, 
no other State and Union Territory have submitted their CZMPs for final approval. The 
Committee recommends that a dedicated mechanism be set up in the Ministry to oversee 
the submission of CZMPs for final approval as early as possible.        (Para: 34.2) 
The Committee notes that though the Ministry has noted the recommendation of the 
Committee regarding formulating a set of the uniform procedures for resolution of 
environmental issues, it h as not outlined any roadmap for targeted action in this regard. 
The Committee therefore, expects the Ministry to share with it the action plan in respect of 
regulatory enforcement of environmental issues and development of the Ports can be  
achieved for a cleaner and greener environment.           (Para: 35.2) 
PUBLIC PRIVATE PARTNERSHIPS (PPP) 
The Committee feels that while seeking to expand Port infrastructure through 
Public-Private Partnership, Government should offer an option which lies somewhere 
between public procurement and privatization. Needless to say, such option brings private 
sector competencies, efficiencies, and capital to improve public assets or services when 
governments lack the upfront cash. On the other hand, the companies agree to take r isk 
and management responsibility in exchange for profits linked to performance. Such an 
environment will help putting a speedy mechanism congenial for the Port output and 
efficiency. The Committee would, however, like the Ministry to exercise caution whil e 
implementing the PPP model in the Port sector in order to ensure that healthy competition 
is promoted because private monopolies tend to abuse their dominant market position.  
                (Para: 36.2) 
Development/ Promotion of Cruise Facilities at Ports 
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the final decision taken by the 
Ministry of Finance on exemption of levy of customs duty on stores used by foreign tourists 
on cruise vessels.                (Para: 37.5) 
Promotion of Solar Energy Generation 

79 
 
The Committee desires to be updated on the follow -up action taken by the Major 
Ports on the recommendation of the Committee for promotion of Solar energy Generation. 
The Committee further recommends that the Ministry of Shipping in consultation with 
Ministry of New and Renewable Energy should explore the possibility of establishing a 
wind farm/ solar farm on the vacant land lying close to the Ports. This will benefit the Port 
Authority in two ways - viz, for supplying power to the Port for operation by redu cing the 
dependency on non-renewable sources of energy and secondly by generating profits by sale 
of extra power generated in the solar farm.           (Para: 38.2) 
Ecological Considerations 
Environment is no more a negotiable domain and it is imperative t hat Ports operate 
in harmony with environment and nature and remain self committed to environmental 
issues. The Ministry should, therefore, prepare analysis report of all the Major Ports and 
also those Minor Ports which are situated near the ecologically s ensitive areas like 
Protected areas, Wildlife Sanctuaries, Ecological hotspots and marine ecosystems. The 
study should focus on causes and remedial steps taken by the concerned authorities to 
tackle oil spillage, hazardous cargo, dirty and dusty cargo, etc . On basis of such report, an 
Action Taken Plan must be prepared to prevent such unforeseen situations in future so as 
to protect the environment.             (Para: 39.2) 
CHAPTER IV 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLY OF THE 
MINISTRY IS STILL AWAITED 
The Committee desires to be kept apprised of the response of the Ministry of 
Environment, Forest and Climate Change and Central Pollution Control Board in the 
matter.               (Para: 1.2) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  


 
VII 
SEVENTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 3:00 P.M. on Tuesday, the 29 th December, 2020 in Room '63', 
First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1.      Shri T.G. Venkatesh                   - Chairman 
  
RAJYA SABHA 
  
2.      Shri Sambhaji Chhatrapati 
3.      Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
4.      Shri K.C. Venugopal 
5.    Shri Sushil Kumar Modi  
  
LOK SABHA 
  
6.      Shri Tapir Gao 
7.      Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8.      Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9.      Shri K. Muraleedharan 
10.      Shri Chhedi Paswan 
11.  Shri Kamlesh Paswan 
12.  Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
13.  Shri Prince Raj 
14.  Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
15.  Shri Rajiv Pratap Rudy 
16.  Shri Dushyant Singh 
17.  Shri Ramdas Chandrabhanji Tadas 
18.  Shri Manoj Kumar Tiwari 
  
SECRETARIAT 
      Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
      Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
      Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
      Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
  
Witnesses 
*                                             *                                               * 
  
* Relates to other matters. 
 
80

2.   At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. 
The Chairman then informed the Members that the first agenda of the meeting is to  consider 
and adopt the draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its Two Hundred and Sixty Ninth Report on 
Cargo Handling at the Major Ports. *  *  *. 
3.   He informed the Committee that it is gratifying to note that out of 73 recommendations of 
the Committee made in its 269 th Report, the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways has 
accepted/ acted upon 33 recommendations.  The Committee, thereafter, con sidered the draft 
Report and after a brief discussion, adopted the same. The Committee then authorized the 
Chairman to present all the 7 Action Taken Reports, adopted by the Committee in its 
meetings held on 17 th August, 11th September, 6th October, 2020 a nd also the Action Taken 
Report adopted today, to the Hon'ble Chairman, Rajya Sabha. 
4.     *                                             *                                               *. 
5.    *                                             *                                               *. 
6.     *                                             *                                               *. 
7.     *                                             *                                               *.   
8.     *                                             *                                               *. 
9.   A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
10.   The meeting adjourned at 5:05 P.M. 
  
New Delhi,                                                                                                P. Narayanan 
29th December, 2020                                                                                      Director 
  
 
 
 
 
* Relates to other matters. 
 
81

XII 
TWELFTH MEETING 
The Committee met at 10:00 A.M. on Thursday, the 28th January, 2021 in Committee 
Room No. 4, First Floor, Block A, Parliament House Annexe Extension Building, New Delhi. 
Members present: 
1. Shri T.G. Venkatesh - Chairman 
RAJYA SABHA 
2. Shri Prasanna Acharya 
3. Dr. Sonal Mansingh 
4. Shri Vinay Dinu Tendulkar 
5. Shri Sushil Kumar Modi 
LOK SABHA 
6. Shri Margani Bharat 
7. Shri Rahul Kaswan 
8. Shri Sunil Baburao Mendhe 
9. Shri Sunil Kumar Pintu 
10. Shri Tirath Singh Rawat 
11. Shri Dushyant Singh 
12. Shri Manoj Tiwari 
SECRETARIAT 
Shri J. Sundriyal, Joint Secretary 
Shri P. Narayanan, Director 
Shri Dinesh Singh, Additional Director 
Ms. Catherine John L., Under Secretary 
 
Witnesses 
*   *   *. 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members to the meeting of the Committee. * 
 *   *. 
3. *   *   *. 
 
* Relates to other matters 
 
 
82

4. *   *   *. 
5. *   *   *. 
6. *   *   *. 
7. *   *   *. 
8. *   *   *. 
9. *   *   *. 
 (The witnesses then withdrew) 
10. The Committee then decided to present/lay the following Reports to both the Houses of 
Parliament on 3rd February, 2021:- 
i. *   *   *; 
ii. *   *   *; 
iii. *   *   *; 
iv. *   *   *; 
v. *   *   *; 
vi. *   *   *; and 
vii. 286th Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the Recommendations/ 
Observations of the Committee contained in its 269th Report on ‘Cargo Handling 
at the Major Ports’. 
11. The Committee, accordingly, authorized Shri T.G. Venkatesh, Chairman and in his 
absence, Shri Prasanna Acharya, M.P. to present the Reports in Rajya Sabha. Shri Rahul  
Kaswan, M.P. and in his  absence, Shri Tirath Singh Rawat, M.P. was authorized to lay  
the above mentioned Reports on the Table of Lok Sabha. 
12. A verbatim record of the proceedings of the meeting was kept. 
13. The meeting adjourned at 11:58 A.M. 
 
 
New Delhi, P. Narayanan 
28th January, 2021 Director 
 
 
* Relates to other matters 
 
83