 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report 
of the Committee on the subject ‘Indian Diaspora Overseas including NRIs, PIOs, OCIs and Migrant 
Workers: All Aspects of their Conditions and Welfare, including the Status of the Emigration Bill’ 
 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
DECEMBER, 2025 /Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2025-26) 
 
EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
11 
 

 
 
ELEVENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2025-26) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the 
Committee on the subject ‘Indian Diaspora Overseas including NRIs, PIOs, OCIs and Migrant Workers: All 
Aspects of their Conditions and Welfare, including the Status of the Emigration Bill’ 
 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 18 December, 2025 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
DECEMBER, 2025 /Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
COEA NO.-- 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
         PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2025-26)……............................................................(ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………………(iii) 
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………………………………1 
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
  Government………………………………..........................................................22 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...…………………………………58 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..……………………….. 60 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited……………………………………68 
 
ANNEXURES 
 
I. Report on the 18th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention 2025……………………...119 
II. Number of Open Houses Conducted in the Last Three Years……………….………161                                                    
 
 
 
APPENDICES 
 
III. Minutes of the Eighth Sitting of the Committee held on 16 December, 2025………170                                                                  
IV. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the Committee  
On External Affairs  (18th Lok Sabha)……………………………………………….172 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2025-26) 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3. Shri Vijay Baghel 
4. Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5. Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
6. Shri Arun Govil 
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
8.Shri Naveen Jindal 
9. Shri Navaskani K. 
10. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
12. Shri Sanatan Pandey 
13. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
14. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
15. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
16. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
17. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
18. Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
19. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
20. Shri Akshay Yadav 
21. Vacant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
23. Dr. John Brittas 
24. Shri Raghav Chadha 
25. Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
26. Dr. K. Laxman 
27.Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
28. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
29. Shri A. D. Singh 
30. Shri Ratanjit Pratap Narain Singh 
31. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 
   

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2025-26) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Eleventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) on 
action taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations contained in the Sixth 
Report of the Committee on External Affairs (18th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘‘Indian Diaspora 
Overseas including NRIs, PIOs, OCIs and Migrant Workers: All Aspects of their Conditions and 
Welfare, including the status of the Emigration Bill'  
2. The Sixth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha 
on 01 April, 2025. The Action Taken Replies of the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 01 July, 2025 (English 
version) and 11th July, 2025 (Hindi version). 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their Sitting held on            
16th December, 2025. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee have been given at Appendix-I to 
the Report. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Sixth Report of the Committee on External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                     
16 December, 2025                                                                                                  Chairperson, 
25 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)                                           Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
      (iii)  

Page | 1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
  
This Report of the Committee on External Affairs (2024-25) deal with the action taken by 
the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in their Sixth Report on the 
subject ‘Indian Diaspora Overseas including NRIs, PIOs, OCIs and Migrant Workers: All Aspects of 
their Conditions and Welfare, including the status of the Emigration Bill' which was presented to the 
Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on 1st April, 2025. 
  
2.        The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs on all the 
72 observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as 
follows: 
  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: 
 Recommendation Nos. 1, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 29, 30, 31, 32, 
33, 34, 36, 39, 42, 44, 45, 48, 49, 51, 52, 53, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 66, 67, 
68, 69, 71 and 72. 
 Total- 46 
Chapter-II 
(ii)    Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies: 
  Nil                                                 
        Total- 0 
Chapter-III 
  
(iii)    Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration: 
               Recommendation Nos. 8, 10, 28, 35, 37, 38, 40, 43, 46, 47, and 65                                      
Total- 11 
Chapter-IV 

Page | 2 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: - 
 Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 17, 18, 19, 20, 41, 50, 54 and 70 
Total- 15 
Chapter-V 
 
3.        The Committee desire that the final replies to the comments contained in Chapter-I 
and observations/recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report may be furnished 
to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report.  
  
4.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
observations/recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
  
Comprehensive Labour Market Information Database  
(Recommendation No.8) 
  
5.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:           
  
  “To facilitate future migration, the Committee desire that a comprehensive Labour Market 
Information (LMI) database for the Indian Diaspora should be developed. This database 
must include, but not be limited to, real-time data on employment trends, wage patterns, 
occupational sectors, skill mismatches and remittance flow among NRIs, PIOs and OCIs. 
Such data would not only improve migration management but also help migrants make 
informed decisions, matching their skills with available opportunities abroad. Strengthening 
such data collection and sharing mechanisms for the same is also essential for ensuring 
efficient and transparent migration governance.  
 
6.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 “The Ministry maintains data in respect of Indian workers, holding Emigration Check 
Required (ECR) passports, proceeding for employment overseas through e-Migrate portal to 
any of the 18 notified ECR countries. The database is quite comprehensive and provides, 

Page | 3 
 
inter alia, gender-wise, destination country-wise, job category-wise and state-wise data of 
Indian workers migrating with Emigration Clearances (Ecs). 
 
 The Ministry intends to expand the scope of e-Migrate portal and include the recruitment of 
workers to ECNR countries through e-Migrate portal as well. In its recent interactions with 
some of the ECNR countries, such as Japan, Portugal, Russia, and Fiji, the Ministry has 
been highlighting the benefits of safe, legal and orderly recruitment of Indian workers through 
e-Migrate portal. The recruitment of workers to ECNR countries through e-Migrate portal 
would help in generating reliable and real-time data on workers, including employment 
trends, wage patterns, occupational sectors, and skilling needs. The LMI data sets can also 
be customised to cater to the needs of ECNR countries. 
 
 Further, a new emigration bill replacing the Emigration Act, 1983, is being worked upon. A 
comprehensive and over-arching framework is being proposed through the upcoming bill 
which would incorporate current as well as futuristic aspects to effectively meet the modern 
day challenges in the emigration sphere. 
 
  
7.      With regard to the recommendation of the Committee for development of a 
comprehensive Labour Market Information database of Indian Diaspora, the Committee note 
from the Action Taken Reply that the Ministry is maintaining comprehensive data in respect 
of Indian workers proceeding for employment overseas through e-Migrate portal to any of 
the 18 notified Emigration Check Required (ECR) countries. The database is quite 
comprehensive and provides, inter alia, gender-wise, destination country-wise, job 
category-wise and state-wise data of Indian workers migrating with Emigration Clearances 
(ECs). The Committee also note that the Ministry intends to expand the scope of e-Migrate 
portal and include recruitment of workers to Emigration Check Not Required (ECNR) 
countries as well. This would help in generating reliable and real-time data on workers, 
including employment trends, wage patterns, occupational sectors, and skilling needs. The 
Committee also note from the reply that a comprehensive and over-arching framework is 

Page | 4 
 
being proposed through the upcoming Emigration Bill which would incorporate current as 
well as futuristic aspects to effectively meet the modern-day challenges in the emigration 
sphere. The Committee are of the view that development of a Labour Market Information 
database of Indian Diaspora would not only improve migration management but help 
migrants in taking informed decisions about various opportunities available abroad 
matching their skills. In essence, a comprehensive LMI database will act as a bridge 
between the Indian diaspora and the global labor market, facilitating better employment 
outcomes, economic empowerment, and contributing to the overall development of both the 
Diaspora and the country. Since a comprehensive LMI database as desired by the 
Committee is yet to be developed, the Committee once again reiterate their earlier 
recommendation that Labour Market Information database of Indian Diaspora including, but 
not to be limited to, real-time data on employment trends, wage patterns, occupational 
sectors, skill mismatches and remittance flow among NRIs, PIOs and OCIs may be 
developed. The Committee are also hopeful that the new Emigration Bill would provide for 
comprehensive and modern framework for building a robust, real-time Labour Market 
Information database.  
 
Policy of ‘Care, Connect, Celebrate and Contribute’ 
 (Recommendation No. 10) 
  
8.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
The Committee observe that India’s Diaspora policy framework is centered around the four 
‘C’s’ namely Care, Connect, Celebrate and Contribute. The Committee note that the shift in 
the Diaspora policy was brought about with the merger of the Ministry of Overseas Indian 

Page | 5 
 
Affairs and the Ministry of External Affairs in January 2016. While acknowledging that the 
4Cs uphold the welfare and protection of our Diaspora, connect them to their roots, and 
celebrate their achievements, the Committee feel that India’s Diaspora policy is still at 
nascent stage. Much needs to be done to tap into the potential of Indians living abroad and 
policy document on its Diaspora needs to be drafted by the Government. The Committee 
do not agree with the Ministry’s perception that the diversity of Indian Diaspora does not 
permit formulation of a single, tight and unique policy. The Committee are of the considered 
view that lack of a dedicated Diaspora policy document hinders our ability to fully leverage 
the potential of the large overseas Indian community, impacting economic growth, foreign 
relations, knowledge transfer, and overall national development by limiting engagement 
with skilled professionals and investors living abroad, while also failing to adequately 
address the concerns and needs of the Diaspora population. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Ministry bring out a policy document on Indian Diaspora in tune with their 
aspirations to serve as a guiding principle for deeper and wider engagement with the 
Diaspora community. 
  
9.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
                         
“The Government of India’s approach to engaging with the Indian Diaspora is focussed on 
the four foundational pillars: Care, Connect, Celebrate, and Contribute. These four ‘C’s form 
the core of a pragmatic, inclusive and dynamic Diaspora Engagement Policy, designed to 
protect the interests of Indians abroad while maximizing the mutual benefits of this global 
community’s links with India. Since the merger of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
(MOIA) with the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) in 2016, this integrated approach has led 
to more coherent, responsive, and effective outreach, which can be outlined as follows. 
 
(I) Care for the Indian communities overseas: Safeguarding the Welfare of Our 
Diaspora 
The “Care” pillar reflects the government’s commitment to the protection and 
welfare of Indian citizens and persons of Indian origin abroad, especially the 
vulnerable and distressed. 
 
Key schemes and mechanisms of the Government to promote the Pillar: 
 
i. Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) – Emergency support for distressed 
overseas Indians, including repatriation, shelter medical aid, legal 
assistance, and transfer of mortal remains. 
ii. One Stop Centers (OSC) – Centers in select Indian Embassies and 
Consulates to provide emergency shelter, police help, and medical and legal 
assistance to women in distress.  
iii. e-Migrate System – Ensures safe and transparent emigration processes, 
especially for ECR passport holders. 

Page | 6 
 
iv. Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY) – A welfare scheme providing 
insurance coverage to Indian workers abroad to ensure their safety and 
support in cases of emergencies. 
v. MADAD Portal – Online platform for consular grievance redressal in a time 
bound manner. 
vi. Pre-Departure Orientation Programme (P-DOT) - One-day training 
programme on soft skills for migrant workers imparted by MEA in 
collaboration with National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC), State 
Governments and other stake holders. 
vii. Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC) – Financial 
assistance for the children of Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs) and Non-
Resident Indians (NRIs) for pursuing undergraduate education at Indian 
universities and institutions. 
viii. Migration and Mobility Agreements – Partnership agreements with key 
countries to harness India’s demographic dividend and foster mobility for 
Indian students, academics, business people, and professionals. 
ix. Assistance in Marital & Child Custody Matters – Support for Indian women 
facing abandonment or abuse abroad. 
x. Support in NRI Property Disputes and Student Grievances – Coordination 
with law enforcement and educational institutions. 
 
(II) Connect with the global network of Indian diaspora: Bridging Indians 
Worldwide with Their Roots 
 
 Under “Connect”, the focus is on forging deeper links between India and its 
global communities through institutional networks and cultural ties.  
 
Key schemes and mechanisms of the Government to promote this Pillar: 
 
i. Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) - A flagship event that provides a platform for 
engagement between the Government and the Diaspora. 
ii. Know India Programme (KIP) – Designed for diaspora youth to explore 
India’s history, heritage, and governance through firsthand experience 
iii. Global Pravasi Rishta Portal – A two-way digital portal to connect the Indian 
Diaspora with the Government of India for dissemination of important 
information and to foster a robust database of the Diaspora through 
voluntary registrations. 
iv. Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora (PCTD) – Grants extended to 
Indian Embassies/Consulates for organizing cultural events abroad for 
promoting heritage and for encouraging the diaspora to stay connected to 
their cultural roots. 
v. Videsh Sampark Programme – Outreach to State governments to address 
the challenges faced by the Indian States to deal with diaspora related 

Page | 7 
 
issues and to suggest efforts to promote robust dialogue between the Indian 
States and their respective Diaspora. 
vi. Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojna (PTDY) – Offers an opportunity for the Indian 
diaspora to visit places of religious and cultural significance in India. 
vii. Bharat Ko Janiye (BKJ) Quiz – Quiz contest for diaspora youth to deepen 
their knowledge of India and organisation of exposure trips for the winners to 
India. 
viii. Social Media Outreach – Daily engagement campaigns like Diaspora India 
Connect on social media platforms 
 
(III)  Celebrate India’s shared heritage with the wide network of global Indian 
diaspora: Honoring Shared Culture and Achievements of the Diaspora 
 
“Celebrate” emphasizes the acknowledgement of India’s rich heritage and the 
remarkable contributions of overseas Indians not only to their host countries, but 
also to the Indian community, society and economy. 
 
Key schemes and mechanisms of the Government directed towards promoting this 
Pillar: 
 
i. Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) – Biennial Convention with special sessions 
to recognize and discuss the contributions of the Indian diaspora in diverse 
domains. 
ii. Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards (PBSA) – India’s highest honor for 
overseas Indians, awarded for their outstanding achievements in myriad 
fields. 
iii. Girmitiya Engagement – Research, outreach, and future establishment of 
Girmitiya Study and Research Center to connect with descendants of 
indentured Indians and celebrate their legacy. 
 
(IV)  Encourage Contributions of the Indian diaspora that drive positive change in 
India: Tapping Diaspora Potential for National Development 
 
The “Contribute” pillar encourages the diaspora to participate in India's 
developmental journey by sharing their knowledge, skills, etc and through 
investments, and innovation. 
 
Key schemes and mechanisms of the Government to promote this Pillar: 
 
i. Knowledge sharing initiatives such as VAJRA (Visiting Advanced Joint 
Research Faculty Scheme), PRABHASS (Pravasi Bharatiya Academic and 
Scientific Sampark) and Vaishvik Bharatiya Vaigyanik (VAIBHAV) 

Page | 8 
 
fellowships, to promote collaborations between global Indian scientists and 
researchers with Indian institutions. 
ii. Promotion of Start-up India, Digital India, and other key programmes that 
welcome diaspora-led innovations and investments. 
iii. Ministry also works closely with the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of 
Commerce, RBI, and other relevant institutions to ensure seamless 
remittance channels for Indian diaspora, promotes Unified Payments 
Interface (UPI) linkages, disseminates updated information regarding tax 
laws, FEMA provisions, Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements, FDI 
norms, etc. 
 While this Ministry has a reasonably well-defined Diaspora Engagement 
Policy based on the aforesaid enumerated 4Cs and has devised effective 
strategies/schemes to promote the same, still it is the considered view and 
experience of this Ministry that the vast diversity of the Indian diaspora demands 
flexibility. So, although this Ministry takes note of the Committee’s recommendation 
to create a tighter, codified Diaspora Policy, it woulde prefer to maintain that a 
“single, tight and unique policy document” on Indian diaspora may not be conducive 
to serve the growing and dynamic aspirations of the Indian diaspora spread across 
the globe because of the inherent diversity and complexity of the diaspora itself. 
Their needs, expectations, legal status, socio-economic contexts vary dramatically 
across regions, from the Silicon Valley to the Gulf region or the Girmitiya countries. 
A central and rigid policy could also undermine or overlook state-level priorities, 
which are often more attuned to specific community needs. A dedicated Diaspora 
policy should also align with the laws of the host country, which differ across 
regions, and may have specific elements such as dual citizenship restrictions, data 
privacy laws, labour rights, etc.  
 The 4C-based Diaspora Policy of the Government functions as a 
comprehensive and dynamic mechanism to engage with the large and diverse 
Indian diaspora that encompasses addressing their welfare, cultural preservation, 
economic collaboration, and institutional dialogue. Going forward, efforts can focus 
on strengthening coordination, enhancing digital access, and expanding the scope 
of existing schemes, so that the 4Cs continue to be the most effective and inclusive 
pathway to fostering a vibrant, connected, and empowered Indian diaspora across 
the globe.” 
 
 10.    The Committee had observed that India’s Diaspora policy framework is centered 
around the four ‘Cs’ namely Care, Connect, Celebrate and Contribute, and at a nascent 
stage. The Committee, therefore, had desired that the Ministry bring out a policy document 
on Indian Diaspora in tune with their aspirations to serve as a guiding principle for deeper 

Page | 9 
 
and wider engagement with the Diaspora community. In response, the Ministry while taking 
note of the recommendation of the Committee have submitted that the vast diversity of the 
Indian diaspora demands flexibility, and a “single, tight and unique policy document” on 
Indian diaspora may not be conducive to serve the growing and dynamic aspirations of the 
Indian diaspora spread across the globe. The Committee have also been informed that 
future efforts can focus on strengthening coordination, enhancing digital access, and 
expanding the scope of existing schemes, so that the 4Cs continue to be the most effective 
and inclusive pathway to fostering a vibrant, connected, and empowered Indian diaspora 
across the globe. The Committee note that the Ministry has designed various 
strategies/schemes to promote the 4Cs. While fully appreciating the view of the Ministry, the 
Committee are constrained to note that lack of a dedicated Diaspora policy document has 
hindered our ability to fully leverage the potential of the large overseas Indian community, 
while also failing to adequately address the concerns and needs of the Diaspora population.  
To address these issues, the Committee are of the view that the present India’s Diaspora 
policy framework which is centered around the four ‘Cs’ needs a review. The Committee, 
therefore, would like the Ministry to once again consider the earlier recommendation and 
draft for implementation of a specific policy document on the Indian Diaspora or take further 
necessary steps so as to leverage the potential of the large overseas Indian community, 
which will also adequately address the concerns.  
 

Page | 10 
 
Prioritization of State-Run Recruitment Agencies  
(Recommendation No. 28) 
  
11.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
“The Committee find that in States like Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, 
etc. there are Recruitment Agencies which have received license from the MEA and act as 
State recruitment agencies. As of now, there are 13 such State Recruitment Agencies in 
various States. In order to ensure safe and ethical recruitment practices, the Committee are 
of the opinion that the Government should prioritize such State-run recruitment agencies, 
which can even adhere to a zero-cost migration model, where employers bear the 
recruitment costs. They, therefore, desire that the Ministry to take it up with all high-
emigration States to encourage them to have their own State- run Recruitment Agencies 
and replicate the best practices of the best performing States in this regard. In addition to 
working out ways and means to strengthen them, without prejudice to the rights of 
legitimate private recruitment agencies, the Government should also incorporate at least 
one State-run Agency into bilateral labour agreements to widen their scope and impact. 
 
12.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
“The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee. The Ministry 
recognizes the role of the state-run recruiting agencies in facilitating overseas employment, 
often aligned with the zero-cost migration model. These agencies have played a vital role in 
reducing migrant vulnerability to exploitation and ensuring greater transparency in the 
recruitment process. 
  As of now there are 14 State-run Recruiting Agencies viz. (i) NORKA Roots & (ii) 
Overseas Development and Employment Promotion Consultants of Kerala (iii) Overseas 
Manpower Corporation Ltd. of Tamil Nadu (iv) Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation of Uttar  
Pradesh (v) Overseas Manpower Company Andhra Pradesh Ltd. of Andhra Pradesh (vi) 
Telangana Overseas Manpower Company Ltd. of Telengana (vii) Rajasthan Skill & 
Livelihoods Development Corporation of Rajasthan (viii) Karnataka State Unorganized 
Workers Society Security Board of Karnataka (ix) Karnataka Vocational Training & Skill 
Development Corporation of Karnataka (x) M/s Pan IIT Alummi Reach for Jharkhand 
Foundation of Jharkhand (xi) Bihar State Overseas Placement Bureau of Bihar, (xii) World 
Skill Center, Odisha, (xiii) Punjab GharGhar Rozgar and Karobar Mission, Punjab and (xiv) 
Haryana Kaushal Rozgar Nigam Limited, Haryana.  The Ministry is engaged with high-
emigration States to encourage the establishment of State-run Recruitment Agency where 
such mechanism is currently absent. With the active support of the Ministry the Haryana 
state has recently registered its state-run recruiting agency ‘Haryana Kaushal Rozgar 
Nigam Limited’ with the Ministry.  

Page | 11 
 
  In order to prioritize the state-run RAs and to protect female domestic workers from 
exploitation/harassment in the destination country, the Ministry has made the process of 
issuance of EC for female workers going for employment in the 18 notified ECR countries 
mandatory only through the above 14 State-run RAs. 
The Ministry also organized a one-day Conclave with the representatives of the MEA 
registered State-run and private Recruiting Agents (RA) Associations on 11 March 2025, 
which was inaugurated by the Minister of State for External Affairs and Environment, Forest 
and Climate Change, Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh. The Conclave aimed at fostering stronger 
collaboration among key stakeholders involved in overseas recruitment including State-run 
recruiting agencies. The event served as a platform for open dialogue between recruiting 
agents, government officials, and other industry participants, with the objective of promoting 
ethical recruitment practices and enhancing transparency in the process. The conclave also 
highlighted best practices in overseas employment and addressed common challenges 
faced by recruiting agents. This initiative reflects the Ministry’s continued commitment to 
ensuring safe, legal and seamless emigration for Indian workers seeking employment 
abroad. 
  The Ministry would assess the feasibility of including at least one State-run 
Recruitment Agency in future bilateral labour agreements or Memorandums of 
Understanding (MoUs), thereby enhancing their institutional role in managing ethical 
recruitment in priority destination countries.”  
 
13.      With a view to ensuring safe and ethical recruitment practices, the Committee had 
desired that the Government prioritize State-run recruitment agencies and take up the 
matter with all high-emigration States to encourage them to have their own State- run 
Recruitment Agencies to widen their scope and impact. They had further desired to 
incorporate at least one State-run Agency into bilateral labour agreements. From the Action 
Taken Reply, the Committee note that these state-run agencies have played a vital role in 
reducing migrant vulnerability to exploitation and ensuring greater transparency in the 
recruitment process, and the Ministry is engaged with high-emigration States to encourage 
the establishment of State-run Recruitment Agency where such mechanism is currently 
absent. The Committee are happy to note that in order to prioritize the state-run RAs and to 
protect female domestic workers from exploitation/harassment in the destination country, 

Page | 12 
 
the Ministry has made the process of issuance of EC for female workers going for 
employment in the 18 notified ECR countries mandatory only through the 14 State-run RAs. 
The Committee also note the assurance given by the Ministry to assess the feasibility of 
including at least one State-run Recruitment Agency in future bilateral labour agreements as 
recommended by the Committee. The Committee are of the view that leveraging state 
agencies would help in ensuring setting high standards for ethical recruitment practices, 
making the migration journey safer, ultimately contributing to better working conditions and 
robust oversight of the entire overseas employment lifecycle. The Committee would like to 
be kept apprised of the developments in the matter.  
 
Need for a Mechanism to Track Labour Migration to Non ECR Counties  
(Recommendation No. 35) 
  
14.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee find that the e-Migrate system captures key data related to the 
Emigration Check Required (ECR) category migrant workers right from when she/he 
applies for foreign employment in the system. Emigrant data is also shared with Embassies 
and Consulates to facilitate easy tracking and assistance when needed. However, the 
Committee note that the Government only tracks people moving to ECR countries with an 
ECR Passport and not migration to non ECR counties.  Though the e-Migrate portal has 
also opened registration for non-ECR countries, such an online registration for Indian 
Emigration Check Not Required (ECNR) passport holders is voluntary and not mandatory.  
Hence, the data is not captured. While noting that the Government only tracks people 
moving to ECR countries with an ECR Passport, the Committee are convinced that it is 
quite important to have a mechanism to detect/track labour migration to even non ECR 
counties. Hence, they recommend that the Government may come up with possible options 
to capture the data despite the constraints faced and apprise the Committee of the same. 
 

Page | 13 
 
15.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 “The concern raised by the Committee is duly acknowledged. As of now, the Ministry 
maintains data in respect of Indian workers, holding Emigration Check Required (ECR) 
passports, proceeding for employment overseas through e-Migrate portal to any of the 18 
notified ECR category countries. The Ministry would have to work with the Bureau of 
Immigration and the Ministry of Labour and Employment to capture the data of labour 
migration to all countries.”  
 
16.      While noting that the Government only tracks people moving to ECR countries, the 
Committee had expressed the importance of having a mechanism to detect/track labour 
migration to even non ECR counties. The Committee note from the Action Taken Reply that 
the Ministry maintains data in respect of Indian workers, holding Emigration Check 
Required (ECR) passports, proceeding for employment overseas through e-Migrate portal to 
any of the 18 notified ECR category countries. This indicates that the registration for Indian 
Emigration Check Not Required (ECNR) passport holders remain voluntary and not 
mandatory. The Committee note from the reply that the Ministry would have to work with the 
Bureau of Immigration and the Ministry of Labour and Employment to capture the data of 
labour migration to all countries. The Committee are of the view that labour migration to 
non-ECR countries is too significant to remain untracked, and the same can be resolved 
through creation of a shared framework with standardized data formats, collection methods, 
and validation processes to ensure consistency across Ministries/Departments. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Government may come 
up with a mechanism to detect/track labour migration even to non-ECR countries. The data 
collected, including from the Governments of the receiving countries, can be shared with 

Page | 14 
 
the embassies and consulates to facilitate easy tracking and assistance when needed. In 
this regard, it is important that MEA works with the Bureau of Immigration and the Ministry 
of Labour and Employment to capture the data of labour migration to all countries. 
Integration of Returnee Migrants  
(Recommendation No. 37) 
  
17.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
  
The Committee note that as per the information available with the Ministry, about 5,95,101 
emigrants have returned to Indian from foreign countries from 2019 to 2024. This is a 
significant number. This surge, largely driven by COVID crisis, economic disruptions, 
stricter immigration policies and a reduction in job opportunities abroad has created 
considerable reintegration challenges. The Committee note that a national level policy on 
re-integration of migrant returnees is still awaited. The Committee further note that Kerala is 
the only State in India that offers economic reintegration and welfare programmes for 
returning migrants, all of which are worth emulating by other States and even other 
countries.  The Committee are of the view that though the responsibility for rehabilitation of 
Indian migrants is currently placed on State Governments, with the Central Government 
providing neither logistical nor financial support, it is high time that this gap is addressed. 
To address this gap, the Government, in coordination with States, should develop a 
sustainable rehabilitation and reintegration policy with shared responsibilities between the 
Centre and State Governments. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Centre 
should assist State Governments through grants and soft loans to help integrate the 
returnee migrants into the domestic industries so that they continue to be economically 
productive. Such a collaborative approach only would ensure a more comprehensive and 
sustainable system for migrant reintegration across India. 
 
18.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
 “The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee. It may, however, be 
noted that responsibility of reintegration of returned Indian migrants rests with respective 
State Governments from where the emigrants belong and not with the Central Government. 
Various State Governments have, therefore, developed ways and means to reintegrate 
workers returning from abroad. 
   During the pandemic, under the Vande Bharat Mission, Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship, Ministry of Civil Aviation, and Ministry of External 
Affairs jointly launched ‘SWADES – Skilled Worker Arrival Database for Employment 

Page | 15 
 
Support’. The initiative aims at empowering the returning citizens with relevant employment 
opportunities by creating a database of qualified citizens based on their skill sets and 
experience to tap into and fulfill demand of Indian and foreign countries. The returning 
citizens are required to fill up an online SWADES Skills Card. The database thus generated 
has been integrated with India’s ASEEM portal. The portal provides employee connect for 
prospective employers.” 
  
 
19. The Committee had noted that about 5,95,101 emigrants have returned to India from 
foreign countries from 2019 to 2024. Noting that rehabilitation of Indian migrants is currently 
left to State Governments, the Committee had recommended that the Centre should assist 
State Governments through grants and soft loans to help integrate the returnee migrants 
into the domestic industries. The Ministry in the Action Taken Reply have informed the 
Committee that the responsibility of reintegration of returned Indian migrants rests with 
respective State Governments and not with the Central Government, and various State 
Governments have, therefore, developed ways and means to reintegrate workers returning 
from abroad. The Committee further note from the reply that the Ministry has jointly 
launched ‘SWADES – Skilled Worker Arrival Database for Employment Support’ with the 
Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, and Ministry of Civil Aviation during 
the pandemic. It aims at empowering the returning citizens with relevant employment 
opportunities by creating a database of qualified citizens based on their skill sets and 
experience to tap into and fulfill demand of Indian and foreign countries. The Committee are 
of the considered view that the Ministry could play a more constructive role to assist the 
states in reintegrating workers returning from abroad. There is no hiding the fact that States 
often lack the financial capacity to design and sustain reintegration programmes. The 

Page | 16 
 
Committee are of the view that reintegration of returnee migrants requires national 
coordination, especially in areas like skill mapping, and industry linkages for their gainful 
reemployment. Treating reintegration as the responsibility of the state only may risk 
wasting this human capital. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier suggestion that 
the Government, in coordination with States, develop a sustainable rehabilitation and 
reintegration policy with shared responsibilities between the Centre and State 
Governments. The Committee are hopeful that the Ministry would give proper consideration 
to this recommendation of the Committee.  
 
Need to Prioritize New Emigration Bill  
(Recommendation No. 38)  
20.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
  
Keeping in view the contemporary global migration dynamics and the requirements of 
Indian citizens, the Committee have underscored the pressing need for a comprehensive 
legislative overhaul to replace the outdated provisions of the Emigration Act 1983 and the 
Committee find that a legislation on Emigration [Overseas Mobility (Facilitation and 
Welfare) Bill, 2024] for the same is on the anvil. This presents a long overdue opportunity to 
reform the recruitment process for seeking overseas employment. The Ministry has 
informed the Committee that the proposed draft is under internal consultation and, 
thereafter, will be put up for public consultation which will be followed up by Inter-Ministerial 
consultations along with the Draft Cabinet Note. Though the efforts to revamp the migration 
management framework through the introduction of a new Bill is commendable, the 
Committee are not happy with the delay in the process despite witnessing harrowing 
incidents of illegal emigration from our country day in and day out. The Committee, hence 
recommend that the Bill should be prioritized and the Committee may be intimated about 
the timelines for presenting the new Bill in both houses of Parliament.   
 
21 The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 “The draft of the Emigration Bill 2024 has been under active consideration with the aim to 
introduce it in the Parliament after finishing due consultation and procedure. The Ministry 
has completed internal consultations and the draft Bill has been sent for inter-ministerial 

Page | 17 
 
consultations in end May 2025. Upon completion of these consultations, the draft bill will be 
put up for public consultation. The final draft will thereafter be submitted for Cabinet’s 
approval and presented to the Parliament. 
 
22. The Committee had recommended that the introduction of Emigration [Overseas 
Mobility (Facilitation and Welfare) Bill, 2024] be prioritized and the Committee intimated 
about the timelines for presenting the new Bill in both houses of Parliament.  The Ministry in 
their action taken reply have informed the Committee that internal consultations on the Bill 
have been completed and the draft Bill had been sent for inter-ministerial consultations in 
end of May 2025. They have submitted that upon completion of these consultations, the 
draft bill will be put up for public consultation, whereafter, the final draft will be submitted 
for Cabinet’s approval and presented to the Parliament. The Committee are constrained to 
note that there has been delay in the timely enactment of the Bill. A comprehensive bill that 
will promote mobility and address the welfare of Indians abroad is the need of the hour. The 
Committee, therefore, while reiterating their earlier recommendation that the Bill should be 
prioritized also urge upon the Ministry to accelerate the timelines in respect of the 
enactment to ensure timely implementation of the proposed reforms. The Committee also 
urge that the Bill be referred to it for Parliamentary consideration.  
 
 Consultations Required for Finalising the New Emigration Bill 
(Recommendation No. 39) 
23. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
 The Committee understand that the proposed Bill to replace the Emigration Act, 1983 aims 
at establishing a hassle-free, robust, transparent and comprehensive emigration 
management framework that facilitates safe and orderly migration for Overseas 
Employment aspirants.  However, to address the challenges posed by evolving landscape, 

Page | 18 
 
wider consultations are required beyond putting it up for public consultation. In this regard 
the Committee urge that once the elements of the Bill are identified, specific consultations 
should be made with the Standing Committee, the State Governments and the Diaspora 
Organisations to make it a healthy Bill worthy of implementation.  
 
24. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 “The recommendation by the Committee is duly noted. The Ministry will hold wide-ranging 
consultation with the objective of incorporating views of various stakeholders 
appropriately.” 
 
25. The Committee are glad to note that in compliance to the recommendation of the 
Committee, the draft bill to replace the Emigration Act, 1983 has been uploaded on the 
MEA’s website for the process of public consultations. The Ministry of External Affairs vide 
its communication dated 10 October 2025 has also requested the Committee to furnish any 
comments/suggestions with regard to the bill. The considered suggestions/comments of 
the Committee on the Draft Bill will be forwarded in due course.  
  
Need to Address Student Migration in the Emigration Bill 
(Recommendation No. 40) 
26. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
 The Committee also note that under emigration, the student migration is generally not 
covered and currently, the Emigration Bill does not cover student migration. But the 
Committee see from the available data and surveys that the student community form a 
sizeable per cent of all emigrants from the country. When irregular and unscrupulous 
recruitment elements misguide students about universities and job opportunities abroad, a 
large number of students end up doing menial jobs, not wanting to come back empty-
handed and become a socio-economic problem in the countries from where they migrate. 
So, the Committee desire that the Ministry should give due importance to student migration 
also in the new Emigration Bill and student recruitment agencies need to be put under the 
scanner. 
 
27. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 

Page | 19 
 
 “The growing trend of Indian students seeking education abroad is evident. While the 
Emigration Bill’s focus would be primarily on migration for overseas employment, the 
Ministry recognises the importance of student welfare. As an instrument for ensuring the 
welfare of Indian students, safety and security abroad, the Migration and Mobility 
Partnership Agreements have explicit provisions for facilitating the ease of mobility as well 
as furthering opportunities for students. Provisions to facilitate post-study pathways, such 
as employment search periods and internships are also included. The MADAD Portal 
allows for voluntary registration of Indian students abroad. Database of students collected 
through the portal enables us to contact the students in the event of an emergency.” 
 
28. Given the large share of student community amongst the emigrants and their 
vulnerability to unethical recruiters, the Committee had desired that student migration also 
be given due importance in the new Emigration Bill and student recruitment agencies be put 
under the scanner. The Committee note that the Ministry, in their Action Taken Reply, while 
acknowledging the importance of student welfare have, however, remained silent on putting 
the recruitment agencies under the scanner as recommended by the Committee. While the 
Committee agree that the Migration and Mobility Partnership Agreements have provisions 
for facilitating the ease of mobility as well as furthering opportunities for students, there is 
no refuting the fact that these are bilateral and selective, covering only certain countries. 
This, in the opinion of the Committee, leaves a large number of students in countries 
outside such agreements without adequate protection or support. The Committee also note 
that MADAD Portal allows for voluntary registration of India students abroad. However, the 
Committee are of the considered view that the portal does not present a complete picture. 
Since registration is voluntary, there is a strong likelihood that many students remain 
outside its ambit. Furthermore, the Committee observe that the portal is limited to 
facilitating emergency contact and does not extend to sustained welfare measures such as 
mentorship, and career guidance.  The Committee are of the view that this would have left a 

Page | 20 
 
large number of students vulnerable to exploitation by irregular and unscrupulous 
recruitment agents. There is an urgent need for legislation to explicitly address the issues 
being faced by the student community, particularly the absence of oversight over student 
recruitment agencies. Accordingly, the Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation 
and desire that the Ministry incorporate dedicated, comprehensive measures to address the 
challenges faced by the student community in the new Emigration Bill. 
Utilisation of the Indian Community Welfare Fund 
(Recommendation No. 43) 
29. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
 Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) has been set up in all Indian Missions and Posts 
abroad to meet the contingency expenditure incurred by them for carrying our various on-
site welfare activities for Overseas Indian citizens on a means-tested basis. This is a self-
sustained fund without any budgetary support and sourced from service charges on 
issuance of Visa/OCI/PIO cards; Passport services and attestation of documents; voluntary 
contribution by Indian community; and income from interests accrued through investments 
and deposits. The Committee note that the ICWF guidelines cover three key areas namely 
Assisting Overseas Indian nationals in distress situations (Boarding and Lodging, Air 
passage, Legal Assistance, Emergency Medical Care, Transportation of Mortal Remains), 
Community Welfare activities and Improvement in Consular services. However, the 
Committee are surprised to note that the overall utilisation of the Indian Community Welfare 
Fund is apparently less than fifty per cent of the collected fund despite sizeable Indian 
Diaspora in requirement of assistance on all aspects covered under the fund. It is felt that 
even after expanding the scope of the fund, not enough assistance could be extended to 
the distressed Indian nationals and, hence, desire to be apprised of the reasons for the 
same. The Committee, while underscoring the need for a more generous approach to the 
requirements of assistance by our Diaspora also desire that our missions should generate 
more awareness regarding the ICW Fund, the assistance provided therein and the way to 
get in touch with the Missions/Posts in case of emergencies rather than resorting to the 
plea that Indian emigrant workers proceeding abroad are apprised about ICWF during 
PDOT.  
30. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
“The Government has established various mechanisms to enable Indian nationals abroad 
to reach out to the Indian Missions in case they need any assistance. Indian nationals can 
contact the Missions/Posts through various channels like walk-in, email, social media, 

Page | 21 
 
multilingual 24x7 emergency numbers and also grievance redressal portals like MADAD, 
CPGRAMS, eMigrate etc. In addition, Indian Missions/Posts abroad have established Toll 
Free Helplines, whatsapp numbers and have launched mobile Apps to enable Indian 
nationals contact respective Indian Missions/Posts when in distress or in emergency 
situation. 
  Whenever any Indian national approaches the Mission with a grievance, all possible 
help is provided promptly whether through ICWF or other means, as the situation demands. 
All the above-mentioned means of approaching the Mission for grievance redressal are 
widely known in the diaspora community through WhatsApp groups of the community, 
website of the Mission and social gathering places like temples, gurudwaras, etc 
 
31. Concerned to note that the overall utilization of the Indian Community Welfare Fund, 
which is a self-sustained fund, remains below fifty per cent of the amount collected, the 
Committee had desired that they be apprised of the reasons. The Committee had also 
desired that our missions abroad to generate more awareness regarding the Fund. 
However, the Action Taken Reply has only indicated the various mechanisms put in place to 
enable Indian nationals abroad to reach out to the Indian Missions in case they need any 
assistance, such as walk-in, email, social media, multilingual 24x7 emergency numbers, 
grievance redressal portals like MADAD, CPGRAMS, eMigrate etc. No reasons have been 
provided in the reply for low utilization of funds under ICW fund. The concern of the 
Committee is that low utilization of fund could be due to reasons, such as not extending 
enough assistance to the distressed Indian nationals despite sizeable Indian Diaspora in 
requirement of assistance on all aspects covered under the fund.  While appreciating the 
Ministry for various measures put in place to enable Indian nationals abroad to reach out to 
the Indian Missions, the Committee once again impress upon the Ministry to apprise the 
Committee of the reasons for low utilization of funds under the Indian Community Welfare 
Fund. The Committee further reiterate their earlier recommendation that our missions 

Page | 22 
 
should generate more awareness regarding the ICW Fund so that Indian diaspora in 
distress may avail assistance under this fund. 
 
Fund for Transportation of Mortal Remains 
(Recommendation No. 46) 
32. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
 The Committee are aware that the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) is used for 
transportation of mortal remains of deceased Indian nationals to India, under the provisions 
of ICWF guidelines. In 2002, an amount of Rs. 8,45,83,770/- was used for the same 
whereas in 2023, the expenditure incurred out of ICWF on transportation of mortal remains 
was Rs. 2,32,51,964/-.  The Committee find from the data provided by the Ministry that 
since 2012 till June 2024, airlifting of 3808 mortal remains of Indian nationals were done by 
Missions/Posts using ICWF. The Committee are of the feeling that as of now Indian 
Community Welfare Fund is being utilized in limited cases which in evident from the small 
number of cases. According to the Committee, the right to get the mortal remains 
transported to the homeland at the expense of the Government, particularly with less well-
off people should be recognized. While urging the empowerment of the Missions with 
adequate funds, the Committee desire that the procedure for utilizing the Indian Community 
Welfare Fund for transportation of mortal remains may be further simplified and the 
authorities vested with discretionary powers in our Missions to take action without awaiting 
clearance from New Delhi. Missions may also be sensitized to take a humane approach 
rather than a bureaucratic one in offering help, especially financial assistance, in such 
cases.  
 
33. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 “The Ministry fully understands the emotional situation during the transportation of mortal 
remains or cremation/burial of deceased Indian nationals. Accordingly, Indian Missions 
abroad and the staff of the Consular wing give utmost importance to prompt resolution of 
such cases and extend all possible support to the family of the deceased Indian national. 
Indian Missions/Posts coordinate with the host government for expeditious issuance of 
death certificate and other documents. Transportation of mortal remains, being a delicate 
situation, is handled with care and sensitivity by the Missions/Posts and all assistance 
under ICWF is rendered in an expeditious manner. 
 
34. Noting that since 2012 till June 2024, airlifting of 3808 mortal remains of Indian 
nationals were done by Missions/Posts using Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF), the 

Page | 23 
 
Committee had recommended that the procedure for utilizing the ICWF for transportation of 
mortal remains be further simplified and the authorities vested with discretionary powers in 
our Missions may be allowed to take action without awaiting clearance from New Delhi. It is 
comforting for the Committee to note that Indian Missions abroad and the staff of the 
Consular wing give utmost importance to the prompt resolution of such cases and extend 
all possible support to the family of the deceased Indian national by coordinating with the 
host government for expeditious issuance of death certificate and other documents. 
Transportation of mortal remains, and all assistance under ICWF is rendered in an 
expeditious manner.  However, no reply has been furnished by the Ministry on the 
recommendation of the Committee to simplify the procedure for utilizing the ICW Fund. The 
Committee would greatly appreciate if the Ministry could provide the measures taken 
towards simplification of procedure for utilizing the Indian Community Welfare Fund for 
transportation of mortal remains, and vesting of discretionary powers with Missions in such 
matters as suggested by the Committee. The Committee are of the view that procedural 
delay in taking administrative approval should not come in the way of rendering timely 
assistance to the affected families and individuals. The Committee desire that the Ministry 
looks into the issue and apprises them of the steps taken in this regard.  
 
Videsh Sampark Programme 
(Recommendation No. 60) 
35. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee note that the Videsh Sampark Programme aims at engaging with the 
relevant stakeholders within the State Governments. It gives a platform for organizing 

Page | 24 
 
brainstorming sessions with the State Governments on various challenges faced by the 
Indian Diaspora overseas and to enhance engagement with the Indian States to address 
the same. The Committee have been informed that under this programme, conferences are 
held in the State capital where MEA officials brief senior State Government officials and 
other stakeholders in the State about the initiatives, programmes and schemes 
implemented by the Ministry. The Ministry is, in fact, enthused that the utility of this 
Programme in sensitizing the State Governments on issues pertaining to the overseas 
Indians cannot be overstated. However, much to the surprise and anguish of the 
Committee, it is observed during the examination of the subject that many States are left 
uncovered under the programme for years together as the Ministry has been conducting on 
an average one or two Videsh Sampark Programmes in a year. So far Videsh Sampark 
Programmes have been conducted with State Governments of Telengana in May 2017, 
Maharashtra in August 2017, Kerala in September 2017, Gujarat in August 2018, Madhya 
Pradesh in September 2018, Karnataka in February 2020, Punjab and Haryana in June 
2023, Bihar in July 2024, Tripura in July 2024 and Uttarakhand in September 2024. The 
Committee feel that there is serious need to look into the schedule of Videsh Sampark 
Programme to ensure frequent and wider engagement/ consultation with the States. The 
Committee, urge the Ministry to look into the feasibility of conducting the programme zone-
wise, so that representatives from more than one State can benefit from the engagement.  
 
36. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 “The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee. The Ministry has 
been actively pursuing the matter of organizing the Videsh Samapark Programme with the 
State Governments of India and to seek their consent for mutually agreed dates to host 
them. In recent months, Ministry has written to the State governments of Odisha, 
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and 
West Bengal, to seek interest for organizing Videsh Sampark Program in their States. 
However, Ministry has not yet received any response from the Governments in these 
States.  
   The issues that are raised during such Programmes are usually state specific in 
nature. Different State Governments face different challenges concerning its Diaspora and 
possess different comparative advantages for offering varying opportunities for trade, 
investment and tourism to the Indian diaspora community overseas. Therefore, it is this 
Ministry’s considered view that organizing Zonal VSPs may not be effective. 
 
37 Observing that many States are left uncovered under the Videsh Sampark 
programme aimed at engaging with relevant stakeholders within the state governments, the 
Committee had expressed the view that there is a serious need to look into the schedule of 

Page | 25 
 
Videsh Sampark Programme to ensure frequent and wider engagement/ consultation with 
the States. The Committee had also urged the Ministry to look into the feasibility of 
conducting the programme zone-wise, so that representatives from more than one State can 
benefit from the engagement. In response the Ministry have informed the Committee that 
the State governments of Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, 
Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and West Bengal have been approached by the Ministry for 
organizing Videsh Sampark Program in their States. Response from these State 
Governments are still awaited. The Ministry have also submitted that since the issues raised 
during such Programmes are usually state specific in nature, therefore organizing Zonal 
VSPs may not be effective. While acknowledging the Ministry’s views as justified, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry continue to pursue the matter with states for organizing 
state-level Videsh Sampark programme at various states.  
Standard Operating Procedures for Student Outreach 
(Recommendation No. 65) 
 
38. The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
 The Committee have been informed that the Indian Missions/Posts abroad invite students 
enrolled in various Universities under their jurisdiction for welcome ceremonies organized 
almost as soon as they reach the foreign shores for pursuing higher studies. Heads of 
Indian Missions/Posts also organize Orientation Programmes for Indian students and brief 
them on challenges / threats, if any, that they may confront during their stay in foreign lands 
and mechanisms to take counter measures. Senior Embassy officials visit Educational 
Institutions, interact with Indian students and their associations. However, these efforts do 
not seem to yield much. Being a country having the highest number of students studying 
abroad, next only to China, the Committee urge the Ministry to put in place Standard 
Operating Procedures regarding student outreach and engagement by our Missions 
abroad. In the absence of such SOPs, emergency response mechanism of the 
Missions/posts in crisis situations would be far from effective. 

Page | 26 
 
39. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 “This Ministry reassures the Committee that safety and welfare of the Indian student 
community abroad is amongst the top priorities of the Government of India. India has 
among the largest student communities studying abroad, and such students are not a 
monolithic or homogenous group. Their academic levels, fields of study, cultural and 
linguistic diversity vary greatly, and they are spread across the globe. The needs of 
students differ from region to region, especially in terms of support systems, academic 
stress, and job prospects. Moreover, host countries differ significantly in terms of their 
domestic legal frameworks, educational structure, and immigration policies. It is possible 
that a particular type of outreach that is considered as a support to Indian students in one 
country may be seen as an interference in another. Since the issues and the support 
required vary greatly from country to country and from university to university, they are best 
addressed on a case-to-case basis. Therefore, having a uniform Standard Operating 
Procedure for engaging with the Indian students might prove counterproductive. 
  The Heads of Embassies/Consulates and the staff are sensitized and well versed 
on the issues faced by the Indian students abroad, resulting from their frequent interactions 
with the student bodies, university officials and local authorities. Indian 
Embassies/Consulates abroad encourage Indian students travelling abroad for higher 
studies to register with them as also on the MADAD Portal so that their grievances and 
outstanding issues can be addressed in a time bound manner. They are also encouraged 
to remain connected on a regular basis and all possible efforts are made to respond to the 
outstanding issues faced by them on a priority basis. The grievances of the students are 
responded to almost on a real time basis through telephone calls, walk-ins, emails, social 
media, 24x7 emergency helplines, open houses and the MADAD Portal.  Any complaint 
received from the Indian students abroad are taken up with the concerned 
University/Institution and the host Government, as the case may be for requisite action. 
 Cases of untoward incidents are immediately taken up by the Indian Embassies/Consulates 
abroad with the concerned authorities of the host country to ensure that they are properly 
investigated and the perpetrators are punished. During emergencies or crisis situations, 
Indian Embassies/Consulates abroad pro-actively help distressed/stranded Indian students 
overseas by providing them food, shelter, medicines and ensure their return/evacuation to 
India as soon as possible. During the last few years, stranded Indian students were 
evacuated to India under the Vande Bharat Mission, Operation Ganga (Ukraine) and 
Operation Ajay (Israel) from countries around the world. The return of many Indian students 
from Bangladesh was also facilitated by the High Commission of India in Dhaka.  
  This Ministry notes and welcomes the Committee’s valuable observation to ensure 
effective emergency response mechanism for Indian students living abroad during crisis 
situations.” 
 
 

Page | 27 
 
40. India, being a country having the highest number of students studying abroad, next 
only to China, the Committee had urged the Ministry to put in place Standard Operating 
Procedures regarding student outreach and engagement by our Missions abroad. In 
response, the Ministry, while assuring that safety and welfare of the Indian student 
community abroad is amongst the top priorities of the Government of India, have however 
submitted that having a uniform Standard Operating Procedure for engaging with Indian 
students might prove ‘counter-productive’, considering inter-alia that students are not a 
monolithic or homogenous group. Their academic levels, fields of study, cultural and 
linguistic diversity vary greatly, and they are spread across the globe. The Ministry have 
further submitted that the issues and the support required with respect to students vary 
greatly from country to country and from university to university and are best addressed on 
a case-to-case basis. The Committee highly appreciate the exemplary service rendered by 
India Mission abroad to evacuate students under the Vande Bharat Mission, Operation 
Ganga (Ukraine) and Operation Ajay (Israel), the return of many Indian students from 
Bangladesh which was also facilitated by the High Commission of India in Dhaka. The 
Committee, however, feel that many challenges such as safety, emergency response, 
financial vulnerability, and grievance redressal, etc are common across geographies. A 
baseline SOP would provide minimum guaranteed standards of support, while still allowing 
flexibility for country-specific adaptations. While acknowledging that certain issues may 
best be handled on case-to-case basis, the Committee are of the view that Standard 
Operating Procedures regarding student outreach and engagement by our Missions abroad 
could be put in place. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and 

Page | 28 
 
urge the Ministry to have a relook to put in place Standard Operating Procedures regarding 
student outreach and engagement by our Missions abroad. 

Page | 29 
 
Chapter-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED Y THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation No. 1 
Conversion of PIO Cards to OCI Cards 
The Committee note that a Person of Indian Origin (PIO) is one who is presently holding a 
foreign passport and whose any of the ancestors was an Indian national while a Non-
Resident Indian (NRI) is a citizen of Indian holding an Indian Passport and is ordinarily 
residing outside India. An OCI Cardholder is a person registered as Overseas Citizen of 
India (OCI) under section 7A of The Citizenship Act, 1955 and enjoys benefits like multiple 
entry, multi-purpose lifelong visa to visit India and parity with NRIs in financial, economic 
and educational fields except in the acquisition of agricultural or plantation properties. The 
Committee further note that the Scheme of PIO cards has been discontinued since 2015 
and all PIO cardholders (handwritten and machine-readable) have been advised to convert 
their PIO card to OCI card before December 31, 2025. While appreciating the merger of 
PIO and OCI Cards, the Committee note that despite a decade of discontinuation of the 
PIO Scheme, there are still a large number of PIO Card holders who are yet to convert 
them to OCI cards. As per available data, only 51,58,262 OCI cards have been issued so 
far. Considering the fact that there are over 19.57 million PIOs spread across the globe, the 
response under the OCI Card Scheme has been slow and the number of OCI cards issued 
is far inadequate. The Committee, hence, feel that there is an urgent need to dispel any 
apprehensions that the overseas Indians may have in this regard and urge the Ministry to 
take proactive steps towards wider dissemination of the information that the process is not 
automatic and the PIO Card holders need to formally apply for an OCI card to receive a 
physical, machine-readable document as handwritten PIO cards are no longer accepted for 
travel due to international standards. Concerted efforts through social media platforms, 
Diaspora organisations, State Governments and other stakeholders may be taken so as to 
ensure the completion of conversion of all PIO cards to OCI cards by the deadline of 31 
December 2025. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has taken note of the suggestions of the Parliamentary Standing Committee. Vide O.M. 
No. 26011/MISC/71/2018-OCI dated 02 January 2025, Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) 
informed Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) that the Bureau of Immigration (BoI) will accept 
PIO cards as valid travel documents till 31.12.2025 alongwith valid foreign passport and Indian 
Immigration Check Post(s) will continue to consider all PIO cards valid for exit / entry into India 

Page | 30 
 
till 31.12.2025. This extension of timeline is subject to the condition that if in the meantime any 
deadline is notified by the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO) thereby making 
hand written PIO cards invalid, then PIO cardholders may have to obtain appropriate visa from 
Indian Missions / Posts. Further, existing PIO cardholders were to be informed that no further 
extension will be given and they will have to get their PIO cards converted to OCI card by 
31.12.2025, else they will have to get Visa from the Indian Missions / Posts abroad for travel to 
India and service of ‘New Visa’ from FRROs on the e-FRRO online portal if they are already 
living in India. Accordingly, MEA vide circular dated 13 January 2025 conveyed to all the 
Indian Embassies / Consulates abroad and advised them to give wide publicity about the 
discontinuation of PIO as a valid travel document by 31 Dec 2025 and need for applying for OCI 
card for existing PIO card holders through the Embassy’s/Consulate’s websites and social media 
handles and also through community groups and diaspora organizations. At the same time our 
Embassies/Consulates were also directed to continue advising existing PIO cardholders to apply 
for conversion of PIO cards to OCI cards, as per the extant guidelines at the earliest.  
 
The latest reminder on this was sent to all Embassies and Consulates on 26 May 2025.  
 
Recommendation No.11 
Working Group on Schemes/Programmes for the Welfare of Diaspora 
 
The Committee note that a Working Group was constituted under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (CPV&OIA) to analyze the objectives, working and challenges of various 
schemes/programmes/initiatives for the welfare of the Indian Diaspora and the group met 
for the first time on 22 December, 2021. However, no meeting is seen to have been held 
since then. The Committee underline that regular meetings of the Working Group are 
imperative for identifying potential issues in the implementation of schemes, facilitating 
communication between different departments, and making informed decisions to achieve 
better policy outcomes. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to ensure biannual 
meeting of the Working Group to analyze the objectives, working and challenges of various 
schemes/programmes/initiatives for the welfare of the Indian Diaspora and intimate the 
Committee about the schedule worked out for holding the meetings. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Joint Working Group (JWG) was constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary (CPV & 
OIA) and Heads of Divisions of the erstwhile OIA-I, OIA-II (now Emigration Policy & Welfare 

Page | 31 
 
and Diaspora Engagement Divisions, respectively), CPV , PSP and OE&PGE Divisions as its 
members. The Working Group met on 22.12.2021 to carry out a comprehensive review of all the 
existing schemes and programmes, as well as new initiatives undertaken by MEA since transition 
of these Divisions from the erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) to MEA, 
besides to review the Programmes which have since been closed/wound up. The Working Group 
had recommended inclusion of medical courses under the Scholarship Programme for Diaspora 
Children (SPDC) Scheme of Ministry and provision of 50% reservation of seats for women 
under SPDC. Both these recommendations have been implemented since then.  
 
Since Secretary (CPV & OIA) chairs weekly meetings with the Heads of the afore-mentioned 
respective Divisions (who are also members of the JWG) under his charge to discuss issues in 
their respective domains and thus continuously monitors the progress of various schemes, it was 
found that further continuation of the Working Group would be superfluous and redundant. As 
the purpose of the Working Group had been achieved, it was subsequently dissolved.  
 
However, subsequent to the recommendation of the Committee, this Ministry has decided to hold 
meetings of the Working Group, as and when necessary, to deliberate upon effectiveness of 
various schemes/ programmes/ initiatives of the Government for engaging with the Diaspora and 
to address challenges for securing the latter’s welfare. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.12 
 
All-of-Government Approach in Diaspora Matters 
 
The Committee understand that India’s engagement with its Diaspora has moved from 
‘All of Ministry approach’ towards an ‘All-of-Government approach’ in which other 
wings of the Government, other Ministries and Departments as well as the State 
Governments are involved in all aspects of Diaspora affairs.  The Committee have been 
informed that the collaborative model of ‘All-of-Government approach’ ensures that the 
diverse and evolving needs of the Diaspora are met more effectively by drawing on the 
expertise and resources of multiple government stakeholders. The Committee, however, 
note from the testimony received from the State representatives that the State 
Governments do not feel connected most of the time. Since the concerns of Indian Diaspora 
transcend Ministries and are largely State specific, the Committee recommend that regular 
consultations are held with States to align concerns/issues of the Diaspora with the policy 
priorities.   
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry agrees with the Committee’s observation that participation and cooperation of 
multiple government stakeholders, particularly the State governments, is crucial in ensuring 

Page | 32 
 
effective engagement with the diaspora. The State governments have a significant and 
increasingly strategic role in shaping diaspora-related policies, since the concerns of the Indian 
diaspora are largely state specific. Therefore, this Ministry organizes ‘Videsh Sampark 
Programmes’ whereby the States are apprised of the various Diaspora Engagement initiatives 
and the Consular and Visa related issues, besides taking feedback from the State government and 
its agencies. Ministry regularly reaches out to the State governments soliciting interest in holding 
Videsh Sampark Programs and to partner in other diaspora related initiatives such as Pravasi 
Bharatiya Divas and Know India Programme. Ministry has recently written to the State 
Governments of Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Assam, 
Arunachal Pradesh and West Bengal for organizing Videsh Sampark Program in these States. 
The response from these States is awaited. The Ministry will endeavour to increase the frequency 
of such programmes in order to connect more strongly with the State governments on diaspora 
issues. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.13 
Missions as Home Away from Home.  
 
The Committee are informed that the Indian Missions/Posts abroad works with the motto 
‘Indian Embassies: Home away from Home’ and a robust system of grievance redressal 
which includes walk-in, email, multilingual 24x7 emergency numbers, grievance redressal 
portal like MADAD, CPGRAMS, e-Migrate, and social media etc. is in place in all 
Embassies. However, the Committee are concerned about the extent to which our missions 
abroad are accessible or inaccessible to NRI workers and students. Despite having every 
mechanism possible to help and facilitate our Diaspora in our Missions, the experience of 
many members of the common Diaspora appears to be on the contrary. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that all mission staff should be given specialized training in gender 
sensitivity, cultural awareness, labour laws, and rights of migrant workers to equip them 
provide more empathetic and informed support to our Diaspora facing diverse challenges 
abroad so that our Missions actually become ‘Home away from Home’. 
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry agrees with the Committee’s emphasis on the importance of having a robust 
system of grievance redressal. Ministry constantly strives to realize the motto ‘Indian Embassies: 
Home away from Home’, in order to ensure the safety and welfare of the Indian diaspora living 
abroad. Indian Embassies and Consulates abroad remain vigilant and closely monitor any 

Page | 33 
 
possible untoward incident concerning the Indian diaspora. Such incidents are immediately taken 
up with the concerned authorities of the host country to ensure that the cases are properly 
investigated and the perpetrators are punished. These issues are also raised during meetings with 
Government officials of the countries concerned, including at the highest levels, as appropriate. 
Any issue pertaining to Indians abroad is thus dealt with by Indian Embassies/ Consulates on 
priority and distressed Indian nationals are provided all possible consular assistance, including 
emergency medical care and boarding/ lodging, whenever required. The Heads of Indian 
Embassies/ Consulates play a crucial leadership role in setting the tone and standards for how the 
Embassies/ Consulates serve the Indian diaspora and ensure that the staff are gender sensitive, 
culturally aware, well-versed in labour rights etc. Feedback through various channels, such as 
walk-in, email, multilingual 24x7 emergency numbers, Town Halls, grievance redressal portals 
like MADAD, CPGRAMS, e-Migrate, Open Houses, and social media etc., which are in place in 
all Embassies and Consulates, have been largely positive. The Ministry has noted the 
Committee’s recommendation and will continue to actively monitor the systemic grievances of 
the Indian diaspora to support them in their challenges and to serve them better. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.14 
Handling Grievances of Diaspora 
 
Keeping in view the fact that the Indian Missions/Posts are the direct link between India 
and its Diaspora community, the Committee desire that Embassies adopt standardized and 
transparent policies for handling grievances, ensuring that all cases are reviewed 
systematically rather than through ad-hoc consular outreach and contact. Responses 
should focus on addressing root causes and offering long-term solutions to migrant issues. 
The presence of multiple contact points and the lack of standardized operating procedures 
hinder timely resolution of grievances affecting migrants. The Committee, hence, desire 
that our Embassies should maintain a publicly accessible database that tracks complaints 
and ensure transparency in providing essential information including contact details of 
Nodal Officers. 
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry has noted the recommendations concerning the need for greater standardization, 
transparency, and systemic handling of grievances in Indian Missions and Posts abroad. 
 
MEA has instituted a uniform grievance redressal mechanism across Embassies through the 
MADAD portal, which offers a centralized platform for registering, tracking, and resolving 

Page | 34 
 
consular grievances. Each complainant receives a unique reference number and its progress and 
the escalation levels are publicly visible and time-bound. The Ministry closely monitors the 
status of the pending grievances and reminders/ instructions are given to the concerned Embassy/ 
Consulate, as and when required. The performance of the consular and community affairs wings 
of the Embassies/ Consulates are periodically evaluated by the Ministry. Additionally, Indian 
Embassies/ Consulates respond to citizen complaints received via the CPGRAMS portal and 
integrates that data into performance reviews. Through such efforts, the Ministry strives to 
improve the consular services provided by its Embassies/ Consulates abroad, avoid ad-hoc 
approaches and ensure timely redressal of grievances. 
 
Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) for common grievance categories such as passport issues, 
employment disputes, repatriation of dead bodies, emergency repatriation, etc., are provided in 
the Consular Manual and are implemented across Indian Embassies/ Consulates abroad. The 
Consular camps, prison visits, labour camp visits and other consular outreach activities are held 
in a time bound manner and are documented to avoid ad-hoc methods. All Indian Embassies and 
Consulates have designated Nodal Officers for addressing different grievances, whose names, 
functions and contact details are published on the website of the Embassy/ Consulate. A 24x7 
emergency helpline is available in all Indian Embassies/Consulates, which is prominently 
displayed on their websites. 
 
Indian emigrants can also contact the Indian Embassies/Consulates through various channels like 
walk-in, email, Open Houses, other grievance redressal portals like CPGRAMS, eMigrate, social 
media, toll free helplines and Whatsapp numbers. Embassies/Consulates have also launched 
Mobile Apps to enable Indian nationals contact respective Indian Embassies/Consulates when in 
distress or in emergency situations. Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras (PBSK) have also been 
set up in New Delhi and at Dubai (UAE), Riyadh & Jeddah (Saudi Arabia), Kuala Lumpur 
(Malaysia) and London (UK) to provide assistance, guidance and counselling to Indians in 
distress. 
 
This Ministry also endeavours to take concrete steps to address systemic migrant welfare issues, 
such as signing Migration, Mobility and Labour related MOUs with other countries to ensure 
structured dispute resolution and protection frameworks. Pre-Departure Orientation Programs 
(PDOT) and e-Migrate reforms are instituted to address root causes of grievances such as 
contract fraud and lack of awareness. 
 

Page | 35 
 
The Ministry reiterates its commitment to providing transparent, responsive, and standardized 
consular services to every Indian citizen abroad.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.15 
Local Language Capacity in Missions 
 
The Committee observe that there is not enough local language capacity in our missions in 
terms of the languages spoken by the migrant labourers. This lack of State-specific liaisons 
within embassies complicates communication and delays necessary interventions. Though 
the Ministry has maintained that communication so far has not been a hindrance in 
addressing labour issues and that the officers/officials in the Ministry of External Affairs, 
coming from different States of India with diverse social background, have the ability to 
directly interact with the migrant labourers in their native language to address their issues, 
the Diaspora Organisations which cater to grievances affecting migrants at ground level 
belie the claim. The Committee feel that it is important to address the issue of local 
language capacity so that poor emigrants do not feel that they cannot understand what is 
being said to them by the representatives of their own country. Hence, the Committee 
desire that the Ministry take into consideration the language of the major Diaspora groups 
present in a particular country while deploying officers/staff in our Missions, especially in 
Gulf countries. 
Reply of the Government 
 
This Ministry acknowledges that effective communication is critical to consular outreach and 
grievance redressal. While the Embassy/Consulate officials are drawn from diverse linguistic and 
cultural backgrounds, the Ministry takes several steps to bridge the language gaps. In countries 
with significant Indian diaspora of a particular language, such as Malayalees in the Gulf region 
or Punjabis in Canada, Embassies/Consulates make sure that sufficient local staff are recruited 
who are able to speak that language. Embassies and Consulates routinely conduct consular 
outreach programmes in regional languages, often using diaspora leaders and welfare 
organizations to facilitate communication. Embassies/Consulates also maintain close 
coordination with State/linguistic diaspora associations in their respective jurisdictions to address 
state-specific grievances. 
 

Page | 36 
 
While Embassies/Consulates are not structured by state-based quotas, the Ministry acknowledges 
the importance of regional and cultural familiarity. Therefore, Officers and officials with relevant 
language skills or regional experience are preferentially considered for postings in high-migrant-
density regions, within the bounds of Service rules, diplomatic requirements and administrative 
feasibility. 
 
The Ministry is committed to strengthening the linguistic and cultural responsiveness of Indian 
Embassies/Consulates to better serve all segments of the overseas population, especially migrant 
labourers. While considerable progress has already been made through hiring practices, outreach 
innovations, and partnerships with diaspora organizations, the Committee’s suggestions offer 
valuable direction for further reforms. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.16 
Community Welfare Wing in Missions 
 
The Committee note that a dedicated Community Welfare Wing has been established in 
Missions and Posts where there is a sizeable Indian community. The Committee are of the 
view that such wings could facilitate closer contact between Indian Diaspora and Indian 
Missions/Posts. The Committee urge the Ministry do apprise them about the objectives 
achieved through such community welfare wings in Missions/Posts and establish 
Community Welfare Wing in all important Indian Missions/Posts on priority basis. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has established Community Welfare Wings in Embassies/Consulates with large 
Indian populations, especially in Gulf countries, Southeast Asia, and select Western nations. 
These wings serve as dedicated units and focus on grievance redressal of migrant workers, 
labour welfare and outreach programs, coordination with diaspora organisations, emergency 
assistance and repatriation, etc. Besides the India based officials, locally recruited staff who 
possess community-level outreach experience, are also deployed in these wings. 
 
This Ministry agrees with the Committee’s recommendation to expand Community Welfare 
Wings to all important Embassies in principle and is already moving in that direction. Currently, 
such wings are operational in all Embassies/Consulates with significant population of Indian 

Page | 37 
 
workers. The Ministry remains fully committed to strengthening the Community Welfare Wing 
model as a vital component of India’s global diaspora engagement architecture. Expansion of 
these units to additional Embassies is under active consideration in line with need assessment 
and resource optimization. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.21 
Impact Assessment of MMPAs and LMAs 
 
The Committee acknowledge that Migration and Mobility Agreements (MMPAs) and 
Labour Mobility Agreements (LMAs) are aimed at providing safe and legal migration 
opportunities to Indian workers in potential employment destinations all over the world. 
However, the impact of such MoUs/Agreements and the manner in which they have 
translated into better deals and more job opportunities for potential migrant workers are 
not known. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should carry out an impact 
assessment of the existing Migration and Mobility Agreements and Labour Mobility 
Agreements while monitoring the implementation aspect of such MoUs/Agreements to 
ensure that the issues of interest of the migrant workers, including their grievances, are 
actually addressed through the said MoUs/Agreements’. 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the Committee is duly noted. The Ministry has been working towards 
establishing institutional mechanisms to foster the global  mobility of Indian workers, students, 
academicians, researchers, business persons and so on. The Ministry has been proactively 
furthering the mobility for the Indian workforce through diverse MoUs and agreements such as 
Migration and Mobility Partnerships and Labour Mobility and Labour Welfare Agreements with 
destination countries, which establish a robust framework for  legal migration. These 
agreements/MoUs seek to achieve fostering people-to-people ties, streamlining visa procedures, 
preventing irregular migration,  strengthening bilateral relations, and supporting skill 
development.   
 
While the MMPAs have been recently concluded and are at different stages of implementation, 
there is no concrete data available for the actual number of Indian workers who have been able to 
utilise the opportunities provided by MMPAs. However, under the Young Professional Scheme 
(YPS) in the MMPA with UK, 3000 Indians can avail two-year visa every year to study, work 

Page | 38 
 
and holiday in the UK. So far, the slots for YPS are in high demand amongst the youth of 18-30 
years in India since its launch in 2023. 6,000 Indians have availed YPS in 2023 and 2024 so far.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.22 
Bilateral Labour Agreements Safeguarding the Rights of Migrant Workers 
 
The Committee desire that the Government should enter into Bilateral Labour Agreements 
(BLAs) and Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) with many more countries with clear 
stipulations regarding working condition, wages, accommodation, health care, repatriation 
rights and dispute resolution mechanism in the employment contract, monitoring of 
recruitment agencies, granting migrants equal rights as locals, etc. to safeguard the rights 
of migrant workers. The Committee further desire that the existing bilateral agreements on 
labour mobility should be strengthened through periodic monitoring and evaluation.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken note of this recommendation. Labor mobility arrangements contain 
comprehensive provisions relating to migrant worker welfare, social protection, recruitment 
procedures, and employment contracts. These arrangements also establish Joint Working 
Groups, which convene periodically to review progress, address implementation challenges, and 
discuss emerging issues to ensure effective implementation of the agreements. 
 
In addition, India has also operationalized Social Security Agreements with several countries. 
Social Security Agreements are binding reciprocal instruments that help in avoiding double 
security contributions, easy remittances of benefits and aggregating contributions to prevent loss 
of benefits. Further, recognizing the vulnerability of certain migrant groups, especially Domestic 
Sector Workers (DSWs) and female workers, the Government has implemented specific 
protective measures such as authorizing only state-run recruitment agencies to facilitate the 
overseas employment of female workers and with certain conditions to mitigate exploitation 
risks. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
 

Page | 39 
 
Recommendation No.23 
International Instruments for Protection of Diaspora 
 
The Committee take cognizance that apart from bilateral arrangements on migration & 
mobility and labour migration, the Government is also deeply engaged with international 
and multilateral organisations for enhancing the horizon of India’s initiatives in fostering 
safe, orderly, and regular migration pathways. However, it is observed that India is not yet 
a party to any international instrument for protection of Diaspora. The reason for choosing 
not to become a party to certain specific instruments is based on the implications of such 
international convention/ instrument on national policies and priorities. While honouring 
our multifaceted approach allowing for flexibility and context-specific solutions that are 
responsive to the unique circumstances in different countries, the Committee are concerned 
about the limited range of bilateral agreements/MoUs and welfare measures we have in 
place as on date in comparison to the extent and spread of our Diaspora. Hence, the 
Committee recommend that the Government may actively explore ways to strengthen 
cooperation and collaboration on Diaspora-related matters at international as well as 
multilateral levels. Efforts may also be taken to examine the feasibility of being a party to 
key international instruments aimed at protecting and promoting the welfare of Diaspora 
communities which work to ensure humane treatment and address potential exploitation of 
migrant populations across borders. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee. It may be noted that this 
Ministry is committed to improving the protection, welfare, and representation of the Indian 
overseas community. India’s cautious approach towards becoming a party to certain international 
conventions stems from a considered evaluation of their implications on India’s sovereignty, 
domestic policy priorities, and operational flexibility. Many international instruments on 
migration and diaspora protection adopt a uniform framework, which may not align with India’s 
diverse bilateral engagements and the context-specific needs of the migrant communities. 
Furthermore, India's non-participation in select instruments does not imply disengagement. 
Instead, India actively contributes to global migration discourse through different mechanisms. 
India is a committed participant of non-binding consultative forums focusing on migration and 
diaspora, such as The Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration (GCM), the 
Colombo Process, the Abu Dhabi Dialogue, the Budapest Process, etc. India is currently the 
Chair of the Colombo Process, and has introduced Diaspora Engagement as a core theme during 
its tenure. India also engages regularly with the International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
and International Labour Organization (ILO), and UN Network on Migration, which allows India 

Page | 40 
 
to shape global norms while maintaining the ability to address issues specific to its diverse 
Diaspora. 
 
The Ministry also recognizes the importance of expanding the scope of bilateral labour and 
migration agreements, and efforts are already underway. India has signed numerous MoUs and 
Labour Mobility Agreements (LMAs) with key destination countries in the Gulf, Southeast Asia, 
and parts of Europe. These MoUs often go beyond general protections, encompassing issues 
such as skill recognition, dispute resolution mechanisms, social security coverage, and safe 
return and reintegration. 
 
India remains open to reviewing key international instruments on a case-by-case basis, ensuring 
alignment with its national interests, and will continue to explore strategic ratifications or 
accessions where the benefits to the Indian citizens are clearly established. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.24 
Global Compact for Migration 
 
The Committee find that India is one among the 152 countries that adopted the Global 
Compact for Migration, the first-ever UN global agreement on a common approach to 
international migration, in December, 2018. The compact strives for better management of 
migration at local, national, regional and global levels. Since the State Governments are the 
key stakeholders in the migration discourse, the Committee desire that a co-ordination 
committee, including the Centre and State Governments, may be set up to ensure effective 
implementation of global compact objectives.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee and would like to mention 
that the policies and initiatives of the Government of India are broadly in consonance with the 
objectives and guiding principles laid out in the Global Compact for Migration (GCM). India’s 
Emigration framework aims at strengthening safe, legal and regular pathways and improving 
recruitment process and decent work in line with objective 5 and 6 of the GCM respectively. 
India has entered into several bilateral agreements/ MoUs/ MoCs with destination countries 
showcasing India’s commitment towards fostering regular pathways for migration and mobility. 

Page | 41 
 
Additionally, the government has put a major focus on skill development and recognition, 
migrant and diaspora contributions and international cooperation aligning with the objectives of 
GCM. The same is being achieved through coordination between different Ministries such as the 
Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship, Ministry of 
Labour and Employment, other line ministries and in collaboration with State and private 
agencies, international organizations and civil societies. Furthermore, the Government of India 
has been taking steps to improve data and information on international migration which align 
with the objectives of the GCM. For instance, the newly revamped eMigrate-2.0 portal, launched 
to regulate the safe and ethical recruitment of Indian workers abroad, embodies GCM objectives 
by ensuring ethical recruitment practices and providing transparency in the entire migration 
process. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.25 
 Setting up of More Protector of Emigrants (PoE) Offices 
 
The Committee note that the process of emigration of Indian workers, with Emigration 
Clearance Required (ECR) category passports is regulated under the Emigration Act, 
1983, which is administered by the Ministry of External Affairs through the Protector 
General of Emigrants (PGE). The Protector General of Emigrants oversees the functioning 
of all Protector of Emigrants (PoE) offices across India. As of now there are 16 offices of 
the Protector of Emigrants located Mumbai, Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata, Chandigarh, 
Hyderabad, Cochin, Thiruvananthapuram, Jaipur, Raebareli, Patna, Bengaluru, 
Guwahati, Ranchi, Bhubaneswar and Agartala. However, the Committee note that PoE 
offices are not there in States like Gujarat and Telangana which account for a large 
number of emigrants. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry may explore the 
feasibility of establishing PoE offices in States where currently such offices do not exist in 
addition to setting up additional PoE offices in migration hotspots including States like 
Punjab, Kerala, etc. to ensure better outreach and support for emigrants. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry of External Affairs acknowledges the recommendation of the Committee regarding 
the need for expanding the network of Protector of Emigrants (PoE) offices across the country, 
particularly in States such as Gujarat and Telangana, which contribute significantly to India’s 
emigrant workforce but currently do not have dedicated PoE offices. The Ministry recognizes the 

Page | 42 
 
critical role played by the PoE offices in regulating emigration processes and in ensuring the 
welfare and protection of Indian workers, particularly those holding the Emigration Clearance 
Required (ECR) category passports. The suggestion to enhance the outreach and support 
mechanisms through the establishment of additional PoE offices is both timely and pertinent, 
especially in light of the evolving patterns of overseas employment. 
In this regard, the Ministry would like to inform the Committee that currently there are 16 PoE 
offices in 15 States / UTs of India. For better coordination with state governments in the matters 
of emigration, Ministry has been exploring the possibility of opening up of PoE offices in those 
states, where such offices currently do not exist. PoE Offices in Odisha, Jharkhand and Tripura 
have been opened recently. The Ministry is in the process of opening PoE offices in Uttarakhand 
and Andhra Pradesh in near future. 
 
As far as opening of additional POE Offices in States like Punjab and Kerala is concerned, the 
POE Offices in Kochi and Thiruvananthapuram in Kerala and in Chandigarh for the State of 
Punjab, are currently fully functional and catering to the needs of emigrants from these States. 
Ministry would consider opening of additional POE Offices based on the need and demand 
analysis. 
 
Furthermore, the Ministry is exploring new outreach initiatives to complement the physical 
infrastructure of PoE offices, thereby enhancing accessibility for emigrants in remote or 
underserved regions. The Ministry has entered into an agreement with the Common Services 
Centres (CSCs), a SPV of the MeitY for delivery of emigration related services at more than 5 
lakh CSC centres across India.  
 
The Ministry remains committed to strengthening the emigration ecosystem and will continue to 
take proactive measures to safeguard the interests and welfare of Indian emigrants.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.26 
Criminalization of Recruitment Malpractices 
 
The Committee observe that the Recruiting Agents (RA) are required to obtain 
Registration Certificate (RC) from the Protector General of Emigrants (PGE) before they 
can engage in recruitment of Indian workers for overseas employment. The process of 

Page | 43 
 
registration of RA is done through a web-based application, e-Migrate portal, which brings 
all the stakeholders, including the RAs, Foreign Employers (Fes) and the prospective 
emigrants on a common platform. The Committee was further informed that the Ministry 
initiates action against agents involved in exploitation, abuse, or other illegal practices 
through issuing Show Cause Notices or suspending the licenses, etc. and publishes the list 
of unregistered Ras on the e-Migrate portal. Till October 2024, a total of 3,094 unregistered 
agents in country have been notified. However, the proliferation of unregistered/illegal Ras 
and illegal migration through them is indicative of the lacunae in the existing system which 
is extremely disconcerting. The Committee are of the opinion that the penalties and fines 
provided for in the Emigration Act are insufficient considering the severity of crimes 
committed by unscrupulous recruiters. Hence, in addition to having a vigorous oversight 
mechanism for RAs, the Committee recommend that the Government should bring in 
provisions to effectively criminalize illegal recruitment practices and impose stringent 
punishment, including imprisonment, to address the widespread exploitation of migrant 
workers and to deter fraudulent recruitment practices. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry concurs with the Committee's concern about the proliferation of unregistered 
Recruiting Agents and the associated risks of exploitation, abuse, and illegal migration. The 
current registration and monitoring mechanism, facilitated through the e-Migrate portal, has 
significantly enhanced transparency and accountability among stakeholders including RAs, 
Foreign Employers, and emigrants. As per Section 24 of the Emigration Act, 1983, the violation 
of the provisions of the Act is a criminal offence. The punishment for offences such as illegal 
emigration, violating emigration rules, providing false information, altering documents, charging 
excessive fees, and cheating an emigrant, includes imprisonment up to two years and/or a fine of 
up to 2,000 rupees.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.27 
Coordination Among Stakeholders in Cracking Fraudulent Practices in Emigration 
 
The Committee have been informed that the Protector of Emigrants maintains close 
coordination with law enforcement agencies, like police and cybercrime units, to tackle 
fraudulent practices and reinforce the integrity of the emigration process. Similarly, 
regular coordination is maintained with Bureau of immigration for discussing 

Page | 44 
 
patterns/trends in emigration and sharing details of violations with each other. However, 
the reality on ground speaks volumes on how the scamsters circumvent the efforts already 
in place. The Committee, hence, recommend that inter-agency co-ordination among law 
enforcement agencies and inter-ministerial exchanges may be stepped up through frequent 
assessment exercises of all stakeholders to track down and prevent operations of illegal 
networks which dupe citizens with fake job offers. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Government accords utmost priority to the safety, security and well-being of Indian nationals 
proceeding for employment abroad. As and when complaints against the illegal agents/dubious 
firms luring Indian youth in false recruitment offers through various channels are received, such 
matters are referred to the State police for investigation and prosecution under the relevant legal 
provisions of the Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS) and other legislations in place including the 
ones enacted by some State Governments.  
 
In the cyber domain, action is also taken against illegal recruiting agents in association with 
Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre (I4C), MHA and State Police authorities. Requests to 
take down social media posts of illegal Recruiting Agents from all over India have been 
regularly shared with I4C. 
 
Ministry also issues advisories through eMigrate portal, social media handles and other modes of 
publicity about the perils of fake job rackets and ways to prevent the same. Till December 2024, 
a total of 3,111 unregistered agents in country have been notified on the eMigrate portal. The 
awareness campaign on safe and legal migration is carried out by the Ministry and the POEs 
across the country from time to time by conducting workshops, trainings, information sessions, 
digital campaigns for media groups, police officials and law enforcement agencies, local 
administration, aspiring recruiting agents, entrepreneurs and general public. During these 
sessions awareness on emigration regulations, schemes beneficial for emigrants like Pravasi 
Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY), Pre-Departure Orientation Training (PDOT), eMigrate portal 
and various advisories issued by Indian Embassies are brought to the notice of all stakeholders, 
including job seekers, and advise them to verify all antecedents of Recruiting Agents before 
accepting any kind of employment offer and not be enticed and entrapped in fraudulent job 
offers. 
In order to enhance inter-agency coordination, the Ministry organized a one-day Conclave with 
the representatives of the MEA registered Recruiting Agents (RA) Associations on 11 March 

Page | 45 
 
2025, which was inaugurated by the Minister of State for External Affairs and Environment, 
Forest and Climate Change, Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh. The Conclave was organized with the 
objective to forge greater synergies among the stakeholders in the emigration process and 
minimize the space for illegal recruitment. The Conclave was attended by the senior officers 
from the Ministry of Labour and Employment (MoLE), Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE), Ministry of External Affairs, Resident Commissioners of State 
Governments/UTs and subject domain experts. The Conclave also provided an opportunity to 
discuss and deliberate upon various facets of emigration process. 
 
The Ministry has also requested State/UT governments to nominate a nodal officer for effective 
collaboration in tracking and redressal of grievances and complaints against the unregistered 
recruiting agents. A number of States/UTs have nominated such nodal officer so far and the 
office of PGE and the POEs are engaging and working with the nodal officers to resolution of 
grievances against the illegal RAs in effective and transparent manner. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.29 
Recruitment of Female Domestic Workers Through State Recruitment Agencies 
 
The Committee understand that since 2016, women who are ECR (Emigration Clearance 
Required) passport holders can travel abroad to ECR countries for employment only 
through 13 State Government recruitment agencies, if they are 30 years and above. These 
agencies are NORKA Roots and ODEPC of Kerala; OMCL of Tamil Nadu; UPFC of Uttar 
Pradesh; OMCAP of Andhra Pradesh; TOMCOM of Telangana; RSLDC of Rajasthan; 
KUWSSB of Karnataka; KVTSDC of Karnataka; M/s Pan IIT alumni Reach for 
Jharkhand Foundation of Jharkhand and Bihar State and Overseas Placement Bureau of 
Bihar. Basically, only State-run Recruitment Agents have the mandate to recruit women 
domestic workers going to the ECR countries and the private recruitment agents are kept 
out of the process. The Committee consider this as a laudable step in ensuring this very 
vulnerable category of overseas job seekers are not exploited by private agents. However, 
the Committee are worried that the prospective domestic workers from most of the States 
are not lucky to be under this safety net and are at the mercy of unscrupulous agents. The 
Committee, hence, recommend that the Ministry may immediately take up with all the 
States to set up State-run Recruitment Agents, especially in States likes Punjab, Gujarat, 
Orissa and the North East. The Ministry should keep strict vigilance through the Protector 
of Emigrants that no loophole is there in the system and the private agents violating the 
provisions are punished strictly. 

Page | 46 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry acknowledges high vulnerability of female domestic workers seeking employment 
abroad and affirms that safeguarding their dignity, safety and rights remains a priority. As 
observed by the Committee, the Ministry has restricted the recruitment of ECR-category women 
domestic workers (aged 30 years and above) exclusively through  State-run Recruitment 
Agencies since 2016. This policy has proven effective in minimizing exploitation, ensuring 
accountability, and providing a secure channel for overseas employment. 
 
As of now there are 14 State-run Recruiting Agencies Agencies viz. (i) NORKA Roots & (ii) 
Overseas Development and Employment Promotion Consultants of Kerala (iii) Overseas 
Manpower Corporation Ltd. of Tamil Nadu (iv) Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation of Uttar  
Pradesh (v) Overseas Manpower Company Andhra Pradesh Ltd. of Andhra Pradesh (vi) 
Telangana Overseas Manpower Company Ltd. of Telengana (vii) Rajasthan Skill & Livelihoods 
Development Corporation of Rajasthan (viii) Karnataka State Unorganized Workers Society 
Security Board of Karnataka (ix) Karnataka Vocational Training & Skill Development 
Corporation of Karnataka (x) M/s Pan IIT Alummi Reach for Jharkhand Foundation of 
Jharkhand (xi) Bihar State Overseas Placement Bureau of Bihar, (xii) World Skill Center, 
Odisha, (xiii) Punjab GharGhar Rozgar and Karobar Mission, Punjab and (xiv) Haryana Kaushal 
Rozgar Nigam Limited, Haryana with Haryana Kaushal Rozgar Nigam Limited being latest in 
the list.  
 
The Ministry concurs with the Committee’s concern that women from States currently lacking 
such agencies are disproportionately exposed to the risk of exploitation by illegal or unregistered 
agents. In this regard, it may be noted that high emigration states such as Punjab, Haryana, 
Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and Odisha have their own state-run recruiting 
agencies. The Ministry is promoting and providing all assistance to State governments and their 
agencies in applying for registration certificate for overseas recruitment. The State governments 
of Mizoram and Himachal Pradesh are also in the process of applying for registration of their 
agencies as State RAs. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
 
 

Page | 47 
 
Recommendation No.30 
Outcome Oriented Awareness Campaigns Against Illegal Recruitment Practices 
 
The Committee have taken note of the various efforts undertaken by the government to 
raise awareness about illegal recruitment practices including advisories/alerts, press 
releases, outreach activities, etc. But the ever-increasing instances of illegal migration 
highlights a persistent lack of awareness, necessitating alternative solutions to combat the 
issue. According to the Committee, the problem calls for a multi-pronged approach with 
MEA coordinating and working in tandem with several other Ministries for effectively 
organizing awareness campaigns. The Committee desire that in high-out emigration states, 
outcome- oriented campaigns in vernacular languages using local channels, social media 
platforms, civil society organisations and Panchayati Raj Institutions may be resorted to 
for wider coverage and adaptation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry concurs with the Committee’s observation that despite various initiatives 
undertaken such as issuing public advisories, alerts, and press releases, along with periodic 
outreach programs, there remains a critical gap in public awareness, particularly in high-
emigration States. The rise in incidents involving illegal recruitment and fraudulent job offers 
underscores the urgent need for a more targeted, localized, and collaborative approach to public 
sensitization. 
 
The Ministry is actively collaborating with other government departments, including the Indian 
Cybercrime Coordination Centre (I4C), to combat the growing menace of fake recruitment offers 
and overseas job scams including on virtual domain. As part of this coordinated effort, MEA is 
collaborating with I4C to educate the public about fraudulent schemes and the importance of 
verifying job offers through official channels. This inter-agency cooperation aims to protect 
Indian citizens, particularly prospective emigrants, from exploitation and ensure safe and legal 
migration practices. 
 
The Ministry organized a one-day Conclave with the representatives of the MEA registered 
Recruiting Agents (RA) Associations on 11 March 2025, which was inaugurated by the Minister 
of State for External Affairs and Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Shri Kirti Vardhan 
Singh. The Conclave was organized with the objective to forge greater synergies with the RA 

Page | 48 
 
fraternity for effective implementation of the Emigration Act 1983 and minimize the space for 
illegal recruitment. The Conclave also provided an opportunity to discuss and deliberate upon 
various facets of emigration process. Three thematic panel discussions focusing on Skill 
Development; streamlining Foreign Employer Registration; and Grievance Redressal, were held 
during the Conclave in addition to a Q&A Session with the Joint Secretary (OE) & PGE. The 
Conclave was also attended by the senior officers from the Ministry of Labour and Employment 
(MoLE), Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepreneurship (MSDE), Ministry of External 
Affairs, and Ministry of Home Affairs. As a major initiative for dissemination of information on 
safe and legal ways of migration in form and content easily understood by the masses, Hon’ble 
MoS also launched a Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendra (PBSK) social media Channel to 
disseminate information on safe and legal channels of migration on real-time basis. 
 
The awareness campaigns (including those in regional languages) on safe and legal migration are 
being carried out by the Ministry and POEs across the country by conducting workshops, 
trainings, information sessions, digital campaigns for media groups, police officials and law 
enforcement agencies, local administration, aspiring recruiting agents, entrepreneurs and general 
public. The POE Offices have been working closely with the State Government officials, civil 
society, and media to raise awareness about safe and legal channels of migration. Digital 
Outreach Programme using social media platforms to disseminate information about eMigrate 
portal, emigration rules and regulations, safe and legal mobility pathways, PBBY policy etc. are 
being carried out by the PoEs.  
 
Some of the specific campaigns to generate awareness on safe and legal migration among 
emigrants, are as follows: 
 
(a) Publication of advertisements in theaters in Chennai City and other prominent districts of 
Tamil Nadu and Radio FM ads by PoE, Chennai. 
 
(b)  “Paathu Ponga” campaign by POE Chennai, during which a walkathon was organized in 
Chennai in February 2025 at Elliot beach road involving participation of local celebrities, 
eminent dignitaries, senior government officials, media and stakeholders including authorised 
Recruitment Agents (RAs). 
 

Page | 49 
 
(c) Regular posting of short videos on social media platforms in Hindi, Punjabi and English on 
safe and legal migration, emigration rules and regulations by PoE, Chandigarh. 
 
(d) Outreach programmes to educate migrants, stakeholders and the public about the Emigration 
Act, 1983 and differentiate between legal and illegal migration with Educational institutions, 
emigrants, agents and law enforcement officials conducted by PoE, Mumbai. 
 
(e) Distribution of Do’s and Don’ts Pamphlets along with ECR passports: The PoE Offices are 
collaborating with Regional Passport Offices (RPOs) for distribution of a Do’s and Don’ts 
pamphlets along with emigration check required passports. The Pamphlets have information 
related to safe and legal pathways of emigration as well as emergency contact details.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.31 
 
Deportation of Illegal Immigrants from United States 
 
In the wake of deportations of illegal Indian immigrants back to the country from the 
United States and probable mass deportations in the future, the Committee had expressed 
their feelings in unequivocal terms about the humanitarian concerns surrounding the issue. 
In this regard, the Committee have been apprised that since India is against illegal 
immigration, the country is committed to taking back its national who is an illegal 
immigrant to another country. Further, it was informed that most countries have necessary 
SOPs in place to handle deportation-related matters and, accordingly, MEA too has an 
SOP in place, whereby nationality and security verification process is undertaken by MEA 
in coordination with other agencies.   Responding to the Committees’ shared feelings about 
detainees restrained by handcuffs, waist chains, and leg irons during flights by US Air 
Force, it was informed that the US actions were in accordance with the Restraints Policy 
No. 11155.1, Section 5.10, effective from November 19, 2012.  The Committee were further 
informed that honouring the repeated requests from MEA not to shackle deportees, 
particularly women and children, in the second deportation flight undertaken on 15 
February, 2025, women and children were not shackled by the US Immigration and 

Page | 50 
 
Customs Enforcement. Though the Committee also view that it is the mandated 
responsibility of any government to take back its citizens who have entered and lived in a 
country without proper documentation, they desire that the Government should deal with 
situation in a more empathetic manner upholding the human rights of migrants and 
explore ways and means to facilitate the return of such illegal immigrants to India without 
hurting their self-respect.   
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee. It may be noted that 
foreign nationals who have entered the U.S. illegally, or who have overstayed their visa validity, 
or found to be staying in the U.S. without any valid documentation, or have criminal convictions 
against them, are likely to be deported. It is the obligation of all countries to take back their 
nationals, if they are found to be living illegally abroad. This is, however, subject to an 
unambiguous verification of their nationality. This is not a policy practiced only by India; it is a 
generally accepted principle in international relations.  
 
The U.S. has been carrying out deportation operations for several years now. It may be noted that 
in the past, the U.S. Department of Homeland Security’s Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
(ICE) carried out deportations of individuals through chartered or commercial flights after 
completion of the judicial process for issuance of removal orders in the U.S. During this time, 
the deportees were either kept under detention or were released within the territory of the United 
States (as per the ‘catch and release’ policy). However, since January 2025, the Department of 
Homeland Security’s Customs and Border Protection (CBP) has been carrying out deportation 
operations as part of the larger “National Security initiative” led by the White House – National 
Security Council (NSC) of USA.   
 
The U.S. Standard Operating Procedure to organize and execute deportations effective from 
November 2012 calls for the use of restraints on deportees. The U.S. side has mentioned that 
restraints are applied to ensure the safety and security of the mission and are used on both 
chartered aircraft as well as military aircraft. While women and minors are generally not 
shackled, the flight officer in charge of a deportation flight has the final say on the matter.  
 
The Ministry of External Affairs has strongly registered its concerns with the U.S. authorities on 
the treatment meted out to deportees on the flight that landed on 5 February 2025, particularly 
with respect to the use of shackles, especially on women. The U.S. side has confirmed that no 

Page | 51 
 
women or children were restrained on the deportation flights that landed in India on 15 and 16 
February 2025 respectively. This has been confirmed and recorded by the agencies after 
interviewing the deportees on their arrival in India. 
 
The need to promote safe, orderly and legal migration while cracking down on illegal 
immigration networks was discussed during the visit of the Prime Minister to U.S. on 12-13 
February 2025. 
 
The Ministry of External Affairs remains engaged with the US side regarding the humane 
treatment of deportees during deportation operations. Over the last several weeks, the U.S. 
Government has been carrying out deportations by charter or commercial flights to India, 
wherein no restraints were used. From 20th January 2025 to 14th May 2025, a total of 1,011 
Indian nationals have been deported back to India.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.32 
Reintegration of Returned Indian Deportees 
 
The Committee have been informed that the responsibility of reintegration of returned 
Indian deportees rests with the respective State governments from where the emigrants 
belong. However, since involuntary returns and reintegration in countries of origin have 
repercussions on the human rights of migrants, the Committee are of the view that solid 
reintegration programs are required mainly by the Central Government to prevent those 
who have already been returned do not risk their lives by undertaking dangerous journeys 
again.  Hence, they recommend specific and detailed re-integration programmes by the 
Government, integrating the inputs, expertise and experience of those States which have 
developed ways and means to reintegrate workers returning from abroad.   
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee. It may, however, be noted 
that responsibility of reintegration of returned Indian migrants rests with respective State 
Governments from where the emigrants belong and not with the Central Government. Various 
State Governments have, therefore, developed ways and means to reintegrate workers returning 
from abroad.  

Page | 52 
 
 
During the pandemic, under the Vande Bharat Mission, Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship, Ministry of Civil Aviation, and Ministry of External Affairs jointly launched 
‘SWADES – Skilled Worker Arrival Database for Employment Support’. The initiative aims at 
empowering the returning citizens with relevant employment opportunities by creating a 
database of qualified citizens based on their skill sets and experience to tap into and fulfill 
demand of Indian and foreign countries. The returning citizens are required to fill up an online 
SWADES Skills Card. The database thus generated has been integrated with India’s ASEEM 
portal. The portal provides employee connect for prospective employers. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.33 
Streamlining Legal Migration 
 
The Committee observe that E-Migrate is a comprehensive e-Governance portal developed 
to facilitate safe and legal migration of Indian workers abroad. The e-Migrate project, 
launched in 2015, is designed to facilitate emigration of ECR category workers emigrating 
to notified countries for employment purposes. The Committee are happy to note that e-
Migrate (Version 2.0) was launched on 14 October, 2024 and was integrated with the 
Passport Seva Project (PSP) of MEA for validation of Passport details of migrant workers 
registering on this portal and with the Bureau of Immigration (BoI) of the Ministry of 
Home Affairs for online validation of EC granted by POEs. The new portal has also been 
integrated with UMANG, Bhashini, Digilocker, SPV- CSC (Meity) DG Shipping systems 
and SBI e-payment gateway. The Portal provides for a contactless and paperless process to 
conduct recruitment process for FEs (Foreign Employers) and Recruiting Agents (RAs) as 
a fully digitized B-2-B platform. The portal also provides a comprehensive and online 
database of emigrants to Missions, RAs, FEs and insurance agencies to make the whole 
emigration cycle faster and transparent. While acknowledging the importance of e-Migrate 
portal as a transformation initiative of the Ministry of External Affairs aimed at making 
the emigration process easy, organized & humane, the Committee desire that the portal is 
kept up to date with easy to navigate provisions and free of technical glitches. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry agrees with the recommendation of the Committee. The process of overseas 
employment of Indian nationals holding Emigration Check Required (ECR) passports and 
emigrating to any of the 18 notified ECR countries is done through e-Migrate portal. The web-
based application makes the process of emigration fully digital, transparent, safe, legal, humane, 

Page | 53 
 
efficient, convenient, and faster. It seamlessly brings all stakeholders, including Foreign 
Employers (FEs), registered Recruiting Agents (RAs) and the prospective emigrants on a 
common platform and enables MEA to capture comprehensive and online database. A dedicated 
helpline and support system is also available to assist emigrants and other stakeholders to address 
any query/issue.  
 
An updated, revamped and user friendly eMigrate V2.0 portal was inaugurated on 14 October 
2024. The revamped portal has been integrated with DigiLocker to provide for storage and 
access by users of documents across the world; Common Services Centers (CSC) to enable 
delivery of emigration related services through its network of over 5 lakh centers across the 
country; UMANG for providing access to pan-India e-Gov services; BHASHINI to enable 
access to information in regional languages; SBIePay for provisioning of an additional digital 
payment gateway with zero transaction charges; Bureau of Immigration for seamless and hassle 
free travel of emigrants; Passport Seva Portal for e-verification of Passports, insurance 
companies for procurement of mandatory PBBY policy etc., among others. The eMigrate Mobile 
App has also been developed for the first time which allows the stakeholders to have easy access 
to major services available on the portal, including tracking of application status, obtaining list of 
registered as well as unregistered recruiting agents, filing grievances etc. 
 
The portal is functioning efficiently with multiple online features and information available to 
the users. There is no complaint regarding fraudulent activities. The functioning of the portal is 
being monitored regularly by a dedicated 24x7 technical team. 
 
The revamped eMigrate application has been developed with the latest technology and security 
features. There is a 24x7 dedicated Network Operating Team (NOC) for real time monitoring 
and prevention of threats. The Application Security and Vulnerability Assessment is regularly 
done by the nodal Government Agency. Regular security audit of the application is also carried 
out to counter any vulnerability and make it robust and secure. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.34 
Make the Campaign 'Surakshit Jayen Prashikshit Jayen' More Meaningful 
 
The Committee have been informed that, as per the Emigration Rules, the Recruitment 
Agent can collect only the prescribed amount in respect of services rendered from the 

Page | 54 
 
prospective emigrant by giving a receipt for the amount collected and any act contrary to 
it, is punishable. But, a 2023 International Labour Organisation (ILO) report found that 
nearly 60 per cent of low-skilled Indian workers migrating to Gulf Cooperation Council 
(GCC) countries paid exorbitant recruitment fees, leading to debt bondage. Though the 
Government has introduced the e-Migrate system to streamline ethical overseas 
recruitment, the Committee are sure that its effectiveness depends on accessibility and 
awareness. The Committee, therefore, desire that the campaign 'Surakshit Jayen 
Prashikshit Jayen' (Go Safe, Go Trained) live up to its name by highlighting the 
recruitment fees to be paid to agents, provisions for ensuring self-protection, etc. and strive 
for well-informed migrant youths who are prepared for a seamlessly integrated and safe 
stay abroad. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation made by the Committee. The Ministry and 
the PoE Offices have been carrying out awareness campaigns which also include targeted 
messaging on migrant rights, grievance redressal mechanisms, health and safety protocols, 
financial literacy, and consular support services. Migrants are sensitized on recognizing 
fraudulent agents and verifying job offers through official portals like e-Migrate.  
 
Ministry has taken several initiatives such as the Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojna (PBBY) and Pre-
Departure Orientation & Training (PDOT) to ensure that migrant workers undertake safe 
migration, have decent working and living conditions in destination countries, are aware of their 
rights and have access to GoI welfare schemes. 
 
The Government of India accords highest priority to the safety, protection and well-being of 
Indian workers abroad by various mechanisms in place to ensure safety and protection of Indian 
workers. The Government has established various mechanisms to enable Indian workers abroad 
to reach out to the Indian Embassies/Consulates in case they need any assistance. Indian workers 
can contact the Embassies / Consulates through various channels like walk-in, email, social 
media, multilingual 24x7 emergency numbers and also grievance redressal portals like MADAD, 
CPGRAMS etc. In addition, Indian Embassies / Consulates abroad have established Toll Free 
Helplines, WhatsApp numbers and have launched mobile Apps to enable Indian nationals 
contact respective Indian Embassies / Consulates when in distress or in emergency situation. 
 
The Embassies in Gulf Countries have provisions for shelter home to assist Indian women in 
distress by providing boarding and lodging, medical treatment and arranging for their 

Page | 55 
 
repatriation. Female workers who are stranded and are in distress can approach the Embassies at 
any time of the day and they are accommodated and provided all facilities till their repatriation to 
India. Besides, Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras (PBSK) have been set up in New Delhi and 
at Dubai (UAE), Riyadh & Jeddah (Kingdom of Saudi Arabia) and Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) to 
provide assistance, guidance and counselling to Indian nationals in distress. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.36 
Professionals Trapped in Job Rackets in Southeast Asia 
 
The Committee have noted instances of dubious firms involved in fake recruitment job 
offers having lured Indian nationals mostly through social media channels to South-East 
Asian countries including Cambodia, Myanmar, Lao PDR to keep them as bonded 
labourers to carry out cybercrime and other fraudulent activities from scam centers 
operating in these countries. Though the exact number of Indian nationals stuck in these 
countries is not known, the Committee have been informed that through concerted efforts, 
1091 Indian national from Cambodia, 770 from Laos and 497 from Myanmar, including 
software engineers have been rescued till date. This, further highlights the vulnerabilities 
faced by Indian job seekers, even professionals, in the hands of unscrupulous agents and 
middlemen. The Committee find that the advisories and social media posts about the fake 
job rackets or similar communications issued by the Ministry or respective Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad through their official websites are unable to prevent our nationals 
from getting enticed and entrapped in the fraudulent job offers in these countries. The 
Committee, hence, recommend that the Ministry may need to go much beyond mere listing 
out fake agents in its efforts to protect Indians from trafficking and cyber slavery. Even the 
educated Indian professionals need to be educated through all channels possible that 
genuine foreign employers usually require educational certificates attested by the Ministry 
of Human Resource Development (HRD) and the MEA and legitimate companies have 
professional websites with clear contact details and overall feedback from employees on 
platforms like Glassdoor or LinkedIn. Above all, the Committee desire that our embassies 
or consulates in the destination countries should always be available for assistance in 
verifying the employer through email or phone calls.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken note of the recommendations of the Committee. It has come to the notice 
of the Ministry instances of dubious firms involved in fake recruitment job offers have lured 
Indian nationals mostly through social media channels to the South-East Asian countries 
including Cambodia, Myanmar, Lao PDR, and made them to carry out cyber crime and other 

Page | 56 
 
illegal activities from scam centres operating in these countries. In the last two years, countries in 
South-East Asia including Cambodia, Myanmar, Lao PDR have witnessed an increase in online 
cyber crimes. 
The exact number of Indian nationals stuck in Cambodia, Myanmar, Lao PDR is not known, as 
Indian nationals often reach these scam centres in the country on their own volition through 
fraudulent/unscrupulous recruitment agents/agencies and through illegal channels. They 
approach the Government or any other authority for rescue when they realise that they were 
trapped.  
 
The Government accords utmost priority to the safety, security and well-being of Indian 
nationals abroad. The Ministry through Indian Embassies / Consulates abroad takes pro-active 
measures to rescue Indian nationals trapped in foreign countries, whenever such cases come to 
the notice of the Ministry. Our Embassies in Cambodia, Myanmar and Lao PDR remains vigilant 
and is actively monitoring the situation. They coordinate the rescue and repatriation of affected 
Indian nationals with active support of the local authorities. The Embassies respond promptly if a 
case of an Indian national is reported and takes appropriate action for registering the case with 
the local police, issues travel documents, help them contact their family in India, and coordinate 
till their rescue and final repatriation to India.  
Ministry frequently issues advisories, including on social media platforms and media briefings, 
about fake job rackets. Such communications have also been issued by the Indian Embassies in 
Cambodia, Myanmar, and Lao PDR through its websites and social media handles. Complaints 
against the unregistered agents and the dubious firms luring Indian youth in false recruitment 
offers through various channels are regularly shared with the respective State Governments and 
Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) for suitable action. Information about unregistered agents is 
also uploaded and updated on regular basis on the e-Migrate Portal.  
 
To spread awareness on cyber crimes, the Central Government has taken steps which, inter-alia, 
include dissemination of relevant information through SMS, Indian Cybercrime Coordination 
Centre (I4C), MHA’s social media account, radio campaigns, engaged MyGov for publicity in 
multiple channels, organizing cyber safety and security awareness weeks in association with 
States/UTs, newspaper advertisement on digital arrest scams, announcements in Delhi Metros on 
digital arrest, and other modus operandi of cyber crimes. 
 
The Government has established various channels to enable Indian nationals abroad to reach out 
to the Embassy/Consulate in case they need any assistance or in distress. They can contact the 

Page | 57 
 
Embassy/Consulate through email, multilingual 24x7 emergency numbers, grievance redressal 
portal like MADAD, CPGRAMS, and eMigrate, and social media etc. Our Missions in 
Cambodia, Myanmar, and Lao PDR hold regular meetings with the local authorities on rescue 
and repatriation of Indian nationals from scam centres. Embassies have put in place an 
emergency contact numbers, and email so that victims can reach out to the Embassy any time.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.39 
Consultations Required for Finalising the New Emigration Bill 
 
The Committee understand that the proposed Bill to replace the Emigration Act, 1983 aims 
at establishing a hassle-free, robust, transparent and comprehensive emigration 
management framework that facilitates safe and orderly migration for Overseas 
Employment aspirants.  However, to address the challenges posed by evolving landscape, 
wider consultations are required beyond putting it up for public consultation. In this 
regard the Committee urge that once the elements of the Bill are identified, specific 
consultations should be made with the Standing Committee, the State Governments and 
the Diaspora Organisations to make it a healthy Bill worthy of implementation.  
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation by the Committee is duly noted. The Ministry will hold wide-ranging 
consultation with the objective of incorporating views of various stakeholders appropriately. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.42 
Settlement of Claims under Pravasi Bharatiya BimaYojana (PBBY) Scheme 
 
Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY) is a mandatory insurance scheme initially 
launched in 2003 for Emigration Check Required (ECR) category workers going to ECR 
countries for overseas employment. PBBY provides an insurance cover of Rs. 10 lakhs in 
case of accidental death or permanent disability and some other benefits at a nominal 
insurance premium of Rs. 275/ Rs. 375 for a period of two/three years. The Scheme has 
been comprehensively revamped in 2017 with facility for online renewal. The Committee 
find with dismay that only 2197 claims have been settled out of 80,37,200 policies issued 

Page | 58 
 
since its inception. From FY 20-21 to FY 23-24, out of 418 claims, only 156 have been 
settled showing a dismal settlement ratio. Given the large number of migrants, having very 
limited claims seems odd to the Committee making them feel that there is a problem in the 
way the scheme is working. This is especially so, when the PBBY scheme provides for 
reimbursement of medical expenses up to Rs.1 lakh on hospitalization in emergencies, 
reimbursement of cost of transportation of mortal remains in accidental death along with 
cost of return airfare of one attendant, etc. This, the Committee feel might be on account of 
not honouring most of the claims by insurance companies on flimsy grounds.  Since 
migrants workers are the most vulnerable section of the Diaspora community, the 
Committee are of the view that they should not be left at the mercy of insurance companies 
making the scheme infructuous. The Committee, hence, recommend that our missions 
should assist and guide the emigrant during the claim process and direct the insurance 
companies not to deny the claims without proper justification.  Further, the missions may 
also help emigrants navigate the complaint process when their claims are not honoured. 
The Missions may also ensure that the cost of transportation of mortal remains in 
accidental death of an insured emigrant is reimbursed by the companies and apprise the 
Committee of the details of such reimbursement done in the last five years.  
Reply of the Government 
Subscription to the Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojana (PBBY) is mandatory for all Emigration 
Check Required (ECR) category passport holding workers going to ECR countries. Migrant 
workers who emigrated to ECR countries through legal route after getting Emigration Clearance 
from the Protector of Emigrants, are insured against accidental death or permanent disability 
under PBBY policy.   
 
Number of claims under Pravasi Bhartiya Bima Yojana (PBBY) are likely to be on the lower 
side as the Scheme covers accidental death or permanent disability only. As such natural deaths 
are not covered under the Scheme.  
 
On receipt of all required documents, the PBBY claims are processed within a week's time by 
insurance companies.  However, major reasons for delay in settlement of claims is discrepancy in 
documents or absence of all requisite documents. 
 
The claimant can approach the Ministry for help if an insurance company denies to settle a claim 
on filmsy grounds. Ministry then directs the concerned insurance company to re-examine into the 

Page | 59 
 
matter for resolution of claimant’s grievance. An emigrant can also approach the Indian embassy 
located in that country for help and guidance.  
Data of insurance claims under PBBY settled and amount paid during period 2019-2023 by the 
insurance agencies is as follows: 
 
IFFCO Tokio New India Assurance 
Year 
Total Claim 
Nos.  Amount Paid Total Claim Nos.  Amount Paid 
2019 47  43,632,184 6  5,000,000 
2020 37  35,706,709 9  6,000,000 
2021 35  35,416,405 14  13,013,000 
2022 20  15,200,535 13  12,024,400 
2023 41  29,005,995 27  18,359,437 
Total 180  158,961,828 69  54,396,837 
 
The Committee’s recommendation is duly noted. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.44 
Setting Up of Legal Panels in Missions/Posts 
It is seen that under ICWF, provisions are there for setting up legal panels in countries 
with sizeable Indian Diaspora, paying of fines/penalty for petty crimes for release of 
prisoners and assisting Indian women in distress. However, the Committee find that till 
June 2024 only 4213 Indian nationals were extended legal assistance from the fund. 
Keeping in view the fact that migrant workers and distressed Indian women are the most 
vulnerable sections of the Diaspora community and may not have the resources for legal 
assistance in case of need, the Committee recommend that legal panels may be set up in all 
the Indian Missions/Posts having Diaspora community, irrespective of the size of the 
Diaspora and immediate legal assistance should be provided when requested for the same. 
 

Page | 60 
 
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry shares the concerns of the Committee for migrant workers and vulnerable Indian 
women, and remains committed to providing legal aid to distressed Indian nationals abroad. 
 
While the figure of 4,213 Indian nationals to whom legal assistance was extended from the 
ICWF may appear modest relative to the overall size of the Indian diaspora, it must be 
emphasized that ICWF is intended as a targeted support for those in genuine distress or legal 
vulnerability, and not as a blanket legal cover for all Indian nationals abroad. Many members of 
the diaspora, particularly those in developed countries or on long-term visas, either do not 
require such assistance or are covered under local legal systems, employer support, or private 
insurance. The ICWF is specifically targeted, and the usage reflects careful screening, need-
based disbursement, and resource optimization. 
 
The number of diaspora members receiving legal assistance through ICWF fund has been 
steadily increasing due to enhanced awareness, proactive outreach by Indian 
Embassies/Consulates, and improved implementation practices. The Ministry agrees that access 
to timely legal assistance is critical for vulnerable diaspora groups. Nevertheless, universal 
deployment of legal panels in all Embassies regardless of diaspora size may not be a judicious 
way of optimally using the available resources, especially in countries where the Indian 
community is extremely small or transient, or where there is minimal incidence of distress or 
legal vulnerability, or where local legal frameworks offer robust, affordable public defenders or 
legal aid. Retaining a panel of lawyers is often expensive, and therefore a context-specific 
approach may be more practical and efficient, where legal panels are prioritised in high-need 
locations where migrant workers are concentrated and face greater legal exposure. Indian 
Embassies/Consulates in such countries are instructed to maintain active legal panels, with clear 
protocols for urgent intervention. Accordingly, as per the existing ICWF guidelines, Embassies 
can set up panels of lawyers for giving legal assistance to Indian nationals in distress in GCC 
countries and 20 other countries with large Indian diaspora, as per the list approved by the 
Ministry. 
This Ministry remains committed to protecting the legal interests of vulnerable Indians abroad. 
In this context, Ministry is reviewing its mechanisms to increase the number of empanelled 
lawyers in Embassies dealing with large Indian diaspora, expand awareness campaigns so that 
more vulnerable individuals can seek help, and evaluate the feasibility of additional legal panels 
in emerging diaspora locations.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 

Page | 61 
 
Recommendation No.45 
Expeditious Transportation of Mortal Remains 
 
The Committee are informed that the CPV Division in the Ministry of External Affairs is 
the nodal Division to coordinate with all Missions / Posts abroad to provide help to Indian 
nationals in distress including in cases of deaths, local cremation/burial or transportation 
of mortal remains to their hometowns in India and settlement of insurance / compensation 
claims. Transportation of mortal remains involves completion of certain formalities by the 
local authorities before such body/bodies are allowed to be transported to India and, in 
case of unnatural deaths, police investigations are to be completed, the procedures of which 
differ from country to country resulting in no fixed time frame for eventual transportation. 
Though the Committee note that our Missions attach highest importance to the issue of 
expeditious transportation of mortal remains of Indians who die abroad, there are 
instances galore when extreme difficulties were faced by the kith and kin of the deceased in 
bringing the dead bodies back home. In view of the emotions involved in such cases, the 
Committee desire that the nodal division in MEA and the Missions/Posts abroad should 
accord utmost priority to ensuring expeditious transportation of the mortal remains by 
making all efforts needed to obtain the necessary clearances. In this regard, it would be 
advisable for all Missions to have a Death Registration Desk with a designated email id to 
be monitored all the time. The details of the same should be made available in the website 
of the Ministry and the Mission.   
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry has noted the recommendations of the Committee and have initiated steps to 
implement the suggestions made by the Committee at the earliest. Indian Embassies/Consulates 
accord utmost priority to the safety, security and well-being of Indian nationals abroad and 
render consular services to distressed Indian nationals on a priority basis. Given the sensitive 
nature of the issue of transportation of mortal remains of Indian citizens from foreign countries, 
our Embassies/Consulates have been directed to further streamline the process of repatriation of 
mortal remains by liaisioning with local authorities in the countries of accreditation thereby 
striving to obtain faster clearances and documents necessary for the repatriation.  
 
Indian Embassies/Consulates with large Indian Diaspora already have a Death Registration Desk 
along with a designated email id whereas in other smaller Indian Embassies/Consulates, death 
registration services are provided by the Consular Wing on a priority basis. All our 
Embassies/Consulates have a working 24x7 emergency consular distress helpline number which 

Page | 62 
 
is published on the Embassy/Consulate’s website apart from media handles and other social 
media platforms to attend to such cases in particular.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.48 
PoEs as Actual First Point of Contact in Case of Deaths of Indians Abroad 
 
The Committee have been informed that in case of death, Protector of Emigrants (PoE) 
works closely with Indian Missions for the timely dispatch of mortal remains and it acts as 
the first point of contact between the emigrant's family and agencies abroad. It was further 
given to understand that POEs also work in assisting the family in obtaining insurance 
claims by coordinating with Missions to gather necessary legal and medical documents. 
The Committee, however, are a bit apprehensive about the actual experience of many 
families who have faced the death of a bread winner abroad vis-a-vis the handholding 
offered by the PoEs in the respective States. The Committee, hence, desire PoEs to actually 
live up to what is being claimed by becoming the actual first point of contact between the 
emigrant's family and agencies abroad and in ensuring the settlement of their Insurance 
claims. The name and contact details of the nodal officer for the same from PoE should be 
prominently shown in the website. The Committee also desire to see the PoE-wise data of 
instances of dispatch of mortal remains and settlement of insurance claims handled by 
them during the last three years. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry acknowledges that the loss of a loved one overseas, especially the family's primary 
breadwinner, poses immense emotional and economical challenges. In this context, the Ministry 
fully agrees with the Committee’s recommendation that PoEs must function as the first point of 
contact for bereaved families and take proactive responsibility in facilitating the repatriation of 
mortal remains and the settlement of insurance claims in a humane and efficient manner. 
However, it may be noted that a number of such cases are directly handled by the Indian 
Embassies / Consulates abroad in coordination with the  family of the deceased, without 
involving the PoEs. In light of the Committee’s concerns and suggestions, the POEs have been 
instructed to coordinate with the Embassies / Consulates in assisting repatriation of mortal 
remains and assist the family of deceased in settlement of insurance claims. The POEs have also 
been advised to maintain a database of such instances where they have assisted in repatriation of 
mortal remains and settlement of insurance claims.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 

Page | 63 
 
Recommendation No.49 
Utilization of Pre-Departure Orientation Training Programme Funds 
 
Pre-Departure Orientation Training Programme was launched by the Ministry of External 
Affairs in January, 2018 under the ‘Surakshit Jaayein Prashikshit Jaayein’ campaign of 
the Government of India, for enhancing soft skills of Indian emigrant workers, going 
abroad specially to Gulf and other ECR countries.  Under this programme, the emigrant 
workers are given one day free of cost orientation training aiming to help them understand 
local rules and regulations of the destination country and their culture, tradition, language 
etc.  PDOT also sensitizes migrant workers about pathways to safe and legal migration and 
various government programmes for their welfare and protection. The Committee are 
given to note that since the inception of the PDOT programme in 2018, a total of 1,72,220 
emigrant workers have been imparted orientation training till 31st December 2024 and 
financial assistance from the allocated budget is disbursed to the State government run 
departments/agencies. However, the Committee are startled to see that in 2022-23, out of 
the Budget Grant, nil was the funds released to the State Agencies in 2023-24, Rs. 79.77 
lakhs out of Rs. 1.20 Crore was given out and in 2024-25, out of Rs. 1 crore Budget grant, 
only Rs. 16.08 lakhs have been released till January 2025. The Committee are really 
concerned about the performance of the scheme and hence recommend that a review of the 
PDOT scheme may be undertaken to identify the issues in its effective implementation 
under intimation to this Committee within three months.  
Reply of the Government 
 
During the COVID-19 Pandemic, the Pre-Departure Orientation Training was stopped from 
March 2020 to November 2021. The PDOT Centers which were closed-down during the 
pandemic, were gradually re-opened. After resumption of PDOT in November 2021 in some 
centres, initially the training did not pick up pace due to low demand as the pandemic had led to 
large scale job loss for emigrants going abroad and there were restrictions in-place during the 
subsequent waves of the pandemic. The training started to gradually pick up pace in most centres 
from late 2022 onwards.  A proposal for opening of 58 new PDOT centres in 11 states had been 
approved by the Ministry in July, 2022 and the same was conveyed to the concerned states. The 
Ministry reached out to the States in September, 2022 requesting them to send requisition of 
funds for PDOT. Keeping in view the expansion of the programme, the Division had requested 
for a budget grant of Rs. 3 crore for FY 2023-24.  
In the Financial Year 2023-24 on receipt of demands for funds from the states of Telangana, 
Punjab and Karnataka, funds amounting to Rs. 79.77 lakhs were disbursed accordingly out of the 

Page | 64 
 
allocated budget amount of Rs. 3 Crore. In January, 2024, the Ministry again reached out to the 
concerned State Governments to seek their proposals for allocation of funds to carry out the 
PDOT. Additionally, in March, 2024, the Ministry reached out to the Principal Secretaries of the 
concerned States seeking their intervention to operationalise the approved new PDOT centres in 
their states and send their budget proposals for running of the centres. Subsequent reminders to 
follow-up on the subject matter were sent in July, October and December, 2024 and February, 
2025. 
 
On receipt of demands from the states of Assam, Andhra Pradesh and Telangana during 2024-25, 
a total amount of Rs. 45,71,300/- was disbursed to the State Agencies of Assam, Andhra Pradesh 
and Telangana out of the allocated budget. Since the inception of the PDOT programme in 2018, 
a total of 1,90,362 emigrant workers have been imparted orientation training till 28th February, 
2025. The pace of PDOT is expected to pick up during the current Financial Year as Ministry has 
been closely coordinating with all State Governments/Training Partners to expand the PDOT 
outreach. 
 
As recommended by the committee, the Ministry will re-examine the PDOT programme to make 
it more effective and useful for prospective emigrants. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.51 
Revision and Updation of PDOT Manuals and Booklets 
 
The Committee note that the PDOT curriculum content has been standardized all over the 
country and Comprehensive PDO Manuals for Master Trainers have been developed in 
seven languages i.e. Hindi, English, Bangla, Malayalam, Punjabi, Tamil and Telugu. In this 
regard, the Committee desire to be informed about the details of country-specific pre-
departure handbooks/booklets prepared by the India Centre for Migration so far. They 
also recommend that these booklets are revised and updated periodically so that 
prospective emigrants are acquainted with the latest rules and regulations of the 
destination countries as well as about safe and legal migration. 
 
 
 

Page | 65 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Committee’s recommendation is duly noted. This is to inform that the updated (March 2024) 
Handbook for Migrant workers traveling to Thailand, Sudan, South Sudan, Malaysia, Libya, 
Lebanon, Jordan, Indonesia is available on the eMigrate Portal. The handbooks were updated 
based on the inputs provided by the Embassies abroad. 
 
The Ministry is currently in the process of finalizing the draft of the country-specific handbooks 
for 6 GCC countries (Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, Saudi Arabia and UAE) and Mauritius. 
Following this finalization, the handbooks will be translated into Hindi, Bengali, Malayalam, 
Punjabi, Tamil, Urdu and Telugu.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.52 
Outcome of Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) Conventions 
 
The Committee note that the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) is being celebrated since 2003 
to recognize the contribution of Overseas Indian Community in the development of India 
and celebrate Indian Diaspora’s connection with its roots. The biennial Convention 
provides a platform to the overseas Indian community to engage with the government and 
people of the land of their ancestors for mutually beneficial activities. These conventions 
facilitate networking among the overseas Indian community residing in various parts of the 
world and enable sharing of experiences in various fields. The Committee note that for the 
last few years, the Government of India has been organizing the PBD Convention in 
partnership with one of the State Governments and the recent ones were held in the cities 
of Gandhinagar (Gujarat), Bengaluru (Karnataka), Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh), Indore 
(Madhya Pradesh) and with the very latest being held in Bhubaneswar from 8-10 January, 
2025. The Committee are however surprised to note that no Outcome Report of the Pravas 
iBharatiya Divas is being prepared by the Ministry. The Committee fail to understand how 
in the absence of Outcome Reports the Ministry is able to assess tangible benefits or failure 
of the Convention or to make improvements in areas where it is lagging. To make PBDs 
meaningful and outcome oriented, beyond being just grand celebrations, the Committee 
recommend that the Ministry prepare Outcome Report and, to begin with, the Outcome 
Report of the 18th PBD held at Bhubaneswar may be prepared and placed before this 
Committee.  
 

Page | 66 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry has prepared a Report on the 18th Pravasi 
Bharatiya Divas held in Bhubaneswar from 8-10 January, 2025. It is enclosed as Annexure – I. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.53 
 
Participation in PBDs 
 
The Committee note that on an average over 3500 members of Indian Diaspora participate 
per edition in the Convention. It is stated that the revision of the format of the PBD in 2015 
has enhanced the participation of the Diaspora besides having participation from HoGs/ 
HoSs & Ministers of Indian origin from other countries, renowned businessmen, eminent 
members of the Diaspora abroad and experts from various fields. The Ministry has 
endeavored to get Diaspora participants from various sectors and disciplines, including but 
not limited to, trade, business, youth, sports, science & technology, academics, research, 
engineering and culture as well as from various segments of society, including youth 
Diaspora, migrant workers and women. The Committee are further informed that the 
participation in PBD celebration is open to all members of the Indian Diaspora, including 
the semi-skilled emigrant workers. The Committee, however, regret to note that the 
Ministry does not maintain any data detailing the profile or statistics about the jobs of the 
participants. In the absence of such data, the Committee apprehend that participation may 
be limited to high profile participants and the benefits of the Convention may not extend to 
the low / semi-skilled and blue-collar workers. The Committee desire that the Ministry 
evolve a mechanism whereby data with respect to the participants are collected and 
regularly maintained so as to ensure that the participation and involvement in these 
Conventions is accommodative of the vulnerable sections of the Diaspora community too. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has noted the Committee’s concern that lack of data on details of participants in the 
PBD Conventions may lead to a bias towards participation of high-profile individuals and limit 
the benefits of the Conventions for low/semi-skilled and blue-collar workers within the Indian 
Diaspora. However, the available empirical evidences are reassuring, particularly considering the 
fact that participants from the blue-collar workers dominated Gulf countries of Oman, Qatar, etc. 
have constituted the largest proportion of the total in the recent PBD Conventions. In view of the 
Committee’s suggestion for encouraging more participation from low/semi-skilled and blue-
collar workers, Ministry proposes, as a first step, to revise the registration form by including 
fields such as profession, skill levels, sectors of employment, etc., which will help in identifying 
skill levels of various participants. Based on the collated data, Ministry will devise and re-design 

Page | 67 
 
the different diaspora engagement programmes and events to attract and encourage more 
participation from the vulnerable sections of the Indian diaspora in the future editions of the 
PBDs. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.55 
 
Loka Kerala Sabha 
 
The Committee find that in 2017, the State Government of Kerala introduced the Loka 
Kerala Sabha, a platform designed to involve Non-Resident Keralites in policy making 
process. The Committee have been informed that the initiative allows Non- Resident 
Keralites from around the world to share their ideas, discuss issues, and submit policy 
suggestions directly to the Government of Kerala. Given that State Governments are often 
the primary entities interacting with migrants and managing migration-related challenges, 
the Committee welcome such initiatives as it empowers the Diaspora community to play an 
active role in shaping policies that impact their lives. The Committee urge the Ministry to 
encourage other State Governments also, especially the ones with large Diaspora community, 
to look into the feasibility of providing similar platforms allowing NRIs from their State 
engage with their government and contribute to the society where their roots are. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Since the adoption of a collaborative ‘All-of-Government approach’ for the diaspora policy, this 
Ministry has endeavoured to involve other wings of the Government as well as the State 
Governments in all aspects of Diaspora affairs. State governments, particularly those with large 
diaspora community, can play an important role in shaping and ensuring optimum effectiveness 
of the diaspora-related policies, especially since much of the Indian diaspora maintains strong 
cultural and family ties with their states of origin.  
 
This Ministry encourages the State governments to set up NRI Departments or Commissions to 
serve as a bridge between the diaspora and state agencies, and to coordinate the welfare schemes, 
investment facilitation and other diaspora related initiatives of the State governments. Ministry 
also organizes the Videsh Sampark Programmme whereby the States are apprised about the 
Diaspora Engagement initiatives and Welfare schemes run by the Government of India. It also 
provides a platform where the State governments can channel the feedback gathered from their 
diaspora to this Ministry, which in turn helps in shaping the larger diaspora policy of the 
Government. The latest recommendations of the Loka Kerala Sabha are being examined by the 

Page | 68 
 
Ministry. The details of the best practices in the states, such as the Loka Kerala Sabha, when 
shared with this Ministry, are also disseminated to other State Governments for their perusal. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.56 
Know India Programme 
 
The Committee note that the Know India Programme was launched with the purpose of 
familiarizing the People of Indian Origin (PIO) youth between the age group of 21-35 years 
with contemporary India, through a three-week orientation programme and providing 
them an exposure to the country of their origin. It aims to promote awareness on different 
facets of life in India and the progress made by the country in various fields. The 
Committee note that 81 editions of KIP have been completed since its inception in 2003, 
with the participation   of more than 2800 Indian Diaspora Youth from 54 countries. The 
programme was revamped to widen its scope and coverage and the Ministry is currently 
conducting eight to nine editions of KIP during each financial year since FY 2023-24. 
Considering the fact that the programme envisages direct engagement of the Government 
with the Overseas Indian youth, most of whom visit India for the first time, the Committee 
urge the Ministry to consider incorporating more diverse regional experiences, facilitating 
meaningful interactions with local communities, providing tailored learning tracks based 
on participants' interests while ensuring accessibility and inclusivity to a wider range of 
participants beyond merely a tourist’s experience. The Ministry may also consider creating 
online platforms for KIP alumni to network, share experiences, collaborate on projects and 
offer mentorship opportunities to guide participants in applying their learning in their 
professional lives. 
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry takes note of the Committee’s valuable suggestions to make the Know India 
Program (KIP) more meaningful, tailored and collaborative. The Ministry has been steadfast in 
its effort to incorporate experiences from different regions of India for the KIP participants by 
facilitating their visits to at least two States in India during each edition of the programme. The 
participants of the Know India Programme are thus showcased various aspects of India’s rich 
cultural heritage, technological advancements, historical places, etc. of different states. Ministry 
is trying to further evolve this programme by making the editions more subject-oriented and 
tailored. For example, the 79th Edition of the KIP was exclusively undertaken for the 
journalists/media professionals from the Indian diaspora community. Further, Ministry also 

Page | 69 
 
factors in comments/ suggestions from Indian Embassies/ Consulates abroad for enhancing the 
robustness and efficiency of this programme. Most KIP beneficiaries have continued to remain 
connected with India even after the conclusion of the different editions of the programme. Such 
participants have also posted positive content on social media handles of their experiences during 
the KIP and have encouraged their friends to participate in it. Ministry has also been sharing the 
alumni database of the KIP with Indian Embassies/Consulates abroad for continued engagement 
with these members of the Indian diaspora overseas with the view to enhance the outreach of the 
Government of India in foreign countries. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.57 
Participation of Girmitiya Countries in Know India Programme 
 
The Committee note that the participation level of some of the Girmitiya countries is very 
low or nearly negligible in Know India Programmes. The Committee are concerned to note 
that in  comparison to 2023-2024, participation of Girmitiya countries has decreased in 
2024-25. The Committee urge the Ministry to utilize its embassies and consulates in 
Girmitiya countries to actively promote the programme through dedicated campaigns, 
information sessions and social media initiatives collaborating with community leaders/ 
organizations in these countries and tailor the programme itinerary to include cultural 
experiences related to the Girmitiya legacy. 
Reply of the Government 
The Committee’s recommendation is duly noted. A multi-pronged approach has been adopted to 
increase awareness and outreach of the Know India Programme amongst the youth diaspora from 
the Grimitiya Countries, by effective utilization of the social media and digital platforms. 
Ministry has also worked towards creating an engaging and attractive content for the youth 
members of the diaspora, such as videos, infographics, and interactive quizzes, to catch their 
attention and share information with the latter in a more dynamic manner. Indian Embassies and 
Consulates abroad have also been reaching out to the Indian diaspora communities abroad to 
further disseminate the unique opportunities offered by this Programme. The response of the 
youth diaspora of Girmitiya Countries towards the KIP has always been exceptionally positive as 
is manifested by an over subscription of applications for each edition of the programme from 
these countries. During the last three years, 658 members of the youth PIOs from 8 Girmitiya 
Countries have participated in the Know India Programme. This Ministry will continue its efforts 

Page | 70 
 
to select KIP beneficiaries with the objective to expand the geographical spread of participation 
in the programme, particularly from the Girmitiya countries.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.58 
Bharat Ko Janiye (BKJ) Quiz 
 
The Committee are aware that Bharat KoJaniye (BKJ) Quiz is an initiative of the 
Government started in 2015 to motivate overseas Indians and foreign youth to enhance 
their knowledge about India. The BKJ Quiz was revamped in 2024 with an aim to 
increasing the level of participation that had remained low since 2015. Accordingly, the age 
limit has been expanded to 14-50 years from the previous range of 18-35 years and the quiz 
was held for two categories PIO / Foreign Nationals and Non-Resident Indians. The 
Committee are happy to see that the efforts have resulted in the participation of a total of 
around 1,08,876 from 203 countries in the 5th Edition of the Quiz and the top 15 winners in 
two categories (NRI and PIO) have been invited to visit India on a two-week long BKJ 
Yatra along with their participation in the 18th PBD Convention held in Bhubaneswar. The 
Committee hope that through effective publicity and collaboration with Social Media 
Influencers, etc. and taking innovative steps like issuing digital participation certificates, 
the Ministry is able to further enhance participation in the next edition of Bharat Ko 
Janiye (BKJ) Quiz and motivate overseas Indians and foreign youth to enhance their 
knowledge about India. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee. The Bharat Ko Janiye 
Quiz is an effective tool to connect with the Indian Diaspora, particularly the youth, and also to 
engage foreigners who are keen to learn about India. All efforts would be made to effectively 
publicize the 6th edition of the BKJ Quiz to be held in the future in the last quarter of 2026 using 
social media handles and the Embassies and Consulates abroad. Ministry will abide by the 
suggestions by the Committee for this purpose.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
 
 

Page | 71 
 
Recommendation No.59 
 
Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora  
 
The Committee note that under the Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora (PCTD), the 
Ministry provides grants to Indian Missions/Posts abroad to support their initiatives aimed 
at strengthening ties with the Overseas Indian Community to preserve, maintain and 
showcase Indian heritage and legacy. The scheme aims to nourish and strengthen the 
cultural bonds between India and its Diaspora and reinforce the cultural identity of the 
persons of Indian origin. However, the Committee note with dismay that the Budget 
provided for PCTD in both BE 2023-24 and 2024-25 was only Rs. 4 crores and the funds 
released to Missions/Posts for financial year 2023-24 & 2024-25 are Rs. 3,48,38000 and Rs. 
3,80,50000 respectively. For BE 2025-26 the provision is Rs. 6 crores. The Committee 
wonder, how the Indian Missions and Posts are expected to organize cultural events with 
such limited resources available to them and are surprised that the Ministry had projected 
only Rs.10 crores for 66 Missions in the current FY despite knowing that it is difficult to 
meet the expectations of growing Indian community living abroad to organize cultural 
events by the Indian Missions in their countries with limited funds. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to make further improvements in its Budgetary projections 
taking into consideration the requests received from Missions/Posts and impress upon the 
Ministry of Finance to provide adequate Budgetary provisions so that the Missions are able 
to support their initiatives to strengthen ties with the Overseas Indian Community without 
being hindered by financial constraints. 
 
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry is grateful for the Committee’s concern pertaining to inadequate allocation of 
financial resources for the Diaspora engagement programmes. During the Current Financial Year 
(CFY) 2025-26, the Ministry has received an enhanced budget allocation under PCTD of Rs 6 
crores, which represents a 50% increase in the budget allocation compared that of FY 2024-25. It 
is pertinent to mention that during the CFY, Ministry had received proposals from over 100 
Indian Embassies/Consulates abroad to the tune of over Rs. 16 crores to organise various events 
under PCTD. Accordingly, Ministry had projected additional Rs. 10 crores under the PCTD 
Budget head which was not allocated. We also share the Committee’s sentiment that the 
expectations of the growing Indian community living abroad from the Indian Embassies/ 
Consulates to organize cultural events in their countries cannot be met with the limited resources 
provided. Keeping this in view, Ministry will strive to impress the necessity to allocate more 
funds to the PCTD budget so that Indian Embassies/ Consulates are able to continue and further 
enhance their diaspora engagement initiatives. Ministry has also urged Indian Embassies/ 
Consulates abroad to explore the possibility of securing partnership stakes/ local sponsorships 
from stakeholders in their respective countries of accreditation to further expand the ambit, 
outreach and effectiveness of the events conducted under the PCTD. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 

Page | 72 
 
Recommendation No.60 
Videsh Sampark Programme 
 
The Committee note that the Videsh Sampark Programme aims at engaging with the 
relevant stakeholders within the State Governments. It gives a platform for organizing 
brainstorming sessions with the State Governments on various challenges faced by the 
Indian Diaspora overseas and to enhance engagement with the Indian States to address the 
same. The Committee have been informed that under this programme, conferences are 
held in the State capital where MEA officials brief senior State Government officials and 
other stakeholders in the State about the initiatives, programmes and schemes 
implemented by the Ministry. The Ministry is, in fact, enthused that the utility of this 
Programme in sensitizing the State Governments on issues pertaining to the overseas 
Indians cannot be overstated. However, much to the surprise and anguish of the 
Committee, it is observed during the examination of the subject that many States are left 
uncovered under the programme for years together as the Ministry has been conducting on 
an average one or two Videsh Sampark Programmes in a year. So far Videsh Sampark 
Programmes have been conducted with State Governments of Telengana in May 2017, 
Maharashtra in August 2017, Kerala in September 2017, Gujarat in August 2018, Madhya 
Pradesh in September 2018, Karnataka in February 2020, Punjab and Haryana in June 
2023, Bihar in July 2024, Tripura in July 2024 and Uttarakhand in September 2024. The 
Committee feel that there is serious need to look into the schedule of Videsh Sampark 
Programme to ensure frequent and wider engagement/ consultation with the States. The 
Committee, urge the Ministry to look into the feasibility of conducting the programme 
zone-wise, so that representatives from more than one State can benefit from the 
engagement.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee. The Ministry has been 
actively pursuing the matter of organizing the Videsh Samapark Programme with the State 
Governments of India and to seek their consent for mutually agreed dates to host them. In recent 
months, Ministry has written to the State governments of Odisha, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh, 
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Assam, Arunachal Pradesh and West Bengal, to seek interest for 
organizing Videsh Sampark Program in their States. However, Ministry has not yet received any 
response from the Governments in these States.  
The issues that are raised during such Programmes are usually state specific in nature. Different 
State Governments face different challenges concerning its Diaspora and possess different 
comparative advantages for offering varying opportunities for trade, investment and tourism to 

Page | 73 
 
the Indian diaspora community overseas. Therefore, it is this Ministry’s considered view that 
organizing Zonal VSPs may not be effective. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.61 
State Governments as Partners in Migration Management 
 
The Committee are aggrieved to note that the States feel there is lack of concern on part of 
MEA with regard to matters relating to Indian Diaspora. The Committee are worried 
about minimal or, at times, no contact with States by MEA on issues relating to the welfare 
of NRIs, including those of migrant workers abroad. The Committee are aware that the 
Protector of Emigrants (PoE) offices located in various states serve as the nodal field office 
of MEA for matters related to emigration and associated grievances, acting as a vital link 
between Indian Missions, the emigrant’s family, local authorities, etc. and is well-
positioned to engage with the State police and administration. The Ministry has maintained 
that regular and timely response to the communications from various State authorities on 
the issue of emigration is ensured.  However, the feedback in this regard is not so positive. 
Given the fact that State Governments are often the primary entities interacting with 
migrants and managing migration-related challenges, the Committee strongly feel that 
unless Ministry actively ropes-in the State Governments and make them partners, the 
Ministry will fail to achieve the objectives with regard to Diaspora management. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to formulate a strategy, designate officers who 
would be interacting with the State Governments and work towards cohesive collaboration 
with State Governments to achieve meaningful utilization of various welfare schemes for 
the Diaspora. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee.  
 
The Ministry has a States Division to facilitate external outreach of States and Union Territories 
through the network of Indian Embassies and Consulates abroad and through MEA Branch 
Secretariats. The States Division is the main agency for the Ministry to liaise with States and 
Union Territories through their Resident Commissioners in New Delhi. Signing of several MoUs 
between State Governments and their entities with foreign counterparts is facilitated on trade/ 
investment promotion, skill development, agriculture research, among other things.  

Page | 74 
 
 
In addition, the Protector of Emigrants (PoE) offices located in various states communicates 
regularly with the state government officials and liaise with them on various issues related to 
emigration. They work closely with the state law enforcement authorities and cyber-crime units 
to tackle fraudulent practices reinforces the integrity of the emigration process.  
 
Currently there are 16 PoE offices in 15 states / UTs of India. For better coordination with state 
governments in the matters of emigration, Ministry has been exploring the possibility of opening 
of PoE offices in those states, where such offices currently do not exist. PoE Offices in Odisha, 
Jharkhand and Tripura have been opened recently. The Division is in the process of opening PoE 
office in Uttarakhand, Gujarat and Andhra Pradesh in near future. 
 
The Ministry has also requested State/UT governments to nominate a nodal officer for effective 
collaboration in tracking and redressal of grievances and complaints against the unregistered 
recruiting agents. A number of States/UTs have nominated such nodal officer so far and the 
office of PGE and the POEs are engaging and working with the nodal officers for resolution of 
grievances against the illegal RAs in effective and transparent manner. 
 
In order to foster in-depth dialogue amongst stakeholders on Ministry’s programmes, schemes 
and initiatives pertaining to Consular, Passport and Diaspora issues as also those for promoting 
safe and legal migration and mobility and for upholding Indian workers’ welfare overseas, 
Ministry has been conducting Videsh Sampark Programme. It may be noted that the Videsh 
Sampark Programme was launched by the Ministry of External Affairs in 2017. Since then, it has 
been organised with Telangana, Kerala, Maharashtra, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Karnataka, 
Haryana, Punjab, Tripura, Bihar and Uttarakhand. Ministry plans to continue with this initiative 
with other Indian States in the future.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.62 
Setting up of One Stop Centre (OSC) in Indian Missions Abroad 
 
The Committee are aware that in 2021, the Ministry of Women & Child Development and 
MEA collectively decided to set up One Stop Centre (OSC) in Indian Missions abroad to 
provide emergency shelter, police help and medico legal assistance to women in distress. 

Page | 75 
 
Further, it has been apprised that the One Stop Centre (OSC) Scheme is   under Nirbhaya 
Fund and the proposal for setting up seven OSCs with shelter homes in Bahrain, Kuwait, 
Oman, Qatar, UAE, Saudi Arabia (Jeddah and Riyadh) and 2 OSCs without shelter homes 
in Toronto and Singapore have been approved by the Empowered Committee of the 
Ministry of Women and Child Development (WCD) on 23.10.2024. The Committee are 
concerned that even after 4 years since announcing the Scheme, not even one OSC could be 
opened abroad, despite repeated recommendations by this Committee. The Scheme seems 
to be imbued with official apathy and chronic delay which needs to be addressed at the 
earliest.  The Committee strongly feel that the failure of this Scheme will undermine the 
ability of our Missions/Posts abroad to help women in distress. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Ministry take proactive steps to accelerate the pace of implementation of the 
9 OSCs in the countries as per approval during the FY 2025-26 itself and the Committee 
may be apprised of the progress in this regard.  
Reply of the Government 
On the basis of inputs received from the 9 Indian Embassies/Consulates in which the One Stop 
Centres are proposed to be established, this Ministry has been approved an expenditure of Rs. 
9.50 Crores for setting up and operationalization of the One Stop Centres (OSC) of the 
Government of India under the ‘Nibhaya Fund’ for FY 2025-26. In May 2025, the Ministry of 
Finance approved the allocation of these funds for the setting up of these centers. The concerned 
Embassies and Consulates are being instructed to establish and operationalise the OSCs. 
Meanwhile, Indian Embassies/ Consulates abroad continue to conduct Open Houses for 
counselling and educating distressed Indian women abroad about their legal rights, local laws 
and the role that Embassies/Consulates could play to assist them to resolve their problems. All 
Indian Embassies/Consulates abroad also disseminate information about the measures being 
taken by them for the welfare of Indian nationals, particularly for Indian women in distress, 
through their official websites and social media for the awareness of the Indian diaspora abroad. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.63 
Engagement with Indian Students by Missions Abroad 
 
As per data available with the Ministry, there are 17,79,097 Indian students studying in 
various Schools/Universities/Tertiary Institutions abroad as on 01.01.2024. The Committee 
note that the Ministry collects yearly data on Indian Students studying abroad from 
Missions and Posts abroad, but information regarding their return / continued stay is not 
kept by the Ministry. The Committee are of firm view that non-availability of 
comprehensive data in respect of our students in a foreign country by our Missions is a 

Page | 76 
 
lacuna and it is important to have authentic list that covers the bulk of our students. 
Moreover, without such imprint, our Missions/Posts will not be in a position to reach out to 
them in times of need/crisis. Having said this, the Committee urge Indian Missions abroad 
to actively engage with Indian students, encouraging them to register on their portals, thus 
contributing to a more comprehensive data set. The Missions/posts may also partner with 
universities and student organizations to facilitate data collection and every event 
organized in the Missions should be utilized for collecting information 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendations of the Committee are noted. Safety and welfare of Indian students 
studying abroad is one of the top most priorities of the Government of India. Indian 
Embassies/Consulates abroad maintain regular contacts with Indian students enrolled in 
Universities abroad. This commences as soon as new Indian students are enrolled in foreign 
Universities. They are invited to participate in Welcome Ceremonies organised by Indian 
Embassies/Consulates abroad. Heads of Indian Missions/ Posts organise Orientation Programmes 
for Indian students and brief them on the challenges and threats, if any, that they may confront 
during their stay in the foreign lands and how to take counter active measures. Heads of Indian 
Missions/ Posts and other senior Embassy officials also visit foreign Universities and 
Educational Institutions in their respective countries of accreditation to regularly interact with 
Indian students and Indian Students’ Associations. During these visits and events, the 
Embassies/Consulates invite the students to register on the relevant portals and also discuss with 
the University authorities about the welfare of Indian students. However, the privacy laws and 
data protection regulations in many countries restrict the Universities and local authorities from 
sharing information about Indian students. Therefore, Ministry will continue in its efforts to 
enhance the voluntary data collection pertaining to Indian students. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.64) 
Timely Redressal of Students Grievances 
 
The Committee have been informed that Indian Missions/Posts abroad encourage Indian 
students to remain connected on a regular basis and make all possible efforts to respond to the 
outstanding issues faced by them on priority basis. The Committee have been assured that the 
grievances of the students are responded to almost on a real time basis through telephone 
calls, walk-ins, emails, social media, 24x7 emergency helpline, open houses and the MADAD 
Portal.  Any complaint received from the Indian students abroad is taken up with the 

Page | 77 
 
concerned University/Institution and the host Government, as the case may be, for requisite 
action. The Committee however find that the students don’t consider our Missions as easily 
approachable or friendly and that perception needs to change. It should be the endeavour 
of our Missions to win the confidence of our student community by minimising the 
response time to their grievances and striving for near complete resolution rates. The 
Committee may also be apprised of the Open Houses arranged by our Missions during the 
last three years, Mission-wise. 
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry notes the Committee’s concern regarding the diaspora’s perception of the Indian 
Embassies and Consulates. Indian Embassies and Consulates endeavour to ensure that distressed 
students are provided all possible consular assistance, including emergency medical care and 
boarding/lodging, whenever required. The grievances of Indian students abroad are dealt with by 
Indian Embassies/Consulates on priority and are responded to almost on a real time basis through 
telephone calls, walk-ins, emails, social media, 24x7 emergency helplines, Open Houses and the 
MADAD Portal. Indian Embassies/Consulates abroad also encourage Indian students travelling 
abroad for higher studies to register with them on the MADAD Portal so that their grievances 
and outstanding issues can be addressed in a time bound manner.  The Indian Community 
Welfare Fund (ICWF) has been set up in Indian Embassies/Consulates abroad for assisting 
overseas Indian nationals, including Indian students, in distress situations on a means tested basis 
for deserving cases. The support extended under ICWF also includes extension of legal 
assistance, counselling and transportation of mortal remains of Indian nationals who die abroad. 
The Indian students are also encouraged to remain connected with Indian Embassies/Consulates 
on a regular basis so that any complaint received from them can be taken up with the concerned 
University/Institution and the host Government, as the case may be, for requisite action.  
 
In order to win the confidence of the Indian students’ community, the Heads of Missions and 
Posts and senior officials regularly visit Universities, attend student-led events, and organize 
Welcome ceremonies for new students, where they share information about the various services 
and welfare programmes provided by the Government of India, and receive feedback from the 
students. Indian Embassies/Consulates continue to make all efforts to proactively make 
themselves available and more approachable for the Indian students studying abroad. 
 
The details of the Open Houses arranged by the Embassies during the last three years, country-
wise, can be found in Annexure II. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 

Page | 78 
 
 
Recommendation No.66 
Safety and Security of Indian Students Abroad 
 
The Committee view Indian students studying abroad as brand ambassadors of the country. 
However, random instances of violence put their lives in danger. The Committee note that 
during the last three years, 14 Indian students have died in foreign countries due to 
violence/attacks. From a reply in the Parliament, it is seen that 403 incidents of death of 
Indian students abroad have been reported from 2018 till February 2024 due to various 
reasons including natural causes, accidents and medical conditions. The Committee desire 
that the Ministry take proactive steps to create some sort of safety net for our students by 
evolving a policy framework regarding the protection of Indian students, especially in 
conflict-prone areas across the world. The Ministry may also consider the creation and 
maintenance of a real time data base of students studying abroad as an essential component 
of their safety and security framework.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The welfare of Indian students abroad is one of the foremost priorities of the Government of 
India. Indian Embassies/ Consulates abroad respond to any issue faced by Indian students 
abroad, on priority basis. Grievances are responded through various channels like calls, walk-ins, 
e-mails, social media, 24x7 Helplines, Open Houses, and MADAD portal. Any complaint 
received from the students abroad are taken up with the concerned universities/ educational 
institutions and the host government as the case may be, for requisite action. Indian Embassies 
and Consulates remain vigilant and closely monitor the well-being of the students. In case there 
is any untoward incident, it is immediately taken up with the concerned authorities of the host 
country to ensure that the incident is properly investigated and the perpetrators are punished. 
During emergency or crisis situations, Indian Embassies/Consulates abroad pro-actively help 
distressed /stranded Indian students by providing food, shelter, medicine and return passage to 
India. During the last few years Indian students were repatriated under various operations such as 
Vande Bharat Mission, Operation Ganga and Operation Ajay from countries around the world.   
 
Indian students are highly mobile as they frequently travel to different countries of the world for 
further studies, for student exchanges, for internships, jobs, and for other reasons. Such mobility 
of Indian students poses serious challenges for both creation and maintenance of real time 
database of Indians students in any particular country. As diaspora engagement continues to 
expand and strengthen, the database maintained by the respective Embassies and Consulates on 
the Indian students living in their jurisdiction is expected to improve in quantity and quality. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 

Page | 79 
 
 
Recommendation No.67 
Assessment of Diaspora Engagement Programmes 
 
The Committee have been informed that the general response from the Indian Diaspora 
towards Diaspora Engagement Programmes of the Ministry is positive and welcoming. It is 
further assured that the feedback of the participants in each of the Diaspora Engagement 
Programmes is examined seriously and diligently to continuously improve such schemes. 
This exercise also contributes to policy making at various levels. While appreciating 
Ministry’s efforts towards improving Diaspora Engagement Programmes, the Committee 
further urge the Ministry to formalize annual assessment of each of these programmes by 
incorporating questionnaire survey of the beneficiaries with a focus on identifying areas of 
concern to them and also to ensure that these programmes remain aligned with the 
evolving needs and capabilities of the Diaspora population. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry seeks to ensure that its diaspora engagement programs remain aligned with the evolving 
needs, desires, interest and capabilities of the Indian Diaspora. As the diaspora increasingly 
becomes agents of India’s soft power, innovation, and diplomacy, their feedback and 
consultation would not only improve the effectiveness of the diaspora engagement programmes 
of this Ministry, but would also play an instrumental role in shaping the larger diaspora policy of 
the Government. The diaspora engagement and welfare programmes of the Government have 
been receiving encouraging feedback through various channels, such as social media, 
interactions with Embassies/Consulates, diaspora events such as the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas, 
and engagements with other stakeholders, such as with the State Governments through the 
Videsh Sampark Programme. Ministry has taken note of the suggestion by the Committee of 
instituting Questionnaire Surveys and will try to incorporate it in future editions of its diaspora 
engagement programmes. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.68 
Dissemination of Information on Schemes for Diaspora 
 
The Committee note that Indian Missions/Posts abroad are making all out efforts to 
disseminate and popularize the programmes for the welfare of the Indian Diaspora 
through their websites, social media handles including Facebook and Twitter, community 

Page | 80 
 
channels, WhatsApp, virtual newsletters, etc. However, the Committee feel that there are 
sections of the Diaspora community who are still unaware of the welfare schemes for them. 
The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry make concerted efforts to spread 
awareness amongst the Indian Diaspora about the various welfare programmes being laid 
out by the Ministry by leveraging digital platforms, using community centres, places of 
worships, Diaspora organisations etc. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has been endeavouring to popularize and spread awareness amongst the Indian diaspora 
about the various welfare programmes run by the Government of India, through various means, 
such as official websites, social media platforms, interactions with the Indian 
Embassies/Consulates, etc. As a result, the participation of the Indian diaspora in these 
programmes have significantly increased in recent years. The Diaspora Engagement Division of 
this Ministry currently runs a daily social media campaign called “Diaspora India Connect” to 
engage with the Indian diaspora, particularly its youth members, which is steadily growing in 
popularity. However, it is true that there may be sections of the Indian Diaspora community who 
are not yet informed about the schemes. Ministry will further strengthen its efforts to expand the 
reach of the Government’s welfare schemes and engagement programmes for the Indian diaspora 
across the world through all possible manner. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.69 
Global Pravasi Rishta Portal 
 
The Committee note that the Global Pravasi Rishta Portal was launched with an aim to 
providing a platform for connecting Pravasis with the Government of India through the 
Missions and Posts abroad. The portal is a two-way communication channel between the 
Government of India and the Indian Diaspora abroad and can be used for dissemination of 
information and creation of database of Diaspora based on voluntary registration. 
However, the Committee are disappointed to note that the Global Pravasi Rishta Portal has 
been temporarily suspended due to malware attack susceptibility. It has been assured that 
the Ministry is working on the restoration of the Portal, or creation of an alternate 
application with similar scope at the earliest for which the tendering process is already 
underway and the portal is expected to be re-launched within one year. Since the Global 
RISHTA portal is one of the main platforms connecting Pravasis with the Government of 
India through the Missions and Posts abroad, the Committee desire that the process may 
be accelerated to ensure that the re-launch is done during this year itself.  

Page | 81 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry acknowledges that the Global RISHTA portal is a necessary platform which enables the 
Pravasis to connect with the Government of India. The contract for re-structuring the portal has 
already been awarded to the selected vendor following due the process. Ministry will strive to 
launch it by the end of this financial year. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.71 
Resolution of Grievances through MADAD Portal 
 
The Committee note that all grievances registered on the portal are automatically 
transferred to the concerned Mission/Post who take up the matters with the concerned 
foreign government and its agencies for redressal. The time taken for redressal of a 
grievance registered on the MADAD Portal depends on a number of factors including the 
response time from foreign employer and foreign governments. The Ministry have 
informed that, as per standard procedure, grievances received on portal are actively 
followed up and responded to on high-priority. Further, MADAD has an inbuilt 
mechanism for identifying and escalating cases when the response in not received in time. 
Concerned Mission and Post abroad also take all necessary steps to resolve these cases as 
soon as possible. The Committee are, however, concerned to note that despite the best 
efforts of the Ministry there are still 3987 cases pending in the portal. The Committee 
desire that the Ministry make efforts to bring about qualitative and quantitative 
improvements in the grievance redressal system to reduce the response time and accelerate 
the settlement of cases, especially in the Gulf countries. 
Reply of the Government 
There are a total of 3687 pending cases on the Madad Portal as on date. 
 
Reason for pendency of such cases: Many pending cases on Madad Portal are due to factors such 
as incomplete information submitted by the complainants, non-cooperative compliance of 
foreign sponsors/ employers/ agencies etc. There have been instances where the role of the 
Indian Embassy/Consulate is limited due to the sub judice nature of cases or ongoing local 
investigations in foreign countries which are beyond our control. These complexities contribute 
to a prolonged resolution time.   
 

Page | 82 
 
Steps taken by the Ministry to dispose off the pendency:  The Ministry is committed to reducing 
pendency and response times on the MADAD Portal. Most of the cases are resolved through 
direct communication with the parties involved or their relatives, mediation with relevant 
agencies involved in specific cases, and so forth.  In addition to this, our Embassies/Consulates 
frequently communicate with the Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MoFA) of the countries they are 
accreditated to, through Note Verbale (official communications through letters, mails etc., 
wherever necessary). In some cases, our Embassies/Consulates also provide legal assistance to 
Indians abroad in distress through list of empanelled lawyers (list of which is available on 
Mission’s website as well as MEA website). Apart from all these measures, Ministry constantly 
strives to address these issues by providing counselling, guidance, conducting open house 
meetings and walk in sessions for aggrieved families/relatives of concerned persons so that the 
number of such cases are reduced in times to come. Indian Embassies/Consulates also 
occasionally mediates between the aggrieved parties to facilitate reconciliation between the 
concerned parties. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.72 
E-Sanad Service 
 
The Committee note that E-Sanad is an electronic service delivery platform for apostille 
and attestation of documents issued by Government of India aiming at contactless service 
to people. The Committee further note that the e-Sanad portal is a central portal and an 
applicant residing in any part of the country can access the portal and upload his / her pre-
authenticated documents online which are processed at New Delhi and sent back to the 
applicants by affixing Apostille sticker or attestation (as desired by the applicant) through 
Speed Post. The same mechanism is also available to any applicant abroad, where he or she 
can upload the pre authenticated document which will be delivered at the given address in 
India. The Committee note that currently 15 Passport Offices as well as 4 Branch 
Secretariats located in various States are providing these services to the applicants. Given 
that the service is in such high demand with number of applications being received by the 
Ministry steadily increasing on year-to-year basis, the Committee desire that the Ministry 
may consider rolling out the E-Sanad services across India. 
Reply of the Government 
Applications for apostille and attestation of documents received through the E-Sanad portal are 
currently being rendered in respect of Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Puducherry, Punjab, Maharashtra and 
Gujarat in addition to the Digilocker documents (e.g. CBSE documents) which are received pan-
India. MEA is coordinating with other State Governments and an official communication has 

Page | 83 
 
been sent to Chief Secretaries of these states for onboarding onto the E-Sanad portal for digital 
pre-authentication of documents by concerned Departments of the State. This will help in 
achieving delivery of E-Sanad services across India.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025]

Page | 84 
 
CHAPTER-III 
 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT 
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

Page | 85 
 
CHAPTER- IV 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation No.8 
Comprehensive Labour Market Information Database 
 
To facilitate future migration, the Committee desire that a comprehensive Labour Market 
Information (LMI) database for the Indian Diaspora should be developed. This database 
must include, but not be limited to, real-time data on employment trends, wage patterns, 
occupational sectors, skill mismatches and remittance flow among NRIs, PIOs and OCIs. 
Such data would not only improve migration management but also help migrants make 
informed decisions, matching their skills with available opportunities abroad. 
Strengthening such data collection and sharing mechanisms for the same is also essential 
for ensuring efficient and transparent migration governance.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry maintains data in respect of Indian workers, holding Emigration Check Required 
(ECR) passports, proceeding for employment overseas through e-Migrate portal to any of the 18 
notified ECR countries. The database is quite comprehensive and provides, inter alia, gender-
wise, destination country-wise, job category-wise and state-wise data of Indian workers 
migrating with Emigration Clearances (Ecs). 
 
The Ministry intends to expand the scope of eMigrate portal and include the recruitment of 
workers to ECNR countries through eMigrate portal as well. In its recent interactions with some 
of the ECNR countries, such as Japan, Portugal, Russia, and Fiji, the Ministry has been 
highlighting the benefits of safe, legal and orderly recruitment of Indian workers through 
eMigrate portal. The recruitment of workers to ECNR countries through eMigrate portal would 
help in generating reliable and real-time data on workers, including employment trends, wage 
patterns, occupational sectors, and skilling needs. The LMI data sets can also be customised to 
cater to the needs of ECNR countries. 
 
Further, a new emigration bull replacing the Emigration Act, 1983, is being worked upon. A 
comprehensive and over-arching framework is being proposed through the upcoming bill which 

Page | 86 
 
would incorporate current as well as futuristic aspects to effectively meet the modern day 
challenges in the emigration sphere.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.10 
Policy of ‘Care, Connect, Celebrate and Contribute’ 
 
The Committee observe that India’s Diaspora policy framework is centered around the 
four ‘C’s’ namely Care, Connect, Celebrate and Contribute. The Committee note that the 
shift in the Diaspora policy was brought about with the merger of the Ministry of Overseas 
Indian Affairs and the Ministry of External Affairs in January 2016. While acknowledging 
that the 4Cs uphold the welfare and protection of our Diaspora, connect them to their 
roots, and celebrate their achievements, the Committee feel that India’s Diaspora policy is 
still at nascent stage. Much needs to be done to tap into the potential of Indians living 
abroad and policy document on its Diaspora needs to be drafted by the Government. The 
Committee do not agree with the Ministry’s perception that the diversity of Indian 
Diaspora does not permit formulation of a single, tight and unique policy. The Committee 
are of the considered view that lack of a dedicated Diaspora policy document hinders our 
ability to fully leverage the potential of the large overseas Indian community, impacting 
economic growth, foreign relations, knowledge transfer, and overall national development 
by limiting engagement with skilled professionals and investors living abroad, while also 
failing to adequately address the concerns and needs of the Diaspora population. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry bring out a policy document on Indian 
Diaspora in tune with their aspirations to serve as a guiding principle for deeper and wider 
engagement with the Diaspora community. 
Reply of the Government 
The Government of India’s approach to engaging with the Indian Diaspora is focussed on the 
four foundational pillars: Care, Connect, Celebrate, and Contribute. These four ‘C’s form the 
core of a pragmatic, inclusive and dynamic Diaspora Engagement Policy, designed to protect the 
interests of Indians abroad while maximizing the mutual benefits of this global community’s 
links with India. Since the merger of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) with the 
Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) in 2016, this integrated approach has led to more coherent, 
responsive, and effective outreach, which can be outlined as follows. 
 
(I) Care for the Indian communities overseas: Safeguarding the Welfare of Our Diaspora 

Page | 87 
 
 
The “Care” pillar reflects the government’s commitment to the protection and welfare of Indian 
citizens and persons of Indian origin abroad, especially the vulnerable and distressed. 
 
Key schemes and mechanisms of the Government to promote the Pillar: 
 
i. Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) – Emergency support for distressed overseas 
Indians, including repatriation, shelter medical aid, legal assistance, and transfer of 
mortal remains. 
 
ii. One Stop Centers (OSC) – Centers in select Indian Embassies and Consulates to provide 
emergency shelter, police help, and medical and legal assistance to women in distress.  
 
iii. e-Migrate System – Ensures safe and transparent emigration processes, especially for 
ECR passport holders. 
 
iv. Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY) – A welfare scheme providing insurance 
coverage to Indian workers abroad to ensure their safety and support in cases of 
emergencies. 
 
v. MADAD Portal – Online platform for consular grievance redressal in a time bound 
manner. 
 
vi. Pre-Departure Orientation Programme (P-DOT) - One-day training programme on soft 
skills for migrant workers imparted by MEA in collaboration with National Skill 
Development Corporation (NSDC), State Governments and other stake holders. 
 
vii. Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC) – Financial assistance for the 
children of Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs) and Non-Resident Indians (NRIs) for 
pursuing undergraduate education at Indian universities and institutions. 
 
viii. Migration and Mobility Agreements – Partnership agreements with key countries to 
harness India’s demographic dividend and foster mobility for Indian students, academics, 
business people, and professionals.  
 

Page | 88 
 
ix. Assistance in Marital & Child Custody Matters – Support for Indian women facing 
abandonment or abuse abroad. 
 
x. Support in NRI Property Disputes and Student Grievances – Coordination with law 
enforcement and educational institutions. 
 
 
(II) Connect with the global network of Indian diaspora: Bridging Indians Worldwide with 
Their Roots 
 
Under “Connect”, the focus is on forging deeper links between India and its global communities 
through institutional networks and cultural ties.  
 
Key schemes and mechanisms of the Government to promote this Pillar: 
 
i. Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) - A flagship event that provides a platform for 
engagement between the Government and the Diaspora. 
 
ii. Know India Programme (KIP) – Designed for diaspora youth to explore India’s history, 
heritage, and governance through first hand experience 
 
iii. Global Pravasi Rishta Portal – A two-way digital portal to connect the Indian Diaspora 
with the Government of India for dissemination of important information and to foster a 
robust database of the Diaspora through voluntary registrations. 
 
iv. Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora (PCTD) – Grants extended to Indian 
Embassies/Consulates for organizing cultural events abroad for promoting heritage and 
for encouraging the diaspora to stay connected to their cultural roots. 
 
v. Videsh Sampark Programme – Outreach to State governments to address the challenges 
faced by the Indian States to deal with diaspora related issues and to suggest efforts to 
promote robust dialogue between the Indian States and their respective Diaspora. 
 

Page | 89 
 
vi. Pravasi Teerth Darshan Yojna (PTDY) – Offers an opportunity for the Indian diaspora to 
visit places of religious and cultural significance in India. 
 
vii. Bharat Ko Janiye (BKJ) Quiz – Quiz contest for diaspora youth to deepen their 
knowledge of India and organisation of exposure trips for the winners to India. 
 
viii. Social Media Outreach – Daily engagement campaigns like Diaspora India Connect on 
social media platforms 
 
(III) Celebrate India’s shared heritage with the wide network of global Indian diaspora: 
Honoring Shared Culture and Achievements of the Diaspora 
 
“Celebrate” emphasizes the acknowledgement of India’s rich heritage and the remarkable 
contributions of overseas Indians not only to their host countries, but also to the Indian 
community, society and economy. 
 
Key schemes and mechanisms of the Government directed towards promoting this Pillar: 
 
i. Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) – Biennial Convention with special sessions to recognize 
and discuss the contributions of the Indian diaspora in diverse domains. 
 
ii. Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards (PBSA) – India’s highest honor for overseas Indians, 
awarded for their outstanding achievements in myriad fields. 
 
iii. Girmitiya Engagement – Research, outreach, and future establishment of Girmitiya Study 
and Research Center to connect with descendants of indentured Indians and celebrate 
their legacy. 
 
(IV) Encourage Contributions of the Indian diaspora that drive positive change in India: 
Tapping Diaspora Potential for National Development 
 
The “Contribute” pillar encourages the diaspora to participate in India's developmental journey 
by sharing their knowledge, skills, etc and through investments, and innovation. 

Page | 90 
 
 
Key schemes and mechanisms of the Government to promote this Pillar: 
 
i. Knowledge sharing initiatives such as VAJRA (Visiting Advanced Joint Research 
Faculty Scheme), PRABHASS (Pravasi Bharatiya Academic and Scientific Sampark) and 
Vaishvik Bharatiya Vaigyanik (VAIBHAV) fellowships, to promote collaborations 
between global Indian scientists and researchers with Indian institutions. 
 
ii. Promotion of Start-up India, Digital India, and other key programmes that welcome 
diaspora-led innovations and investments. 
 
iii. Ministry also works closely with the Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Commerce, RBI, 
and other relevant institutions to ensure seamless remittance channels for Indian diaspora, 
promotes Unified Payments Interface (UPI) linkages, disseminates updated information 
regarding tax laws, FEMA provisions, Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements, FDI 
norms, etc. 
 
While this Ministry has a reasonably well-defined Diaspora Engagement Policy based on the 
aforesaid enumerated 4Cs and has devised effective strategies/schemes to promote the same, still 
it is the considered view and experience of this Ministry that the vast diversity of the Indian 
diaspora demands flexibility. So, although this Ministry takes note of the Committee’s 
recommendation to create a tighter, codified Diaspora Policy, it woulde prefer to maintain that a 
“single, tight and unique policy document” on Indian diaspora may not be conducive to serve the 
growing and dynamic aspirations of the Indian diaspora spread across the globe because of the 
inherent diversity and complexity of the diaspora itself. Their needs, expectations, legal status, 
socio-economic contexts vary dramatically across regions, from the Silicon Valley to the Gulf 
region or the Girmitiya countries. A central and rigid policy could also undermine or overlook 
state-level priorities, which are often more attuned to specific community needs. A dedicated 
Diaspora policy should also align with the laws of the host country, which differ across regions, 
and may have specific elements such as dual citizenship restrictions, data privacy laws, labour 
rights, etc.  
 
The 4C-based Diaspora Policy of the Government functions as a comprehensive and dynamic 
mechanism to engage with the large and diverse Indian diaspora that encompasses addressing 
their welfare, cultural preservation, economic collaboration, and institutional dialogue. Going 
forward, efforts can focus on strengthening coordination, enhancing digital access, and 

Page | 91 
 
expanding the scope of existing schemes, so that the 4Cs continue to be the most effective and 
inclusive pathway to fostering a vibrant, connected, and empowered Indian diaspora across the 
globe. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.28 
Prioritization of State-Run Recruitment Agencies 
 
The Committee find that in States like Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, 
etc. there are Recruitment Agencies which have received license from the MEA and act as 
State recruitment agencies. As of now, there are 13 such State Recruitment Agencies in 
various States. In order to ensure safe and ethical recruitment practices, the Committee are 
of the opinion that the Government should prioritize such State-run recruitment agencies, 
which can even adhere to a zero-cost migration model, where employers bear the 
recruitment costs. They, therefore, desire that the Ministry to take it up with all high-
emigration States to encourage them to have their own State- run Recruitment Agencies 
and replicate the best practices of the best performing States in this regard. In addition to 
working out ways and means to strengthen them, without prejudice to the rights of 
legitimate private recruitment agencies, the Government should also incorporate at least 
one State-run Agency into bilateral labour agreements to widen their scope and impact. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee. The Ministry recognizes 
the role of the state-run recruiting agencies in facilitating overseas employment, often aligned 
with the zero-cost migration model. These agencies have played a vital role in reducing migrant 
vulnerability to exploitation and ensuring greater transparency in the recruitment process. 
 
As of now there are 14 State-run Recruiting Agencies viz. (i) NORKA Roots & (ii) Overseas 
Development and Employment Promotion Consultants of Kerala (iii) Overseas Manpower 
Corporation Ltd. of Tamil Nadu (iv) Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation of Uttar  Pradesh (v) 
Overseas Manpower Company Andhra Pradesh Ltd. of Andhra Pradesh (vi) Telangana Overseas 
Manpower Company Ltd. of Telengana (vii) Rajasthan Skill & Livelihoods Development 
Corporation of Rajasthan (viii) Karnataka State Unorganized Workers Society Security Board of 
Karnataka (ix) Karnataka Vocational Training & Skill Development Corporation of Karnataka 
(x) M/s Pan IIT Alummi Reach for Jharkhand Foundation of Jharkhand (xi) Bihar State Overseas 
Placement Bureau of Bihar, (xii) World Skill Center, Odisha, (xiii) Punjab GharGhar Rozgar and 
Karobar Mission, Punjab and (xiv) Haryana Kaushal Rozgar Nigam Limited, Haryana.  The 

Page | 92 
 
Ministry is engaged with high-emigration States to encourage the establishment of State-run 
Recruitment Agency where such mechanism is currently absent. With the active support of the 
Ministry the Haryana state has recently registered its state-run recruiting agency ‘Haryana 
Kaushal Rozgar Nigam Limited’ with the Ministry.  
 
In order to prioritize the state-run RAs and to protect female domestic workers from 
exploitation/harassment in the destination country, the Ministry has made the process of issuance 
of EC for female workers going for employment in the 18 notified ECR countries mandatory 
only through the above 14 State-run RAs. 
 
The Ministry also organized a one-day Conclave with the representatives of the MEA registered 
State-run and private Recruiting Agents (RA) Associations on 11 March 2025, which was 
inaugurated by the Minister of State for External Affairs and Environment, Forest and Climate 
Change, Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh. The Conclave aimed at fostering stronger collaboration 
among key stakeholders involved in overseas recruitment including State-run recruiting 
agencies. The event served as a platform for open dialogue between recruiting agents, 
government officials, and other industry participants, with the objective of promoting ethical 
recruitment practices and enhancing transparency in the process. The conclave also highlighted 
best practices in overseas employment and addressed common challenges faced by recruiting 
agents. This initiative reflects the Ministry’s continued commitment to ensuring safe, legal and 
seamless emigration for Indian workers seeking employment abroad. 
 
The Ministry would assess the feasibility of including at least one State-run Recruitment Agency 
in future bilateral labour agreements or Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs), thereby 
enhancing their institutional role in managing ethical recruitment in priority destination 
countries. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No. 35 
Need for a Mechanism to Track Labour Migration to Non ECR Counties. 
 
The Committee find that the e-Migrate system captures key data related to the Emigration 
Check Required (ECR) category migrant workers right from when she/he applies for 
foreign employment in the system. Emigrant data is also shared with Embassies and 
Consulates to facilitate easy tracking and assistance when needed. However, the Committee 

Page | 93 
 
note that the Government only tracks people moving to ECR countries with an ECR 
Passport and not migration to non ECR counties.  Though the e-Migrate portal has also 
opened registration for non-ECR countries, such an online registration for Indian 
Emigration Check Not Required (ECNR) passport holders is voluntary and not 
mandatory.  Hence, the data is not captured. While noting that the Government only tracks 
people moving to ECR countries with an ECR Passport, the Committee are convinced that 
it is quite important to have a mechanism to detect/track labour migration to even non 
ECR counties. Hence, they recommend that the Government may come up with possible 
options to capture the data despite the constraints faced and apprise the Committee of the 
same.  
Reply of the Government 
The concern raised by the Committee is duly acknowledged. As of now, the Ministry maintains 
data in respect of Indian workers, holding Emigration Check Required (ECR) passports, 
proceeding for employment overseas through e-Migrate portal to any of the 18 notified ECR 
category countries. The Ministry would have to work with the Bureau of Immigration and the 
Ministry of Labour and Employment to capture the data of labour migration to all countries. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.37 
Integration of Returnee Migrants 
 
The Committee note that as per the information available with the Ministry, about 5,95,101 
emigrants have returned to Indian from foreign countries from 2019 to 2024. This is a 
significant number. This surge, largely driven by COVID crisis, economic disruptions, 
stricter immigration policies and a reduction in job opportunities abroad has created 
considerable reintegration challenges. The Committee note that a national level policy on 
re-integration of migrant returnees is still awaited. The Committee further note that 
Kerala is the only State in India that offers economic reintegration and welfare 
programmes for returning migrants, all of which are worth emulating by other States and 
even other countries.  The Committee are of the view that though the responsibility for 
rehabilitation of Indian migrants is currently placed on State Governments, with the 
Central Government providing neither logistical nor financial support, it is high time that 
this gap is addressed. To address this gap, the Government, in coordination with States, 
should develop a sustainable rehabilitation and reintegration policy with shared 
responsibilities between the Centre and State Governments. The Committee, therefore, 

Page | 94 
 
recommend that the Centre should assist State Governments through grants and soft loans 
to help integrate the returnee migrants into the domestic industries so that they continue to 
be economically productive. Such a collaborative approach only would ensure a more 
comprehensive and sustainable system for migrant reintegration across India. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee. It may, however, be noted 
that responsibility of reintegration of returned Indian migrants rests with respective State 
Governments from where the emigrants belong and not with the Central Government. Various 
State Governments have, therefore, developed ways and means to reintegrate workers returning 
from abroad.  
 
During the pandemic, under the Vande Bharat Mission, Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship, Ministry of Civil Aviation, and Ministry of External Affairs jointly launched 
‘SWADES – Skilled Worker Arrival Database for Employment Support’. The initiative aims at 
empowering the returning citizens with relevant employment opportunities by creating a 
database of qualified citizens based on their skill sets and experience to tap into and fulfill 
demand of Indian and foreign countries. The returning citizens are required to fill up an online 
SWADES Skills Card. The database thus generated has been integrated with India’s ASEEM 
portal. The portal provides employee connect for prospective employers. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.38 
Need to Prioritize New Emigration Bill 
 
Keeping in view the contemporary global migration dynamics and the requirements of 
Indian citizens, the Committee have underscored the pressing need for a comprehensive 
legislative overhaul to replace the outdated provisions of the Emigration Act 1983 and the 
Committee find that a legislation on Emigration [Overseas Mobility (Facilitation and 
Welfare) Bill, 2024] for the same is on the anvil. This presents a long overdue opportunity 
to reform the recruitment process for seeking overseas employment. The Ministry has 
informed the Committee that the proposed draft is under internal consultation and, 
thereafter, will be put up for public consultation which will be followed up by Inter-
Ministerial consultations along with the Draft Cabinet Note. Though the efforts to revamp 
the migration management framework through the introduction of a new Bill is 
commendable, the Committee are not happy with the delay in the process despite 
witnessing harrowing incidents of illegal emigration from our country day in and day out. 

Page | 95 
 
The Committee, hence recommend that the Bill should be  prioritized and the Committee 
may be intimated about the timelines for presenting the new Bill in both houses of 
Parliament.   
Reply of the Government 
The draft of the Emigration Bill 2024 has been under active consideration with the aim to 
introduce it in the Parliament after finishing due consultation and procedure. The Ministry has 
completed internal consultations and the draft Bill has been sent for inter-ministerial 
consultations in end May 2025. Upon completion of these consultations, the draft bill will be put 
up for public consultation. The final draft will thereafter be submitted for Cabinet’s approval and 
presented to the Parliament. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.40 
Need to Address Student Migration in the Emigration Bill 
 
The Committee also note that under emigration, the student migration is generally not 
covered and currently, the Emigration Bill does not cover student migration. But the 
Committee see from the available data and surveys that the student community form a 
sizeable per cent of all emigrants from the country. When irregular and unscrupulous 
recruitment elements misguide students about universities and job opportunities abroad, a 
large number of students end up doing menial jobs, not wanting to come back empty-
handed and become a socio-economic problem in the countries from where they migrate. 
So, the Committee desire that the Ministry should give due importance to student 
migration also in the new Emigration Bill and student recruitment agencies need to be put 
under the scanner. 
Reply of the Government 
The growing trend of Indian students seeking education abroad is evident. While the Emigration 
Bill’s focus would be primarily on migration for overseas employment, the Ministry recognises 
the importance of student welfare. As an instrument for ensuring the welfare of Indian students, 
safety and security abroad, the Migration and Mobility Partnership Agreements have explicit 
provisions for facilitating the ease of mobility as well as furthering opportunities for students. 
Provisions to facilitate post-study pathways, such as employment search periods and internships 
are also included. The MADAD Portal allows for voluntary registration of Indian students 
abroad. Database of students collected through the portal enables us to contact the students in the 
event of an emergency. 

Page | 96 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.43 
Utilisation of the Indian Community Welfare Fund 
 
Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) has been set up in all Indian Missions and Posts 
abroad to meet the contingency expenditure incurred by them for carrying our various on-
site welfare activities for Overseas Indian citizens on a means-tested basis. This is a self-
sustained fund without any budgetary support and sourced from service charges on 
issuance of Visa/OCI/PIO cards; Passport services and attestation of documents; voluntary 
contribution by Indian community; and income from interests accrued through 
investments and deposits. The Committee note that the ICWF guidelines cover three key 
areas namely Assisting Overseas Indian nationals in distress situations (Boarding and 
Lodging, Air passage, Legal Assistance, Emergency Medical Care, Transportation of 
Mortal Remains), Community Welfare activities and Improvement in Consular services. 
However, the Committee are surprised to note that the overall utilisation of the Indian 
Community Welfare Fund is apparently less than fifty per cent of the collected fund despite 
sizeable Indian Diaspora in requirement of assistance on all aspects covered under the 
fund. It is felt that even after expanding the scope of the fund, not enough assistance could 
be extended to the distressed Indian nationals and, hence, desire to be apprised of the 
reasons for the same. The Committee, while underscoring the need for a more generous 
approach to the requirements of assistance by our Diaspora also desire that our missions 
should generate more awareness regarding the ICW Fund, the assistance provided therein 
and the way to get in touch with the Missions/Posts in case of emergencies rather than 
resorting to the plea that Indian emigrant workers proceeding abroad are apprised about 
ICWF during PDOT.  
Reply of the Government 
The Government has established various mechanisms to enable Indian nationals abroad to reach 
out to the Indian Missions in case they need any assistance. Indian nationals can contact the 
Missions/Posts through various channels like walk-in, email, social media, multilingual 24x7 
emergency numbers and also grievance redressal portals like MADAD, CPGRAMS, eMigrate 
etc. In addition, Indian Missions/Posts abroad have established Toll Free Helplines, whatsapp 
numbers and have launched mobile Apps to enable Indian nationals contact respective Indian 
Missions/Posts when in distress or in emergency situation. 
Whenever any Indian national approaches the Mission with a grievance, all possible help is 
provided promptly whether through ICWF or other means, as the situation demands. All the 
above-mentioned means of approaching the Mission for grievance redressal are widely known in 

Page | 97 
 
the diaspora community through WhatsApp groups of the community, website of the Mission 
and social gathering places like temples, gurudwaras, etc. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.46 
Fund for Transportation of Mortal Remains 
 
The Committee are aware that the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) is used for 
transportation of mortal remains of deceased Indian nationals to India, under the 
provisions of ICWF guidelines. In 2002, an amount of Rs. 8,45,83,770/-was used for the 
same whereas in 2023, the expenditure incurred out of ICWF on transportation of mortal 
remains was Rs. 2,32,51,964/-.  The Committee find from the data provided by the Ministry 
that since 2012 till June 2024, airlifting of 3808 mortal remains of Indian nationals were 
done by Missions/Posts using ICWF. The Committee are of the feeling that as of now 
Indian Community Welfare Fund is being utilized in limited cases which in evident from 
the small number of cases. According to the Committee, the right to get the mortal remains 
transported to the homeland at the expense of the Government, particularly with less well-
off people should be recognized. While urging the empowerment of the Missions with 
adequate funds, the Committee desire that the procedure for utilizing the Indian 
Community Welfare Fund for transportation of mortal remains may be further simplified 
and the authorities vested with discretionary powers in our Missions to take action without 
awaiting clearance from New Delhi. Missions may also be sensitized to take a humane 
approach rather than a bureaucratic one in offering help, especially financial assistance, in 
such cases.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry fully understands the emotional situation during the transportation of mortal 
remains or cremation/burial of deceased Indian nationals. Accordingly, Indian Missions abroad 
and the staff of the Consular wing give utmost importance to prompt resolution of such cases and 
extend all possible support to the family of the deceased Indian national. Indian Missions/Posts 
coordinate with the host government for expeditious issuance of death certificate and other 
documents. Transportation of mortal remains, being a delicate situation, is handled with care and 
sensitivity by the Missions/Posts and all assistance under ICWF is rendered in an expeditious 
manner. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 

Page | 98 
 
Recommendation No.47 
Extension of ICWF on Deaths of Students Abroad 
 
The Committee have viewed that in many countries, especially in Gulf countries, 
philanthropic agencies as well as well meaning members of the respective communities 
extend assistance in transporting dead bodies. They have further observed that when 
children from poor families who have taken loans for study abroad die in accidents or 
otherwise, the family falls into an extremely sad plight of not being able to afford to bring 
the dead bodies back or to repay the student loan they took for him. In those cases, the 
Committee desire the Ministry to explore whether it can be made a policy to make special 
provisions under the Indian Community Welfare Fund for meeting expenditures for the 
same.  
Reply of the Government 
Indians nationals abroad who approach the Indian Missions/Posts for transportation of mortal 
remains of their family members to India, are assisted by the Indian Missions/Posts.  
Missions/Posts with the consent of the family of the deceased in India and in coordination with 
the concerned government agencies, take necessary action for early transportation of mortal 
remains of the deceased Indian nationals from abroad. Such assistance is rendered where the 
family is unable to meet the cost, irrespective of whether the deceased Indian national was a 
student, worker or business person in the host country.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
Recommendation No.65 
Standard Operating Procedures for Student Outreach 
 
The Committee have been informed that the Indian Missions/Posts abroad invite students 
enrolled in various Universities under their jurisdiction for welcome ceremonies organized 
almost as soon as they reach the foreign shores for pursuing higher studies. Heads of Indian 
Missions/Posts also organize Orientation Programmes for Indian students and brief them on 
challenges / threats, if any, that they may confront during their stay in foreign lands and 
mechanisms to take counter measures. Senior Embassy officials visit Educational Institutions, 
interact with Indian students and their associations. However, these efforts do not seem to 
yield much. Being a country having the highest number of students studying abroad, next only 
to China, the Committee urge the Ministry to put in place Standard Operating Procedures 
regarding student outreach and engagement by our Missions abroad. In the absence of 

Page | 99 
 
such SOPs, emergency response mechanism of the Missions/posts in crisis situations would 
be far from effective. 
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry reassures the Committee that safety and welfare of the Indian student community 
abroad is amongst the top priorities of the Government of India. India has among the largest 
student communities studying abroad, and such students are not a monolithic or homogenous 
group. Their academic levels, fields of study, cultural and linguistic diversity vary greatly, and 
they are spread across the globe. The needs of students differ from region to region, especially in 
terms of support systems, academic stress, and job prospects. Moreover, host countries differ 
significantly in terms of their domestic legal frameworks, educational structure, and immigration 
policies. It is possible that a particular type of outreach that is considered as a support to Indian 
students in one country may be seen as an interference in another. Since the issues and the 
support required vary greatly from country to country and from university to university, they are 
best addressed on a case-to-case basis. Therefore, having a uniform Standard Operating 
Procedure for engaging with the Indian students might prove counterproductive. 
 
The Heads of Embassies/Consulates and the staff are sensitized and well versed on the issues 
faced by the Indian students abroad, resulting from their frequent interactions with the student 
bodies, university officials and local authorities. Indian Embassies/Consulates abroad encourage 
Indian students travelling abroad for higher studies to register with them as also on the MADAD 
Portal so that their grievances and outstanding issues can be addressed in a time bound manner. 
They are also encouraged to remain connected on a regular basis and all possible efforts are 
made to respond to the outstanding issues faced by them on a priority basis. The grievances of 
the students are responded to almost on a real time basis through telephone calls, walk-ins, 
emails, social media, 24x7 emergency helplines, open houses and the MADAD Portal.  Any 
complaint received from the Indian students abroad are taken up with the concerned 
University/Institution and the host Government, as the case may be for requisite action. 
 
Cases of untoward incidents are immediately taken up by the Indian Embassies/Consulates 
abroad with the concerned authorities of the host country to ensure that they are properly 
investigated and the perpetrators are punished. During emergencies or crisis situations, Indian 
Embassies/Consulates abroad pro-actively help distressed/stranded Indian students overseas by 
providing them food, shelter, medicines and ensure their return/evacuation to India as soon as 
possible. During the last few years, stranded Indian students were evacuated to India under the 
Vande Bharat Mission, Operation Ganga (Ukraine) and Operation Ajay (Israel) from countries 
around the world. The return of many Indian students from Bangladesh was also facilitated by 
the High Commission of India in Dhaka.  

Page | 100 
 
 
This Ministry notes and welcomes the Committee’s valuable observation to ensure effective 
emergency response mechanism for Indian students living abroad during crisis situations. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 

Page | 101 
 
CHAPTER-V 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
Recommendation No.2 
Revocation/Denial of OCI Cards 
 
The Committee understand that the OCI card issuance/revocation falls under the purview 
of MHA, while its implementation is done primarily through Indian Missions/Posts abroad. 
The Committee have come across concerns about revocation of OCI Cards, rejection of 
OCI Cards, denial of travel permission at airports, etc. from several quarters. In this 
regard, the Committee are of the view that the OCI Card carries with it an implicit 
promise of multiple entry, multi-purpose lifelong visa to visit India, etc, and actions 
dishonoring the same on flimsy reasons would damage the country's international image as 
a welcoming nation for its Diaspora and potentially impact economic decisions/discourage 
investment. The Committee, hence, desire that Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), in 
coordination with the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), may chalk out procedural 
safeguards to ensure clear communication channels including regular updates on requests 
made, sharing of relevant information on suspected violations and collaboration on the 
decision making. They may also ensure consistency and due process while 
revoking/denying OCI Cards, with the MHA primarily handling the legal aspects and the 
MEA managing international communication. 
 
Reply of the Government 
OCI policies including grant, denial, suspension and revocation are subject matters that fall 
under the purview of the MHA. The decision to cancel an OCI registration under Section 7D of 
Citizenship Act, 1955 is taken by MHA with due diligence after obtaining views / comments 
from various stakeholders including MEA and security agencies. The recommendations of the 
committee have been conveyed to MHA and the response of MHA is awaited.  
 
 

Page | 102 
 
 
Recommendation No.3 
Working on an Agreed Definition for ‘Non-Resident Indians’ 
 
When it comes to Non-Resident Indians (NRIs), the Committee find that a common 
definition is lacking and multiple definitions are in vogue across the country or even 
between States. It is also different amongst the various Acts of the Government of India. 
The Committee are of the view that multiplicity of definitions has a potential for multiple 
interpretations which in turn impacts the decision making process and accessibility of 
services. The Committee feel that there is an urgent need for a common definition of the 
term across the nation to avoid confusions. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry of External Affairs work towards proposing a common definition for the term 
‘Non-Resident Indians’ which would be binding on all Acts as well as the State 
Legislations in tandem with other stakeholder Ministries/Departments. 
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry has taken note of the Committee’s observation that a common definition for the 
term ‘Non-Resident Indians’ across the nation is advisable in order to avoid confusion. This 
Ministry follows a broader definition of the term ‘Non-Resident Indian’, viz., any Indian 
citizen who has travelled abroad from India with an Indian passport for any purpose, except 
that of tourism and short business visits. While different Ministries and State governments may 
be following different definitions which suits their purposes, this Ministry adheres to the most 
inclusive and expansive definition of NRIs to ensure that the benefits of the diaspora 
engagement programmes and welfare schemes can reach the Indian diaspora living abroad as 
widely as possible.  
 
In view of the Committee’s recommendation, the Ministry has written to the Department of 
Legal Affairs for their guidance to work towards a common definition of the term ‘Non-
Resident Indian’, which would be binding on all Acts as well as the State legislations in 
tandem with other stakeholder Ministries/ Departments. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
 
 

Page | 103 
 
 
Recommendation No.4 
Aadhaar Facilitation for Overseas Indians 
 
The Committee note that Overseas Indians are facing difficulties in getting Aadhaar 
Cards in the country. The Committee have been given to understand that UIDAI, which 
is the competent authority in the matter has not made any arrangement for setting up 
Aadhaar facilitation centers outside India. Today, in India, Aadhaar is an essential 
document providing a portable proof of identity verifiable through Aadhaar 
authentication on-line anytime, anywhere. An Aadhaar Card is an essential document for 
literally every form of registration and transaction facilitating access to various services 
like banking, property transactions, healthcare and government benefits, especially when 
the card holders reside in the country for extended periods, while also streamlining 
processes like tax filing and KYC verification. The Committee are of the considered view 
that extending facility of Aadhaar cards to Overseas Indians will promote greater 
integration of Indians living abroad into the Indian society. The extension of the facility 
of Aadhaar cards to Overseas Indians will also align with the goal of creating a unified 
identity system in India, enabling them to participate fully in the country's economic and 
social activities while maintaining their non-resident status. The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Ministry to work in coordination with UIDAI in identifying the bottlenecks 
involved, including procedural difficulties, technical grievances etc., and resolve the 
same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry agrees with the Committee’s recommendation that extension of the facility of 
Aadhaar cards to Overseas Indians may contribute towards integrating the Indian diaspora 
more comprehensively into the Indian economy and society. However, the proposal entails 
significant complexities and challenges that are outlined here. 
 
 Aadhaar is governed by the Aadhaar (Targeted Delivery of Financial and Other 
Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act, 2016, which explicitly defines eligibility based on 
residency in India. The Act defines a "resident" as an individual who has been in India for a 
cumulative period of 182 days or more within the 12 months preceding their application for 
Aadhaar enrolment. This residency requirement applies to all individuals, including Non-
Resident Indians (NRIs), who wish to obtain an Aadhaar card. Extending Aadhaar to non-

Page | 104 
 
residents would require fundamental amendments to the Act. Moreover, establishing biometric 
enrolment infrastructure in foreign countries would be logistically complex, costly, and could 
conflict with data protection laws in host countries such as the European Union’s GDPR and 
similar frameworks elsewhere. This exposes the Indian government to litigation risks, 
diplomatic tensions, or data localization demands by host nations. Additionally, collecting 
sensitive biometric data abroad introduces the risk of identity duplication and verification 
difficulties, potentially compromising the reliability of the Aadhaar ecosystem. 
 
 For the diaspora members who do not reside in India, or do financial transactions in 
India or require access to Indian subsidies or government services, the practical benefits of 
Aadhaar are limited. Existing identity mechanisms such as passports, OCI/PIO cards, 
NRE/NRO bank accounts and PAN numbers already serve many of their financial and legal 
needs in India. The diaspora members who stand to benefit the most with Aadhaar are also 
likely to travel frequently to India, during which they can obtain their cards through the 
widespread and robust network of Aadhaar centers in the country. 
 
 The Ministry remains committed to facilitating and enhancing the engagement of the 
Indian diaspora with India. In pursuance of the Committee’s recommendation, Ministry has 
written to UIDAI to explore the feasibility of extending Aadhaar universally. The comments 
from UIDAI are awaited.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.5 
Voting Rights to NRIs 
The Committee are aware that through an amendment to Section 20A of the 
‘Representation of People Act 1950’ in 2010, NRIs have been conferred limited voting 
rights. As per existing norms, NRIs who have enrolled in the voters list have to be present 
physically to cast their votes. Since travelling to India is an onerous task considering the 
logistical and practical problems involved, only a few among the registered voters come 
down for voting. The Committee feel that due to limitations in exercising their franchise, 
the issues/concerns of NRIs are being completely side-lined from electoral politics. The 
Committee are given to understand that the matter regarding grant of voting rights to 
NRIs is currently pending with the Ministry of Law and Justice (MoLJ). The Committee 
are further given to understand that the issue will also need amendments in the 
Representation of People Act 1950’ and 1951 as well as engagement with national political 

Page | 105 
 
parties before implementation. The Committee feel sad that despite being one of the largest 
emigrant populations in the world, direct involvement in India’s electoral politics is limited 
for our NRIs though the right to vote is universally recognised as an important ingredient 
of a vibrant democracy. With ever growing technological advancements and capabilities, 
the Committee feel that solutions like Electronically Transmitted Postal Ballot System 
(ETPBS) can be looked into for extending the voting rights of NRIs. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to vigorously pursue the matter with the Ministry of Law and 
Justice, the Election Commission of India and other stakeholders and come up with clear 
timelines for the reforms while keeping the Committee apprised of the developments in the 
matter. The Committee will continue consideration of this question, in consultation with 
the authorities concerned. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has duly noted this recommendation of the Committee. The issue of grant of voting 
rights to NRIs is within the purview of the Election Commission of India. The Ministry has, 
however, been pursuing this issue with the Ministry of Law and Justice and the Election 
Commission of India, and has been engaging with them to inquire about its current status and to 
offer suggestions.  
 
The ECI is assessing the logistical and technological feasibility of extending voting rights 
to NRIs, while the relevant Ministries are exploring the legal and constitutional amendments or 
procedural changes necessary to facilitate NRI voting. It is understood that Indian Embassies/ 
Consulates abroad have to play a central role for conducting the NRI voting process, will require 
extensive logistical arrangements and manpower to create facilitation centres for conducting the 
voting process. Welcoming this onerous task to ensure that the Indians living abroad are 
empowered to exercise the franchise, this Ministry suggested to organise a virtual workshop 
between ECI officials and select Indian Embassies on this subject; but it has not materialized yet. 
This Ministry will continue to coordinate with the relevant stakeholders as they work towards a 
clear timeline for implementing this ambitious project.  
 
The Ministry has written to the Department of Legal Affairs (DLA) and the Election 
Commission of India once again forwarding to them the recommendations of the Committee to 
seek updates from the concerned authorities. The comments from the DLA and the ECI are 
awaited.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
 

Page | 106 
 
Recommendation No.6 
Need for Authentic Data on the Indian Diaspora 
 
The Committee note that as per the official records and inputs received from Missions and 
Posts, Indian Diaspora comprise of 15.85 million NRIs and 19.57 million PIOs and OCIs, 
adding to a total of 35.42 million in January 2024. However, as per the UN Population 
Division’s estimate there were around 17.86 million Indian migrants in 2020 implying that 
the number of migrants would have significantly increased by now than the figures 
reflected by the Ministry. The Committee are concerned to note that the Ministry does not 
have any authentic data on the Indian Diaspora as registration with Indian Embassies is 
voluntary and the official data collection is restricted to Emigration Check Required (ECR) 
countries. The Committee have been surprised to note that despite being aware of the 
magnitude of the issue, no efforts are being made by the Ministry to address the same. 
While acknowledging that accurately tracking the large Indian Diaspora spread across 
the globe is a challenging task requiring enhanced data collection methods through 
regular surveys, census data, and collaboration with host countries, the Committee feel 
that lack of reliable data acts as a major hurdle in the international migration 
governance. In the absence of a comprehensive and up-to-date database, effective framing 
of programmes for migrants as well as proper delivery of welfare schemes for them 
would be challenging. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry together with 
the Bureau of Immigration may devise mechanisms to collect and collate reliable data on 
migrants and returnees on real time basis and apprise the Committee of the same. 
 
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry agrees with the recommendation that having a comprehensive and up-to-date 
database of Indian diaspora abroad will help in framing effective policies for migrants. However, 
the Ministry has been encountering difficulties in collecting accurate data and maintaining such a 
database even for countries with smaller and homogeneous diaspora communities. The 
Government of India faces several challenges in maintaining updated records about the Indian 
diaspora living abroad due to administrative, legal and practical limitations. Indian diaspora is 
not only large and diverse but it is also highly mobile, translocating themselves frequently for 
education, jobs and other reasons. Due to a long history of international exchanges, Indian 
diaspora currently comprises of several generations with varying levels of linkages with their 
ancestral homeland. They, therefore, belong to multiple classifications based on their nature of 
residency abroad, such as NRIs, OCIs and PIOs. Many Indians return temporarily or shuttle 
between countries for work or family reasons, creating gaps or duplication in records. Moreover, 

Page | 107 
 
privacy laws and data protection regulations in many countries restrict information sharing about 
Indian nationals. The phenomenon of irregular / illegal migration adds to these challenges.  
 
This Ministry follows the widest and the most inclusive definitions of the Indian diaspora 
categories in order to ensure that no one is excluded from its diaspora engagement and welfare 
programmes. Information from Embassies/ Consulates is currently the most reliable source of 
information for building the diaspora database. As the diaspora engagement continues to expand 
and strengthen, the veracity of the collected data is expected to increase. Meanwhile, this 
Ministry has written to the Ministry of Home Affairs to explore the possibility of the Bureau of 
Immigration devising mechanisms to collect and collate reliable data on migrants and returnees 
on real time basis. Their comments are awaited.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.7 
Data Collection by Bureau of Immigration 
 
Currently, the only available national-level migration data pertains to Emigration Check 
Required (ECR) category migrants. However, ECR category migrants are becoming a 
minority in the migrant population and the ECR data often lead to misrepresentation of 
international migration from the country. The Committee are aware that the most 
reliable data is that collected at various ports by Bureau of Immigration on various 
categories of migrants including temporary labour migrants, students, long-term 
migrants, etc. The Committee, hence, desire that data collection efforts by Bureau of 
Immigration at exit and entry points must be strengthened by adopting safe, secure 
technological platforms, supported by an effective monitoring mechanism. The data, thus 
collected may be shared with other stakeholders, especially other Central Government 
Departments and State Governments.  
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry agrees with the Committee’s observation that the data collected by the Bureau of 
Immigration at exit and entry points can be shared with other stakeholders, such as with other 
Central Government Departments and State Governments, in order to engage with the Indian 
diaspora more effectively and to ensure their safety and welfare. The data on Indian diaspora 
exiting India that is being collected by the Bureau of Immigration is indeed being used by most 
Ministries of the Government of India while dealing with the Indian diaspora. Ministry has 

Page | 108 
 
written to the Ministry of Home Affairs suggesting that the Bureau of Immigration needs to 
explore mechanisms to further strengthen the process of data collection. Their comments are 
awaited. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.9 
Inward Remittances from NRIs 
 
The Committee note that inward remittances from NRIs have witnessed a steady increase 
during the last three years and in 2023-24 it was 118.7 billion US Dollars. The Committee 
are aware that the hard power that the Non-Resident Indians wield through the money 
they send back to their families and relatives in India, bolster India's economy by fuelling 
consumption, enhancing foreign exchange reserves and ensuring macroeconomic stability. 
Considering the fact that NRI investments have emerged as a significant driving force in 
shaping the trajectory of the Indian economy by playing a pivotal role in catalyzing growth 
across various sectors, there should be consistent efforts to foster greater economic 
engagement with the Diaspora. Remittances being the second largest source of external 
financing after service exports and accounting for a significant chunk of India's GDP, the 
Committee desire that the Government should streamline online transfer platforms, reduce 
transaction fees, communicate government policies regarding NRI remittances, address 
taxation concerns, etc. to build trust and transparency. In addition to easing out business 
opportunities, the Government should promote other investment options available to NRIs 
in India, like mutual funds, stocks, and real estate. Above all, MEA should actively engage 
with NRI communities to understand their needs and concerns regarding sending money 
back to India. 
 
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry endeavours to play a proactive and evolving role in promoting the economic and 
financial interests of the Indian diaspora on the one hand and that of the Indian economy as a 
whole, on the other. However, facilitating NRI remittances, NRI investment options and 
addressing taxation concerns fall within the purview of the Ministry of Finance. However, 
recognizing that NRIs are a key pillar of India's global engagement and a major source of inward 

Page | 109 
 
remittances, MEA - alongwith other relevant ministries - has undertaken several initiatives to 
build trust, ensure transparency, and facilitate economic participation of the Indian diaspora. 
 
MEA works closely with the Reserve Bank of India and the Ministry of Finance to ensure 
seamless remittance channels for the Indian diaspora, through activities such as promoting the 
Unified Payments Interface (UPI) linkages with countries like the UAE, Singapore, and the UK 
and promotion of RuPay cards. Through social media, website and physical interaction with the 
diaspora, Indian Embassies regularly communicate clarifications and changes in tax laws, 
residential status rules, Double Taxation Avoidance Agreements, FEMA (Foreign Exchange 
Management Act) provisions, and investment norms.  
 
In partnership with the Ministry of Commerce, agencies such as ‘Invest India’ and industry 
associations, MEA encourages the Indian diaspora to actively engage with the Indian economy 
and entrepreneurship through means of Single-window clearances, sector-specific investor 
seminars and publication of handbooks, and promotion of investment-centric events like the 
Vibrant Gujarat. Indian Embassies abroad also engage in market expansion activities and provide 
assistance in cases of financial and trade disputes.  
 
The Pravasi Bharatiya Divas, the flagship biennial event of this Ministry where diaspora 
members meet Indian policy makers, normally contains informative sessions on remittances, 
fintech, and taxation in India. During PBD 2025, the Ministry had organized a ‘Diaspora 
Business Meet’ in partnership with the Government of Odisha at Bhubaneswar to promote 
Business opportunities and linkages for members of diaspora with their counterparts in India.  
 
Ministry has written to the Ministry of Finance seeking their views on how to ensure that the 
concerns of the Indian diaspora relating to sending remittances are satisfactorily resolved. Their 
comments are awaited. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
 
 
 

Page | 110 
 
Recommendation No.17 
Bilateral and Multilateral Agreements on Transfer of Sentenced Persons 
 
The Committee find that India has so far signed 31 bilateral Agreements on Transfer of 
Sentenced Persons with Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bosnia & Herzegovina, Brazil, 
Bulgaria, Cambodia, Egypt, Estonia, France, Hong Kong, Iran, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, 
Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Maldives, Mauritius, Mongolia, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, 
Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Turkiye, United Arab Emirates (UAE), United 
Kingdom and Vietnam, by virtue of which Indian prisoners lodged in foreign countries can 
be transferred to India to serve the remainder of their sentence and vice-versa. With India 
signing two multilateral conventions on Transfer of Sentenced Persons, namely Inter-
American Convention on Serving Criminal Sentences Abroad and Council of Europe 
Convention on Transfer of Sentenced Persons, the Committee note that most of the 
countries in Europe, North America and South America are covered for the purpose. 
However, countries in Asia, Africa and few countries in Eastern Europe are yet to be 
covered by bilateral agreements. The Committee, hence, recommend that the Government, 
through the Ministry of Home Affairs, which is the nodal Ministry for this subject, may 
pursue, process and sign such agreement with the remaining countries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken note of this recommendation and would like to mention that the mandate 
to sign Agreement on Transfer of Sentences Persons (TSP) with foreign countries comes under 
the remit of the Ministry of Home Affairs. The recommendation of the Committee on expanding 
TSP Agreement with other remaining countries has been conveyed to MHA. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.18 
Transfer of Sentenced Persons from Foreign Jails 
 
The Committee find with dismay that despite having bilateral and multilateral 
agreements/conventions on Transfer of Sentenced Persons which covers several countries 
in Middle East, Europe, North America and South America, only 8 Indian prisoners were 
transferred from foreign countries to India in the last three years. This low success rate in 

Page | 111 
 
bringing back Indian prisoners calls for an assessment of the efforts taken in this regard. 
Keeping in view the large number of prisoners languishing in foreign jails, the Committee 
desire that the Government study the obstacles in implementing the 
agreements/conventions and, if need be, amend existing agreements or create new ones to 
facilitate smoother repatriation of prisoners. The Committee also stress the need to 
enhance diplomatic efforts and negotiations with other countries to streamline the process 
of transferring prisoners and ensuring fair treatment for Indian nationals in foreign jails. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has taken note of the recommendation of the Committee and would like to mention 
that the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) is the nodal authority in the matters pertaining to 
Transfer of Sentenced Persons (TSP) from foreign countries. MEA has conveyed the 
recommendations of the Committee to MHA to examine the existing agreements/conventions on 
TSP on the need to streamline the process of transferring prisoners and to ensure smoother 
repatriation of prisoners. Response from MHA is awaited. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.19 
Implementation of Agreements on Transfer of Prisoners 
 
The Committee note that at present 10,152 Indian prisoners including under-trials are 
lodged in foreign prisons. There are 12 countries where Indians are imprisoned in large 
numbers, viz., Bahrain (272), China (185), Italy (164), Kuwait (387), Malaysia (371), Nepal 
(1187), Oman (117), Qatar (740), Saudi Arabia (2647), Sri Lanka (143), United Arab 
Emirates (2479) and United Kingdom (288). The Committee have been informed that nine 
of these countries are covered under existing agreements on Transfer of Sentenced Persons 
and that MHA is working on negotiating such agreements with the other three countries, 
namely, Nepal, Malaysia and Oman. The Committee understand that the Ministry of Home 
Affairs is the nodal Ministry for negotiating and implementing the agreements on transfer 
of sentenced persons. In view of the large number of Indians lodged in prisons abroad, the 
Committee desire that no efforts are spared in getting the agreements implemented and the 
Missions/Posts remain extra vigilant to ensure that the rights of the Indian prisoners in 
foreign jails are protected. At the same time, the nodal Ministry may continue to make 
efforts in right earnest to transfer more sentenced Indians, especially from the countries 
where they are lodged in large numbers. 
 

Page | 112 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This Ministry has taken note of the recommendation and would like to submit that the 
Government attaches high priority to the safety, and well-being of Indians in foreign countries, 
including those lodged in jails abroad. Indian Embassies/Consulates remain vigilant and closely 
monitor the incidents of Indian nationals being lodged in jails in foreign countries for violations/ 
alleged violations of local laws.  
 
As the Committee is aware, Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), being the nodal authority in the 
matters pertaining to Transfer of Sentenced Persons (TSP), has been requested to streamline the 
process of transferring prisoners under TSP Agreement and to ensure their smoother repatriation 
to India. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.20 
 
Expeditious Finalisation of MMPAs and LMAs with Countries having large Indian 
Diaspora 
 
The Committee find that India has signed Migration and Mobility Partnership 
Agreements/ MoUs (MMPAs) or Labour Mobility Agreements/ MoUs (LMAs) with several 
countries where the Indian Diaspora is present. MMPAs aim at harnessing India’s 
demographic dividend and fostering mobility for our students, academics, business people 
and professionals. India has MMPAs signed with France, the UK, Germany, Australia, 
Austria, Italy and Denmark. The Labor and Manpower Cooperation MOUs/Agreements 
are in place with the Gulf Cooperation Council countries, Japan, Portugal, Mauritius, 
Israel, Taiwan and Malaysia. Further, to safeguard the specific interest of domestic 
workers in GCC Countries, agreements on Labor Cooperation for Domestic Sector have 
been signed with Saudi Arabia, UAE and Kuwait. However, the Committee note that we do 
not have any labour protection agreements with many countries where our Diaspora is in 
large numbers. Since it is extremely important to have legally binding agreements to 
protect the interest of our Diaspora while working across borders, the Committee 
recommend that the Government should actively engage in concluding more such 
agreements with destination countries, especially those with significant potential to offer 

Page | 113 
 
benefits and opportunities for Indian nationals including skilled workers, professionals and 
students. They also desire that the ongoing discussions with various countries, particularly 
with countries in Europe and the Far East on MMPAs and LMAs may be finalized at the 
earliest under intimation to the Committee. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has taken note of this recommendation. It may be noted that India has signed 
bilateral Agreements/MoUs with several countries that host significant Indian diaspora 
populations, including the Gulf countries, United Kingdom, Italy, Denmark, Austria, Australia, 
Germany, France, Israel, Malaysia and Mauritius. 
 
Additionally, discussions for expediting finalization of bilateral agreements/MOUs are in various 
stages with countries such as Armenia, Andorra, Brunei, Cyprus, Croatia, Finland, Greece, 
Guyana, New Zealand, Oman, Portugal, Russia, Saudi Arabia, South Korea, Switzerland and 
Trinidad & Tobago.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.41 
Creation of a Centralised, Real-Time Migration Database 
 
Effective policymaking requires robust migration data governance. While acknowledging 
that MEA’s PoE offices track Emigration Clearance Required (ECR) data, and migration 
estimates exist from Census 2011 and the National Sample Survey 2020-21, the Committee 
note that a centralised, real-time migration database remains absent. They, therefore, 
recommend that under the proposed new legislation, the Government must make provision 
for establishing a national migration database or social registry, to track outgoing and 
returnee migrants, their skills, employment sectors, and remittance patterns. Integrating 
passport, visa and emigration data portals would positively aid policy formulation and 
social welfare provisioning. 
Reply of the Government 
This Ministry agrees with the Committee’s observation that strengthening migration data 
governance is a critical component of effective policymaking that will positively aid policy 

Page | 114 
 
formulation and social welfare provisioning. The Government has already laid strong 
foundational work through interlinked digital platforms and ongoing integration efforts. It has 
instituted and constantly enhances key systems such as the eMigrate portal, which manages 
emigration clearance, labour contracts, and welfare registration for ECR passport holders; 
Passport Seva system, which is a digitized and globally accessible passport issuance platform; 
MADAD portal, which facilitates grievance redressal and enables real-time feedback; Global 
Pravasi Rishta portal, which aims to create a voluntary database of Indian diaspora, etc. 
 
However, the creation of a centralised real-time migration database at a global scale presents 
major challenges. Migration of Indians has a dynamic and decentralised nature. They move 
across countries for a wide range of purposes and through formal and informal channels. Many 
diaspora members are long-settled citizens or permanent residents of host countries and are not 
consistently captured in any existing Indian database. Tracking them in real time across 
jurisdictions to create a database could discourage voluntary registrations by migrants, especially 
those in irregular or transitional employment.  
 
Moreover, collecting, storing, and transmitting personal data of migrants abroad raises serious 
concerns under host country privacy laws. Without express consent or bilateral data-sharing 
agreements, maintaining a live registry could lead to diplomatic sensitivities and violate local 
data protection norms. 
 
Therefore, a balanced and targeted approach is preferred by enhancing the existing systems of 
data capture and promoting interoperability between them, in collaboration with other concerned 
Ministries. This Ministry has initiated discussions with the Bureau of Immigration to explore the 
feasibility of an integrated migration data system, in order to build a robust, data-driven, people-
centric migration governance framework. Their comments/inputs are awaited. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.50 
Blue Print for Expanding PDOT 
 
The Committee are aware that 36 PDOT centers are operational in UP, Rajasthan, Punjab, 
Maharashtra, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Bihar, 

Page | 115 
 
Odisha, Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka and out of them 14 centers are managed by 
National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) and 22 by State Government Agencies. 
The Ministry has informed that they are is in the process of taking the total number of 
PDOT centres to 100 by partnering with industry bodies such as CII, FICCI, ASSOCHAM 
and Common Services Centre, e-Governance Service India Limited of Ministry of 
Electronics and Information Technology.  The Committee are further informed that online 
PDOT has been launched in April 2021 to reach out to prospective emigrants who live far 
away from PDOT centres, especially women participants. While acknowledging that these 
initiatives will go a long way in delivering training for more migrants, the Committee are 
quite apprehensive about the actual implementation vis a vis tall claims on paper. The 
Committee, hence, recommend that there should be a clear blue print for expanding PDOT 
Centres and the status of opening them, may be apprised to the Committee, including in 
the north-eastern region. The Committee also desire to know the target for online and 
offline PDOT training programmes for the current year and the number of persons likely 
to be covered for both the trainings.  
 
Reply of the Government 
The Committee’s concerns regarding PDOT programme are noted. Since inception of the PDOT 
programme in 2018, a total of 1,90,362 emigrant workers have been imparted training through 
41 PDOT Centres as on 28 February 2025. The proposal to open another 51 new P-DOT centres  
within the next one year is under implementation.   
 
The PDOT training is imparted under two models: 
 
(i) PDOT Centres operated by National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) empanelled 
training partners under the Pravasi Kaushal Vikas Yojna (PKKY), a joint collaboration under an 
MoU between Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) and a grant of Rs. 10 crore was extended by MEA to MSDE. 
       
(ii) The second model is  PDOT Centres managed by State Government agencies. Ministry 
has been granting funds to State Governments to conduct PDOT Training to emigrant workers 
both for in-person training and for online training.  
  

Page | 116 
 
The Ministry has been making concerted efforts to expand the PDOT outreach to promote safe, 
legal and orderly migration. Towards this end, Ministry has reached out to all concerned State 
Governments/agencies to send their proposals for allocation of funds to carry out PDOT and also 
operationalise the new PDOT centres approved by the Ministry. In this regard, Ministry has 
written letters to the Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries of the concerned States seeking their 
intervention for promotion of PDOT programme and early operationalisation of new PDOT 
Centres in their States. The matter is being followed up directly with the State Governments as 
well as through the PoEs in these States.  Ministry is working in close coordination with all 
relevant stakeholders to expand the P-DOT outreach.   
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.54 
 
Regional Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Conferences (RPBDs) 
 
The Committee note that Regional Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Conferences (RPBDs) were 
being organised by the Ministry in different parts of the world to reach out to a vast 
majority of our Diaspora, who, for various reasons, were unable to attend the main biennial 
event in India and benefit from its deliberations. The Committee further note the Ministry 
has so far successfully organized 10 regional PBDs, with the last one being held in 
Singapore in 2018. Due to COVID pandemic, the Regional PBDs could not be held in 2020 
and 2022. The Ministry has further informed that the policy of holding Regional PBD has 
not been abandoned by them and that the next Regional Pravasi Bharatiya Divas is 
expected to be organized in 2026. The Committee feel that Mini/Regional PBDs are a means 
to embrace and involve thousands more of Overseas Indians and utilize their potential to 
showcase India in the countries where the events are scheduled. Delay in conducting such 
events result in loss of opportunities for overseas Indians to connect and engage with their 
homeland. The Committee, hence, desire that Regional Pravasi Bharatiya Divas 2026 is 
organized without fail in a manner that compensates for the gap of eight years and the 
tentative plan for the same may be communicated to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry would like to assure the Committee that the policy of holding Regional PBDs has 
not been abandoned. The Ministry shares the Committee’s sentiment that Regional PBDs are 
crucial for embracing and involving a larger number of Overseas Indians and leveraging their 
potential to showcase India in their respective host countries. Ministry is committed to 

Page | 117 
 
organizing regular Regional PBDs and is currently in the process of formulating the plan to 
organize Regional PBD in 2026 in one of the diaspora intensive countries in the Gulf region. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
Recommendation No.70 
Expansion of MADAD Portal in Regional Languages 
 
The Committee note that MADAD is an online comprehensive grievances redressal portal 
launched as part of the good governance initiative by the Government. The portal is 
accessible to all Indian nationals abroad in distress, including to those who have been 
stranded overseas due to various reasons. MADAD can be accessed through website 
(www.madad.gov.in) or through mobile app. All Indian Missions and Posts abroad and the 
MEA's Branch Secretariats in Chennai, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Mumbai are 
linked to this portal for consular grievance tracking and follow-up. The Committee have 
been informed that the MADAD Portal is regularly monitored at various levels and Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad take action on the complaints and update the status regularly. The 
Committee find that the grievances being handled in MADAD comprise of a range of 
consular issues including repatriation, transportation of mortal remains, death 
compensation, work related problems, imprisonment cases, marital disputes, consular 
services, passport issues, court cases, students' issues, etc. Multilingual Call Centres (Under 
PBSK), Student Registration, Prisoners Module, Integration with the portal "eMigrate", 
Integration with State Governments in India, Module for assistance through Indian 
Community Welfare Fund, etc. have also been added to the scope of the portal. The 
Committee, however, note that MADAD is available bilingually in Hindi and English 
languages only. The Committee are of the considered view that this is definitely an 
impediment to a large number of overseas Indians who may not be able to put forth their 
grievance effectively in English and Hindi. The Committee desire that the Ministry may 
look into the feasibility of expanding the ambit of the portal, including in regional 
languages that are used by a significant number of Diaspora. 
 
 
 
 

Page | 118 
 
Reply of the Government 
The MADAD Portal, a key good governance initiative, effectively serves Indian nationals abroad by 
addressing a wide range of consular grievances, including transportation of mortal remains, repatriation, 
work-related issues, imprisonment, and passport services. Accessible via www.madad.gov.in and a 
mobile app, it integrates Indian Missions/Posts, MEA’s Branch Secretariats, and additional modules like 
Multilingual Call Centers, e-Migrate, and the Indian Community Welfare Fund. Regular monitoring and 
updates by Missions/Posts ensure efficient grievance tracking and follow-up. 
While the Madad portal is presently available in English and Hindi, availability of the portal in other 
languages would be helpful. MEA will try to examine the technical feasibility of having the existing 
MADAD portal shown in regional languages, Ministry is constantly working upon enhancing the 
accessibility for non-Hindi/English-speaking diaspora which would lead to higher grievance registration 
and resolution by strengthening the engagement with the Indian diaspora, particularly in regions with 
significant regional language speakers. These measures are aimed at increasing accessibility of local 
vernacular speakers to articulate and register their grievances in their local languages.  Existing 
Multilingual Call Centers under PBSK (Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayta Kendra) are also addressing these 
issues by providing support in regional languages. From time-to-time, Ministry conducts awareness 
campaigns through our Embassies/Consulates, diaspora networks, and social media to inform overseas 
Indians about the availability of regional language support. Ministry is also increasing the engagement 
with Indian diaspora organizations to provide support for grievants/complainants to put forth their 
grievances in available languages more effectively on the social media platforms as well.  
Bhashini: Bhashini is an AI-driven language translation platform developed by the Government of 
India under the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology (MeitY). Launched in August 2022 as 
part of the National Language Translation Mission (NLTM), Bhashini aims to bridge language barriers 
and promote digital inclusion across the country. The platform leverages Artificial Intelligence (AI) and 
Natural Language Processing (NLP) to provide real-time translation, speech-to-text, text-to-speech, and 
voice-to-voice translation services.  
In order to provide multilingual support, Madad Section is exploing the possibilities of integrating 
Bhashini module into the Madad Portal.   
[File No. AA/Parl/125/31/2025 dated 01/07/2025] 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                     
16 December, 2025                                                                                                             Chairperson, 
25 Agrahayana, 1947 (Saka)                                                     Committee on External Affairs 

Page | 119 
 
 
ANNEXURE-I 
Ministry of External Affairs 
(Diaspora Engagement Division) 
**** 
 
Report on the 18th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention 2025 
 
Background: 
  
 Government of India launched its flagship Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention in the year 2003 
with a view to strengthen its engagement with the overseas Indian community. It was part of its endeavor 
to celebrate the remarkable achievements of the esteemed Indian community living across the globe and 
to recognise their contributions to the development of India besides reconnecting them with their cultural 
roots. January 09 was chosen as a day to celebrate the occasion since it was on this day in the year 1915 
that Mahatma Gandhi, the most influential Pravasi, returned to India from South Africa, to lead India’s 
freedom struggle that changed the lives of Indians forever. 
 
2. The Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention was an annual event till the year 2015 after which it is 
being celebrated on a biennial basis in partnership with a State Government of India. Indian Diaspora 
Members are encouraged to participate in the event to explore the rich cultural heritage of India. The 
Convention provides a platform to leverage the expertise of the Indian Diaspora in technology, education, 
innovation, attract investments and entrepreneurship, and promote India’s global soft power. These 
Conventions also provide an avenue for the overseas Indian community to engage with the Government 
and the people of the land of their ancestors for undertaking mutually beneficial activities. These 
Conventions have proved to be very useful for facilitating networking amongst the overseas Indian 
community residing in various parts of the world and to enable them to share their expertise in various 
fields. Till the year 2023, 17 editions of the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention were held, the last being 
at Indore, Madhya Pradesh in January 2023. 
 
Organisation of the 18th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas: 
 

Page | 120 
 
3. The 18 th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention was organised by the Ministry of External Affairs 
in partnership with the State Government of Odisha at Bhubaneshwar in Odisha from January 08-10, 
2025. The theme of the 18th PBD 2025 was “Diaspora’s Contribution to a Viksit Bharat”. The Convention 
was a three-day event with the Youth PBD being celebrated on Day 01 (January 08, 2025). The State 
Government of Odisha also interacted with the participating Indian Diaspora in the afternoon on Day 01.  
Prime Minister inaugurated the 18th PBD 2025 on January 09, 2025 while President of India chaired the 
Valedictory Session of the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention on Day 03 (January 10, 2025) when she 
also conferred the Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards. The three-day PBD also comprised of 5 Thematic 
Plenary Sessions that involved deliberations on contemporary realities and challenges besides 
organisation of gala cultural programmes, exhibitions and putting up of promotional stalls showcasing 
India’s rich cultural heritage and exquisite artisanry. The programme for the 18th PBD 2025 is annexed 
at Flag ‘A’. The details of the 18th PBD 2025 are as follows: 
 
Day 1 (January 08, 2025): 
 
Youth Pravasi Bharatiya Divas--Inaugural Session 
 
4. As is customary and tradition, the Youth PBD was held on Day 01 (on January 08, 2025). It was 
co-hosted by External Affairs Minister (EAM), Dr. S. Jaishankar and Minister of Youth Affairs and 
Sports,      Dr. Manshukh Mandaviya. Besides the aforesaid two Ministers,  Chief Minister of Odisha, 
Shri Mohan Charan Majhi,  MOS for External Affairs, Shri Pabitra Margherita,  MOS for Youth Affairs 
and Sports,    Ms. Raksha Nikhil Khadse and the Guest of Honor of the 18th PBD,      Dr. Dev Pragad, the 
CEO of Newsweek from the USA, also addressed the Session. Over 4,000 members of the Indian 
diaspora attended the Inaugural session of the Youth PBD. 
 
5. The leaders at the Inaugural Session highlighted the vital role played and important contributions 
that the younger generation of the Indian Diaspora can make towards building of a Viksit Bharat and 
India’s global image.  EAM emphasized that organising the Youth PBD by the Government of India 
assumes high significance particularly at a time when several innovations in the world are being shaped 
by the younger generation including those from the Indian Diaspora in diverse fields such as AI, EV, 
Space, Drones and as the latter are making distinct marks in sports such as Chess and Cricket. It is the 
endeavor of the Government of India to motivate the younger generation to accelerate their efforts and 
transform their attitude from ‘Chalta hai’ to ‘Badal sakta hai’ to ‘Hoga kaise nahin?’. He cited the 
inspiring role of the Indian Badminton Ace, PV Sindhu, who has championed the narrative of youth-led 
development in India. The text of External Affairs Minister’s speech is annexed at Flag ‘B’.   
 

Page | 121 
 
6. Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports, Dr. Mansukh Mandaviya enumerated several roles that 
could be played by youth members of the Indian Diaspora to contribute towards Viksit Bharat and to 
progress upon PM Modi’s motto of “Sabka Saath, Sabka Vikas, Sabka Vishwas”. He emphasized upon 
the tremendous demographic dividend that India could reap particularly since out of every 20 Indians, 13 
are below 35 years of age and the average age of Indians today being only 28 years. He informed that 
Government of India is making sustained efforts towards involving the youth in India’s developmental 
story. 3000 youth members of India had been selected to participate in the upcoming National Youth 
Festival of India on January 11-12, 2025, a platform in which they would share their thoughts on Viksit 
Bharat with the Prime Minister of India. 
 
7. The Guest of Honour for the Youth PBD, Dr. Dev Pragad, CEO Newsweek from USA informed 
that his story is quintessentially American-- about a striving immigrant with a dream of pulling off a 
business turnaround of an iconic American brand against impossible odds in the New York city. Speaking 
of his journey in Newsweek, he detailed his contributions towards the popularity of the journal and its 
emergence as the fastest growing English-language news publisher in the world last year. 
 
Plenary Session I - “Beyond Borders: Diaspora Youth Leadership in a Globalized World”: 
 
8. The Inaugural session of the Youth PBD was followed by the 1st Plenary Session of the 18th PBD 
on the theme “Beyond Borders: Diaspora Youth Leadership in a Globalized World”. The Session was 
Chaired by the Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports of India,          Dr. Mansukh Mandaviya, and 
was moderated by Shri Binny Bansal, Co-Founder of Flipkart. The Panelists were as follows:  
   Panelists -  a. Mr. Y B Prabhakaran – Malaysian Politician and Member of Parliament for Batu, Member of the People’s Justice Party (PKR) – Malaysia  b. Ms. Eeshaanee Shandilya - Business Analyst, HSBC Global Services, Hong Kong. Technology Graduate Trainee, Digital Business Services – Hong Kong  c. Mr. Don McLain Gill - Lecturer, Department of International Studies, De La Salle University. He specializes in Philippine foreign policy, India-Southeast Asian security relations, and maritime security cooperation in the Indo-Pacific, and India-Southeast Asian relations. - Philippines   d. Ms. Revathy Pillay – IT Business Analyst and Southside Radio FM Presenter. Dynamic youth ambassador and radio personality dedicated to empowering youth voices – South Africa  

Page | 122 
 
e. Mr. Mohiuddin Mohamad Ali –Vice-chairman of Galfar Engineering & contracting SAOG. He is president of the Oman chapter of the Indo-Gulf & Middle East chamber – Muscat  
f. Ms. Mickela Panday – Daughter of former Prime Minister of T&T Basdeo 
Panday. Political Leader of the newest political party in T&T- the Patriotic Front, 
launched in 2019. She is a former MP. She is an Attorney-at-Law – Trinidad & 
Tobago 
 
9. Dr. Mansukh Mandaviya recounted the efforts that are being made by the Government of India 
and the initiatives taken by it to provide opportunities to the youth of this country to further enhance the 
impressive economic growth rate of 8% in India that is significantly higher than that of Europe, China and 
the United States. Efforts are being made to create new openings for the Indian youth in emerging sectors 
such as Artificial Intelligence, Information Technology etc., and by shaping critical linkages between 
industries and the academia. 
 
 
10. Other participants of the Session focused upon the transformative role that the Diaspora Youth 
can play in shaping a globalised world through leadership, innovation and cultural diplomacy. They 
highlighted the importance of the Indian Diaspora youth in fostering vital links between India and the 
global community. They recounted their unique experiences and reflected upon their remarkable 
contributions in diverse fields such as politics, technology, academia, entrepreneurship and social 
empowerment and discussed ideas for collaboration with India in areas such as education, skill 
development,  technology, agriculture and culture preservation. The Session concluded with a key 
takeaway that people-to-people connectivity is central to promoting collaboration and realizing the vision 
of Viksit Bharat by 2047. 
 
Joint Business Session  
 
11. Chief Minister of Odisha and External Affairs Minister chaired a Business Leaders Meeting on 
the sidelines of 18th PBD. The Joint Session witnessed participation of over 500 members of the Indian 
Diaspora community involved in business and their counterparts from the State of Odisha. The Chief 
Secretary of Odisha, Shri Manoj Ahuja, opened the Session when he enumerated the advantages and 
abundant opportunities offered by the State of Odisha and the upcoming infrastructure projects planned 
by it to attract business and investments by Indian Diaspora members in the State. Principal Secretary, 
Industries of the State Government of Odisha also highlighted the investment opportunities offered by the 
State that were reiterated by Shri Sampat Chandra Swain,  Minister of Industries, Skill Development and 
Technical Education of the State Government of Odisha. 
 

Page | 123 
 
12. EAM underlined Government of India’s steadfast commitment to Mission Purvodaya and the role 
of Odisha for its success. He highlighted Odisha’s potential in the 3Ts, Trade, Tourism and Technology, 
which makes it an excellent investment destination. 
 
13. Chief Minister of Odisha apprised what the State can offer to investors and business persons such 
as a stable Government, good law and order machinery, infrastructure, skilled manpower, a friendly 
industrial policy, natural resources etc. The State Government of Odisha made presentations on the 
investment opportunities available in the State.  
 
Plenary Session of the State Government of Odisha (January 08, 2025) 
 
 (a) “Unraveling India's Best Kept Secret”  
 (b) “Odisha: A Land of Opportunities” 
 
14. The above sessions presented the enormous potential that could be utilized by the Indian diaspora 
in Odisha through their engagements in developing and promoting trade, tourism and investments in 
different sectors. The State Government of Odisha is working on a Vision Document for 2047 focusing 
on three main themes, namely, development of infrastructure—ports, airports and industries; wellness of 
its people with focus on augmenting infrastructure for health; and creating social and economic equities. 
The sub text of these three themes also include policies to foster women empowerment, bring reforms in 
governance, engage with the community including the Odia diaspora and framing policies to combat 
climate change. Government of Odisha also highlighted its efforts to bring about holistic development of 
its people including through creation of infrastructure for sports. The State has built the largest hockey 
stadium and has hosted two World Cup Hockey Tournaments. It is also sponsoring the National Kho Kho 
team and the National Women’s Hockey Team in line with its vision to use sports to create commercial, 
social and individual growth opportunities. Some suggestions from the discussions for further 
development of Odisha included leveraging diaspora for talent, ideas and as role models. It was also 
highlighted that Odisha is a success story in India's overall growth trajectory where labor force 
participation of women is much higher than other states and where there is a vibrant diaspora community 
which can further augment economic growth of the State.  
 
Cultural Programme Organised by the State Government of Odisha 
 

Page | 124 
 
15. In the evening of Day 01 of the PBD, the State Government of Odisha organised a Gala Cultural 
Programme showcasing Odisha’s history and cultural legacy through a dance presentation by the Odisha 
Dance Academy choreographed by Dr. Aruna Mohanty.  
 
Day 2 (January 09, 2025) 
 
Inaugural Session: 
 
16. The 18th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas was formally inaugurated by Prime Minister of India, Shri 
Narendra Modi on January 9, 2025. H.E. Christine Carla Kangaloo, the President of the Republic of 
Trinidad and 
Tobago, was the Chief Guest of the 18th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas. She addressed the convention virtually. 
Prime Minister remotely flagged off the inaugural journey of the special tourist train for the Indian 
diaspora, Pravasi Bharatiya Express, which left Delhi on that day for travel to multiple destinations of 
touristic and religious importance in India for a period of three weeks. 
 
17. Addressing the Convention, Prime Minister of India, Shri Narendra Modi, observed that the 
Pravasi Bharatiya Divas has become an institution to strengthen the bond between India and its diaspora. 
Prime Minister emphasized that he always considered the Indian diaspora as Ambassadors of India. 
Expressing his joy in meeting and conversing with fellow Indians around the world, he said that the love 
and blessings he received from them were unforgettable and always stayed with him. He mentioned that 
the 21st century India was progressing at an incredible speed and scale. He conveyed that today's India 
not only firmly asserted its own point but also strongly amplified the voice of the Global South.  
 
18. Prime Minister mentioned that India has the potential to fulfill the world's demand for skilled 
talent. He assured that Government of India considered it a responsibility to help Indian diaspora during 
crisis situations, no matter where they were. He highlighted the significant history of the Indian diaspora 
worldwide, emphasizing their achievements in various countries, as an important part of India's heritage. 
He urged that these interesting and inspiring stories should be shared, showcased and preserved as part of 
our shared legacy and heritage as has been done in the case of Oman. He also emphasized the need to 
undertake similar efforts with the diaspora in various other countries, particularly the need for creation of 
a database to identify the villages and cities in India from where Girmitiya community originated and the 
places they have settled, establish a Girmitiya Study and Research Center (GSRC) to serve as a dedicated 
research and documentation hub to preserve the history, culture, struggles, and contributions of the 
Girmitiya diaspora, partner with a University to initiate research on Girmitiya legacy and establish a 
University Chair for it, document lives of Girmitiya community through films and documentaries, 
organise regular World Girmitiya Conferences, partner with countries connected to the Girmitiya 

Page | 125 
 
Community, such as Mauritius, to identify ‘Indentured Labour Routes’ and to set up mechanism to 
preserve key heritage sites along the ‘Indentured Labour Routes’. 
 
19. Prime Minister also reiterated his “Chalo India” tourism campaign for the diaspora, encouraging 
each of them to visit India with five foreign friends. He emphasized the goal of making India a developed 
nation by 2047, a Viksit Bharat, and highlighted the importance of the GIFT City ecosystem in meeting 
the financial services and investment needs of the diaspora and encouraged them to leverage its benefits 
to strengthen India's journey towards development. (Transcript of PM’s Address is attached at Flag C) 
 
Thematic Exhibitions: 
 
20. Following his address, Prime Minister inaugurated the following four exhibitions at the venue of 
the PBD: 
 
(i) “Vishwaroop Ram, the universal legacy of Ramayana” curated by the Indian Council for Cultural 
Relations, 
 
(ii) “Diaspora's contribution to Technology and Viksit Bharat” curated by MEA 
 
(iii) “Spread and Evolution of Indian diaspora in the world with special focus on Mandvi to Muscat” 
curated by the National Archives of India 
 
(iv) “The Heritage and Culture of Odisha” curated by the State Government of Odisha. 
 
 Several Promotional stalls were also set up by Ministries and Departments of the Government of 
India, the State Government of Odisha and other State Governments to present their developmental 
efforts in India's march towards a Viksit Bharat. Punjab Tourism, Andaman Nicobar Tourism, 
Maharashtra Tourism, West Bengal Tourism, Commerce & Industries of Mizoram, NRI Division of 
Gujarat State Government etc. had put up stalls at the PBD.  
 
 

Page | 126 
 
 
 
Plenary Session II - “Building Bridges, Breaking Barriers: Stories of Migrant Skills”: 
 
21. In the afternoon of January 9, 2025, the Second plenary session of the 18th PBD entitled 
“Building Bridges: Breaking Barriers, Stories of Migrant Skills” was organised to focus upon migration 
of Indians over centuries. The Session was chaired by Minister of State for Micro, Small and Medium 
Enterprises and Labour and Employment, Smt. Shobha Karandlaje and was moderated by the Special 
Secretary for Economic Relations of the Ministry of External Affairs, Shri P. Kumaran. The Panelists 
were as follows: 
 
 i. Shri V. Muraleedharan, Former Minister of State for External  Affairs  
 ii. Shri Ashok Mago – Chairman & CEO, Mago & Associates Inc, USA 
 iii. Shri Rohit Ratnakar Rao- Founder-CEO of ‘Medrock  Corporation’, a multinational 
pharmaceutical company and  ‘Eske  Corporation’ – Peru & Bolivia 
 iv. Shri Vilwanathan Krishnamurthy - Dedicated and experienced  social worker 
and cultural leader with an extensive background in welding technology  and social services - 
Germany  
 v. Shri Sopnendu Mohanty – Chief Fintech Officer of the Monetary Authority of 
Singapore – Singapore  
 vi. Shri Ashok Kalra – Managing Director and Partner of the Mughal Mahal Group -  
Kuwait  
 vii. Shri Kandarp Mehta - Senior Lecturer in the Negotiation unit and the Entrepreneurship 
Department of IESE Business School –  Spain 
 
22. The Session focused on the stories of migrant workers and professionals from India across the 
world who have been building bridges through fostering key partnerships, shaping political conversations, 
building positive connections and serving as cultural ambassadors of India globally.  The discussion 
highlighted the importance of India's diaspora, particularly the migrant workers, in shaping global 
economy and the need to upskill labour force of India to cater to the demographic shift in the world that 
has led to increased demand for human resources from India. This was also emphasised by speakers from 
the Western countries who highlighted that intake of Indian students by Western universities is going to 
witness an uptick.  
 
Plenary Session III - “Green Connections – Diaspora’s Contributions to Sustainable Development”:  

Page | 127 
 
 
23. The third plenary session entitled “Green Connections: Diaspora’s Contributions to Sustainable 
Development” focused on green energy. The Session was chaired by the Minister of Electronics and 
Information Technology, Information and Broadcasting and Railways, Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw and was 
moderated by the Chairman and Managing Director of the Indian Renewable Energy Development 
Agency, Shri Pradeep Kumar Das. The Panelists were as follows:  
 
 i. Hon. Mr. Hambyrajen Narsinghen – Junior Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration 
and International Trade,  Government of the Republic of Mauritius 
 
 ii. Mr. Rahul Fotedar – He is the Founder & CTO of Morrow Batteries in Norway. He has been 
playing a leading role in product strategy, technology development and strategic  partnerships – Norway 
 
 iii. Shri Jagdish Nainwal – Jagdish Nainwal is currently working as CEO of UPL for LATAM 
region which is one of the leading agriculture companies in Latin America by having near to 1 billion 
revenue – Mexico 
  
iv. Mr. Indronil Sengupta – Has been working in various business areas for 30  years and has expertise 
in the field of energy. He is also the Chairman of Indian Business Chambers in Hanoi and has served in 
Tata Group for long years. His present Consultancy venture “Invesify’ also engages in energy – Vietnam 
 
 v. Mr. Aditya Yellepeddi – Working with the Swiss Biotech  Association (from  2022 
onwards). Heading the Indo-Swiss  industry initiative to foster   collaborations and investments 
 between  India and Switzerland. Politics (Main Party: Le  Centre -  a Federal 
 Government Party – Switzerland 
 
 vi. Mr. Jitender Kr. Sachdeva – Group President, SkipperSeil Ltd. Over the past 38 years, 
Skipper has grown into a leading player in the regional power – Nigeria 
 
 vii. Shri Kishore Reddy – Former President, India-Sri Lanka Society and India CEO Forum) – 
Sri Lanka 
 

Page | 128 
 
 viii. Ms Anju Virmani - Ontario Power Board, former CIO Cargojet – Canada 
 
24. Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw spoke about India’s remarkable progress in increasing the share of 
renewable energy (RE) power production capacity to 45%, the need for self-reliance in RE technology 
and the importance of creating the ability for indigenous manufacture of core components of the RE value 
chain. Moderator Shri Pradip Kumar Das highlighted the impressive growth of India’s RE capacity in the 
last 10 years and brought forth the need for battery storage systems in order to have round-the-clock 
supply of RE. The Panellists from Mauritius, Norway, Mexico, Vietnam, Switzerland, Nigeria, Sri Lanka 
and Canada spoke about various topics related to sustainable development, including the vulnerability of 
Small Island Developing States (SIDS) and coastal states; the need for setting up large manufacturing 
facilities for batteries in parallel with R&D of battery technologies; necessity of reducing carbon 
emissions from agricultural practices; promotion of RE through industrial zones/parks; potential 
partnerships between India and other countries in the field of bioethanol; and adoption of digital solutions 
such as Smart Grids, Net Metering, Blockchain, etc. in energy transmission and distribution networks.  
The session concluded with the key takeaway that having a long term vision for green energy, with 
particular focus on green technology, innovation and skilling, is essential to achieve the goal of 
sustainable development.  
 
Cultural Event Presented by Indian Council of Cultural Relations (ICCR) 
 
25. The Indian Council for Cultural Relations organised a Gala Cultural Event – “Celebration of 
Bharat” through stirring Audio-Visual spectacle of classical and folk dances from across India 
complemented by a voice narrative choreographed by Maitreyee Pahari, in the evening of January 9, 
2025.  
 
Day 3 (January 10, 2025) 
 
Plenary Session IV -  “Diaspora Divas: Celebrating Women's Leadership and Influence – Nari 
Shakti”: 
 
26. The fourth plenary was chaired on January 10, 2025, by External Affairs Minister, Dr. S. 
Jaishankar, on the topic “Diaspora Divas: Celebrating Women's Leadership and Influence – Nari Shakti”. 
It was moderated by Dr. Ritu Karidhal, Scientist and Aerospace Engineer at the ISRO. The Session 
focused on celebrating the indomitable spirit of women diaspora and their contributions across diverse 
fields. The Panelists were as follows:  

Page | 129 
 
 
 i. Ms. Shullete Cox - President, Jamaica Promotions  Corporation (JAMPRO), an 
agency  of the Ministry of Industry, Investment and Commerce – Jamaica 
 
(ii) Ms. Poonam Sagar - Director & Co-Owner PT Infotech Solutions — Jakarta, Founder of 
IndoIndians.com, chairperson of Indonesia India Business Forum (IIBF), Global 
Ambassador of International Women’s Entrepreneur Challenge (IWEC) – Indonesia  
 
(iii) Ms. Sudha Majithia - Social Worker and Philanthropist. Dynamic entrepreneur, 
renowned social worker and philanthropist, having established and founded a diverse 
group of companies operating in Tanzania – Tanzania  
 
(iv) Dr Indrani Rampersad - First female Pandita, Academic, Cultural & Women’s Activist. 
Visiting Professor (2024-25) at Banaras Hindu University (BHU) – Trinidad & Tobago  
 
(v) Ms. Maitri Joshi - Experienced in social welfare projects, flash flood mitigation, and 
tourism restoration with a proven track record in collaborating with diverse teams - Addis 
Ababa  
 
(vi) Ms. Sakala Appachu Debrass – Innovative marketing professional with an in-depth 
knowledge of the Doha market, with more than 20 years' experience in direct and indirect 
sales and Events. Built new products into independent businesses. Strong public relations 
skills – Qatar  
 
(vii) Ms. Koki Veber – Ms. Koki Veber has a chain of handicraft stores, Sariko, which sells 
traditional items primarily imported from India. To bridge the cultural gap, she supports 
charitable bazaars by SILA (Slovenian International Ladies Association) – Slovenia  
 
(viii) Ms. Loveleen Brenna -- Ms. Loveleen Brenna is founder and CEO of "'Seema', a center 
for 
diversity leadership. 'Seema' was the initiator of the first standard in the world that 
systematize and standardize diversity and gender equality. 
 
27.  EAM recounted how the challenges faced by women are rooted in age-old traditions and are, 
therefore, hard to overcome. He provided a snapshot of the changes brought about by the Government of 
India in the last decade, which has propelled women empowerment in various sectors, including financial 
independence. He apprised Government of India’s initiative to promote gender equality and women led 
development. He explained that under PM Narendra Modi’s leadership, initiatives for gender parity have 
been integrated into India’s foreign policy and development programmes in over 78 Global South 
countries. He emphasized India’s efforts to incorporate women-led development into the G20 framework 
as well as during the Summit of the Future. He shared statistics to illustrate India’s progress in Gender 
Equality, including an improved sex ratio, 26 weeks of paid maternity leave, and an increase in women’s 
participation in STEM education (43% of total enrollments). He also noted that 32 million Sukanya 
Samriddhi Accounts have been opened to support girls’ education, 30 crore Mudra loans have been issued 
to women entrepreneurs, and 72% of the 40 million homes built under the Awas Yojana have women 
ownership. Additionally, programs like Ujjwala Yojana have provided 100 million smoke-free kitchens in 

Page | 130 
 
India. He emphasized the importance of role models in driving societal change and highlighted the need 
for structural shifts in traditional attitudes towards gender.  
 
28. Other Panelists shared their experiences regarding various aspects of women empowerment in 
their respective countries, including through increased political representation; promotion of women’s 
mental and physical health; continuous learning; and developing a framework for Gender Equality and 
Inclusion. They recounted their enormous contributions across diverse fields towards promoting the 
indomitable spirit of women Indian Diaspora in the globe. 
 
29. In his concluding remarks, EAM shared his personal experience of having worked and interacted 
with women role models in countries from which the Panelists come. Remarking that ‘Nari Shakti’ must 
be internalized as an attitude and belief, he also made a mention of increasing women representation in 
the Indian Foreign Service, Indian military and Indian political leadership.  
 
Plenary Session V - “Diaspora Dialogues: Stories of Culture, Connection, and Belongingness”: 
 
30. The fifth Plenary Session was held on January 10, 2025 on “Diaspora Dialogues: Stories of 
Culture, Connections and Belongingness”. It was chaired by Minister of Culture and Tourism, Shri 
Gajendra Singh Shekhawat and was moderated by Director General of the Indian Council for Cultural 
Relations, Smt. K. Nandini Singla. The Panelists were as follows:  
 
i.  H.E. Mr. Mahendra Gondeea -  Minister of Arts and Culture, Government of 
Mauritius  
    ii.  Mr. Ranveer Brar, Indian Chef  
iii. Ms. Charmi Chheda- Writer, Designer, Theatre Director, Filmmaker, Artist, 
Actor, Dancer, Facilitator, Bhutan  
iv.  Mr. Arnab Roychuramony – Director/Owner Menkar LLC.  Proactively 
participating in all Yoga, Ayurveda, Indian dance and all cultural activities in 
Ukraine    
v.  Ms. Vanisa Dhiru – Commissioner, NZ National Commission for UNESCO 
Commissioner, Library & Information Advisory Commission. Advocate for 
community, ethnic and gender rights issues (media) Co-Founder, Women in 
Leadership Aotearoa network Justice of the Peace of New Zealand),  New 
Zealand   

Page | 131 
 
vi. Smt. Aishwarya Hegde – Director of Deepam Odissi Academy, a thriving arts 
institution in Oman dedicated to nurturing Odissi dance, Oman   
 vii. Mr. Paresh Kumar Ratilal Mehta –  Currently serves as ‘Trustee of Shree 
Sanatan Dharma Mandal Kampala’, National Convener of of BJP Uganda and 
Community Coordinator of Indian Association Uganda) , Uganda  
 viii. Mr. Shankar Kandasamy – Head of the Dept of Bharatanatyam at the Temple 
of Fine Arts, Malaysia 
      ix. Ms Urmila Chakraborty - Writer and translator (from and to English, Italian, Bengali and 
Hindi),  Italy 
 
31. The Session dwelled upon the importance of inculcating Indian culture and tradition including its 
cuisine in the younger generation and remaining connected with one’s roots while living a Pravasi life. 
Discussions focused upon the uniqueness of Indian culture that has found its relevance in many countries 
from where the panelists hailed. The panelists brought forth their unique experiences of keeping their 
language and tradition alive to maintain the pride of Indian heritage. It was also highlighted how 
experiences of local communities enrich Indian culture and make people appreciate Indian culture. The 
Session concluded with the sense that the practice of Indian culture by the present generation should 
encourage and motivate the younger generation to inculcate and appreciate it.  
 
Valedictory Session  
 
32. The Valedictory session of the 18th Pravasi Bharatiya Convention on January 10, 2025, was 
chaired by the President of India. The Presidential Band played the National Anthem following which the  
President of India conferred the Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards on 27 distinguished members of the 
Indian Diaspora from 24 countries in recognition of their outstanding contributions and achievements in 
various fields such as business, education, community service, medicine, public affairs, science and 
technology, both in their own countries of residence as well as in India. The list of Awardees is at F/D. 
 
33. President delivered her Valedictory address (attached at Flag E) in which she observed that the 
Indian Diaspora has made a mark that the world acknowledges and respects. She congratulated all the 
winners of the Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards for their exemplary achievements and extraordinary 
contributions. She described the PBD Convention as a platform where ideas converge, collaborations are 
forged and bonds between India and the Diaspora are strengthened.  She observed that the Indian 
Diaspora was an integral part of the vision of building a Viksit Bharat by 2047 and urged them to actively 
engage in this journey. She made a special mention about the contribution of women, students and the 
youth amongst our Diaspora. 
 

Page | 132 
 
Cultural Programme presented by the Ministry of External Affairs 
 
34. Pandit Abhay Rustom Sopori presented a scintillating Santoor Performance in the evening of 
January 10, 2025.  Minister of Finance of Uttar Pradesh made a presentation on the preparations of the 
Mahakumbh and invited Indian diaspora delegates to visit Prayagraj.  
 
Other Sideline Events 
35. Besides the main programme of the 18th PBD, there were many events on the sidelines of this 
Convention. External Affairs Minister and other Cabinet Ministers, including Shri Dharmendra 
Pradhan, Minister for Education, Shri Jual Oram, Minister of Tribal Affairs, Shri Ashwini 
Vaishnaw, Minister of I&B, Electronics and Information Technology and Railways, and 
Ministers of State for External Affairs, Shri P. Margherita and Shri Kirtivardhan Singh, who 
were present during the three-day session, had bilateral meetings with the Ministerial delegations 
from Mauritius, Malaysia and South Africa. They also had separate meetings with the Diaspora 
groups from countries which had large delegations. In the series of such interactions, External 
Affairs Minister met with the Indian Diaspora from Malaysia, Mauritius, USA, UK, Oman, 
Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and Sri Lanka. In a special gesture, visiting Ministers from Mauritius also 
joined EAM during his interaction with Indian Diaspora from their country. Shri Dharmendra 
Pradhan, Minister of Education spoke with the groups from Oman, Qatar and USA. While 
Minister of State for External Affairs Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh interacted with the groups from 
Qatar, Kuwait and UAE, Minister of Tribal Affairs Shri Jual Oram jointly addressed the group 
from Myanmar with Minister of State for External Affairs Shri Pabitra Margherita. In these 
meetings, the Indian Diaspora got an opportunity to directly discuss their issues with the 
concerned Ministers.  
 
36. There were also high level representations, including Ministerial delegations from the several 
State Governments of India at the 18th PBD. Minister of Finance from the State Government of Uttar 
Pradesh, Shri Suresh Kumar Khanna, addressed the delegates of the 18th PBD on its last day in a special 
session when he detailed preparations for the upcoming Mahakumbh at Prayagraj and invited the Indian 
diaspora to participate in it in large numbers. Minister of State for MSME & NRIs from Andhra Pradesh, 
Shri Kondapalli Srinivas, and high officials heading the NRI Divisions from the State Governments of 
Gujarat and Rajasthan, also participated in the PBD. Besides, Member of the Standing Committee of 
External Affairs of the Parliament, Shri Miteshbhai Patel, and Members of the Consultative Committee 
on External Affairs, Shri Anil Firojiya, Shri P. Sandosh Kumar and           Shri Keshava Sudhakar, also 
attended the event. 
 
Conclusion 

Page | 133 
 
 
37. Over 7000 delegates from 65 countries participated in the 18th PBD. From the feedback received, 
it appeared that the participants were satisfied with the hospitality extended by the people of 
Bhubaneswar and Odisha as well as the State Government of Odisha. There was great appreciation for the 
tourism programme organized and the different kinds of local cuisine served during the Convention.  
 
38. Hosting the 18th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention in Odisha was in line with Government of 
India's Purvodaya Plan under which all-round development of five States of Eastern India, including 
Odisha, would be undertaken. The discussions during the PBD showed that Odisha is a leader in India 
when it comes to mining, iron and steel manufacturing, marine economy, sports, skilling and even 
knowledge economy. Odisha is a rich tourism destination with culture, history, religious sites, national 
parks and pristine beaches. The PBD Convention highlighted Odisha's tourism potential. Several Indian 
IT companies have already established their base in Odisha. The PBD event was an opportunity to 
showcase what Odisha has to offer to the world. It was felt that Odisha can be a gateway to promoting 
cultural ties between India and the ASEAN region as it has age-old maritime connections with South East 
Asia. The Bali Yatra and Odisha's connections with Sri Lanka speak of these vibrant cultural ties. These 
exchanges were renewed during this 18th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention. It also illuminated those 
historical journeys and efforts underway to revive them.  
 
39. The 18th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas also showcased the continued vibrancy of the Indian diaspora 
and their achievements abroad. It spotlighted the contributions of the Indian diaspora and how they have 
acted as a vehicle for promotion of Indian culture, values and ethos abroad, as well as how they would 
continue to be a partner for India's march towards a Viksit Bharat.  
 

Page | 134 
 
Ministry of External Affairs 
 (DE Division) 
**** 
18TH PRAVASI BHARATIYA DIVAS 
 
PROGRAMME 
 
Wednesday, January 8, 2025 
 
Youth Pravasi Bharatiya Divas – 8th January, 2025 
 
09:00 hrs • All delegates to be seated 
09:30 hrs 09:32-09:37 hrs  09:37-09:47 hrs  09:47-10:00 hrs  10:00 – 10:15 hrs  10:15-10:25 hrs  10:25-10:30hrs 
• Lighting of the Traditional Lamp • Welcome Remarks by Shri Pabitra Margherita, Minister of State for External Affairs • Opening Remarks by Dr. Mansukh Mandaviya, Hon'ble Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports • Address by Guest of Honour, Dr. Dev Pragad, CEO, Newsweek from the USA  • Address by Dr. S. Jaishankar, Hon’ble External Affairs Minister • Address by Shri Mohan Charan Majhi, Hon’ble Chief Minister of Odisha  
• Vote of Thanks by Ms. Raksha Nikhil Khadse, Minister of State for Youth Affairs & Sports. 
10:30-10:45 hrs Tea Break 
10:45 - 12:30 hrs Plenary Session I - “Beyond Borders: Diaspora Youth Leadership in a Globalized World”  
 

Page | 135 
 
• Chair - Dr. Mansukh Mandaviya, Hon'ble Minister of Youth Affairs and Sports  Moderator – Shri Binny Bansal, Co-Founder Flipkart  
 Panelists -  i. Mr.Y B Prabhakaran – Malaysian Politician and Member of Parliament for Batu, Member of the People’s Justice Party (PKR) – Malaysia  ii. Ms. Eeshaanee Shandilya - Business Analyst, HSBC GLOBAL SERVICES, HONG KONG. Technology Graduate Trainee, Digital Business Services – Hong Kong  iii. Mr. Don McLain Gill - Lecturer, Department of International Studies, De La Salle University. He specializes in Philippine foreign policy, India-Southeast Asian security relations, and maritime security cooperation in the Indo-Pacific, and India-Southeast Asian relations. - Philippines   iv. Ms. Revathy Pillay – IT Business Analyst and Southside Radio FM Presenter. Dynamic youth ambassador and radio personality dedicated to empowering youth voices – South Africa  v. Mr. Mohiuddin Mohamad Ali – ALI, vice-chairman of Galfar Engineering & contracting SAOG. He is president of the Oman chapter of the Indo-Gulf & Middle East chamber – Muscat  
vi. Ms. Mickela Panday – Daughter of former Prime Minister of T&T Basdeo Panday. Political Leader of the newest political party in T&T- the Patriotic Front, launched in 2019. She is a former MP. She is an Attorney-at-Law – Trinidad & Tobago 
10:45 - 11:30 hrs Parallel Session – Joint Business Session between MEA and Odisha-- Interaction of Dr. S. Jaishankar, Hon’ble External Affairs Minister of India and Shri Mohan Charan Majhi, Hon’ble Chief Minister of Odisha with the Members of the Indian diaspora involved in business, particularly from Odisha 

Page | 136 
 
 (i) Welcome Remarks by Chief Secretary of Odisha (ii) Remarks by Dr. S. Jaishankar, Hon’ble External             Affairs Minister of India  (iii) Promotional video of Odisha Government would be played (iv) Remarks by Shri Mohan Charan Majhi, Hon’ble    Chief Minister of Odisha (v) Vote of Thanks by Special Secretary (Industries & Investment), State Government of Odisha (vi) EAM and CM of Odisha leaves the venue 
11:30 - 12:30 hrs Presentations by the State Government of Odisha on Investment Opportunities in Odisha Business Networking between stakeholders 
12:30 - 14:00 hrs Lunch hosted by Hon’ble Minister of Youth Affairs & Sports 
14:00 - 15:30 hrs SESSION HOSTED BY GOVERNMENT OF ODISHA-- “Unraveling India’s Best Kept Secret” 
15:30 - 15:45 hrs Tea Break 
15:45 - 17:15 hrs SESSION HOSTED BY GOVERNMENT OF ODISHA—“Odisha: A Land of Opportunities” 
17:45 hrs onwards Cultural programme (Showcasing dance and music of Odisha) by Odisha Dance Academy choreographed by Dr. Aruna Mohanty 
Dinner hosted by Hon’ble Chief Minister of Odisha 
 
Thursday, January 9, 2025 
 Inauguration of 18th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention 9th January, 2025 
 
0800 hrs Gates closed for Guests and Delegates 
09:30 hrs All Guests and Delegates to be seated 

Page | 137 
 
10:00 hrs Hon’ble Prime Minister enters the Stage in the Main Hall   [Governor of Odisha, EAM, CM of Odisha, Minister of Railways (Proposed), MoS (KVS), MoS (PM) and MoS (MSME)-(Proposed) on stage,]-- they are already seated when Hon’ble PM arrives. Each one will felicitate PM. 
Inaugural Session of the PBD  
10:01 -10:03 hrs PBD Cultural Welcome Song is played Live   [20 Musicians/Artists present the Theme Song Live from a Stage below—coordinated by ICCR]  
10:04 -10:07 hrs Welcome Remarks by Dr. S. Jaishankar, Hon'ble External Affairs Minister 
10:08 -10:13 hrs Remarks by Shri Mohan Charan Majhi, Hon’ble Chief Minister of Odisha 
10:14 -10:34 hrs Virtual Address by Chief Guest of PBD, H.E. Ms. Christine Carla Kangaloo, President of the Republic of Trinidad & Tobago  
10:35 – 10:37 hrs Remote Flagging off Pravasi Bharatiya Express by Hon’ble Prime Minister of India  
10:38 -11:18 hrs Inaugural Address by Hon’ble Prime Minister of India 
11:18 - 11:45 hrs Hon’ble Prime Minister leaves the Main Hall and inaugurates the following 4 exhibitions. Then takes a tour of the Exhibitions and Promotional Stalls of Union and State Ministries/Depts: 
 1. Vishwaroop Ram: The Universal Legacy of Ramayana  – by ICCR  2. Diaspora’s Contribution to Technology-- by MEA (being curated by Dr. Masooma Rizvi)  3. “Bharat Bharatiya: Swadesh Pardes—Abhilekhiye Virasat par adharit Pradarshani—Launch of Oman Collection”—by National Archives of India  4. Exhibition on Heritage and Culture of Odisha by State Government of Odisha 

Page | 138 
 
 Visit to Promotional Stalls of Union Ministries (MSME, DST, MNRE, Ministry of Culture, AYUSH, MeiTy, Ministry of Tourism, National Health Mission, IRCTC, FIPI) and State Governments of Odisha, Maharashtra, Andaman & Nicobar Islands, Gujarat etc) 
11:45 -11:55 hrs  Group Photographs of Hon’ble Prime Minister of India:  
1. With Guest of Honour of Youth PBD, and Foreign 
Ministerial delegations 
2. With PBSA Awardees of 2025 (24) 
3. With Bharat Ko Janiye Quiz Winners for 2024 (30) 
4. With Plenary Session Panelists and Moderators 
 
Union Ministers and Odisha State Chief Minister and Odisha 
Governor will be present in the aforesaid Group Photographs  
12:00 hrs Hon’ble Prime Minister departs from the PBD Venue 
12:00 – 14:00 hrs Lunch hosted by Hon’ble External Affairs Minister - Santoor by Abhay Rustum Sopori 
14:30 - 16:00 hrs Plenary Session II - “Building Bridges, Breaking Barriers: Stories of Migrant Skills”  
 
Chair - Sushri Shobha Karandlaje, Hon’ble Minister of State for Micro, Small & Medium Enterprises and Labour & Employment 
 
Moderator – Shri P. Kumaran, Special Secretary (ER & DPA), MEA  Panelists -  
i. Shri V . Muraleedharan, Former MOS for External 
Affairs – New Delhi (former Minister of State for 
External Affairs) 

Page | 139 
 
ii. Mr. Ashok Mago – Chairman & CEO, Mago & 
Associates Inc, USA 
iii. Mr. Rohit Ratnakar Rao--Founder-CEO of ‘Medrock 
Corporation’, a multinational pharmaceutical 
company and ‘Eske Corporation’ – Peru & Bolivia 
iv. Mr. Vilwanathan Krishnamurthy -- Dedicated and 
experienced social worker and cultural leader with 
an extensive background in welding technology and 
social services – Berlin   
v. Mr Sopnendu Mohanty – Chief Fintech Officer of 
the Monetary Authority of Singapore – Singapore   
vi. Shri Ashok Kalra – Managing Director and Partner 
of the Mughal Mahal Group, is the founder of the 
Mughal Mahal chain of restaurants across Kuwait 
with 12 dine in outlets & 500 staff members from 
India) – Kuwait (accepted invitation but flight 
itinerary yet to be received) 
vii. Mr. Kandarp Mehta - Actor/Professor. Senior 
Lecturer in the Negotiation unit and the 
Entrepreneurship Department of IESE Business 
School. I teach in the MBA as well as in the 
Executive Education) - Spain 
16:00 – 16:15 hrs Tea Break 
16:15 - 17:45 hrs Plenary Session III - “Green Connections: Diaspora’s Contributions to Sustainable Development”  
 
Chair – Shri Ashwini Vaishnaw, Hon’ble Minister of Electronics & Information Technology; Information & Broadcasting and Railways 
 
Moderator – Shri Pradip Kumar Das, Chairman & MD – Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency)  Panelists -   
i. Hon. Mr. Hambyrajen Narsinghen – Junior 

Page | 140 
 
Minister of Foreign Affairs, Regional Integration and 
International Trade, Government of the Republic of 
Mauritius 
ii. Mr. Rahul Fotedar – He is the Founder & CTO of 
Morrow Batteries in Norway. He has been playing a 
leading role in product strategy, technology 
development and strategic partnerships – Norway 
iii. Shri Jagdish Nainwal – Jagdish Nainwal is 
currently working as CEO of UPL for LATAM 
region which is one of the leading agriculture 
companies in Latin America by having near to 1 
billion revenue – Mexico  
iv. Mr. Indronil Sengupta – Has been working in 
various business areas for 30 years and has expertise 
in the field of energy. He is also the Chairman of 
Indian Business Chambers in Hanoi and has served 
in Tata Group for long years. His present 
Consultancy venture “Invesify’ also engages in 
energy – Vietnam   
v. Mr. Aditya Yellepeddi – Working with the Swiss 
Biotech Association (from 2022 onwards). Heading 
the Indo-Swiss industry initiative to foster 
collaborations and investments between India and 
Switzerland. Politics (Main Party: Le Centre - a 
Federal Government Party – Switzerland   
vi. Mr. Jitender Kr. Sachdeva – Group President, 
SkipperSeil Ltd. Over the past 38 years, Skipper has 
grown into a leading player in the regional power – 
Nigeria  
vii. Shri Kishore Reddy – Former President, India-Sri 
Lanka Society and India CEO Forum) – Sri Lanka  
viii. Ms Anju Virmani - Ontario Power Board, former 
CIO Cargojet - Canada 
19:15 – 20:00 hrs Gala Cultural Show - Celebration of Bharat through stirring Audio-Visual spectacle of classical and folk dances from across India, complemented by a voice narrative – by Maitreyee Pahari – organised by ICCR 
20:00 hrs Onwards Dinner hosted by Hon’ble External Affairs Minister, Dr. S. Jaishankar 

Page | 141 
 
 
Friday, January 10, 2025 
 
Valedictory of 18th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention 10th January, 2025 
 
09:30 - 11:00 hrs Plenary Session IV - “Diaspora Divas: Celebrating Women's Leadership and Influence – Nari Shakti”  
 Chair – Dr. S. Jaishankar, Hon’ble External Affairs Minister  Moderator – Dr. Ritu Karidhal, Indian Scientist & Aerospace Engineer, ISRO  
 Panelists -   i. Ms. Shullete Cox - President, Jamaica Promotions Corporation (JAMPRO), an agency of the Ministry of Industry, Investment and Commerce – Jamaica ii. Ms. Poonam Sagar- Director & Co-Owner PT Infotech Solutions — Jakarta, Founder of IndoIndians.com, chairperson of Indonesia India Business Forum (IIBF), Global Ambassador of International Women’s Entrepreneur Challenge (IWEC) – Indonesia  iii. Ms. Sudha Majithia--Social Worker and Philanthropist. Dynamic entrepreneur, renowned social worker and philanthropist, having established and founded a diverse group of companies operating in Tanzania – Tanzania  iv. Dr Indrani Rampersad --First female Pandita, Academic, Cultural & Women’s Activist. Visiting Professor (2024-25) at Banaras Hindu University (BHU) – Trinidad & Tobago  v. Ms. Maitri Joshi -Experienced in social welfare projects, flash flood mitigation, and tourism restoration with a proven track record in collaborating with diverse teams - Addis Ababa  vi. Ms. Sakala Appachu Debrass -- Innovative marketing professional with an in-depth knowledge 

Page | 142 
 
of the Doha market, with more than 20 years' experience in direct and indirect sales and Events. Built new products into independent businesses. Strong public relations skills – Qatar  vii. Ms. Koki Veber -- Ms. Koki Veber has a chain of handicraft stores, Sariko, which sells traditional items primarily imported from India. To bridge the cultural gap, she supports charitable bazaars by SILA (Slovenian International Ladies Association) – Slovenia  
viii. Ms. Loveleen Brenna -- Ms. Loveleen Brenna is 
founder and CEO of "'Seema', a center for 
diversity 
leadership. 'Seema' was the initiator of the first 
standard in the world that systematize and 
standardize diversity and gender equality 
management as a tool for value creation – Norway 
11:00 - 11:15 hrs Tea Break 
11:15 - 12:45 hrs Plenary Session V - “Diaspora Dialogues: Stories of Culture, Connection, and Belongingness”  
 Chair - Shri Gajendra Singh Shekhawat, Hon’ble Minister of Culture & Tourism 
 Moderator – Smt. K. Nandini Singla, DG (ICCR)  Panelists -   
i.  H.E. Mr. Mahendra Gondeea -  Minister of Arts 
and Culture, Government of Mauritius – Mission has 
verbally conveyed his confirmation. 
ii. Mr. Ranveer Brar, Indian Chef, New Delhi 
iii.   Ms. Charmi Chheda- Writer, Designer, Theatre 
Director, Filmmaker, Artist, Actor, Dancer, 
Facilitator. She's worked with the Royal 
Government of Bhutan, under the Ministry of 
Education, Ministry of Information and 
Communication and Ministry of Home and cultural 
affairs.) - Bhutan 
iv.  Mr. Arnab Roychuramony – Director/Owner 
Menkar LLC. Proactively participating in all Yoga, 

Page | 143 
 
Ayurveda, Indian dance and all cultural activities 
in Ukraine) – Ukraine   
v.  Ms. Vanisa Dhiru – Commissioner, NZ National 
Commission for UNESCO Commissioner, Library 
& Information Advisory Commission. Advocate 
for community, ethnic and gender rights issues 
(media) Co-Founder, Women in Leadership 
Aotearoa network Justice of the Peace of New 
Zealand) – New Zealand  
vi.  Smt. Aishwarya Hegde – rtistic Director of  
Deepam Odissi Academy, a thriving arts institution 
in Oman dedicated to nurturing Odissi dance and 
serving as a collaborative space for artists from 
various disciplines) – Oman  
vii.  Mr. Paresh Kumar Ratilal Mehta –  Currently 
serves as ‘Trustee of Shree Sanatan Dharma 
Mandal Kampala’, National Convener of of BJP 
Uganda and Community Coordinator of Indian 
Association Uganda) – Uganda 
viii. Mr. Shankar Kandasamy – Head of the Dept 
of Bharatanatyam at the Temple of Fine Arts, 
Malaysia, Trained in the multi-disciplinary Indian 
classical dances) – Malaysia  
ix.  Ms Urmila Chakraborty - Writer and translator 
(from and to English, Italian, Bengali and Hindi). 
She has long standing collaborations with various 
Italian cultural institutions in the field of 
intercultural education. She has several 
publications ranging across diverse subjects related 
to the Indian socio-cultural scenario - Italy 
13:30 - 14:45 hrs Lunch hosted by Shri Mohan Charan Majhi, Hon’ble Chief Minister of Odisha  
Valedictory Session and Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards Ceremony (15:00 -16:30 hrs) 
15:00-15:02 hrs National Anthem 

Page | 144 
 
15:02 – 15:04 hrs Welcome Address by Dr. S. Jaishankar, Hon'ble External Affairs Minister 
15:05-15:07 hrs Remarks by Shri Jual Oram, Hon'ble Minister of Tribal Affairs 
15:08-15:11 hrs Remarks by Shri Dharmendra Pradhan, Hon'ble Minister of Education  
15:12-15:14 hrs Remarks by Shri Mohan Charan Majhi, Hon’ble Chief Minister of Odisha 
15:15- 1550 hrs Conferment of Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awards 2025 by Hon'ble President of India 
15:50-15:55 hrs Acceptance Speech by one of the Samman Awardees 
15:55 -16:05 hrs  Group Photo with recipients of Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awardees 2025 
16:05-16:25 hrs Valedictory Address by Hon'ble President of India 
16:25- 16:27 hrs Vote of Thanks by Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh, Minister of State for External Affairs 
16:27 – 16:29 hrs National Anthem 
19:00 – 19:30 hrs Santoor Concert by Shri Abhay Rustum Sopori 
19:30 – 21:00 hrs Dinner hosted by Minister of State for External Affairs, Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh 
 
**** 

Page | 145 
 
 
Remarks by External Affairs Minister Dr. S. Jaishankar at Youth PBD 2025 
in Odisha January 08, 2025  
 
 
Odisha k Mananiya Mukhya Mantri Shri Mohan Charan Majhi ji,  
Mere Cabinet k sathi Dr. Mansukh Mandaviya ji,  
Hamare Guest of honor Dr. Dev Pragad ji,  
Hamare Rajya Mantri Shri Kirti Vardhan Singh ji,  
Shrimanti Raksha Nikhil Khadse ji,  
Shri Pabitra Margherita ji  
 
Namaskar  
 
Jai Jagannath  
 
I am very pleased to welcome you all to the Youth Pravasi Bharatiya Divas 2025 
in Bhubaneswar today. You all know that it is customary to hold a conclave of our 
younger generation as part of the PBD celebrations. The thinking behind that is 
one of recognizing the special contribution that young minds make, at home and 
abroad. And indeed, in connecting them more effectively for mutual good. At a 
time when so many key developments in the world are being shaped by this 
younger generation – whether we talk of AI and EV, innovation or startups, space 
or drones, sports - chess, cricket – there is all the more reason to do so.  
 
Friends,  
 

Page | 146 
 
At home, we have just started our journey towards Viksit Bharat in the Amrit 
Kaal. This is an endeavour that is very much about the future generation. After 
all, it is in this period that they will come to the front ranks of our society and lead 
our nation. A large part of our efforts is to give the right motivation to the younger 
generation to accelerate their efforts. While development itself is a very complex 
task, it becomes much easier when we are confident that nothing is beyond us. I 
still recall some time ago an observation by the famous badminton star, PV 
Sindhu, on why Prime Minister Modi is a youth icon. She summed it up as his 
attitude which moved our nation from ‘chalta hai’ to ‘badal sakta hai’ to ‘hoga 
kaise nahin?’. Indeed, it is this very spirit which has driven our achievements in 
very recent years. When confronted by the Covid pandemic, India demonstrated 
a remarkable resilience and strong recovery thereafter and I remember working 
with Mansukhbhai, the Health Minister during that period. The very country that 
was predicted to go under ended up supplying vaccines and medicines to the 
entire world. A different but equally telling example is what we see in the realm of 
space, where there is a growing competition internationally. Our Chandrayaan-3 
landing, the Aditya L1 observatory and the proposed Gaganyaan mission are 
powerful inspirations. In a digital era, the scale of UPI transactions speaks 
volumes both of our infrastructure and of our mindsets. The new India, with 
90,000 startups and 100 plus unicorns, has calling cards like Drone Didi, Atal 
tinkering labs, hackathons, green hydrogen mission or nano-fertilizers.  
 
Friends,  
 
Ambitious visions need strong foundations to be realized. Our collective 
prospects are no exception to that rule. Here again, it is critical to invest in our 
youth in order to achieve their full potential. Many of you would be familiar with 
various campaigns and programmes to develop India, undertaken since 2014 
under the leadership of Prime Minister Narendra Modi. Whether it is Swacch 
Bharat or Beti Padhao, Awas or Anna Yojana, Mudra or Swanidhi, Ayushman 
Bharat or Jal Jeevan, each one of them has been a transformational effort. 
However, if you were to see them in their entirety, connecting those dots will give 
you an appreciation of how we are securing the future of our youth. They will help 
bring their skills and creativity to the fore, ensuring that India’s talents are fully 
available to the global workplace.  

Page | 147 
 
 
Friends,  
 
Given the rapidity of changes underway, it is also essential that we step up 
efforts to keep the diaspora continuously connected. It is a matter of satisfaction 
to know that Know India Programme and Bharat Ko Janiye Quiz are now getting 
much more traction than previous years. We also regularly welcome the visits of 
PIO journalists to India. Let me take the opportunity to urge you on behalf of 
Prime Minister Modi to promote India as a tourism destination. If young Indian 
PIOs bring their equally young friends from abroad to explore our uniquely rich 
and diverse heritage and culture, this will surely become a lifelong habit. Let me 
say a few words for our guest of honor, normally we pick somebody from the 
political world for that position. On this occasion we made a departure, I think, a 
very understandable and a very justifiable departure of picking someone from the 
world of media, from the world of business because young Indians today are 
succeeding in so many domains and it is important that we recognize that.  
 
Friends, allow me also to say a few words about the great state of Odisha,  
 
This State offers a tremendous opportunity to experience personally much of 
what we would be discussing in the course of the PBD. Its cultural festivals and 
religious and archaeological sites are a reminder why we in India consider 
ourselves to be a civilizational society. It is equally a living testament to the 
developmental progress in all its dimensions. And when it comes to the youth, 
their optimism and energy is very much on display in Odisha, whether it is in 
institutions of learning or those we encounter in daily life.  
 
So let me conclude by saying this,  
 
We are today well on the way to address longstanding challenges to build 
modern, inclusive and progressive society. Our quest is unique because the 

Page | 148 
 
largest nation in the world is developing in that manner in a democratic 
framework. The mantra of that journey is to advance, as Prime Minister Modi 
says, advance on the two legs of technology and tradition. And the youth can 
surely be the defining factor in the pace of that endeavour and the realization of 
our goals.  
 
So once again I welcome you to Bhubaneshwar, I welcome you to PBD 2025. I 
am sure all of you will have a remarkable next few days ahead.  
 
I thank you for your attention.  
 
Jai Jagannath, Jai Bharat, Jai Hind

Page | 149 
 
 
PM's address at the inauguration of 18th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas convention in 
Bhubaneswar, Odisha  
09 January,2025  
 
 
The Governor of Odisha, Dr. Hari Babu Ji, our popular Chief Minister Mohan Charan 
Manjhi Ji, my fellow member of the Central Cabinet S. Jaishankar Ji, Jual Oram Ji, 
Dharmendra Pradhan Ji, Ashwini Vaishnav Ji, Shobha Karandlaje Ji, Kirti Vardhan 
Singh Ji, Pabitra Margareta Ji, Deputy Chief Minister of Odisha Kanak Vardhan 
Singhdeo Ji, Pravati Parida Ji, other ministers, MPs, and MLAs, all sons and daughters 
of Mother Bharati who have come from across the world! 
Ladies and gentlemen! On this holy land of Lord Jagannath and Lord Lingaraj, I 
welcome my Indian diaspora family from all over the world. The welcome song that was 
sung at the beginning, I am completely confident that this welcome song will be played 
again and again in the future, wherever Indian community events are held across the 
world. Congratulations to you. Your team has expressed the spirit of a Non-Resident 
Indian beautifully, congratulations to you. 
 
Friends, 
 
We just heard from the Chief Guest of this Pravasi Bhartiya Diwas. The video message 
of the President of Trinidad and Tobago, Her Excellency Christine Kangaloo left an 
impact on all of us. She too was speaking about India’s progress. I thank her for the 
warm and affectionate words. 
 
Friends, 
 
This is a time of vibrant festivals and gatherings in India. In just a few days, the 
Mahakumbh will start in Prayagraj. The festivals of Makar Sankranti, Lohri, Pongal and 
Magh Bihu are also coming up. There is a joyful atmosphere everywhere. Further, it was 
on this day, in 1915, that Mahatma Gandhi Ji came back to India after a long stay 
abroad. Your presence in India at such a wonderful time is adding to the festive spirit. 
This edition of Pravasi Bharatiya Diwas is special for an additional reason. We have 
gathered here just a few days after the birth centenary of Atal Bihari Vajpayee Ji. His 
vision was instrumental to this programme. It has become an institution to strengthen 
the bond between India and its diaspora. Together, we celebrate India, Indianness, our 
culture, our progress and connect to our roots. 

Page | 150 
 
 
Friends, 
 
The land of Odisha, where you have gathered today, is also a reflection of India’s rich 
heritage. In Odisha, at every step, we come across our heritage. Whether it is the 
historical caves of Udayagiri-Khandagiri, the Sun Temple of Konark, the ancient ports of 
Tamralipti, Manikpatna, and Palur, seeing these fills everyone with pride. Centuries ago, 
our traders and businessmen from Odisha used to embark on long sea voyages to 
places like Bali, Sumatra, and Java. In memory of that, even today, the Bali Jatra is 
celebrated in Odisha. It is here in Odisha that the place called Dhauli stands, which is a 
great symbol of peace. When the world was in an era of expanding empires through the 
sword, our Emperor Ashoka chose the path of peace here. This strength of our heritage 
is what inspires India today to tell the world that the future lies not in war, but in Buddha 
(भिवˈ  युȠ मŐ नहीं है, बुȠ मŐ है). Therefore, it becomes very special for me to welcome you 
all to this land of Odisha. 
 
Friends, 
 
I have always considered the Indian diaspora as ambassadors of India. I feel immense 
joy when I meet all of you from around the world, when I converse with you. The love I 
receive from you is something I can never forget. Your affection, your blessings always 
stay with me. 
 
Friends, 
 
Today, I want to personally express my gratitude to all of you, and I also want to say 
Thank you. Thank you because of you, I get the opportunity to hold my head high with 
pride in the world. Over the past 10 years, I have met many leaders from around the 
world. Every world leader praises the Indian diaspora, all of you. A big reason for this is 
the social values that all of you add to the societies there. We are not just the “Mother of 
Democracy,” but democracy is a part of our life, it is our way of living. We don’t have to 
be taught diversity; our life itself runs on diversity. That’s why wherever Indians go, they 
integrate with the society there. Wherever we go, we respect the rules and traditions of 
that place. We serve that country, that society with utmost sincerity. We contribute to 
their growth and prosperity. And alongside all of this, India continues to beat in our 
hearts. We rejoice in every happiness of India, and we celebrate every achievement of 
India. 
 
Friends, 

Page | 151 
 
 
The India of the 21st century, the pace at which it is progressing today, and the scale at 
which development is happening in India is unprecedented. In just 10 years, India has 
lifted 250 million people out of poverty. In just 10 years, India has moved from being the 
10th largest economy in the world to the 5th largest economy. The day is not far when 
India will become the 3rd largest economy in the world. The world is witnessing India’s 
success today. When India’s Chandrayaan reaches the Shiv-Shakti point, we all feel 
proud. Today, when the world is astonished by the power of Digital India, we all feel 
proud. Today, every sector in India is moving forward to touch the sky. Whether it is 
renewable energy, aviation ecosystems, electric mobility, the vast metro network, or the 
bullet train project, the pace of India’s progress is breaking all records. Today, India is 
making “Made in India” fighter jets, transport aircraft, and the day is not far when you 
will come to India for the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas in a “Made in India” plane. 
 
Friends, 
 
These achievements of India, the prospects that are emerging in India today, are 
contributing to India’s growing global role. Today, the world listens attentively to India. 
Today’s India not only strongly puts forth its point but also raises the voice of the Global 
South with full strength. When India proposed to make the African Union a permanent 
member of the G-20, all members supported this proposal. With the spirit of “Humanity 
First,” India is expanding its global role. 
 
Friends, 
 
India’s talent is being celebrated worldwide today. Our professionals are contributing to 
global growth through the major companies of the world. Tomorrow, many of our 
colleagues will be honored with the Pravasi Bharatiya Samman by the esteemed 
President of India, Draupadi Murmu Ji. I extend my best wishes to all the distinguished 
individuals who will be receiving this honor. 
 
Friends, 
 
You know, for many decades to come, India will remain the country with the youngest 
and most skilled population in the world. It is India that will fulfill a significant portion of 
the global demand for skills. You must have noticed that many countries around the 
world are now welcoming India’s skilled youth with open arms. In such a scenario, the 
Government of India is also striving to ensure that whenever any Indian goes abroad, 
they do so with excellent skills. That’s why we are continuously focusing on skilling, re-

Page | 152 
 
skilling, and up-skilling our youth. We give great importance to your convenience and 
comfort. Your safety and welfare are a top priority. We consider it our responsibility to 
help our diaspora during crisis situations, no matter where they are. This is one of the 
guiding principles of India’s foreign policy today. Over the last decade, our embassies 
and offices worldwide have been sensitive and pro-active. 
 
Friends, 
 
Earlier, in many countries, people had to travel long distances to access consular 
facilities. They had to wait for days for help. Now, these problems are being solved. In 
just the last two years, fourteen embassies and consulates have been opened. The 
scope of OCI cards is also being expanded. It has been extended to PIOs of the 7th 
generation of Mauritius and 6th generation of Suriname martinique and guadeloupe. 
 
Friends, 
 
The history of the Indian diaspora spread across the world, their journey to various 
countries and their stories of raising the flag of India in those lands, is an important part 
of India’s heritage. You have many such interesting and inspiring stories, which need to 
be shared, showcased, and preserved. These are our shared legacy, our shared 
heritage. Just a few days ago, I spoke in detail about an initiative related to this in my 
“Mann Ki Baat” address. Several centuries ago, many families from Gujarat settled in 
Oman. Their 250-year journey is truly inspiring. An exhibition related to this has also 
been set up, showcasing thousands of documents related to this community that have 
been digitized. Additionally, an ‘Oral History Project’ was undertaken with the senior 
members of the community, many of whom are quite elderly now, sharing their 
experiences. I am happy that many of these families are present here with us today. 
 
Friends, 
 
Such efforts should also be made with the diaspora in different countries. For example, 
we have our “Girmitya” brothers and sisters. Why not create a database of our Girmitya 
community? We should identify which villages and cities in India they came from, where 
they went and settled, and also recognize those places. What kind of life they led, how 
they turned challenges into opportunities—this can be portrayed through films or 
documentaries. A study on the Girmitya legacy could be conducted, and research could 
be carried out. Universities could establish chairs for this, and we could organize the 
World Girmitya Conference at regular intervals. I will ask my team to explore the 
possibilities of this and work towards taking it forward. 

Page | 153 
 
 
Friends, 
 
Today’s India is moving forward with both development and heritage under this mantra. 
During the G-20, we held meetings across the country so that the world could have a 
first-hand experience of India’s diversity. We proudly organize events like Kashi-Tamil 
Sangamam, Kashi-Telugu Sangamam, Saurashtra-Tamil Sangamam, and others. Just a 
few days from now, we will celebrate Saint Thiruvalluvar Day. Our government has 
decided to establish Thiruvalluvar Culture Centers to spread the teachings of Saint 
Thiruvalluvar. The work for the first center in Singapore has already begun. A 
Thiruvalluvar Chair is also being established at the University of Houston in the USA. All 
these efforts are taking Tamil language, Tamil heritage, and India’s heritage to every 
corner of the world. 
 
Friends, 
We have also taken numerous steps to connect our heritage sites in India. For example, 
there is a special Ramayana Express train for visiting places associated with Lord Ram 
and Mata Sita. The Bharat Gaurav trains also connect important heritage locations 
across the country. With our semi-high-speed Vande Bharat trains, we have connected 
major heritage centers of the country. A little while ago, I had the opportunity to 
inaugurate a special Pravasi Bharatiya Express train. Around 150 people will travel on 
this train to visit seventeen tourism and faith-related destinations. There are also many 
places in Odisha that you should definitely visit. The Maha Kumbh in Prayagraj is 
starting soon, and such an opportunity doesn’t come often in life. You should also visit 
there. 
 
Friends, 
 
In 1947, India gained independence, and our diaspora played a significant role in this. 
They contributed to India’s freedom while living abroad. Now, our target is 2047. We 
have to make India a developed country. You are still making an outstanding 
contribution to India’s growth. Thanks to your hard work, India has become the number 
one country in the world for remittances. Now, we must think beyond this. You invest not 
only in India but also in other countries. Our GIFT City ecosystem can help fulfill your 
financial services and investment needs. All of you can benefit from it and further 
strengthen India’s journey towards development. Every effort you make will strengthen 
India and help in its growth. 
One such sector is heritage tourism. Currently, India is known around the world primarily 
through its large metro cities. But India is not limited to these big cities. A large part of 

Page | 154 
 
India is in tier-2, tier-3 cities, and villages, where you can witness India’s heritage. We 
need to connect the world to this heritage. I urge you to take your children to these 
smaller cities and villages in India. Then, share your experiences with your friends once 
you return. I would also like to suggest that the next time you come to India, bring at 
least five friends who are of non-Indian origin with you. Inspire your friends where you 
live to visit India, to experience India. 
 
Friends, 
 
I have one appeal, especially to all the young friends of the diaspora. Participate in the 
quiz to learn more about India. This will help you understand India better. You should 
also make sure to benefit from the ‘Study in India’ program. The ICCR scholarship 
scheme is another great opportunity that the youth of the diaspora should take 
advantage of. 
 
Friends, 
 
In the countries where you live, you must also take the lead in spreading India’s true 
history. The current generation in many countries doesn’t know about our prosperity, the 
long period of slavery, and our struggles. You can help share India’s true history with the 
world. 
 
Friends, 
 
Today, India is known as the ‘Vishwa Bandhu’. To further strengthen this global 
connection, you need to increase your efforts. For example, in the country where you 
live, you can organize award functions. These awards can be for the local residents of 
the country you live in. You can honor prominent individuals from various fields, whether 
it be literature, arts and crafts, film, theater, or any other sector. Invite these achievers 
and present them with awards and certificates on behalf of India’s diaspora. The Indian 
embassy and consulate in that country will be more than happy to assist you. This will 
strengthen your personal connection with the people of that country and deepen your 
emotional bond with them. 
Friends, 
You also play a significant role in making local products global. Make sure to buy 
something like “Made in India” food packets, clothes, or any other product. If some 
items are not available in your country, order them online. Include Made in India 
products in your kitchen, your drawing room, and as gifts. This will be a great 
contribution from all of you in building a developed India. 

Page | 155 
 
 
Friends, 
 
I have one more appeal related to Mother and Mother Earth. A few days ago, I visited 
Guyana, where I participated in an initiative with the President to plant a tree in the 
name of our mother. Millions of people in India are already doing this. Wherever you 
are, I urge you to plant a tree or a sapling in the name of your mother. I believe that 
when you return from India, the resolution of building a developed India will accompany 
you. Together, we will build a developed India. 
May 2025 bring prosperity to all of you, whether in health or wealth. I wish you all a 
prosperous and fulfilling year ahead. Once again, I warmly welcome you all to India and 
offer my heartfelt greetings. 
 
Best wishes, and thank you very much. 

Page | 156 
 
 
Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Award 2025  
List of Awardees  
 
Sr. No. Name Country Field 
1. Prof. Ajay Rane Australia Community Service 
2. Dr. Marialena Joan Fernandes Austria Education 
3. 
Dr. The Honourable 
Philomena Ann Mohini Harris Barbados Medical Science 
4. Swami Sanyuktanand Fiji Community Service 
5. Saraswati Vidya Niketan Guyana Community Service 
6. Dr. Lekh Raj Juneja Japan Science & Technology 
7. Dr. Prem Kumar KYRGYZ Republic Medical Science 
8. Mr. Soukthavy Chowdhury Laos Business 
9. Mr. Krishna Savjani Malawi Business 
10. 
Tan Sri  Subramaniam K.V. 
Sathasivam Malaysia Politics 
11. Dr. Mrs Sarita Boodhoo Mauritius Community Service 
12. Mr. Abhaya Kumar Moldova Business 
13. Dr. Ram Niwas @ Hla Tun Myanmar Education 
14. 
Mr. Jaggannath Shekhar 
Asthana Romania Business 
15. Hindustani Samaj Russia Community Service 

Page | 157 
 
16. Ms. Sudha Rani Gupta Russia Education 
17. Dr. Syed Anwar Khursheed Saudi Arabia Medical Science 
18. Mr. Atul Arvind Temurnikar Singapore Education 
19. Mr. Robert Masih Nahar Spain Community Service 
20. 
Dr. Kaushik Laxmidas 
Ramaiya Tanzania Medicine 
21. 
H.E. Christine Carla Kangaloo 
ORTT 
Trinidad & Tobago 
 Public Affairs 
22. 
Mr. Ramakrishnan Sivaswamy 
Iyer UAE Business 
23. 
Mr. Bonthala Subbaiah Setty 
Ramesh Babu Uganda Community Service 
24. 
Baroness. Usha Kumari 
Prashar UK Politics 
25. Mr. Ravi Kumar S. USA Business (IT & Consulting) 
26. Dr. Sharad Lakhanpal USA Medicine 
27. Dr. Sharmila Ford USA Community Service 
 

Page | 158 
 
 
(ix) VALEDICTORY REMARKS OF THE HON’BLE PRESIDENT OF INDIA SMT. 
DROUPADI MURMU AT THE 18 TH PRAVASI BHARATIYA DIVAS 
Bhubaneswar : 10.01.2025 
 
 
Namaskar, and a warm welcome to your own Bharat-bhumi! 
It is with immense pleasure and a heart full of pride that I stand before you today in 
the vibrant city of Bhubaneswar, a city rich in culture and heritage. After the success 
of the last Pravasi Bharatiya Divas in Indore in 2023, I am delighted to be here with 
you all, to celebrate the indomitable spirit of our Pravasi Bharatiyas. As we gather in 
the first month of this New Year 2025, I also extend my greetings and best wishes 
for a prosperous and fulfilling year ahead. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
I take this opportunity to extend congratulate Her Excellency Christine Kangaloo, 
President of the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, on being conferred with the 
Pravasi Bharatiya Samman 2025. Excellency, your outstanding contributions in 
leading your nation, with a special focus on women and the Indian diaspora, has set 
a high benchmark on the world stage. This is a reflection of the deep ties of 
friendship and cooperation between our two countries, as much as it is a testament 
of the shared values that bind us across borders. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The Indian Diaspora represents the best of our country. You, the sons and daughters 
of Bharat, have carried with you not just the knowledge and skills acquired in this 
sacred land, but also the values and ethos that have been the foundation of our 
civilization for millennia. Whether in the fields of technology, medicine, arts, or 
entrepreneurship, the Indian Diaspora has made a mark that the world 
acknowledges and respects. 
Today, we honour those amongst you who have distinguished themselves through 
exemplary achievements. It is my privilege to confer on them the Pravasi Bharatiya 
Samman, as India’s token of recognition of their extraordinary contributions. My 
heartfelt congratulations to all the awardees. Your success stories are not just a 
matter of pride for India, but they also inspire millions across the world to strive for 
excellence. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The Pravasi Bharatiya Divas has, over the years, become more than just an event; it 
is a platform where ideas converge, collaborations are forged, and the bonds 

Page | 159 
 
between India and its Diaspora are strengthened. I am sure that over the last three 
days, you have used this occasion to engage in meaningful dialogue, and share 
your experiences. This event underscores the fact that while you may be physically 
distant from your homeland, your connections with Bharat remain as strong as ever. 
 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Our nation today is marching towards Viksit Bharat – a developed India – by the 
year 2047, when we will celebrate 100 years of our independence. This vision is not 
just a government initiative; it is a National Mission that requires proactive and 
enthusiastic participation of every Indian, including those living abroad. 
The Indian Diaspora is an integral part of this vision. Your global presence gives you 
a unique perspective, and your achievements place you in a position to significantly 
contribute to the realization of a developed India. I have seen this first-hand during 
my interactions with our Diaspora as part of my travels abroad. I urge you all to 
actively engage in this journey, for in your success, lies the success of India. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Recognising the crucial role of the Diaspora in nation-building, Government of India 
has undertaken several initiatives to support you. Consular services for Non 
Resident Indians (NRIs) have been simplified. For Overseas Citizens of India 
(OCIs), processes have been digitized and streamlined. Initiatives like “Know India 
Programme” provide avenues for the younger members of our Diaspora to re-
discover their Indian roots. 
I am happy to know that Odisha Government is appointing a Nodal Minister for 
engaging with Pravasi Bharatiya for projects, investments, etc. I appreciate the step 
taken by the Odisha Government. 
We have also been proactive in safeguarding interests of Indians living abroad. In 
recent years, we have launched several missions, including Operation Kaveri, 
Operation Ganga and Operation Vande Bharat, to assist distressed Indians. Today, 
Indians around the world can count on their homeland for support and protection in 
times of need. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Over the last three days, experts from diverse fields have come together here to 
discuss issues of importance, for both India as well its Diaspora. You all must have 
seen the special exhibits at the Convention, which highlight various important facets 
of our Diaspora’s connection and contributions to India. I am sure these insightful 
discussions will help to shape policies that benefit both India and the global 
community. 

Page | 160 
 
A special mention must also be made of the contributions of women, students, and 
the youth amongst our Diaspora. The achievements of Indian women globally are a 
matter of immense pride for us, as they break barriers and scale new heights in 
various fields. Our students and youth, with their dynamism and creativity, are the 
torchbearers of our future. They are the ones who will carry forward the legacy of a 
vibrant and progressive India. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
Our vision for Viksit Bharat aligns with our growing stature on the world stage, 
particularly as a leading voice for the Global South. It is guided by our timeless 
philosophy of Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam, or 'The World is One Family’. 
This vision is about creating an ecosystem that not only meets our needs, but also 
contributes to global well-being. We seek to be a nation that balances economic 
progress with social justice and environmental stewardship, ensuring a bright future 
for generations to come. Each one of you, whether through entrepreneurship, 
philanthropy, or knowledge-sharing, will play an essential role in achieving this 
vision. 
Ladies and Gentlemen, 
The connection between the Indian Diaspora and the Motherland is eternal. No 
matter where you are in the world, Bharat is and will always be your home. This 
bond is rooted in shared heritage, culture, and values. It is this connection that we 
celebrate today, and it is this connection that will continue to inspire us as we move 
forward together. 
As we celebrate the achievements of our Pravasi Bharatiya family, let us also look 
forward to the future with hope and determination. Together, we can build a Viksit 
Bharat, a nation that stands tall on the global stage and continues to be a beacon of 
light for the world. 
Thank you, 
Jai Hind! 
Jai Bharat! 

Page | 161 
 
 
Annexure – II 
 
Number of Open Houses Conducted in the Last Three Years 
 
Sl. 
No. Name of Country 
Name of Mission/ 
Post 
Years  
Remarks 2022 2023 2024 
1 Algeria EoI, Algiers 1 1 12  
2 Albania EoI, Tirana Nil Nil Nil  
3 Argentina EoI, Buenos Aires Nil Nil Nil  
4 Armenia EoI, Yerevan 11 22 18  
5 Australia 
HCI, Canberra 52 52 52  
CGI, Sydney Nil Nil 4  
CGI, Brisbane Nil Nil 2  
6 Azerbaijan EoI, Baku 45 48 48  
7 Bangladesh 
HCI, Dhaka 1 4 4  
AHCI, Chittagong 3 4 4  
AHCI, Rajshahi Nil Nil Nil  
AHCI, Sylhet Nil Nil 1  
8 Belgium EoI, Brussels 2 2 2  
9 Bhutan 
EoI, Thimphu 2 3 3  
CGI, Phuentsholing 3 2 3  

Page | 162 
 
10 Bolivia EoI, La Paz Nil Nil Nil  
11 Botswana HCI, Gaborone Nil Nil 18  
12 Brazil 
EoI, Brasilia 1 1 2  
CGI, Sao Paulo 2 3 2  
13 
Brunei 
Darussalam 
HCI, Brunei 
Darussalam Nil 2 2  
14 Bulgaria EoI, Sofia 3 5 8  
15 Burkina Faso EoI, Ouagadougou Nil Nil 1  
16 Cambodia EoI, Phnom Penh 12 12 52  
17 Cameroon HCI, Yaounde Nil Nil Nil  
18 Canada 
HCI, Ottawa 2 1 1  
CGI, Toronto 40 50 50  
CGI, Vancouver Nil Nil Nil  
19 Cape Verde EoI, Praia Nil Nil 1  
20 Chad EoI, N'DJAMENA Nil 3 7  
21 China 
EoI, Beijing    
Regular interactions 
facilitated by the 
Mission 
CGI, Shanghai 3 4 2  
22 Colombia EoI, Bogota 12 12 12  
23 
Congo 
(Democratic 
Republic) EoI, Kinshasa Nil Nil Nil  
24 Republic of EoI, Brazzaville Nil 2 5  

Page | 163 
 
Congo 
25 Cote D Ivory EoI, Abidjan Nil 12 12  
26 Croatia EoI, Zagreb Nil Nil Nil  
27 Cuba EoI, Havana Nil 1 1  
28 Cyprus HCI, Nicosia Nil Nil 7  
29 Czech Republic EoI, Prague Nil 3 5  
30 Denmark EoI, Copenhagen 1 1 4  
31 Djibouti EoI, Djibouti 12 12 12  
32 
Dominica 
Republic EoI, Santo Domingo 52 52 52  
33 Egypt EoI, Cairo Nil 1 1  
34 Equatorial Guinea EoI, Malabo Nil Nil 5  
35 Eritrea EoI, Asmara Nil 12 12  
36 Estonia EoI, Tallinn Nil Nil 1  
37 Eswatini HCI, Mbabane 3 2 2  
38 Ethiopia EoI, Addis Ababa 2 2 5  
39 Fiji HCI, Suva 49 50 49  
40 Finland EoI, Helsinki 8 7 7  
41 France 
EoI, Paris Nil 12 12  
CGI, St. Denis-
Reunion Island 1 1 1  
42 Gabon EoI, Libreville Nil Nil Nil  

Page | 164 
 
43 Germany 
EoI, Berlin 52 52 52  
CGI, Munich 45 43 48  
44 Georgia EoI, Tbilsis Nil Nil 3  
45 Ghana HCI, Accra Nil Nil 10  
46 Greece EoI, Athens Nil Nil 6  
47 Guatemala EoI, Guatemala City Nil Nil Nil  
48 Guinea EoI, Conakry Nil 10 12  
49 Guyana HCI, Georgetown 12 24 24  
50 Hungary EoI, Budapest 12 12 12  
51 Iceland EoI, Reykjavik Nil Nil 9  
52 Indonesia 
EoI, Jakarta Nil Nil 2  
CGI, Medan Nil 1 8  
53 Iran EoI, Tehran Nil Nil 1  
54 Iraq 
EoI, Baghdad 52 52 52  
CGI, Erbil 1 3 2  
55 Ireland EoI, Dublin Nil 4 12  
56 Israel EoI, Tel Aviv 3 3 1  
57 Italy 
CGI, Milan Nil 18 24  
EoI, Rome Nil Nil 11  
58 Jamaica HCI, Kingston 52 52 52  
59 Japan CGI, Osaka-Kobe Nil Nil 4  

Page | 165 
 
EoI, Tokyo 12 12 12  
60 Jordan EoI, Amman 0 1 1  
61 Kazakhstan EoI, Astana Nil Nil Nil  
62 Kenya HCI, Nairobi 5 2 3  
63 Korea (ROK) EoI, Seoul Nil 3 12  
64 Kuwait EoI, Kuwait 38 27 17  
65 Kyrgyzstan EoI, Bishkek 52 52 52  
66 Laos EoI, Vientiane Nil 2 2  
67 Latvia EoI, Riga Nil Nil Nil  
68 Lebanon EoI, Beirut 5 7 7  
69 Liberia EoI, Monrovia 6 12 12  
70 Libya EoI, Tripoli Nil Nil Nil  
71 Lithuanaia EoI, Vilnius Nil Nil 16  
72 Madagascar EoI, Antananarivo Nil Nil 4  
73 Malawi HCI, Lilongwe 4 2 4  
74 Malaysia HCI, Kuala Lumpur 6 24 22  
75 Maldives HCI, Male 1 3 3  
76 Mali EoI, Bamako Nil Nil Nil  
77 Malta HCI, Valletta 39 50 50  
78 Mauritania EOI, Nouakchott Nil Nil 1  
79 Mauritius HCI, Port Louis Nil 1 2  

Page | 166 
 
80 Mexico EoI, Mexico City 52 52 52  
81 Mongolia EoI, Ulaanbaatar Nil Nil 4  
82 Morocco EoI, Rabat 38 45 42  
83 Myanmar 
EoI, Yangon Nil 4 4  
CGI, Sittwe Nil 10 Nil  
84 Namibia HCI, Windhoek Nil 1 1  
85 Nepal EoI, Kathmandu Nil 11 12  
86 Netherlands EoI, The Hague Nil 7 24  
87 New Zealand HCI, Wellington Nil 7 8  
88 Niger EoI, Niamey 12 12 12  
89 Nigeria HCI, Abuja Nil Nil 3  
90 Norway EoI, Oslo Nil 1 12  
91 Oman EoI, Muscat 10 9 17  
92 Pakistan HCI, Islamabad Nil Nil Nil  
93 Palestine RoI, Ramallah 12 12 12  
94 Panama EoI, Panama 2 4 9  
95 
Papua New 
Guinea HCI, Port Moresby Nil 1 12  
96 Paraguay EoI, Asuncion 12 12 12  
97 Peru EoI, Lima 12 12 12  
98 Philippines EoI, Manila Nil Nil 17  
99 Poland EoI, Warsaw Nil 1 1  

Page | 167 
 
100 Portugal EoI, Lisbon 12 12 10  
101 Qatar EoI, Doha 8 12 12  
102 Romania EoI, Bucharest 52 52 52  
103 Russia 
EoI, Moscow Nil Nil 52  
CGI, St. Petersburg Nil 2 2  
104 Rwanda HCI, Kigali Nil Nil Nil  
105 Sao Tome EoI, Sao Tome Nil Nil 3  
106 Saudi Arabia 
EoI, Riyadh 140 134 103  
CGI, Jeddah 2 2 1  
107 Senegal EoI, Dakar 1 2 1  
108 Serbia EoI, Belgrade 52 52 52  
109 Seychelles HCI, Victoria (Mahe) Nil 5 6  
110 Sierra Leone HCI, Freetown Nil 3 5  
111 Singapore HCI, Singapore Nil 1 9  
112 Slovenia EoI, Ljubljana 1 1 6  
113 South Africa 
CGI, Johannesburg Nil 2 2  
HCI, Pretoria 52 52 52  
114 South Sudan EoI, Juba 52 52 52  
115 Spain EoI, Madrid 30 25 27  
116 Sri Lanka 
HCI, Colombo Nil Nil Nil  
CGI, Hambantota Nil 3 12  

Page | 168 
 
AHCI, Kandy Nil Nil 1  
117 Sudan EoI, Khartoum Nil Nil Nil  
118 Suriname EoI, Paramaribo Nil 1 1  
119 Sweden EoI, Stockholm 24 24 24  
120 Switzerland 
EoI, Berne 
 
  
Regular interactions 
facilitated by the 
Mission 
CGI, Geneva 1 2 5  
121 Syria EoI, Damascus Nil Nil Nil  
122 Tajikistan EoI, Dushanbe Nil 2 2  
123 Tanzania 
HCI, Dar-es-Salaam Nil Nil 14  
CGI, Zanzibar Nil Nil 1  
124 Thailand 
EoI, Bangkok Nil 4 4  
CGI, Chiangmai 2 2 2  
125 Timor Leste EoI, Dili Nil Nil Nil  
126 Togo EoI, Lome 2 1 2  
127 
Trinidad & 
Tobago HCI, Port of Spain Nil 1 2  
128 Tunisia EoI, Tunis 24 24 24  
129 Turkiyie 
EoI, Ankara 2 Nil 3  
CGI, Istanbul 1 1 1  
130 Turkmenistan EoI, Ashgabat 50 50 50  
131 Uganda HCI, Kampala    Regular interactions 

Page | 169 
 
facilitated by the 
Mission 
132 Ukraine EoI, Kyiv Nil Nil Nil  
133 UAE 
EoI, Abu Dhabi Nil 2 5  
CGI, Dubai 5 3 3  
134 U.K. 
Edinburgh Nil Nil 8  
Birmingham 26 51 49  
HCI, London 11 4 5  
135 USA 
CGI, Chicago 4 4 11  
CGI, Houston Nil 10 24  
CGI, New York Nil Nil 65  
CGI, San Francisco 48 48 48  
EoI, Washington 7 12 14  
CGI, Seattle Nil Nil 2  
136 Venezuela EoI, Caracas Nil Nil Nil  
137 Vietnam EoI, Hanoi 6 8 12  
138 Zambia HCI, Lusaka Nil 52 52  
139 Zimbabwe EoI, Harare Nil Nil Nil  
Total 1485 1792 2228  
 
***** 

Page | 170 
 
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2025-26) 
HELD ON 16 DECEMBER, 2025 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 16th December, 2025 from 1700 hrs. to 1800 hrs. in Committee 
Room No. 2, Extension Building, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Secretariat 
 
 1. Shri Anjani Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
 Present 
 Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 Lok Sabha 
2   Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3  Shri Vijay Baghel 
4   Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
6  Shri Navaskani K. 
7  Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
8  Shri Arun Govil 
9  Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
10  Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
 Rajya Sabha 
11  Shri Ayodhya Rami Reddy Alla 
12  Dr. John Brittas 
13  Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
14  Dr. K. Laxman 
15  Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
16  Shri Ratanjeet Pratap Narain Singh 
17  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

Page | 171 
 
 2. Shri Shangreiso Zimik  - Director 
 3. Ms. Shanta Banerjee Datta - Deputy Secretary 
  
2. At the outset, Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee and 
apprised them of the agenda for the day. 
 
 (i) XXX  XXX  XXX  XXX  
 (ii) Draft Report on the Action Taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Sixth Report of the Committee on 
External Affairs (18th Lok Sabha) on the subject ‘‘Indian Diaspora Overseas 
including NRIs, PIOs, OCIs and Migrant Workers: All Aspects of their Conditions 
and Welfare, including the status of the Emigration Bill' 
 
 4. The Chairperson, invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation in 
the draft Reports. After deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Reports with minor 
modifications suggested by the Members.  
 
5. The Committee authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action Taken Reports 
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned 
 

Page | 172 
 
APPENDIX- I 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE SIXTH REPORT OF 
THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
(i)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: - 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 29, 30, 31, 
32, 33, 34, 36, 39, 42, 44, 45, 48, 49, 51, 52, 53, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 
66, 67, 68, 69, 71 and 72 
 Total- 46 
Percentage : 63.89% 
(ii)      Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies: - 
Nil          
         Total- 0 
Percentage : 0.00 % 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration: - 
                    Recommendation Nos. 8, 10, 28, 35, 37, 38, 40, 43, 46, 47, and 65                               
                          Total- 11  
Percentage : 15.28 % 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: - 
           Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 17, 18, 19, 20, 41, 50, 54 and 70 
       Total- 15 
Percentage : 20.83 % 