 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
‘INDIA’S POLICY PLANNING AND ROLE OF THINK TANKS 
WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO ICWA AND RIS.’ 
 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
JULY, 2023 /Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2022-23) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
24 
 

 
 
TWENTY FOURTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2022-23) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 ‘INDIA’S POLICY PLANNING AND ROLE OF THINK 
TANKS WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO ICWA AND RIS’ 
 
 
  
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 07 August, 2023 
            Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 08 August, 2023 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
JULY, 2023 / Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
COEA NO.       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
   COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)…….........................................................  (ii)                                        
   INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………… (iii)      
     
REPORT 
 
CHAPTER - I   Foreign policy planning in India and Role of think tanks 
 
                       I   Foreign Policy Planning in India...................................................................1 
                      II   Role of Think Tanks in Foreign Planning....................................................33       
 
CHAPTER - II   Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA)  
 
                      I.   Historical Background....................................................................................33 
                     II.   Organisational Structure of ICWA.................................................................34 
                    III.   Funding of ICWA......................................................................................... 35 
                     IV   Mandate and Activities of ICWA…………………………………….....… 35 
                         A. Research and Dissemination.........................................................................38 
                         B. Publications ..................................................................................................41 
                         C. Events: Seminars, Lectures, Conferences, Dialogues and Other 
Activities........................................................................................................44 
                         D. Outreach........................................................................................................48 
                         E. Expanding Role of ICWA.............................................................................51 
                         F. Sapru House Library.....................................................................................55 
                        G. ICWA Website/Social Media........................................................................57 
 
 CHAPTER-III   Research and Information system for Developing Countries (RIS)  
 
                     I.  Overview..........................................................................................................69 
                    II. Historical Background......................................................................................70        
                    III. Funding of RIS................................................................................................70 
                     IV. Organisational Structure of RIS......................................................................71 
                     V   Mandate and Activities OF RIS......................................................................72 
                    VI   Frame work of RIS work Programme............................................................76 
                    VII   RIS and India’s G20 Presidency...................................................................83 
                    IX   Dissemination Programmes of RIS................................................................88 
                    X      RIS Human Resources Base.........................................................................91 
                 XI   Overlapping of Mandate of ICWA and RIS....................................................93  
        
ANNEXURE 
 
Annexure I Conferences and Research Studies Organised By MEA with various Think 
Tanks………………….…………………………………………………….105  
 
APPENDICES 
 
APPENDIX – I Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Standing Committee on External   
Affairs (2022-23) held on 22 November, 2022………..……...…..….110 
APPENDIX- II Minutes of the seventh Sitting of the Standing Committee on External 
Affairs (2022-23) held on 12 December, 2022………………....….....112 
APPENDIX -III  Minutes of the Sixteenth Sitting of the Standing Committee on External 
Affairs (2022-23) held on 05, April 2023……………………………115 
APPENDIX –IV Minutes of the Twenty Second Sitting of the Standing Committee on 
External Affairs (2022-23) held on 03, August 2023……………….118 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2022-23) 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary - Chairperson 
 
    Lok Sabha  
 
2.    Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 3.    Shri Abhishek Banerjee 4.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.    Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
6.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait 7.    Smt. Preneet Kaur 
8.    Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
9.    Smt. Poonam Pramod Mahajan 10.  Shri Srinivas Reddy Manne 
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan 
12.  Smt. Queen Oja 13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey 
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel 
15.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 16.  Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
17.  Shri Soyam Bapu Rao 
18.  Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 19.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
20.  Dr. Harsh Vardhan 21.  Vacant 
    Rajya Sabha  
 22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan 23.  Smt. Misha Bharti 
24.  Shri Anil Desai 
25.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 26.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
27.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
28.  Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 29.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
30.  Shri Kapil Sibal 31.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
Secretariat  
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    –   Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   –   Director  
3. Ms.  Maya Menon   -  Under Secretary 
  
 
 
   
 
      
      
      

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2022-23) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Fourth Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on the subject ‘India’s Policy Planning and Role of Think Tanks with Special Reference to 
ICWA and RIS’.  
2. The Committee selected the subject ‘India’s Policy Planning and Role of Think Tanks with 
Special Reference to ICWA and RIS’ for detailed examination during 2022-23. Briefing on the 
subject was held on 22 November, 2022. Thereafter, the Committee took oral evidence of the 
representatives of the ICWA and RIS on 12 December, 2022. The representatives of the Ministry 
of External Affairs, ICWA and RIS were again called for evidence on 05 April, 2023.  
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 03 
August, 2023. The Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report. 
4.  The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the Ministry of External Affairs as well as 
ICWA and RIS for placing material information as well as tendering evidence and views before the 
Committee.  
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                             P.P. CHAUDHARY,                        
August, 2023                                                                                                        Chairperson,                                
Sravana, 1945 (Saka)                                                   Committee on External Affairs 
 
 

P a g e | 1 
CHAPTER-I 
 
FOREIGN POLICY PLANNING IN INDIA AND ROLE OF THINK TANKS 
 
I.  FOREIGN POLICY PLANNING IN INDIA   
 
a. History and Evolution of Foreign Policy Planning Division in India 
 
 1.1. Prior to independence and immediately after, the ‘historical division’ in MEA was 
responsible for research inputs. The first Policy Planning Department was established in the World 
in 1947 in the USA. In 1960, MEA established the Policy Planning & Review Committee which was 
chaired by Foreign Secretary and included all Secretaries of MEA. Commerce Secretary and 
Chairman, Joint Intelligence Committee were members. The Policy Planning & Research Division 
was established in 1966, reporting to Foreign Secretary. It functioned concurrently with the 
Committee and served as the main feeder of inputs for the Policy Planning & Review Committee. 
The Division and the Committee existed in parallel, and played a major role in 1971 in developing 
policy inputs on Bangladesh. In the 1980s, the Policy Planning & Review Committee was wound 
up.  
 
1.2 In 1984, the Policy Planning Division in MEA received an increased mandate- to assist in 
foreign policy formulation, prepare position papers, carry out in depth analysis of international 
affairs, make assessments of critical situations of concern, prepare drafts for speeches of 
President, PM, EAM etc., conduct seminars and studies, etc. The Division’s mandate was 
extended further in 2015 with a thrust towards creating Indian global flagship platforms. The 
objective was to create an Indian platform wherein global leaders can gather and discuss policy 
matters. Also, this would allow India to articulate its foreign policy directions to a global audience. 
In addition to the above four focus areas, the Policy Planning Division endeavors to take the Policy 
discourse beyond Delhi, and involve think tanks and organizations across India.  
 
1.3 Elaborating further about the history of the Policy Planning Division, the Foreign Secretary 
stated during the sitting of the Committee, held on 22.11.2022, as under: 
 
“Initially, when we became independent in 1947, essentially it was a Historical Division in 
MEA which was more or less in-charge of research and intelligence. I remember that … the 
Historical Division used to provide us phenomenal support in terms of the history of what 
has happened between the two countries. These are not necessarily there in the files 

P a g e | 2 
individually; these are there as research in the intelligence products. Then, into 1960s, we 
converted it into a Foreign Policy and Review Committee, and in 1966, the proper PPR 
Division was established under Foreign Secretary. In 1970s and again in 1989, at the time 
of Soviet Union’s break up, the Policy Planning Division came up with a plenty of scenarios, 
options and how do we position ourselves as India vis-à-vis other countries. Everybody 
knows that Bangladesh Liberation was a very tricky time in terms of global politics. Again, 
in 1989 when the Soviet Union broke up, everybody in the world was looking for policy 
options and how do we position vis-à-vis not just the centre piece Russian Federation, but 
also the peripheral States, the European part of former Soviet Union, the Asian part of 
former Soviet Union, which were the Central Asian republics, and the two were very 
different, and the policy option for Uzbekistan in Central Asia could not be the same for  
Kazakhstan which is partly Central Asia but the North parts of Russian Steppes for 
example. So, it played a crucial role.  
 Then, since 2014, it has been playing one of the critical roles - xxxx-  and that is the 
creation of India-centric thinking, India-centric think tanks, and based on that, the India-
centric conferences. The idea is that the world outside should know what I think; not just 
know, appreciate what I think; not just appreciate, accept that this is one of the things which 
is out there, and this was done through the Raisina Dialogue. Xxxx  in 2015, when the 
section session of the Raisina Dialogue was done – xxxx xxx..it was a very conscious 
decision that the Raisina Dialogue will become the global benchmark to reflect Indian 
thinking. So, with regard to anything happening in the world, what is the Indian point of view 
in that situation, the ORF Conference, the Raisina Dialogue should reflect that. Today, 
Raisina Dialogue is a permanent fixture in the international calendar for any think tanker 
you ask for. For any opinion global-maker you want, they all want to come for Raisina 
Dialogue. They want to come in large numbers” 
 
1.4 When the Committee sought clarifications on how the Raisina Dialogue of Observer 
Research Foundation (ORF) which is an independent think tank relates with the Government, the 
Foreign Secretary, replied as under: 
 
 “It is an independent think tank, but we work with ORF because they do invite political 
leadership to their conferences. That is where the synergy between ORF and the 
Government plays out.” 
 
1.5 On being asked further about the importance of the Raisina Dialogue to the Government, 
Foreign Secretary responded as below: 
“Raisina is not the only Dialogue that the Government of India is working on. We 
have worked with several other institutions, including ICWA and domain-specific institutions 
to bring about domain-specific conferences. xxxxx It is just that when we started these 
dialogues, Raisina Dialogue was the first one and it has evolved over a period of time.  
  Sir, if you look at the list of sponsors which Raisina Dialogue puts out when they do 
it, you will find the entire world is a co-sponsor to that Dialogue. You will also notice in 
those conferences that at some point, there is a degree of, xxxx, critical appraisal of 
Government’s foreign policy and various other things. For example, I have myself spoken 

P a g e | 3 
last year at one of the sessions which was essentially on global transitions, what are the 
major transitions which are taking place in the world, which had nothing to do with 
Government of India’s position. What was remarkably useful to know how 40 academicians 
and other think tankers look at the global transitions, which was very useful for the Policy 
Planning Division to assimilate in itself and then do go about it. 
  We do associate with them but we also look at some of the signature participations 
because obviously there is a Government commitment to it. For example, last time when 
the EU Commissioner Ursula von der Leyen came, there was a time commitment for the 
leadership to also meet with her. So, we need to be very careful of what we commit and 
what we do not commit. If a Foreign Minister is coming, then EAM’s commitment tends to 
be there, so we need to be very careful whether EAM is available or not, for how much he 
is available, and for whom he is available. It is a complex exercise but it is not a 
complicated exercise. We are able to maneuver it in a manner that the Government’s view, 
Government’ interest, and the national interest is center to it. 
We have a platform which today rivals any other international conference. I must 
submit this is something which every other country is trying to do. For example, Singapore 
has Shangri-La dialogue. In the old world, and even now, there used to be Davos 
Economic Forum but Davos is no longer necessarily central to foreign policy. There was a 
time in 1990-91 xxx…where you would see there is an economic forum but it talks of 
foreign policy. Perhaps, it is no longer so. There are now platforms in Abu Dhabi, in the 
Middle East which are coming up as a key center. Then, you have Munich Security 
Conference which focusses on global security issues. Likewise, there is no shortage of 
such initiatives which every country is trying to do. So, it is important that we also position 
not just one but multiple structural conferences, which I call as products essentially.” 
 
b. Mandate of Policy Planning Division 
 
1.6 The Policy Planning and Research Division is the nodal division of the Ministry for policy 
planning and public diplomacy initiatives with the strategic and academic community. The Division 
is tasked with the responsibility of providing inputs for Foreign Policy Planning. The Ministry also 
has specialized divisions and centers to undertake focused research and develop policy on specific 
matters. The Division along with its network of autonomous bodies (Indian Council of World Affairs 
and Research and Information Systems), think tanks and academic collaborations provides a well-
organized mechanism for the purpose of Policy Planning and Research in foreign affairs. These 
think tanks include both Government funded organizations and private organizations. The Division 
also utilizes external expertise of domestic scholars by inducting them as Consultants. These 
consultants are used for producing research papers, policy briefs, coverage of strategic 
conferences and seminars, preparation of template speeches, think-tank compendium, as well as 
daily analysis of significant global events. 
 
 

P a g e | 4 
1.7 During the sitting held on 22.11.2022, Foreign Secretary explained the mandate of the 
Policy Planning Division as follows: 
 
“If you look at the work of the Ministry of External Affairs, xxxxxx, we have structured it into 
different territorial jurisdictions, what we call territorial divisions. So, Americas will do 
America, PAI will do Pakistan, Afghanistan, Iran, and likewise. The entire globe is divided 
into different jurisdictions. Now, these jurisdictions, by their very nature, look at the day-to-
day work relating to those relationships, and naturally that includes the policy planning also. 
So, if I have to make a policy framework vis-à-vis the United States of America, Russia, 
UAE, Australia, Canada, these territorial jurisdictions play a very important role in 
assimilating information relating to that relationship putting it together in a form along with 
the policy recommendation for the senior leadership to take a decision, what to do and 
what not to do in a given situation.  
  The classic situation xxxxxx is Russia-Ukraine conflict, for example. Right since 
February of this year, because of the changing situation of the Russia-Ukraine Conflict, the 
ERS Division has been working pretty much on 24x7 basis to come up with what is 
happening in the field and come up with policy options, and even with operational options. 
When our students were evacuated from Ukraine, these were operational options, not 
necessarily policy options. Policy was given that you have to evacuate them. But to be able 
to execute them, to be able to send and coordinate with the people on the ground, to 
coordinate with the Russian Federation, to coordinate with Ukraine both ways were all 
operational options. That is also a place where Policy Planning Division comes in because 
it is a dedicated Division which looks beyond daily emergency.  
  The Policy Planning Division may not be occupied with the daily emergency of crisis 
between Russia and Ukraine but yet on the other hand they are involved because they 
need to assimilate information regarding what is happening on a daily basis, and present 
first to the Territorial Division, which actually prepares policy, and then to the higher 
leadership, and come out with what exactly needs to do. So, it is a dedicated Division, I 
would say, a landing zone of ideas, an originator of ideas. This is one Division in my 
Ministry, which I can truly call the junction box of all thinking. Russia Division may be 
thinking something; Pakistan Division may be thinking something, but the Policy Planning 
Division, the junction box will know about the thinking of all these Divisions. If there is a 
cross sectoral decision that the Ministry has to take; if today a decision, for example, has to 
be taken, which involves Russia, UAE, Australia, US – altogether to be factored in, the 
Policy Planning Division will have a key interface into those territorial divisions to come up 
with a distinct element, which can be presented to the leadership in order so that a decision 
can be taken which is in the best national interest, and which serves our perspective very 
well.  
  Two, the way the world is changing, the policy planning is not just limited to what 
Government makes. In this policy planning, the Government also has to respond to what is 
happening outside the Government. So, what is civil society thinking about India’s position 
on, let us say, Russia-Ukraine conflict; what does a certain think tank think of India-US 
relationship; how do individual entities, individual thinkers, individual writers, former 
ambassadors, former leaders, former academicians look at different elements of different 
relationships that we have all over the world. So, policy planning has to be a response to 
that. Now, who will interface with them? Territorial divisions do try their level best but there 

P a g e | 5 
is a limitation in that across the spectrum interface. That work is done by the Policy 
Planning Division. So, they would interface, for example, with the policy research institutes, 
and I would say not just in Delhi, not just in India but across the world, and we would come 
to that later on how they do that.  
  They would also interface regularly with the key opinion makers in the civil society. 
They may not be in the academia but they hold a view, and that view in today’s world of, I 
would say, truly democratized media holds significance. Xxx.. 
  So, it is helmed by Policy Planning Division which interfaces with these elements 
which are external to the Government, but yet are very crucial for the Government also 
should know where we are wrong and where we need to correct ourselves going forward. 
Likewise is the case with the business and the corporate community because economic 
dimension of relationship is a very crucial part of the policy making these days. Hence, that 
is important. And also with other individuals, when it comes to this.  
  We have also noticed that there is a bit of a revolving door in the policy making 
when you look at the civil society. Sometimes, the retired people from the Government 
become think tankers; and sometimes, think tankers closely interface with the Government.  
All those kind of revolving door issues do take place. As a result, if there is one division at 
least in the MEA which keeps itself up to date with the latest thinking, views of different 
people, right or wrong, would be the Policy Planning Division. So, in terms of its role 
whether it is to receive all the ideas, assimilate them; to generate ideas, spread them 
across; to know what is happening outside, bring it in; and put this all together into a policy 
framework; use all this to build India narrative abroad; to use this to create ideas, thinking, 
conferences in India which can project Indian point of view, India-specific point of view, 
India-anchored products - all this makes Policy Planning a very crucial Division. Of course, 
this policy planning works with the entire Government of India approach.  
We are doing so many conferences which are actually not MEA specific. We work 
with the State Governments. For example, we have now started taking the discourse on 
foreign policy outside Delhi. There is a very interesting piece in today’s media, for example, 
which talks of role of foreign policy in State elections. This is obviously because the impact 
which the foreign policy has on the people becomes a part of a constituency. It is a 
constituency in the end. I think, that is somewhere where Policy Planning Division, over a 
period of last seven decades, has continued to play a role – different roles at different times 
because the world around us kept changing, our surroundings kept evolving, and the world 
outside kept changing. So, Policy Planning Division essentially got centred in that and then 
moved around outside it.  
 
1.8 Regarding the mandate of Policy Planning division, the Ministry in their written reply have 
stated as under: 
 
 “The overall mandate of the Policy Planning Division today can be summarized into three 
main categories.  
 The first is Thinking:  Policy Planning Division receives information input from different 
sources- within the Ministry, and outside including from Policy Planning Dialogues. Its job is 
to analyze this information and generate meaningful output.  
 The Second is Knowledge Creation: Using the different inputs that Policy Planning 
receives, the Division creates functional and useful research output that builds the 

P a g e | 6 
knowledge base of the Ministry and our Missions abroad. The Division’s research output 
goes to several Government agencies/departments/ministries including PMO, Ministry of 
Defense, NSCS, etc. as well as to heads of some prominent think tanks in India. 
 The third mandate of the Division is Narrative Building: This is a crucial function that is 
achieved through flagship conferences, Policy Planning Dialogues, Track 1.5/Track 2, as 
well as by engaging the strategic community, both in India and abroad.  In such 
conferences, policy ideas are also gathered from specialists from outside the government, 
for seeding into and deliberation in the government apparatus. 
 
1.9 Explaining further on the same, the Foreign Secretary stated: 
 
“These are the three key tasks. You may call it mandate, tasks, objectives, roles. I would 
structure them broadly into these three. I have already briefly spoken about the first one, 
which is the thinking part. Then, there is the idea part. In this, there is assimilation of idea. 
After assimilation, there is production of those ideas into a policy narrative or into a public 
narrative, then putting it as a policy space for the Government, and then is the policy 
product. I will explain that. I would say I must admit how that works in actuality, not 
necessarily in perfection, is not as much as we would want it to but that is actually a work 
for us to do but it does work. And then there is the policy recommendation. 
  This is just in terms of how does it assimilate ideas. The assimilation of idea begins, 
I would say, where the media reporting ends. We have to credit media that sometimes they 
do come out with information which perhaps may or may not be known in the Government’s 
space, like a sudden development anywhere in the world. Sometimes when that happens, 
the work of the policy planning and the territorial division immediately starts. There is 
feedback from the Missions, feedback from the division. Today, for example, there is the 
Russia-Ukraine conflict.xxx At this time, every country in the neighbourhood of that part of 
the world, the immediate neighbourhood, which includes six-seven countries, then the 
extended neighbourhood of that country, which is essentially the rest of Europe, then the 
broader neighbourhood which are the key players, UAE, Saudi Arabia, Turkey, US, UK, 
Canada, France, thinking on those parts, all those divisions feed into policy planning, feed 
into the Russia division to know what is their thinking and the situation is changing every 
day, events are changing every day. We have to be up to date on all these. Inputs come 
from these 10-12 places. They get consolidated, filtered through, interfaced with the 
territorial division and results into a consideration for the leadership for a policy precision. 
And of course, leadership gets other inputs also which are political in nature. 
Then, there are policy planning dialogues. I will talk about it, both at Track 1.1, 1.5, 
even interface with Track 2. There is commission research, and then we come out with the 
different kind of reports and the publications. We bring out our think tank compendium. We 
have all these products here. These are very sharply written products which are 
immediately circulated.” 
 
1.10  Main functions of the Division: 
  
(i) Interface with the Strategic Community by organizing collaborative conferences and 
seminars with various think tanks, as well as supporting and facilitating India’s participation in 
major international conferences. In addition, the PP&R Division organizes flagship conferences, 

P a g e | 7 
both in India and abroad in partnership with prominent think tanks and academic institutions. The 
four flagship annual conferences of the Ministry- Raisina Dialogue, Global Technology Summit, 
Asian Economic Dialogue, and Indian Ocean Conference - facilitate greater interaction of 
academia with the policy-making community.  
 
 In addition to these, the Division also organizes national level seminars in collaboration with 
universities and academic institutions in different locations across the country to generate greater 
awareness on foreign policy issues. 
 
(ii) Encourage Research: Through the Policy Planning Division, the Ministry funds various 
research projects, with a view to fulfill its mandate of encouraging research in the foreign policy 
domain. Research projects are regularly commissioned in Think Tanks and academic institutions 
for the consumption of the Ministry. Officers in the Division maintain regular contact with academics 
and researchers working on areas of interest to the Ministry. There are multiple mechanisms for 
engaging with academics. For example, the division funds universities and think tanks for the 
conduct of national/international seminars and thematic conferences on a regular basis. In addition, 
seminars and discussions organized by think tanks are covered by consultants/officers of the 
PP&R Division and useful inputs filtered into the Ministry’s information stream and decision making 
apparatus. 
  Details of research funded by the Ministry in the last 5 years are placed in Annexure-I.  
(iii) Conducting bilateral and multilateral policy planning dialogues with other Foreign 
Offices and organizing Track 1.5 dialogues with our important diplomatic partners is another key 
function. This way, the Division also maintains a connection with the Policy Planning and Strategic 
Community of other partner countries. The Division also liaises with the Policy Planning offices of 
partner countries to exchange ideas, perspectives, expectations and future orientations from time 
to time. 
(iv) Prepare research papers, policy briefs and situation reports pertaining to global 
developments and international affairs in general and India’s foreign policy in particular. 
Throughout the year, the PP&R Division issues a range of publications. This includes Daily Reports 
covering major news developments and interesting foreign policy related snippets, Monthly Think-
Tank Compendium on important policy events organized by think tanks, global conflict monitor, etc. 

P a g e | 8 
The research is circulated within the Government as well as shared with the wider strategic 
community. 
(v) Preparation and publication of the Annual Report of the Ministry which is tabled in 
Parliament. This is an intensive, three-month-long process during which this Division collates and 
synthesizes inputs from all Divisions and presents a comprehensive overview of the Ministry's 
activities on an annual basis. On a Monthly basis, the Division also prepares Monthly Summary of 
the Ministry for the Cabinet. Through these monthly and annual reports, the Policy Planning 
Division also performs the function of being the record keeper of the Ministry’s key foreign policy 
actions. 
 
1.11 When the Committee sought to know the contribution of the publications issued by PP&R 
Division in shaping India's foreign Policy, the Ministry in their written reply have inter-alia stated as 
under: 
 
 “All these inputs are then distilled into several reports and products, such as the daily report 
on global affairs, monthly reports, the Ministry’s annual report, etc. Records of discussion 
and core recommendations/ideas from Track 1.5/Track 2 seminars are summarized and 
shared by the Division in the form of a think tank compendium. The Division also shares 
summaries of research, and makes other issue specific reports such as Global Conflict 
Monitor, etc. The Division also plays an important role in providing inputs for speeches for 
senior leadership.  
 
 1.12 On the issue of availability of these publications for public consumption, the Ministry have 
stated that the publications of Policy Planning Division are non-classified, and shared mostly within 
the government apparatus, and also to heads of leading think tanks.  
 
Activities of Policy Planning Division 
 
1.13 Informing the Committee on the activities undertaken by the Policy Planning Division, the 
Foreign Secretary stated as under: 
 
“Now, the activities which the Policy Planning Division, in association with Policy Planning 
Research Division and other such bodies, have done essentially fulfill one of these tasks, 
two of these tasks or all of these tasks at any given point in time. xxxx since November 
2022, the Policy Planning Division has been coordinating the holding of the BRICS Policy 
Planning Dialogue in virtual format in January 2023. xxxxxx. So, BRICS is an inter-
governmental plurilateral organisation. So, the Policy Planning and Research Division 
organised the BRICS Policy Planning Dialogue in January this year. Three out of the four 

P a g e | 9 
flagship conferences were held and coordinated by PPNIR. One is the Global Technology 
Summit. Xxxxxx. Then, the Asian Economic Dialogue took place. The Raisina Dialogue 
which took place earlier in March this year saw the presence of the Prime Minister of Italy 
and at least thirty Foreign Ministers. We saw representation and delegations from over 100 
countries which participated in the Raisina Dialogue in March 2023. I can mention for the 
purposes of record that Raisina Dialogue from its very humble beginning in 2015, when we 
had sum total of only 100 people in the room – xxxxx- within a short period of eight years, 
today is a centre piece of global think tank deliberations. It is a go to place. It is a 
permanent fixture now in the international calendar for any think tanker for any speaker of 
repute to be on. There was a time when we used to look for sponsors for the Raisina 
Dialogue. Today, sponsors fight with each other to come to Raisina Dialogue. Such has 
been the nature of transformation. I must put on record here that the one thing that actually 
transformed the journey was when the hon. Prime Minister attended and spoke at the 
Raisina Dialogue in 2016. In 2015, the first Raisina Dialogue was addressed by late 
External Affairs Minister, Shrimati Sushma Swaraj ji. And, hon. Prime Minister addressed 
the 2016 one. After that, the entire attention, the entire framework and the entire reference 
point of Raisina Dialogue changed remarkably. It has now transformed to a stage in where 
it is one of the most significant global level think tank events in the world.  
 I would also like to mention another signature event which we have done at political 
level, but which is now feeding into the think tank world, I would say. That event was in 
January 2023 which was chaired by the hon. Prime Minister which was the Voice of Global 
South. It was an inter-governmental event spread over 10 sessions, two at the level of 
Heads of the State in Government and remaining eight at the level of Ministers. All the 
countries of the Global South, except two, were invited. Out of 135 countries invited, 125 
attended in person. There were 10 or 15 who gave their recordings. But by and large, an 
overwhelming majority of them attended it in person. One of the decisions of the Voice of 
Global South Summit was to create a centre for global south. We are currently working with 
RIS to set up such a centre. It is still in very initial stages. So, we would hopefully try and 
fructify it. We are trying to see how the notion of the centre for global south can actually 
have multiple branches. But right now, we are at the conceptual stage. So, Summit, as I 
said, was a big success, and an initiative which has generated great excitement in the think 
tank community also.  
 Policy Planning and Research Division also organised the third Atal Bihari Vajpayee 
Memorial Lecture, which was held last month. This is a lecture which is organised in the 
memory of the visionary contribution and the statecraft of the late hon. Prime Minister. For 
this year’s lecture, we had invited Ambassador Bilahari Kausikan, who is the Chairman of 
the Middle East Institute of National University of Singapore and former Foreign Secretary 
of Singapore. xxxx. It was attended full house. Hon. External Affairs Minister was himself 
present for the duration of the lecture. Again, it is something which actually gives a huge 
outreach to the work of the Policy Planning and Research Division because when speakers 
like Mr. Bilahari Kausikan come and speak at the event organised by the Policy Planning 
and Research Division, the other think tanks take note of it and realise the significant value 
proposition that the Policy Planning and Research Division of the MEA brings to the 
table.xxx the rest of the routine activity of the Policy Planning and Research Division in 
terms of daily report, research insights, think tank compendium, global conflict monitor, 
weekly reports, etc., have continued since the last Summit meeting.  

P a g e | 10 
 Policy Planning and Research Division also connects in a participatory fashion with 
other think tanks. For example, whether it is the Munich Security Forum; whether it is the 
Shangri-La Dialogue; whether it is the India Global Forum which was held in December 
2022 in the UAE; and whether it was the Sydney Forum again held in the month of 
February-March, Policy Planning and Research Division participates in these global events 
and connects to the thought streams which they come across in these events and use them 
then as an input for developing, as I said, policy planning products which the MEA and the 
rest of the policy making ecosystem in India can make use of.  
 We have also undertaken some of the activities specifically under the guidance of 
the esteemed Committee which came out at the last evidence presentation and also, after 
carefully going through the reports on Demands for Grants for 2023-24 for the Ministry of 
External Affairs. The esteemed Committee had made three key recommendations and we 
are working on them. The first being that closer interaction and deeper collaboration with 
the policy planning divisions of the other countries. xxxxx. Secondly, the Committee had 
desired MEA should take the lead in developing research culture through its PP&R Division 
and create more think tanks and directly impact, interact with the universities. xxxxxx you 
would have noticed that the hon. External Affairs Minister travels all over India, and speaks 
directly to the students of the universities. Pretty much every weekend, he is travelling one 
university or the other in India, and speaking to the students there. He is travelling to the 
one university or the other in India and speaking to the students there. We cannot ask for a 
more direct interface with the university when the External Affairs Minister himself travelling 
to these locations, going to the universities, the most recent being when he spoke to the 
student in more or less in open town hall setting in the State of Karnataka which was in the 
last weekend. This is the highest level of interface, we in the ministry  do, directly with the 
universities at a more functional level as part of G-20 and also on our own, we are currently 
in the processing of shaping and engagement with 75 identified universities all over India 
for the purposes of generating research content, using our interface with these universities 
to build narrative, encouraging greater interest on topics of foreign policy particularly those 
topics which also have a huge domestic resonance because that is where the connect 
becomes very organic. It is not just limited to books and what we do in the seminar halls, 
but it is also connected to the ground realities of what they do.  
 xxx….We also have a series of events which are coming up during the course of 
this year which will further reinforce this point which is the interface with the universities, 
wide-ranging spread of interaction with the think tanks. We have listed out a much of the 
interface that the Policy Planning Division maintains with these think tanks in terms of 
research studies and products in the annexure for the last five years. xxxx. It is our effort, it 
is going to be as sincere effort going forward to further 1) strengthen this network of 
interaction with the think tanks; 2) extend it further, go regional, may be so sub-regional in 
that sense. We do not just do that in terms of going and visiting them, we also try and do 
that by sponsoring research studies with those think tanks, with those universities. 
Naturally, we will be the sponsor; we will also try to provide – depending upon resources we 
have – budgetary support also to many of these think tanks all over the country. Another 
key element, xxxxx, which is happening again as part of India’s G-20  residency, is the G-
20 university connect. So, we are currently doing about 200 meetings of the G-20 spread 
over each and every State and Union Territory of India. Under the directions of the hon. 
Prime Minister, every G-20 meeting that takes place in any part of India, tries and pretty 
mandatory and obligatory on them to connect with the local universities, to connect with 

P a g e | 11 
whatever is the think tank ecosystem which is available there, and engage them through a 
side event of the G-20nmeeting. So, whether it is an engagement group meeting, the 
working group meeting or the Ministerial meetings, overwhelming majority of these 
meetings have a side event. The idea is to interface through the side event with the 
university and the thinktank ecosystem, which would be prevalent in those areas. It can 
take any form. For example, we have just concluded the Tourism Working Group Meeting 
in Darjeeling. While it was actually held in Siliguri, it had an interaction with the city of 
Darjeeling and one with another city. So, we used Siliguri as a base, but expanded the 
scope of our interface with the institutions, with the universities, with the places of tourist 
importance. Essentially, we used G20 events as force multipliers wherever possible and in 
most cases positively so for establishing a university connect and a think tank connect.”  
 
Extended mandate of Policy Planning and Research Division of MEA 
 
1.14 The Committee sought to know the objectives of extending the mandate of the Policy 
Planning Division in 2015. The Ministry in their written reply have inter-alia stated that the main 
objectives for extending the mandate are to provide greater visibility to Indian foreign policy; 
articulate the Indian view on major emerging global developments; receive and deliberate on new 
ideas from outside the Ministry; attract high-level international participation to these flagship 
events; provide useful exposure to the Indian think-tank institutions and raise their capabilities and 
ambitions; provide opportunities for our political leadership to interact with visiting foreign 
dignitaries in a more informal setting on the sidelines of the events; help advance India’s leadership 
projection in the world; etc. 
 
Taking policy discourse beyond Delhi 
 
1.15 Asked to provide in detail the endeavors being taken by the Policy Planning Division to take 
the policy discourse beyond Delhi, the Ministry in their written reply have stated as under:  
  
“The Policy Planning Division has been mandated with the organization of dialogues at the 
international and national levels involving think-tanks and academic institutions. In this 
regard, the Ministry organizes flagship conferences such as Raisina Dialogue, Global 
Technology Summit, Indian Ocean Conference and Asia Economic Dialogue. Among 
these, earlier editions of the Global Technology Summit were held in Bengaluru. Indian 
Ocean Conference has been held in various countries in the Indian Ocean Region, such 
as: 5th Indian Ocean Conference in Abu Dhabi (2021), the 4th Indian Ocean Conference in 
Maldives (2019), and the 3rd Indian Ocean Conference in Vietnam (2018). Asia Economic 
Dialogue is held in Pune. Besides these there are various national level seminars held from 
time to time in collaboration with think tanks, universities and academic institutions in 
different locations across the country to generate greater awareness on foreign policy 
issues such as the NADI Dialogue (Guwahati), Maha Rana Pratap Annual Geopolitics 

P a g e | 12 
Dialogue (Udaipur), Policy Dialogue “Act East to Indo-Pacific: Role of North-east Indian 
states in ‘Connecting the Connectivities’” (Imphal), Third India-Japan Intellectual Conclave 
(Agartala), etc. The Ministry has also supported the organization of the India Global Forum 
in UAE (2022). 
 
Consultations with academics and subject experts 
 
1.16 The Ministry have further submitted that the Officials in Divisions/Missions routinely hold 
consultations with academics and subject experts on matters of interest to the Ministry. They 
monitor research studies conducted by think-tanks. They also commission studies by engaging 
think-tanks/institutions. The research output of the academic activities is compiled into reports and 
compendiums which are utilized by the ministry. Separately, Indian Missions/Posts abroad also 
have a structured mechanism to interact with subject experts, think-tanks and policy advocacy 
groups in their country(ies) of jurisdiction to discuss, formulate and convey Indian policy, as well as 
collect feedback from partner countries. This also contributes toward a continuous engagement 
and study of political processes in foreign countries. Further, the Ministry has institutional 
arrangements with various Indian and foreign academic institutions for capacity-building of our 
diplomats which enables knowledge exchange between them and faculties of these institutions. 
The Policy Planning Division also serves as the lead agency for coordination with line Ministries on 
functional policy matters. The Division provides policy inputs on inter-agency/inter-ministry matters 
related to foreign policy and India’s engagement with international stakeholders. The Division also 
liaises with other Ministries, Departments and Agencies as per functional requirement. 
 
1.17 In response to specific query about the mechanism put in place to interact with subject 
experts, think-tanks and policy advocacy groups in their country(ies) of jurisdiction, the Ministry in 
their written reply have submitted as under: 
 
 “Indian Missions/Posts interact with subject experts, think-tanks and policy advocacy 
groups in the following manner: 
 Mission level engagement: Missions and Posts abroad maintain an active engagement with 
prominent think tanks, research scholars and experts in their countries of jurisdiction, to 
discuss, convey Indian policy as well as collect feedback and find convergences with the 
country of accreditation towards the furtherance of mutually beneficial goals. This is 
periodically shared with Ministry in the form of political reporting and assessments by 
Missions. 
 Collaborated engagement: The Policy Planning Division of the MEA also conducts Policy 
Planning Dialogues with partner countries- for example, USA, UK, Germany, etc. The 

P a g e | 13 
Division not only interacts with Policy Planners in the counterpart Ministry, but also holds 
interactions with Think Tanks and Members of Strategic Community during an outbound 
Policy Planning Dialogue visit. Mission officials also participate in such interactions. The 
outcome of such visits is then compiled and shared appropriately in the Ministry. 
 Track 1.5 engagements: During a Ministerial / High Level Visit, events are held in Track 1.5 
format- involving both Government Officials and other members of the strategic community. 
In addition, Indian Think Tanks also conduct events outside India with partner countries- 
with the support of our Missions/Posts from time to time. The Ministry receives feedback in 
the form of a summary of discussions. In addition, several ideas are discussed and 
deliberated in above engagements, which are then suitably reported or utilized by the 
Ministry”.   
 
1.18 On being asked how the matrix of Policy Planning Division interface takes place, Foreign 
Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs during the sitting held on 22.11.2022 stated as under: 
 
 “We have dialogues at Track 1, which are essentially Government to Government 
dialogues. Then we have Track 1.5 dialogue, which is part Government and part 
independent think tank community. Then there is Track 2 that is purely think tank. There is 
zero involvement of the Government but Government is either an invitee, Government is 
either a participant, Government is either an observer, or in some cases Government is 
even a contributor to their debate. If only a think tank discussion is taking place where 
Policy Planning Division has no association, but they invite us and say we want to hear the 
perspective of MEA, Government of India on a foreign policy issue, or as a Policy Planning 
Division, we invite you to come and speak to us, that is purely Track 2. 
  So, the Policy Planning Division interfaces with all these three. Track 1, itis directly 
responsible. Track 1.5, it is semi-responsible. Track 2, it is not majorly responsible, but it is 
majorly responsible to present Government of India’s viewpoint. 
  Now, this interface generates ideas, and it generates initiatives, which then 
translate into processes, conferences or conference themes. For example, if they are 
looking for a theme for a conference, sometimes they ask us as to what are our views, how 
should we keep the theme for this year’s annual conference, etc. It is just a thought. They 
do take our views. Sometimes our views are accepted. Then the thinking that we want to 
project gets captured. I am giving a concrete example of how this works in conferences. 
BRICS is a classic case of it. BRICS started as a Track 2 idea at some stage, got into 
Track1.1, then got into Track 1, became a process, and now it is a new grouping. It took a 
long time. It took a couple of decades. Another example is G20. If you go back to 1997, 
when G20 was essentially an organisation of finance track. When the 2008 crisis 
happened, then the thinking started that why we do not have an organisation which 
captures the key 20 countries in the world. So, this is how the dynamism of the thinking 
results in creation of different elements of products. 
  Products, as I said, perhaps not the correct word. But just for the sake of identifying 
the basket in which to put it, we are using the word basket. These are all the 21 Track 1 
dialogues that India has with different countries, which are piloted and chaired by the Joint 
Secretary, Policy Planning on our side. Of course, when he goes, he goes along with the 
delegation. If I am doing a policy planning dialogue with Russia obviously, he would take 
the officer from the Russia Division also. We might even take some officers from the NSA 

P a g e | 14 
because it would involve security related discussions. Besides these two dialogues, we 
also have two multilateral dialogues, one relating to the Quad, which is a very recent one; 
and the BRICS-related policy planning discussions. So, these are all formats. Quad 
discussion feeds feed only into Quad in terms of new thinking. BRICS would naturally feed 
only into BRICS. But these 21 bilateral discussions discuss everything under the sun. 
xxxxx” 
 
1.19 Asked about whether the Government has any plans wherein Indian Parliamentarians, 
policy makers, young Indian leaders etc. can be part of foreign policy planning, Foreign Secretary 
responded as under: 
 
 ”I would like to say something about the role or the potential responsibility of the select 
Parliamentarians who would be interested in engaging with the foreign policy questions in a 
manner that put forward India’s position and India’s narrative, both in terms of offensive 
interest and defence interest. xxxxx. It is very serious thought, Madam, and it is an idea, I 
think, whose time has come. It is also reflective of maturity of our own discourse on foreign 
policy issues. So, I would say, yes, the idea is definitely worth taking forward and we are 
already working on it, Madam. A point which I would flag for your consideration, xxx, is that 
if you go to the US Congress and the Senate, you will find that one of the systems 
strengths is that they have a set of staffers to backstop them on different policy related 
issues. If not related to foreign policy issues, it is related to any policy. So, even on 
domestic policy issue, you will have the Congressmen and the Senators with the staffer 
who backstops his thinking, etc. They have a dedicated office. It allows us also to build our 
own eco-system or our own systemic strengths in that sense. With regard to the allowing 
opportunity for the young minds to interface with the daily routine process of the foreign 
policy making and how different wings of Ministry of External Affairs come together to 
shape a view, we have a fairly robust internship programme in the MEA, xxxx. It is robust 
that it undergoes a fairly rigorous selection process because it is in huge demand and 
these interns are placed all across the Ministry of External Affairs including with the Policy 
Planning and Research Division. These interns are graduates and undergraduates from the 
universities who apply, get selected and get an opportunity to associate and to see very 
closely the functioning of the Ministry of External Affairs. Is it large enough? Perhaps, not. 
Can it grow? Of course, it can. Can it have an institutional basis in terms of we creating an 
institution outside the MEA framework, but within the regulatory framework, let us say, with 
our training institute. That is again a fact which is under serious consideration for us to look 
at. We do end up facing the constant question, which all of us face in our system, where do 
I allocate my scarce resources in terms of optimisation of my need. It is not about 
maximisation. Right now, we are looking at optimisation process within the system. When I 
say this, I am not referring to Budgetary resources. Frankly, I would say, Ministry of 
External Affairs cannot complain of constraints on the financial Budget resources. It is more 
a question of apportioning appropriate number and the quality of human resources through 
this which has the ability, capacity and the strength to interface and create this institution 
which allows me to build a domestic externality outside my Ministry, which in some ways 
we are trying to do with various universities by sponsoring research. In most such cases, 
when we sponsor, when we sit down to designate, evolve, shape terms of references, we 

P a g e | 15 
do sit down with them. They do get to, at least, understand what our demands are which 
come from our thinking. On the whole, I would like to express my sincere gratitude to you, 
in a way, for reinforcing what we think is a highly meritorious, I think, it should be our 
objective to pursue in that sense.” 
 
1.20 The Committee sought to know why elected representatives of the country are not given 
opportunity to be part of the Track dialogues. Responding to the query, Foreign Secretary, 
responded as under: 
 
“But I do remember of one or two 1.5 Track dialogues where elected representatives are 
present. I must confess in all honesty that I do not know if it is fully institutionalised in that 
sense. For example, I have seen myself, though not because of us to be honest, in Raisina 
Dialogue we have seen elected representatives participating. This is in India. So, it is much 
easier. But I, personally speaking, would not see any constraint in participation of anybody 
who can contribute to Government of India’s interest and furtherance of national interest in 
any 1.5 dialogue. It is simply a question of constitution of those dialogues. I must say that I 
have seen myself elected representatives participating in 1.5 dialogue. But I would mention 
that we do not have too many1.5 dialogues because it does not depend just on us. The 
other side also has to agree to the 1.5 narrative.” 
 
1.21 The Committee further enquired whether there is any mechanism in the Ministry to invite 
proactively people to contribute to policy making. Responding to the same, foreign secretary 
submitted as under: 
 
“xxx. I think, it is a very pertinent question which we grapple with every day pretty much. 
There are two or three parts to it. One, I totally agree with you that information spectrum of 
each subject is very vast. If I was to put out that entire information even in a sanitised form 
in a public domain, I will probably invite more criticism than understanding because it is so 
vast. 
 It is important, therefore, from our perspective, for the average person on the street 
to know what the Government is doing on a given subject, what the general contours of 
policy are, and how it serves the national interest. There are many ways in which we try to 
do it. One of the institutional ways for us to do it is the weekly presser of the spokesperson. 
Every Thursday, at the appointed time, spokesperson speaks to the Media and takes all the 
questions that may be relevant during that day, in a week preceding that day, or 
anticipatory questions which might be there in the public domain. For example, I was there 
in Myanmar yesterday. I spent the entire day in Myanmar yesterday meeting the 
leadership. There will be a presser on Thursday. There will be questions which will come on 
Myanmar. So, that presser will capture everything that India tries to do with Myanmar; what 
is in our national interest, what is it that we are trying to do, what are the challenges, etc. In 
a very short span of an hour spokesperson will be able to answer that and the other 
questions. Challenges that our Indian nationals face abroad is of crucial interest and 
importance to all our stakeholders in India. They ask questions as to what the Government 
is doing. There is so much of information relating to - for example if you take evacuation - 

P a g e | 16 
Operation Ganga, about which I will talk during tomorrow’s Presentation. Operation Ganga 
is about evacuation of 22,000 odd students from there. There was a public face of what we 
did. But there is a background face of it; the effort which went into it, the consideration 
which went into it, and the coordination which the Ministry had to do. Some of the 
information by its very nature is so sensitive that I may not be able to put out because it will 
harm the interest of my own nationals in that country. So, we try to put it out in a form which 
is understandable, digestible, and is simple enough for people to understand whether the 
national interest is being served or not. It is not very difficult for us as a Ministry to put out 
documentation. If that is the recommendation of the Committee, we will be very happy to 
look at it. But we do try our best. I must say that it is very difficult to compress all the 
information, and put it out in a product which will be acceptable to everybody or which is in 
a form which he was anticipating. We have our Annual Report, which is a public document, 
which is used for research purposes. It is a very good archival material, which the 
researchers, students use quite a lot. The conferences we do, the speeches that we make 
in public, EAM’s speeches, EAM’s interactions, all this is put together into an India 
Narrative, which is out in the market on one subject, on more than one subject, on the 
whole range of foreign policy issues, on a collective of national interest vis-à-vis Foreign 
Policy and all that. There are multiple things which we do. Unfortunately, there is no one-
size-fits-all for all customers that we can do at this stage. We can definitely try it, and 
hopefully try and do something good xxxx” 
 
II. ROLE OF THINK TANKS IN FOREIGN POLICY PLANNING  
 
 1.22 The term ‘Think tanks’ broadly refers to independent research institutions that specialize in 
foreign policy research and policy advocacy activities, including organizing conferences, seminars, 
and outreach activities like Track 1.5/2 dialogues. They are generally non-profit in nature, and are 
registered as ‘societies’ or ‘trusts’. Think tanks are distinct from academic institutions; in so far, 
they do not confer any academic degrees or programmes. 
 
a). History and Evolution of Think Tanks in India 
 
1.23 India has a rich legacy of the think tank ecosystem. The oldest think tank in India is United 
Service Institution (USI), which was setup in 1870. It specializes in military and national security 
affairs. The Indian Council of World Affairs was established in 1943, as the pre-eminent think tank 
of India, specializing in area studies and foreign policy affairs. The Manohar Parrikar Institute for 
Defence Studies and Analyses was established in 1965, which specializes in strategic and defence 
issues. The Research and Information System for Developing Countries was established in 1983, 
which specializes in international trade and economic development issues. 
 

P a g e | 17 
1.24 Prior to the economic reforms of the 1990s, think tanks in India were largely funded by 
government or semi-government bodies. Since the 1990s, private sector think tanks have steadily 
grown. The Observer Research Foundation (ORF) was set up in 1990 and was one of the first 
private sector-led foreign policy think tanks. Similar private sector think tanks like Gateway House, 
Ananta Aspen Centre, Carnegie India, Pune International Center, India Foundation, etc have also 
had significant impact in the development of think-tank space in India. 
 
1.25 As India’s stature in the World rises, there is an increasing interest, both Indian and foreign, 
to establish Think Tanks in India- to understand India and its foreign policy, undertake foreign 
policy research and policy advocacy activities on various thematic issues.  
 
i) Engagement of Government with think tanks 
 
1.26 The Committee sought to know about the intensity of the engagement of the Government 
with Think Tanks. The Ministry in their reply have stated as under: 
 
 “Outreach to the strategic and foreign policy community is one of the core verticals of 
PP&R Division. The Division holds regular and structured interactions with think tanks and 
research institutions. It supports several collaborative activities with think tanks through 
conferences, seminars/webinars, Track 1.5/2 dialogues, and research projects. 
  The Division supports four annual flagship conferences organized in partnership 
with prominent Indian think-tanks - Raisina Dialogue (in partnership with Observer 
Research foundation), Asia Economic Dialogue (in partnership with Pune International 
Centre), Global Technology Summit (in partnership with Carnegie India) and Indian Ocean 
Conference (in partnership with India Foundation), India-US Forum (in partnership with 
Ananta Aspen Center). These conferences are broadly themed under geopolitics, 
geoeconomics, geotechnology and geostrategy, respectively.  
  The Division is also expanding the number of conferences that it supports, to 
encourage dialogue on foreign policy and international affairs across the country. It also 
endeavors to support conferences outside New Delhi, such as the NADI Dialogue 
(Guwahati), Maha Rana Pratap Annual Geopolitics Dialogue (Udaipur), Policy Dialogue 
“Act East to Indo-Pacific: Role of North-east Indian states in ‘Connecting the Connectivities’ 
(Imphal), etc.” 
   
 
ii) Scope of Think Tanks 
1.27 The Committee sought to know how and to what extent the political space generated for 
dialogues by the think tanks as also their contribution in developing new ideas actually increases 

P a g e | 18 
the quality and effectiveness of the policy making process. The Ministry in their written reply 
submitted as under: 
 
“Think tanks serve to provide well researched data and information for helping policy 
makers make informed choices. The growing complexity of global challenges has made the 
role of think tanks significant in breaking down the complex problems into simpler 
understandings and formulating solutions that cover all the relevant dimensions. They can 
also help build expertise, and perform in-depth or specialized research. Think tanks have 
been acknowledged for bridging the gap between the knowledge creators and policy 
practitioners. They create conditions for a healthy conversation between area experts and 
policy makers. Globally, think tanks are projected to assume an even greater role in the 
implementation and evaluation of public policies. This trend is likely to be followed in India 
as well. 
  It has been seen that many foreign policy concepts/initiatives have a tendency to 
move from Track 2 dialogues to Track 1.5 dialogues and eventually to become Government 
policy. Therefore, engaging think tanks is a crucial exercise to capture important and 
upcoming ideas/initiatives at an early stage so that the Government can deliberate upon 
them. 
  In addition, think tanks play a substantive role in dialogue and collaborative work 
through research, seminars, track 1.5/track 2 events with other foreign think tanks and 
research organizations, thereby further engaging and familiarizing the global strategic and 
think tank community with Indian developments and policy orientations.  
  There is a well-established mechanism in the Policy Planning Division, by which, 
key takeaways from various think tank discussions are summarized and shared by the 
Division in the form of a report titled ‘Think Tank Compendium.’ This Compendium 
captures important trends which are then widely circulated within the Ministry, Missions 
abroad, as well as heads of think tanks in the country. 
 
1.28 Responding to a query on the how the outputs provided by these think-tanks have helped 
the Ministry in foreign policy formulation of the country, Foreign Secretary stated as under: 
 
 “xxxxxx. I do not have statistical evidence to show to you that XYZ product of a thinktank 
gave me ABCD outcome. But I will give you just one example. When we did the Global 
Technology Summit or when we did the Asian Economic Dialogue or when we coordinated 
with ORF to do the Raisina Dialogue, it essentially helps us shape India's narrative in global 
arena whether it is domain specific like in case of Global Technology Summit or in case of 
Asian Economic Dialogue or it is political spread across multiple domains, like in the case 
of Raisina Dialogue. Raisina dialogue had, for example, at least easily 40 to 50 domains 
that were addressed over a span of 48 hours. Sessions would start at 8 o'clock in the 
morning and would go on till midnight. There was Session, which is most popular there, 
which is discussion over Kahwa -- which is after dinner you sit down at 10:30 and go on till 
well past midnight -- is one of the most popular proceedings. The thing, which frankly 
excited me the most personally was the presence of the young university students at this 
event. Now, can I attach value to this? In one way, zero value and in one-way 

P a g e | 19 
incomparable value. You cannot measure this valuable. So, when I look at output, I look at 
how their work strengthens situational awareness in the university students about the 
matters where India stands on various issues of global importance; what India has to say 
on those issues; how the world looks at India's position; how the world responds to India's 
position; what is the acceptability quotient of what India says; what is the impact -- you 
talked about impact and influence; what is the impact and influence that we tried to do; and 
it does make a huge difference. So, when the Italian Prime Minister comes and inaugurates 
a global event of India, it is huge. At one level, I cannot measure it in dollar sense, and at 
another time I can attach infinite value proposition to such events. xxxxx. You mentioned 
about reactive versus proactive. I can singularly say that we are perhaps so proactive that 
the think tankers have to react to us. They find it difficult to respond to our speed in terms of 
when we ask them for research proposals, we find them actually because it is something, 
which perhaps they have not experienced with such intensity in the past. Again, I am not 
putting it in relative terms. I am not saying that this is better than yesterday. I am saying this 
is what it is today, and our effort is to make it better than what it is today tomorrow, and not 
look at how it is compared to past. I am looking at it in a very absolutist way where it is 
today, but position is relativity to what I am going to do next rather than what I am doing 
compared to what is in the past. I am saying in that sense.” 
 
1.29 The Committee also sought to know whether the information regarding various track 
dialogues are available in the public domain or the same are of confidential nature. Foreign 
Secretary replied as under: 
 
“Sir, 1.5 Dialogues are public because they bring out their own websites. I know EU and 
UAE have a website. Canada and USA have multiple 1.5 dialogues. In the US you have 
this Ananta SPIN dialogue, Carnegie dialogue, Brookings dialogue. So, within one country, 
you have four or five, andeach one runs on its own website. But these are all public. 
Absolutely, none ofthese is confidential. These are some of the flagship conferences which 
we work on. Global Technology Summit is the latest of this. This is the sixth one. This is not 
all that old. Raisina is probably the older. Indian Ocean Conference can be made more 
intense, and more useful. Then, we have the Asia Economic Dialogue which focusses on 
the geo-economics. These are some of theconferences where policy planning works with 
the organisers to ensure that ourpoint of view, our interest, etc. are flagged out and 
projected. 
 These are some of the weekly and monthly reports that we bring in-house for the 
consumption of the Divisions, and for the consumptions of the rest of the Ministry. There is 
a daily report on the foreign policy because they serve as the junction of the Ministry to 
bring it all together as a global conflict monitor. It is a very info-graphic oriented so that in a 
single shot you can see the spread of conflict. 
 xxxxxx. We have, of course, the Annual Report which is submitted officially to the 
Government. These are some of the researches which we commissioned inhouseto be 
able to go in depth into what are our policy options could be. So, a lot of the deficits of the 
policy planning dialogues that you mentioned, are sometimes addressed through these 
commissioned researches to incorporate that point of view. Our idea is not to leave any 

P a g e | 20 
gaps in geographies when it comes to policy making. So, this commissioned research 
helps us quite a lot indoing this.” 
 
1.30 Asked how these researches are commissioned, the Foreign Secretary responded as 
under: 
 
“We partner with universities and think tanks. We first do the need analysis. Based on that 
we commission them. We work with ICWA, RIS, etc. They do their own in-house research 
also, which gets fed into us as a value proposition. In fact, for me it was an eye opener. I 
was there at the ICWA Governing Board Council just a few days ago. If you put together 
conferences, research publications, viewpoints, roughly the total would be 300. So, it is 
virtually one a day in that sense. If being ‘prolific’ is a problem, then ICWA has aclassic 
case of prolific problem. It is a great value proposition because it helps us to know these 
things. This is also a global trend in the sense. For example, on defence issues, through 
the Ministry of Defence, we work very closely to understand the core issues related to 
defence. There are many others which are not mentioned here, which we do. For example, 
on the economic space we work through the Finance Ministry. Of course, RIS is there. 
There is Delhi Policy Group. There is Centre for Policy Research. There are new 
organisations. So, these things keep evolving. Now, they are even going outside Delhi. In 
Mumbai, for example, Gateway House brings out some phenomenal publications, some in 
partnership with us, and some on their own. Bengaluru has this Kautilya Dialogue, which 
works very strongly. We have in the last three or four dialoguesstarted the NADI dialogue 
essentially with the North-East of the country wherethe EAM was also present. This is 
about how the narrative building takes place because lot of this also serves us to put up our 
own narrative. One of the classic examples of how this narrative is fed through think tank 
community is our position on Russia-Ukraine conflict. This is no era for war plus diplomacy 
and dialogue has got such a strong narrative out in the market partly because of think 
tanks, and partly because of Government positioning that it is now a part of the G 20 
communique. That is the ultimate reflection that your narrative has not only been 
understood but also appreciated and found acceptance, and got incorporated subsequently 
in a policy document of a probably the most important international body, that is G20. So, I 
think, this is one classic evidence of how narrative which we want to project finds a 
presence through a series of steps into a document where you wanted to land. This is the 
discourse beyond Delhi. So, we have taken the studies on connectivity projects between 
India and Bangladesh, and Bhutan-Myanmar-Nepal. This is NADI dialogue, Natural Alliance 
on Development and Interdependence Initiative at Guwahati. This is about Imphal 
Conclave, which is on North-East Initiative. We have started a new forum. We encourage a 
forum Raisina Forum for Future of Diplomacy. This year we did the first session. We invited 
30 diplomats from other countries for a ten days programme in Delhi and travel rest of India 
so that they see the country. At least they look at India with an open mind. Many of these 
have never visited India. So, the idea is to catch the next generation of potential policy 
makers of those countries, and start interacting and interfacing with them very early on. 
 
1.31 Noting that the various track dialogues Europe and East Asia centric and do not include 
any dialogue with African countries, or with our own neighbouring countries, except China, as also 

P a g e | 21 
the North American and South American countries, except USA and Brazil, the Committee sought 
to know the reason for the same. In response, Foreign Secretary stated as under: 
 
“I agree with you entirely on that one. It is absolutely correct. If you map Africa in terms of 
presence of Think tanks, we have one of these very established mechanisms called 
Foreign Office Consultations, wherein the Secretary of the Division which looks after Africa 
would travel to Africa. Many of these countries do not necessarily have an established 
Policy Planning Division. So, for us to have a Track 1 dialogue, I need to have a Policy 
Planning Division on the other side also. I was in Nepal as Ambassador.  
 The Policy Planning Division in the Foreign Ministry is not manned or empowered at 
a level that they can have that conversation in their full empowerment. Similar is the case 
with many of the African countries. So, what we try and do is that, when we go to Africa, for 
example, for the foreign office consultations, then the Secretary concerned will have an 
interface with the relevant stakeholders within the Foreign Ministry who contribute to the 
policy making. So, it is not because of lack of desire on our part. From our side, we are 
ever ready to constitute new and new dialogues. In fact, there was once a criticism as to 
why you are doing so many policy planning dialogues. But genuinely speaking, there is a 
constraint on the other side. A lot of these we try to fulfil through ICWA. ICWA is also a 
Government-associated body. They take up a lot of these roles. In the neighbourhood we 
also try and do a lot of things. We used to have, we still have it though it is dormant, what is 
called SAARC Think tank mechanism. So, what we will have is that the Think tank in Sri 
Lanka, Nepal, and Bangladesh coming together and have an interface directly with the 
Policy Planning Divisions because in those countries they tend to feed into the policy 
making part of their countries. But I have taken this point as a point for compliance. We will 
proactively map out each of the countries in Africa and in neighbourhood. I mean we will 
initiate on our own that we want to do a policy planning dialogue, and whichever country is 
ready to do it with us, we will be happy to take it forward.” 
 
iii) Constraints faced by think tanks 
 
1.32 On being asked about the constraints being faced in the growth of foreign policy think tanks 
in India as also how the same can be eased or removed, the Ministry submitted as under: 
 
 “As India’s stature in the World rises, there is an increasing interest, both Indian and 
foreign, to establish Think Tanks in India- to understand India and its foreign policy, 
undertake foreign policy research and policy advocacy activities in India. The number of 
think tanks in India is expanding at a healthy rate. According to a study, India now houses 
the third largest think-tank ecosystem in the World, after USA and China.  
  However, according to think tanks in the country, two major constraints being faced 
in the development of think tanks in the country are shortage of funds and shortage of 
qualified researchers and policy researchers.  
  The growth of think tanks in India should be encouraged through an organic 
process- through greater interest and funding from trusts, foundations and private 
organizations- both for long-term finance without strings attached as well as for projects. At 
the same time, transparency about the source of funding should be ensured. Think tanks 

P a g e | 22 
need to be open about their source of funding in order to maintain credibility and avoid 
conflict of interest. Think Tanks would benefit from greater transparency, as well as 
autonomy from the funding organizations. Research and education in foreign policy, public 
policy, economics, international law, security studies, etc. can be encouraged in the 
country. 
 
c) Autonomous Think Tanks under MEA 
 
1.33 The Committee have understood  that ICWA and RIS are two autonomous research bodies 
which function under the Ministry of External Affairs  and the PP&R Division is processes the grant 
in aid for ICWA and RIS as well as the administrative matters pertaining to their governance. The 
division is also responsible for tabling the Annual Reports of ICWA and RIS in the Parliament.  
 
1.34 On being asked whether any assessment of the working of ICWA and RIS has been done 
by the division so far, the Ministry in their written reply have submitted as under:  
 “Apart from its annual financial support, MEA continues to actively assess the work 
programme of ICWA and RIS so that it is in alignment with the evolving priorities and focus 
areas of India’s foreign policy goals. EAM is the Vice-President of the Governing Council 
and a member of the Governing Body of ICWA. Foreign Secretary is a member of both the 
Governing Body and the Governing Council of ICWA. Foreign Secretary and Secretary 
(Economic Relations) in the MEA attend the meetings of the Governing Council of RIS and 
share their vision which forms a vital part of the work programme of RIS. 
  At the functional level, PP&R Division maintains regular contact with ICWA and RIS. 
It also coordinates with various divisions of the Ministry where inputs and programmatic & 
research support might be required from ICWA and RIS. Senior officials of the MEA 
participate in the wide range of conferences, dialogues and workshops organized by ICWA 
and RIS on core areas of India’s interest in the geopolitics and geoeconomics, trade, 
finance, development, neighborhood connectivity and South South Cooperation and share 
their perspectives on emerging issues of critical importance to India. 
  MEA also works with ICWA and RIS to hold track 1.5 and 2 dialogues on emerging 
issues so as to promote India’s foreign policy objectives. RIS also organizes the meetings 
of BRICS and IBSA Academic and Civic forums with the support of MEA.” 
 
1.35 The Committee also sought to know whether the Ministry has institutional arrangements 
with think tanks other than the ICWA and RIS. The Ministry in their written reply have stated that 
apart from RIS and ICWA, MEA engages with other established think tanks for organizing 
seminars/conferences/Track 1.5 dialogues, conducting research projects, etc. The details of the 
same are in Annexure-I.  
 

P a g e | 23 
1.36 On being asked whether in the opinion of the Ministry, ICWA & RIS as think tanks in India, 
are more in the reactive mode than proactive, the Ministry in their written reply have stated that 
Think Tanks in India, including RIS and ICWA, work on both proactive mode- in which India 
specific foreign policy priorities and initiatives, best practices, homegrown solutions, expertise, etc. 
are promoted and explained, as well as in reactive mode- to respond to major geopolitical, geo-
economic, geo-technological or geo-strategic shifts, as well as give fact based data and arguments 
to place the policies and steps taken by the government in better perspective, etc. 
 
1.37 The Committee also sought to know whether any biases have crept in the working of ICWA 
and RIS including the research agenda, the Ministry in their written reply have stated as under: 
 
 “Both RIS and ICWA carry out their programmes in an independent manner as autonomous 
policy research institutions. 
  Their research focus is not only topical, but also demand driven- based on 
consultations and requirements of various stakeholders including Ministries and 
Departments of Government of India, foreign think tanks and institutes, and the research 
focus of their scholars/faculty. 
  The two organizations have been founded under different sets of legislations, have 
different research orientations, follow different approaches to engagement with the World, 
with ICWA having an “Area studies approach” while RIS emphasizing on “South-South 
cooperation”. 
  They also have different monetary funding mechanisms. While ICWA is wholly 
funded by GOI, RIS has been given the power to generate funds by way of “Consultancy 
fee and like charges” by conducting specialized studies and programmes for its partner 
institutions and bodies within the country or abroad.” 
 
1.38 The Committee note that the Policy Planning & Research Division was established in 
the Ministry of External Affairs in 1966. In 1984, the mandate of the division was enhanced 
to assist in foreign policy formulation, preparation of position papers, analysis of 
international affairs, assessment of critical situations, preparation of drafts for speeches of 
President/ PM/ EAM, conduct of seminars and studies, etc. The Committee also note that the 
division’s mandate was extended further in 2015 with an aim to providing greater visibility 
to Indian foreign policy, articulate the Indian view on major emerging global developments, 
receive and deliberate on new ideas, attract high-level international participation in flagship 

P a g e | 24 
events, provide useful exposure to the Indian think-tank institutions and help advance 
India’s leadership projection in the world. The Committee are pleased to note that the PP&R 
Division of the Ministry has in the years since supported several collaborative activities with 
think tanks through conferences, seminars/webinars, Track 1.5/2 dialogues, and research 
projects to advance the extended mandate assigned to them. However, in Committee’s view 
the division needs to be strengthened and well equipped to conduct or collaborate in more 
and more established conferences/dialogues to upscale the targets and outcomes while 
simultaneously enlarging the scope of engagement with more think-tanks and regions 
across the country and the world and they may be apprised accordingly. 
(Recommendation No. 1) 
1.39 The Committee note that ever since the thrust of PP&R Division was centered 
towards creating Indian global flagship platforms which would allow India to articulate its 
foreign policy directions to a global audience, they have been reaching out to the strategic 
and foreign policy community by supporting several collaborative activities. As a result, 
several flagship Indian platforms evolved at the global level, namely, the Raisina Dialogue, 
the Indian Ocean Conference, the Global Technology Summit, the Asia Economic Dialogue, 
etc. Among these platforms, the ‘Raisina Dialogue’ by the Observer Research Foundation 
has become the global benchmark to reflect Indian thinking and over a period of time, it has 
evolved as a platform which rivals any other international conference. At the same time, the 
Committee take note of the popularity of certain other platforms like Shangri-La Dialogue, 
the Munich Security Conference, etc. In a global scenario where it is extremely important for 
the world outside to know not only what you think but to appreciate and accept the same 
also, the Committee desire that the PP&R Division of MEA position India before the 

P a g e | 25 
international community through multiple structural platforms and strive to make each one 
of them, a platform that the entire world aspire to be a part of.   
(Recommendation No. 2) 
1.40 The Committee understand that the Policy Planning Division of the Ministry is a true 
junction box of all thinking where all ideas, information and inputs land from different 
sources from within the Ministry and outside, including from Policy Planning Dialogues. It is 
their job to assimilate, analyze and filter through all of it to generate meaningful research 
output that builds the knowledge base of the Ministry and our Missions abroad. The 
Committee also note that the policy planning is not just limited to what the Government 
thinks but also to respond to what is happening outside the Government including the 
thoughts of international think tanks, thoughts of civil society about India’s position and 
they way the academia look at different relationships that India  have. Hence, the Committee 
desire that the division maintain robust interfaces with all elements which are external to 
the Government including the business and the corporate community. Since the policy 
planning work needs whole of Government approach and the work is very crucial, the 
Committee further desire that the division keeps itself up to date with the latest thinking, 
with the best of the personnel who could create anchored policy framework for building a 
strong India narrative abroad.  
(Recommendation No. 3) 
1.41 The Committee note that the Policy Planning Division prepares research papers, 
policy briefs and situation reports pertaining to global developments/ international affairs in 
general and India’s foreign policy in particular. The publications of Policy Planning Division 
are non-classified and shared mostly within the government apparatus, and also to heads of 
leading think tanks. The Annual Report of the Ministry which is a compilation of its activities 

P a g e | 26 
is a public document. The speeches of the External Affairs Minister, spokesperson and the 
contents of conferences are all put together into an India Narrative, which is also out in the 
market.  Further, the website of the Ministry also provides for information on bilateral 
relations of India with various countries. The Committee, however, feel that there is lack of 
awareness amongst the general public regarding the activities of the Ministry and access to 
most of the pertinent information compiled by Ministry is restricted to limited fraternity. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry may take steps towards wider dissemination of its 
publications, including Reports, Briefs and compendia as well as that of its network of think 
tanks and autonomous bodies. The Committee also desire that the Ministry actively work on 
a mechanism to proactively converse with the people of India in layman language, as well 
as in Rajbhasha and major regional languages on the issues related to external affairs and 
India’s foreign policy. 
(Recommendation No. 4)  
1.42 The Committee note that the Ministry has taken positive steps towards initiating 
direct interface with the student’s fraternity through their universities. The Committee have 
been informed that the Ministry is currently in the process of shaping an engagement with 
75 identified universities all over India for the purposes of generating research content, 
using the interface with the universities to build a narrative, encouraging greater interest on 
topics of foreign policy particularly those topics which have a huge domestic resonance. 
The Committee appreciate the initiative taken by the Ministry to catch the next generation of 
potential policy makers and start interacting and interfacing with them very early on. The 
Committee are hopeful that the Ministry would continue its efforts to create more 
opportunities for the student fraternity to be actively part of foreign policy making and 

P a g e | 27 
directly sponsor research studies of relevance in select universities and apprise the 
Committee about the outcomes in this regard.   
(Recommendation No. 5) 
1.43 The Committee are given to understand that as part of India’s G 20 residency the 
Ministry are organizing G-20 university connect wherein about 200 meetings of G-20 are 
being organized spread over each and every State and Union Territory of India. The 
Committee have also been given to understand that directions have been given to 
organizers of these G-20 meetings to mandatorily connect with the local universities and 
the think tank ecosystem available there in respective State and Union territory and to 
engage them through a side event of the G-20 meeting. While the Committee appreciate the 
initiative taken by the Ministry to utilise the G20 Summit as an opportunity to connect with 
the various Think Tanks and Universities in the country, the Committee are of the 
considered view that the Ministry should utilize this opportunity and those of similar events 
in future too to strengthen its network of interaction with the think tanks and extend it 
further to go regional and sub-regional levels. The Committee are also hopeful that the 
Ministry would continue in its endevours to connect to local Universities and think tanks of 
the country and utilize the interface for the purposes of generating research content as well 
as   encouraging greater interest amongst the student community on topics of foreign 
policy particularly topics which have a huge domestic resonance and apprise the 
Committee about the achievements made through such initiatives. 
(Recommendation No. 6) 
1.44 The Committee understand that outreach to the strategic and foreign policy 
community is one of the core verticals of PP&R Division. The Committee are given to 
understand that the Division supports four annual flagship conferences organized in 

P a g e | 28 
partnership with prominent Indian think-tanks - Raisina Dialogue (in partnership with 
Observer Research foundation), Asia Economic Dialogue (in partnership with Pune 
International Centre), Global Technology Summit (in partnership with Carnegie India) and 
Indian Ocean Conference (in partnership with India Foundation), which are broadly themed 
under geopolitics, geoeconomics, geotechnology and geostrategy, respectively. The 
Committee  note that these Conferences have been organized across various cities in India 
and abroad, for instance the Global Technology Summit was held in Bengaluru, Indian 
Ocean Conference was held in various countries in the Indian Ocean Region and the Asia 
Economic Dialogue was held in Pune. The Committee have also been informed that besides 
these conferences there are various national level seminars being held from time to time in 
collaboration with think tanks, universities and academic institutions in different locations 
across the country to generate greater awareness on foreign policy issues such as the 
NADI Dialogue (Guwahati), Maha Rana Pratap Annual Geopolitics Dialogue (Udaipur), Policy 
Dialogue “Act East to Indo-Pacific: Role of North-east Indian states in ‘Connecting the 
Connectivities’” (Imphal), Third India-Japan Intellectual Conclave (Agartala), etc. The 
Committee are happy to note that the policy discourse is not restricted to Delhi and urge the 
Policy Planning Division   to take it to regional locations more often and ensure involvement 
of more think tanks and organizations across India in such endeavours.  
(Recommendation No. 7) 
1.45 The Committee are given to understand that Indian Missions/posts abroad not only 
act as the representative of India but also play a key role in gathering information on the 
diplomatic frontline, disseminating information to the overseas public and promoting of 
diplomatic relations. As a part of these activities, the Missions and Posts abroad maintain 
active engagements with prominent think tanks, research scholars and experts in the 

P a g e | 29 
countries of their jurisdiction and the feedback is periodically shared with the Ministry in 
the form of political reporting and assessments by Missions. Taking note of this, the 
Committee feel that Indian Missions can play a more proactive role towards greater 
engagement with such experts and hence, urge the Ministry to utilize Indian Missions and 
posts abroad for a deeper and regular exchange of ideas and for channelizing the 
intellectual inputs/ subject expertise from abroad into the formulation of India’s short, 
medium as well as long-term foreign policy objectives and goals. 
(Recommendation No. 8) 
1.46 The Committee have been informed that the MEA has a robust internship programme 
wherein opportunity is given to youths of the country to interface with the daily routine 
process of the foreign policy making and learn that how does the different wings of Ministry 
of External Affairs come together to shape a view on a foreign policy issue. It has been 
further given to understand that there is a high demand for internship in MEA and that the 
selection process to the programme is fairly rigorous. The Committee have been informed 
that the candidates who apply and are selected are placed across the Ministry of External 
Affairs including with the Policy Planning and Research Division whereby they get an 
opportunity to associate and to see very closely the functioning of the Ministry of External 
Affairs. The Committee note that the programme is open to graduates and undergraduates 
from universities across the country. The Committee feel that internship programme of MEA 
is an excellent opportunity for budding scholars of our country to familiarize themselves 
with the process of formulation of foreign policy and its implementation. The Committee are 
hopeful that the Ministry would continue in its efforts through its internship programme to 
bring foreign policy closer to the people of the country. The Committee further desire that 
the Ministry strive to ensure that there is sufficient diversity amongst the group of interns 

P a g e | 30 
selected with respect to gender, underprivileged sections, geographical domicile and 
balanced representation from both urban and rural areas so that students from across the 
country are able to associate themselves with MEA. The Ministry should also create some 
job opportunities for utilization of services of talented young interns interested in making 
career in this field. 
(Recommendation No. 9)  
1.47 The Committee note that Policy Planning Division interfaces with all three Track 
Dialogues in the country. For Track 1, it is directly responsible, for Track 1.5, it is semi-
responsible and for Track 2 its responsibility is only to present Government of India’s 
viewpoint. The Committee are aware that these interfaces generate ideas, which translates 
to  initiatives which then translate into processes, conferences or conference themes. While  
appreciating the fact that the Division is expanding the number of conferences that it 
supports to encourage dialogue on foreign policy and international affairs across the 
country, the Committee find that Track Dialogues in our country are dealt by domain 
experts. The Committee feel that in an increasingly complex global environment, where 
peace builders and diplomats looking to address difficult policy challenges are increasingly 
incorporating track 1.5 and track 2 dialogues in their strategies, the Ministry should seek 
guidance from Parliamentary Standing Committee on External Affairs on topical issues.  
(Recommendation No. 10)  
1.48 The Committee understand that India has a rich legacy of think tank ecosystem. The 
Committee note that the oldest think tank, United Service Institution (USI), was setup as far 
back as in 1870. The Committee also note that prior to the economic reforms of the 1990s, 
think tanks in India were largely funded by government or semi-government bodies. 
However, since the 1990s, private sector think tanks have come up steadily and their 

P a g e | 31 
numbers are growing now at a healthy rate. According to a study, India now houses the 
third largest think-tank ecosystem in the World, after USA and China. The Committee are of 
the view that growing complexity of global challenges has made the role of think tanks very 
significant in recent years. Think tanks serve to provide well researched data and 
information for helping policy makers to make informed choices. They assist in breaking 
down the complex problems into simpler understandings and help in formulating solutions 
that cover all the relevant dimensions. The Committee are given to understand that  think 
tanks play a substantive role in dialogue and collaborative work through research, 
seminars, track 1.5/track 2 events with other foreign think tanks and research organizations, 
thereby further engaging and familiarizing the global strategic and think tank community 
with Indian developments and policy orientations. The Committee are also given to 
understand that many foreign policy concepts/initiatives move from Track 2 dialogues to 
Track 1.5 dialogues and eventually  become Government policy. Keeping in view the same, 
the Committee desire MEA to take the lead in developing research culture through its PP&R 
Division, create or support more think tanks and directly interact with universities in the 
country. Further, taking note of the fact that globally think tanks are projected to assume an 
even greater role in the implementation and evaluation of public policies and that this trend 
is likely to be followed in India as well, the Committee also exhort the Government to scale 
up its current  collaboration with think tanks and universities with proper assessment of 
their funding requirements. 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
1.49 The Committee note that one of the primary functions of the Policy Planning Division 
is to conduct bilateral and multilateral policy planning dialogues, especially Track 1, Track 
1.5 dialogues. The Committee note that the various track dialogues are mostly Europe and 

P a g e | 32 
East Asia centric and do not include any dialogue with African countries, or with our own 
neighbouring countries, or the North American and South American countries, except USA 
and Brazil. The Committee are given to understand that many of these countries do not 
have an established Policy Planning Division and for a Track 1 dialogue to materialise, a 
Policy Planning Division is needed on the other side also. Despite such  constraints  the 
Committee desire the Ministry to proactively map out each of the neighbourhood as well as 
the African countries and explore the possibility of  initiating policy planning dialogue with 
them, especially in view of  India’s raising interest in African countries and thrust on 
Neighbourhood First Policy. 
(Recommendation No.  12) 

P a g e | 33 
Chapter II 
 
INDIAN COUNCIL OF WORLD AFFAIRS ( ICWA) 
 
I. Historical Background 
 
2.1 The Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA) was established in 1943 by a group of eminent 
intellectuals led by Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru and Dr. H.N. Kunzru. The principal objective was to 
create an Indian perspective on international relations and act as a repository of knowledge and 
thinking on foreign policy issues. On 31st March 1945, the ICWA was registered under the 
Registration of Societies Act XXI of 1860. 
2.2 From its earliest years, the Council had landmark achievements such as hosting of the 
'Asian Relations Conference' a few months before India’s independence in March 1947.A total of 
243 delegates from the developing countries including 56 from India participated in this conference. 
This was the precursor of the Afro-Asian Conference in Bandung in 1953. The seeds of the 
concept of the Non-Aligned Movement (NAM) can be said to have been sown at ICWA in 1947. 
 
2.3 Many world dignitaries, intellectuals, academicians, journalists and diplomatic community 
have addressed the Council. The list includes Dag Hammarskjold, former Secretary General, 
United Nations; Nelson Mandela, President of South Africa; Ho Chi Minh, Prime Minister of 
Vietnam; Margaret Thatcher, Prime Minister of UK, Dr. Henry Kissinger, former Secretary of State 
of USA; Yasser Arafat President to Executive Committee of PLO, and President XI Jinping of 
China.  
 
2.4 From a Registered Society, ICWA became an Autonomous Institution under an Act of 
Parliament in 2001, and it was declared as an ‘institution of national importance’. It has a General 
Body and Governing Council, headed by Hon’ble Vice President of the Republic of India who is the 
President of the ICWA. 
 
2.5 Over the years ICWA has contributed to promoting the study of International Affairs from an 
Indian perspective. Currently the Council undertakes numerous research-oriented activities, 
towards fulfilment of its mandated objectives. The activities include research, publications, bilateral 
dialogues, international conferences, seminars, lectures and outreach activities. 

P a g e | 34 
 
I. Organisational Structure of ICWA: 
2.6 ICWA is an autonomous institute. It has a General Body and Governing Council. The 
Governing Council (GC) consists of 47 members, 12 of whom are ex-officio posts; 5 Lok Sabha 
MPs nominated by Speaker, Lok Sabha, 3 Rajya Sabha MPs nominated by Chairman Rajya 
Sabha and 27 members nominated by the Governing Council. The Governing Body (GB) is the 
Executive Committee of the Council and comprises 15 members which is constituted by the 
Governing Council of ICWA. The Director General, appointed by the Governing Council for a fixed 
tenure of three years is the Chief Executive Officer. 
 
  
  
President: Hon’ble 
Vice President of 
India 
 
Vice-President: 
External Affairs 
Minister 
 
Vice-President: 
Ex Officio 
Chairman CEA 
 
Vice-President 
 
Director General 
(CEO) 
The Council comprises of 
Ministers, MPs, 
Secretaries to Government 
of India and other eminent 
intellectuals. Total 47 
Members. 
The Governing Body is the 
executive committee & is 
drawn from the Governing 
Council. Total 15 members 

P a g e | 35 
III. Funding of ICWA 
2.7 The Committee sought to know about the funds being provided to ICWA. In response the 
Ministry in their written reply has submitted as under: 
 “The year-wise grant allocated by Government of India to ICWA in the last 5 years is as 
below: 
 
FY ICWA 
FY 2018-19 11.87 Cr 
FY 2019-20 15 Cr 
FY 2020-21 11.83 Cr 
FY 2021-22 12 Cr 
FY 2022-23 13.74 Cr 
 
2.8 On being asked about the purpose of granting such funds, the Ministry has stated as under: 
 “The funds are utilized for organizing various conferences, seminars, dialogues, lectures 
and discussions, conducting outreach activities, publishing books, periodicals, journals and 
papers, purchasing books for the library and meeting expenditure on general establishment 
such as payment of salaries, purchase of office equipment and furniture, and repairs and 
maintenance of the building.  
 The timely research outputs on important foreign policy issues, in forms of research papers, 
commentaries, journal articles and books; and informed   debates and discussions on 
bilateral, regional and global developments have been found very useful in developing an 
Indian perspective on world affairs and promoting India’s relations with other countries”. 
 
IV. Mandate and Activities of ICWA: 
 
2.9 The Indian Council of World Affairs Act, 2001 lays down the objectives of the ICWA under 
Section 13 as under: 
a. To promote the study of Indian and international affairs so as to develop a body of 
informed opinion on international matters. 
b. To promote India's relations with other countries through study, research, discussions, 
lectures, exchange of ideas and information with other organisations within and outside 
India engaged in similar activities. 
c. To serve as a clearing house of information and knowledge regarding world affairs. 
d. To publish books, periodicals, journals, reviews, papers, pamphlets and other literature 
on subjects covered under clauses (a) & (b). 
e. To establish contacts with organisations promoting objects mentioned in this section. 

P a g e | 36 
f.  To arrange conferences and seminars to discuss and study the Indian policy towards 
international affairs. 
g. To undertake such other activities for the promotion of ideas and attainment of the 
above-mentioned objects. 
 
2.10 To fulfill its mandated objectives the Council has focused on the following: 
 
(i) Expanding and diversifying its in-house research output both in terms of geography as 
well as thematic issues, keeping in view their importance and relevance to India’s 
foreign and security policies. Thematic studies that received added focus include 
maritime studies, Indo-Pacific, Ukraine, Afghanistan, and multilateral institutions like 
SCO, G-20, IORA and the UN. 
(ii) Setting up Special Centers to undertake focused research andanalysis in certain 
specific areas. 
(iii) Enhancing its research activities and publications 
(iv) Increasing the frequency of events such as seminars, conferences, roundtables, and 
other discussions in both physical and hybrid mode. 
(v) Collaborating with the Ministry of External Affairs and other GOI entities for undertaking 
special studies and research projects and to organize dialogues, lectures and special 
events. 
(vi) Signing MoUs/partnerships arrangements and undertaking collaborative research 
projects with MoU partners in areas of mutual interest. 
(vii) Collaborating with national and international universities and think tanks.This promotes 
Council’s engagement with other think tanks and the related eco-system, thereby 
enriching research. 
(viii) Commissioning books, monographs, and special studies by external experts and 
scholars on emerging issues having implications for foreign policy.This increases the 
research output of the Council. 
(ix) Making Sapru House Library accessible to a wider community of individuals, experts 
and scholars. 
(x) Actively promoting research output of the Council in Hindi and other national 
languages through translation of research output into Hindi and other national 
languages. 
(xi) Dissemination of ICWA output (all publications) on Council’s website, and social media 
platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, LinkedIn and fortnightly electronic 
notifications. This aims to increase the access by the wider public to the output and 
work of the Council. 
 
2.11 Explaining the mandate of ICWA, DG ICWA during the sitting of the Committee on 
05.04.2023 stated as under: 
 
“xxx Being a statutory body, our scope of work and the activities that we have to undertake 
are under the ICWA Act which is in a way comprehensive and in a way very broad in 

P a g e | 37 
scope. Our main area is to promote the study of international relations and to develop a 
body of informed opinion. Second, to promote India’s relations with other countries through 
dialogue, discourse and exchange of ideas. Third, to strive to serve as a clearinghouse and 
a knowledge institution on international relations. Based on this mandate, we have been 
carrying out our activities which have ranged actually from programmes, which are lectures, 
which are discussions, conferences and dialogues, to having our research faculty work and 
bring out research papers. We have publications that we bring out. And then we have an 
outreach programme with other think tanks, with the universities. And we work with the 
general public in terms of the interaction we have through our social media platform. 
Xxxxxx 
 
2.12 On being asked whether the activities of ICWA are proactive or reactive, DG, ICWA stated 
as under: 
 
“Of course, our work is guided by the fundamental mandate that we have in the Act. Our 
effort is to bring out work in a timely fashion.  
 That is very important as you look at developments which happen. Those 
developments need a deeper understanding of what is the background against which they 
are happening and what are the interests of various stakeholders. Are there any conflicting 
interests and where do the conflicts lie? So, that kind of work is very important to get it out 
on a timely basis. We do it through all our activities, but of course, there would be events 
like the Ukraine conflict. The Ukraine conflict is moving on a daily basis. For that kind of an 
event, we would have to be, in one sense, very reactive about what is happening and what 
implications will it have. For example, we need to look at what is the implication that the 
Ukraine conflict is having on the relationship between China and Russia.  
 So, we would look at that. That would be a way to do relative study to certain 
developments. But in other sense, we would also look at other issues which are more 
constant on our agenda and where we would be very pro-active. As we look at India’s 
neighbourhood, we would look at the developments in our neighbourhood on a constant 
basis. We have deep interests in India’s constant interests. In the Indian Ocean region, we 
would monitor it constantly. We will bring out publications on it constantly, and we would 
engage with other partners in the region on a regular basis. For example, Indian Ocean, in 
fact, particularly the Western Indian Ocean, we held a conference in which we looked at 
how do the smaller islands in India Ocean look at India and what do they like India to do. 
So, we organized a conference in which we had participants from various island countries. 
We had participants from Seychelles, Mauritius, Maldives etc. We heard the voices from 
those parts of the world for which we were pro-active in bringing it together. We got a 
publication on that. So, in that sense, we are a combination of reactive and pro-active. We 
governed in that sense, and sometimes the Ministry of External Affairs would ask us to do 
something that give us a research outcome on what is happening in a particular country. 
So, we are reacting to a request rather than being pro-active. So, that would be a 
combination of our work as we structure ourselves.” 
 

P a g e | 38 
A.  Research and Dissemination 
  
2.13 Regarding the research activities of ICWA  , it has been informed as under: 
 
(a) Research Works by in- house Faculty 
 
  The Research Scholars of ICWA were involved in writing research papers- 
Issue Briefs, View Points and Special Reports- on topical issues in particular those 
having a bearing on Indian foreign policy interests. They undertook study and 
research on major political, security, and economic trends and developments in Asia, 
Africa, Europe, United States, Latin America and the wider global geostrategic and 
economic environment, examining and analysing their global and regional 
implications. The Council has published 167 Issue Briefs, 136 View points, and 5 
Special reports since April 2021. 
  A Special volume on Afghanistan crisis, a volume of China’s BRI assessing 
the experiences and responses in different regions across the world and a volume 
titled ICWA Global Review 2023 were brought out. 
  The Research Faculty were encouraged to undertake Sapru House Papers 
which are comprehensive future- oriented policy research papers on selected topics 
related to foreign policy and international affairs and which take a longer-term view on 
important issues in international affairs. The aim is to contribute new policy ideas or 
new empirical work to the body of existing knowledge.  
  Since April 2021 the Council has worked on 25 Sapru House papers of these 
19 are published, and 6 Sapru House papers are in various stages of progress which 
will be published soon. 
  Several of these Sapru House papers covered subjects related to China to 
reflect the current geopolitics and contemporary realities, which include themes such 
as China and Indo- Pacific, China and Arab World, China-Japan, China-Russia, 
China– Nepal and China Party Congress. Some of them focused on building ties with 
small countries like SICA countries in Central America; on political and security 
dynamics in the neighbourhood with country focus on Sri Lanka and Afghanistan; on 
foreign policy and changing relations in Gulf, West Asia and Central Asia and on 
evolving geopolitics in Africa. Some of the papers dwelt on political and connectivity 
issues related to South East Asia, and Arctic; and on bilateral issues with South Korea 
and Australia. 
 
(b) Guest Articles and Research Papers by Outside Experts 
 
 The Council commissioned several guest articles by external experts viz., 
academics, former diplomats on range of important subjects, which include the 
following: Philippines and the South China Sea; Normalization of Ties between 
Morocco and Israel; The Global (Dis) Order-the Pandemic and the Ukraine Conflict; 
Revisiting Extended Nuclear Deterrence; India-Iran Ties: Turkey’s Quest for Status- 
Politics of Alliances and Counter Alliances:- ; .and The Changing Contours of Great 
Power Politics in West Africa. The Council also published a guest article from our 
counterpart institute in Uzbekistan on ‘Potential of Central Asia – India Cooperation by 

P a g e | 39 
D. Kurbanov and Sh. Khoshimova.  It published guest articles by other foreign 
scholars which include ‘Voice of Global South Summit and Uzbek-India Relations’ by 
EldorTulyakov and ‘Uzbekistan on the Eve of the Referendum on the Constitution’ by  
Prof. Amonulla Mukhamedjanov, Tashkent State Law University; 'Irrationalism and 
International Relations by Tsogtbaatar Damdin, Member of Parliament and Former 
Foreign Minister of Mongolia; 'Belarus on its Way to the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organisation: Reflections on the eve of the SCO International Conference of 
Analytical Centers at ICWA, New Delhi' by Yuri M. Yarmolinsky,  Belarusian Institute 
of Strategic Research. 
 It also commissioned Special Research Papers on SCO in preparation of 
India’s Chairmanship of SCO from September 2022 -2023 and on G-20 for the 
forthcoming India’s Presidency and published those papers as Special publications.  
 The Council also came out with special publications on Gallipoli Revisited and 
Indo-Pacific Oceans Initiative. Some of the recent Special Publications that Council 
came out are:  Ukraine Crisis: A Point of Inflection for the Emerging World Order; 
Beyond Fez and Nazar: Views from India on Turkiye; Concluding on a High Note in 
the UN Security Council: An Assessment of India’s Term 2021-2022; Pushing the 
Frontiers of Women – led Development: India’s G20 Presidency; and Indian 
Diplomacy and GOI Flagship Programmes. Three Special publications  under 
publication  are: Towards Secure SCO: Views of SCO Resident Research Scholars at 
ICWA; Celebrating 75 Years of Indian Foreign Policy; and US- China Strategic 
Competition: Aspects and Prospects. 
 
(c) Research Projects with MoU Partners 
 
  The Council worked on collaborative research projects with Centre for Public 
Policy Research (CPPR), Cochin on maritime issues; with National Institute for 
Advance Studies (NIAS), Bangalore on Pakistan studies; and with United Service 
Institution of India (USI) on India and UN peacekeeping and Indian Armed forces in 
France and Flanders during World War I and World War II.  
 
(d) Research Projects with MEA 
 
  ICWA conducted studies at the request of Ministry of External Affairs and has 
shared Reports and Discussion papers with the Ministry, which include the following: 
 
 (i) Project on Study of Nepal. 
(ii) Project on Pakistan in collaboration with NIAS, Bangalore 
(iii) Project on issues of relevance to Indian Ocean Rim Association 
(IORA) and  on the Indo- Pacific and the Indo –Pacific Oceans 
Initiative of India.  
(iv) Research-oriented activities as Chair of the Indian Ocean Academic 
Research Group (IORAG) from 2019-2021 and as academic nodal 
point of India in IORA.  

P a g e | 40 
(v) UNSC Academic Project to provide policy inputs in support of India’s 
responsibilities arising from its UNSC tenure 2021-22 through 
commissioned research.  
(vi) Joint ICWA-MEA Publication on ‘Indian Diplomacy and Covid 
Response’. 
 
(e) Research Project with Ministry of Defence 
 
  Besides MEA, the Council also undertook a project tasked by Ministry of 
Defence on India – Latin America Defence Cooperation. The outcome of the study 
was presented and the reports were shared with MoD. 
 
f) Manpower in Research Faculty 
 
2.14 When the Committee sought to know about the manpower in ICWA Research Faculty, the 
Ministry in their written reply have stated that as per approval by ICWA Governing Council 
Research Faculty’s sanctioned strength is  30: 
Director (Research)         :  01 
Senior Research Fellows   :  05 
Research Fellows  :  12 
Research Associate           :  01 
Research Interns  :  05 
 
2.15 In this backdrop, it has been submitted  by ICWA that getting quality researchers is a 
challenge including their retention. They have further submitted  as under:  
i. ICWA Research Faculty’s sanctioned strength (30) is adequate and we expect 
numbers to remain around the same range in future.  
ii. ICWA’s focus is to hire Research Faculty with experience, exposure and knowledge 
in their domain areas and also having in-depth understanding of broad global 
themes and trends. 
iii. For this, ICWA selection criteria will focus more on the expertise, knowledge & 
presentation skills in addition to academic qualifications like Ph.D, Masters etc.   
iv. To give a younger profile to the Research Faculty, additional hiring of Research 
Associates will be considered on a need basis.  
v. Proper incentive structure including pay raise and allowances as applicable and 
required can be considered. All such proposals and considerations are deliberated 
and discussed/ decided in the Governing Body and Governing Council of ICWA 
headed by Hon’ble Vice President and has External Affairs Minister and 
Chairperson, Parliamentary Standing Committee as Vice President. 
 

P a g e | 41 
2.16 On the issue, DG, ICWA, during the sitting held on 05.04.2023 stated as under: 
“Then, we would also come to the fact that what would be and how can we increase the 
output and impact of ICWA activities. I would say that one challenge that we face, I 
suppose, is also because you have a growing thinking community in India. It is very difficult 
to get quality research faculty because of that competition. It is even now difficult to retain 
them because they keep looking for more opportunities. So, I would look at how we can 
have a system under which we can give some increase to our research faculty whether it is 
based on DA or annual increment of a certain percentage that would be helpful in terms of 
attracting and retaining talent.  
 
B. PUBLICATIONS 
 
2.17 ICWA publications include Sapru House Papers, Special Publications, ICWA Guest 
Columns, Viewpoint, Issue Briefs, Special Reports, Oral history Project, etc.  
a) Sapru House Papers 
 ICWA has published 20 Sapru House papers and 5 are under publication. These 
papers are comprehensive analytical studies on selected topics related to foreign policy 
and international affairs from an Indian perspective. These are useful for academics, 
policymakers and students of International relations. The topics are chosen based on 
global regional and country specific developments to understand possible implications 
for India. The studies on the chosen topics are undertaken to fill the gaps in research 
on the subject, with an aim to contribute new policy ideas or new empirical work to the 
body of existing knowledge. These papers are widely disseminated to policy makers, 
research institutes, universities and the wider public. These papers have an impact in 
shaping discourse on foreign policy and international relations from an Indian 
perspective. 
 
b) Book Publications 
 
 The Council published books which include single authored books, edited books 
and conference proceedings. Since April 2021 ICWA has published 32 books which 
include 18 single authored and edited books and 14 conference proceeding books. 4 
books and 3 conference proceedings book are under publication.  
 
Books published cover a wider spectrum of subjects. Its recently published books are 
titled: The Harambee Factor: India-Africa Economic and Development Partnership; 
Arab World in Transition and the Quest for a New Regional Order; Between Survival 
and Status: The Counter-Hegemonic Geopolitics of Iran; Indian Diplomacy and Covid 
Response; Advancing Reformed Multilateralism in the Changing World; K M Panikkar 
and The Growth of a Maritime Consciousness in India; China's BRI in Different Regions 
of the World: Cooperation, Contradictions and Concerns; भारत- अफगािन᭭तान संबंध: 

P a g e | 42 
इितहास एवं िवदेश नीित क े  आईने; भारत-᭥यांमार सीमा पार आधारभूत सरचंनाᲐ का 
िवकास एवं उजाᭅ सहयोग; कलादान पᳯरयोजना का अ᭟ययन ; भारत कᳱ बौ᭟द मूᳶतकला 
और अराकान (᭥यांमार) पर उसका ᮧभाव ;A Master Catalogue of the Manuscripts and 
Published Editions of the Works ; and G20@2023: The Roadmap to Indian Presidency. 
 Two books published on the occasion of 50 years of India-Bangladesh diplomatic 
relations are titled: A Bangladesh War Commentary by U L Baruah and India – 
Bangladesh 50 Years of Friendship by Samudra Gupta Kashyap. The latter book on 
India- Bangladesh was brought out as part of the initiative undertaken at the behest of 
the President of the Council to come out with a publication targeted at the general 
public and not a specialized reader.  
 It may be noted that books authored by outside experts are commissioned by the 
Council through its Book Research Grant scheme to eminent experts as well as 
emerging scholars to diversify its area of research. Since April 2021 21 book projects 
were approved by the Research Committee of ICWA which extend from area studies to 
thematic issues.  
 Currently 41 previous book projects are in various stages of progress. A concerted 
effort is being made by the Council to ensure that there is a time bound submission of 
these book projects. 
 
c) Translations 
 
 In order to reach out to a wider audience, the Council brought out translations of 
some of its book publications into Hindi and regional languages in accordance with the 
directions of the President of the Council. Since the last meeting it has brought out 8 
book translations- 5 in Hindi, 1 in Tamil, 1 in Urdu and 1 in Malayalam.  Another 8 are 
under translation into Hindi, Urdu and Bangla. 
 ICWA continued to publish translated versions of its academic articles in Hindi.In 
pursuit of this objective, all Viewpoints, Issue Briefs, Sapru House Papers, Special 
Reports were translated into Hindi and published on the Hindi version of the ICWA 
website. Among the think tanks, ICWA has been at the forefront of putting Hindi articles 
on its website. This has been appreciated by the universities and colleges from Hindi 
hinterland.  
 The following ICWA publications have been translated and published: 
In Hindi 
 (i)  Pakistan: The Balochistan Conundrum by TilakDevasher; 
(ii) India-China Boundary Issues by Ranjit Singh Kalha;  
(iii)  Latin America, Caribbean and India: Promise and Challenge by Deepak 
Bhojwani, 
(iv)   ICWA Global Review 2022 
(v)   Kashmir: A Study in India-Pakistan Relations by Sisir Gupta 
In Urdu 
(i) The Balochistan Conundrum by TilakDevasher 
In Malayalam 
(i) The Legitimacy of Power: The Permanence of Five in the Security Council 
by Dilip Sinha  

P a g e | 43 
In Tamil 
(i) India Relations with IMF by V. Srinivas’s book 
 
d) India Quarterly 
 
 ICWA regularly publishes its flagship journal ‘India Quarterly’ since 1945. The 
journal is on a steady course and has consolidated its position in recent years.  
 This is a reputed peer reviewed journal on international affairs which is now listed 
on reputed abstract and citation data bases such as SCOPUS, 'International Political 
Science Abstracts' and 'ABC of Political Science'.  
 Both Indian and foreign scholars contribute articles to the India Quarterly. Articles 
by authors from UK, Australia, Finland, Sri Lanka, Turkey, Nigeria, Malaysia and Russia 
besides India have been published in recent issues of India Quarterly. In a recent effort, 
the ICWA Research Faculty is also being encouraged to submit original research 
articles for publication in the journal; and ICWA publications are being reviewed in the 
IQ by external reviewers. 
 Special issues of India Quarterly, and the inclusion of guest editors, have brought 
additional focus on important anniversaries and events, such as the recent issue on 
India@75 the special issue on Afghanistan and India’s Borderlands.  
 The journal has also begun its Hindi edition, a valuable contribution to foreign affairs 
discussions for the Hindi speaking constituency. 
 
2.18 On being asked whether ICWA has any proposals in the pipeline to get versions of its 
academic articles translated in other languages other than Hindi, Tamil, Urdu, Malayalam, and 
Bangla. Ministry in their written reply have stated as under: 
 “In order to reach out to a wider audience, the Council has laid emphasis on bringing out 
translations of its book publications from English into Hindi and regional languages. 
Depending on the subjects and authorship it has brought out translations of its selected 
books in Hindi, Tamil, Urdu, Malayalam, and Bangla. These efforts will continue including 
for other languages depending upon the subject of ICWA books. However, it is a challenge 
to get quality translators who have knowledge of international affairs to understand the 
tone, tenor and the nuances of terminologies.” 
 
2.19 Further the Committee sought to know whether ICWA has any plans to make India 
Quarterly journal available in other vernacular languages. The Ministry in their written reply have 
stated that at present there is no proposal under consideration to get ‘India Quarterly’ translated in 
any Indian languages other than Hindi. They have further informed that it is difficult to get quality 
translators who can understand the nuances of the subject.  
 
2.20 Explaining further on the matter, DG, ICWA, during the sitting held 05.04.2023 on stated as 
under: 

P a g e | 44 
 
“We have been doing some translation work and we are undertaking them based on the 
topic which is written and the interest that it evokes. But we do have one limitation in terms 
of our translation and broadening it. It is a challenge to get quality translators who have 
knowledge also of the international relations and the various nuances and the tone and 
tenor of international relations. So, that is one limitation that we get when we look at our 
translation work.” 
 
C. Events: Seminars, Lectures, Conferences, Dialogues and Other Activities  
 
2.21 ICWA in their background note have submitted that as per its mandate ICWA undertook 
numerous intellectual activities to promote India’s relations with other countries and to discuss 
India’s policy towards international affairs. The activities included bilateral dialogues, international 
conferences, seminars, lectures and discussions. Some of these activities are organized in 
collaboration with Ministry of External Affairs. They have further submitted that since April 2021 the 
ICWA has organized 126 events which were mix of lectures, talks, bilateral dialogues, international 
and national seminars, book launches, panel and round-table discussions, which were organized in 
physical and hybrid mode. The digital hybrid mode enabled easier participation of scholars/experts 
based abroad and this has had a positive impact on the content of ICWA’s conversations making it 
more engaging and productive. Some discussions were held close –door with restricted 
participation to have a frank and candid interaction.  
 
2.22 Detailing the Council’s activities, ICWA in their background note has stated as below. 
 
(a) Lectures/Talks 
 
(i)  Sapru House Lectures were delivered by visiting foreign dignitaries,which include 
Lectures delivered by Mr. Abdulla Shahid, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of 
Maldives; Mr.  Nikola Selaković, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia and 
Ambassador Salman Al Farisi, Secretary General, IORA, H.E. Mr. Csaba Kőrösi, President, 
77th UN General Assembly (UNGA) and H.E. Mr Fumio Kishida, Prime Minister of  Japan. 
The objective was to give a platform to the visiting dignitary to  presenttheir views on issues 
of interest to bilateral relations or to India and to provide for an interaction of the dignitary 
with an informed audience. The next Sapru House Lecture is scheduled to be delivered 
later this month by H.E. Enrique Manalo, Foreign Minister of Philippines. 
(ii) Special lectures were delivered by visiting foreign dignitaries and those include 
lecture by Hasan Mahmud, Minister of Information and Broadcasting, Government of 
Bangladesh on the occasion of book launch, VuongDinh Hue, President of the National 
Assembly of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam and Shahidul Haque, Former Foreign 
Secretary, People’s Republic of Bangladesh Vladimir Norov, Secretary General, Shanghai 

P a g e | 45 
Cooperation Organisation and Emine Dzhaparova First Deputy Foreign Minister of Ukraine. 
A Talk on “Situation in Myanmar” was given by U Min Zin, Founding Member and Executive 
Director, Institute for Strategy and Policy, Myanmar, which was a close –door event and a 
Talk was delivered by Dr Ali BagheriKani, Political Deputy, Ministry of Foreign Affairs of 
Iran, which was also a close – door interaction. 
 
(b) International Interactions 
 
International interactions in the form of Conferences, Bilateral Dialogues, and online 
interactions were organized by the Council on important themes of international affairs. 
Since April 2021 the Council has organized 40 international interactions. The Council, in its 
conferences, seminars and bilateral dialogues gave priority to engage a more diverse set of 
voices in the discussion and debates. At the national level, experts and scholars were 
invited from various think tanks, universities and research institutes across the country, to 
participate as resources person in the international conferences.  
 (i) Bilateral Track II Dialogues were held online with our MoU partners in Russia, 
Uzbekistan, China, Poland, South Korea, Hungary, Spain, New Zealand, Vietnam, Peru, 
Colombia, Mexico, Saudi Arabia, Singapore and UAE.  Dialogue with Morocco is scheduled 
for later in June 2023.  
(ii) Bilateral Track I.5 Dialogues were held with partners in Germany and UK. 
 In these Dialogues the Council brought together a cross section of Indian analysts 
and experts from various universities, research institutes, to interact with the counterpart 
delegation on range of areas of mutual interest at the bilateral and regional level. In most of 
these dialogues Head of Indian Missions and Foreign Heads of Missions in Delhi 
participated.  
 The Council held interactions with visiting dignitaries from Australia, Vietnam, Iran, 
Uzbekistan, Latvia, Slovakia, Albania, China and experts from Russia, RoK, Japan and 
Myanmar. 
 (iii) International Conferences: The Council also organized a number of international 
online conferences and events. Some of the important international conferences organized 
were the8th Indian Ocean Dialogueon Post-Pandemic Indian Ocean : Leveraging Digital 
Technologies for Health, Education, Development and Trade in IORA Member States;and 
the  Indian Ocean Rim Academic Group Meeting organised in partnership with MEA; India-
Japan Relations at 70:Reflections and Way Forward; Commemorating Thirty Years of 
India-ASEAN Relations-Geopolitical Shifts and Opportunities: New Horizons in India-
Southeast Asia Relations; and India and the Island States in the Indian Ocean: Evolving 
Geopolitics and Security Perspectives; and Strategic Competition in the South China Sea: 
Interests, Defence and Diplomacy; Dynamics of India-Central Asia Relations: Scale & 
Scope; Shanghai Cooperation Organization: Reconnect ~ Rejuvenate and International 
conference on Indian Armed Forces in Flanders during WWI and WWII. These international 
conferences saw wide participation by scholars and experts from various countries in the 
respective areas. 
 

P a g e | 46 
(c) National Seminars/Panel Discussions/Round Tables Discussions/Book 
Discussions 
 
 ICWA organized 53 intellectual activities in form of online seminars webinars, Panel 
discussions, roundtable discussions and Book discussions. Some of these discussions 
were held with restricted participation as close –door events.  
 
Some of the major national seminars held were on India’s Development Partnership: 
Expanding Vistas and India-Nepal Development Partnership and on Celebrating 75 Years 
of Indian Foreign Policy’. Several panel discussions that were organized focused on 
themes such as G-20, Abraham Accords, Extended Nuclear Deterrence; Pakistan’s 
Continuing Political and Economic Crisis, India-Egypt Ties , Diaspora in an era of Amrit 
Kaal, India-Bangladesh Relations and The Evolving Situation in Pakistan and Afghanistan. 
A number of book discussions were held including ICWA Books. Some of the important 
books discussed were: Indian Diplomacy and Covid Response; The Harambee Factor-
India- Africa Partnership; India- Africa Relations; Between Survival and Status Counter-
Hegemonic Geopolitics of Iran; and Arab World in Transition – Quest for a New Regional 
order and The Pashtuns: A Contested History’.       
 The Council has initiated for the first time Round Table discussions series led by 
Head of Diplomatic Missions in Delhi. Recently held such discussions include 
Ambassadors’ Round Table Discussion on ‘Relations between India and SICA (Central 
American) Countries, Ambassadors Panel discussion on the occasion of Africa Day. 
 
 d) Activities organized in collaboration and Participation with MEA 
 
 A number of Council’s activities are organized in support and coordination with 
Ministry of External Affairs. Sapru House Lectures delivered by visiting foreign dignitaries 
were organized in coordination with MEA. The latest  Sapru House Lecture organized in 
collaboration with MEA was the lecture by H.E. Mr Fumio Kishida, Prime Minister of  Japan.  
Events such as the celebration of the 50th anniversary of India-Vietnam Diplomatic 
Relations, ‘Maitri Diwas’ the India-UK Strategic Futures Forum dialogue or the international 
conference on Shanghai Cooperation Organization Reconnect ~ Rejuvenate under India’s 
Presidency were conducted with MEA. MEA representatives regularly participated in a 
range of our activities. In some conferences and dialogues conceptualized and organized 
by ICWA, there was participation at the level of EAM, MoS, Foreign Secretary and 
Secretaries from the Ministry of External Affairs.  
  EAM Dr. S. Jaishankar addressed the India-UK Strategic Futures Forum, a Book 
Launch on Africa and Celebration of 5th Anniversary of India-Vietnam Comprehensive 
Strategic Partnership 2016-2021. 
  MoS Shri V. Muraleedharan participated in the Book Launch and ‘Africa Day’ 
commemoration. MoS Shri RajkumarRanjan Singh participated in the Conference on 30 
Years of India-ASEAN Friendship; and IORA-Indian Ocean Dialogue.  
  Foreign Secretary addressed the launch of the Book on ‘Covid and Indian 
Diplomacy’ and the India-Bangladesh MaitriDiwas, in which the Prime Minister of 
Bangladesh Sheikh Hasina sent a Video message. MEA Secretaries addressed ICWA’s 

P a g e | 47 
events on IORA, SCO and Africa. G-20 Coordinator and Former Foreign Secretary chaired 
a Talk on G-20 by Shri V Srinivas, Secretary, DAPRG. Indian Ambassadors abroad 
participated in ICWA’s Dialogues with its partners in the countries of their accreditation.”  
 
2.23 On being asked to explain the nature of collaboration of ICWA with MEA, the Ministry in 
their written reply have stated as under: 
 “Collaboration with MEA is carried out by ICWA to fulfill its mandate objectives. ICWA has 
collaborated with MEA in conducting research and organizing intellectual activities.  With 
regard to research, ICWA has fulfilled MEA’s requirements by conducting studies at 
Ministry’s request, for instance on Nepal, Afghanistan, Pakistan and Africa and has 
submitted the reports. It also contributed to discussion/research papers on IORA and 
UNSC and carried out the publication of the book Covid and Diplomacy. 
 
 ICWA also organizes activities in collaboration and participation of MEA. Representatives 
from MEA regularly participate in a range of its activities including at the level of EAM, MoS, 
Foreign Secretary and Secretaries from the Ministry of External Affairs. A number of 
Council’s activities such as Sapru House Lectures delivered by visiting foreign dignitaries 
are organized in support and coordination with the Ministry of External Affairs. The last 
Sapru house Lecture was delivered by the Prime Minister of Japan H.E. Mr Fumio Kishida 
on 20 March 2023. 
 
2.24 When enquired about the special studies and research projects and dialogues, lectures and 
special events which have been organized by ICWA in collaborating with the Ministry of External 
Affairs and other GOI entities, the Ministry in their written reply have stated as under: 
 
 “ The Council conducted following recent studies at the request of the Ministry of External 
Affairs MEA) and other GOI entities and has shared the Reports and Discussion papers. 
 Study on Nepal 
 Study on Afghanistan 
 China in Africa 
 African Students in India 
 Discussion Papers on IORA related to  Fishery Management,  Disaster Risk 
management, Maritime Safety and Security and Blue Economy and Industry 4.0 
Technologies 
 Publication on Covid and Diplomacy 
 Academic inputs for UNSC 
 Study on India – Latin America Defence Cooperation. 
 
The Council partnered with MEA to organize the following recent activities: 
 Discussion to commemorate Maitri Diwas: 50 the Anniversary of India- Bangladesh 
where Special video message of PM Sheikh Hasina was screened and 
 5th Anniversary of Diplomatic Relations between India and Vietnam in which 
President of Vietnam National Assembly delivered the keynote address 
 The India-UK Strategic Futures Forum 

P a g e | 48 
 International Conference on SCO- Reconnect ~ Rejuvenate 
 International Conference on Africa 
 Book launch and Discussion on Indian Diplomacy and Covid Response 
 
Sapru House Lectures by Foreign dignitaries. Some of the recent lectures include : 
 SHL by  Prime Minister of Japan, H.E. Mr Fumio Kishida 
 SHL by H.E. Mr. Csaba Korosi, President, 77th UN General Assembly (UNGA) 
 Lecture  by H.E. Cyril Ramaphosa, President of South Africa in which Prime 
Minister Shri Narendra Modi presided; 
 SHL by Mr. Abdulla Shahid, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Maldives; 
 SHL by Mr.  Nikola Selaković, Minister of Foreign Affairs of the Republic of Serbia 
 SHL by Ambassador Salman Al Farisi, Secretary General. 
 SHL by H.E. Mr Pradeep Kumar Gyawali, Minister of Foreign Affairs, Nepal 
 SHL by Rt. Hon. Winston Peters Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Foreign 
Affairs, New Zealand” 
 
 
2.25 Asked about how far ICWA has been successful in bringing about the changes in India’s 
foreign policy through collaboration with MEA, the Ministry have stated that the ICWA publications 
are regularly shared with concerned policy makers in MEA. ICWA is engaged with policy makers in 
MEA in its day-to-day activities especially as regards programme and dialogue activities, thereby 
contributing to the policy discourse.  
 
D. OUTREACH  
 
2.26 ICWA in a written note have submitted as under: 
 
i) Dissemination of ICWA Products 
 
 All ICWA publications in the form of  Issue Briefs, View Points, Special Reports and 
Sapru House Papers are not only shared on the Council’s website but are transmitted 
electronically every fortnight under “Sapru House Soundings” to Think Tanks, MOU 
partners (national and international), Members of the Governing Body & Council, Officers of 
MEA and to a large database of scholars, nationally and internationally. Select papers are 
also circulated by the Policy & Planning Division of the Ministry of External Affairs in its 
Foreign Policy daily report. 
 
ii) Memorandums of Understanding 
 
 ICWA has undertaken a conscious effort to expand its outreach and signed MoUs 
with new international and national partners. Currently, the Council has 89 MoU Partners 
arrangements. 
 

P a g e | 49 
 While the international MoUs enable ICWA to structure dialogue and exchange of 
views with international partners on topics of bilateral and topical interest. National MoUs 
expand the Council’s ability for outreach in terms of awareness creation on foreign policy 
and international affairs through joint event and joint studies,  
 Since April 2021, at the international level, the Council has signed MOUs with Al- 
Ahram Center for Political and Strategic Studies (ACPSS), Cairo, Egypt; Pontifical 
University of Peru; Center for Contemporary India and South Asia Studies of Colombia 
University, Belarusian Institute of Strategic Research, Minsk and Diplomatic Academy of 
Vietnam, Hanoi. 
 The Council also revived its MoU with partners, which were not active. It renewed 
its MoU with COMEXI, Mexico with which a dialogue is scheduled next year in February. It 
revived its MoU with CASA Asia, Spain with which ICWA had a dialogue after 10 years, 
which was very engaging and productive; It revived its MoU with Nigerian Institute of 
International Affairs (NIIA), Nigeria. ICWA, Indonesia and ISPI, Italy with whom joint 
intellectual activities are planned for next year. With the signing and reviving MoUs with 
partners in countries of Latin America, Africa and Asia, ICWA is building relations with 
Global South.  
 At the national level, the Council concluded MoU with Puducherry University, Delhi 
University, Punjab University and Federation of Indian Chambers of Commerce and 
Industry (FICCI). 
 
iii) Outreach Conference 
 ICWA as part of its national outreach activities has been sponsoring seminars/ 
conferences across India on foreign policy and international relations. ICWA provides a 
grant of rupees two lakh for this purpose.  These outreach conferences are organised in 
collaboration with several Indian universities and think tanks including Council’s MoU 
partners across the country. 
 Since April 2021, 14 outreach conferences in Universities have been supported by 
ICWA in which Council’s faculty members participated. Out of the 14 outreach conferences,  
10 were held outside Delhi in Amritsar (Punjab),Ajmer (Rajasthan), Kanpur (UP), Siddharth 
Nagar (Uttar Pradesh), Manipal (Karnataka), Kolkata (West Bengal), Aizawl (Mizoram), 
Bodh Gaya ( Bihar) and Ranchi (Jharkhand) .  
 It may be also noted that due to pandemic joint activities conducted in collaboration 
with Universities had reduced as most of the Universities were badly disrupted. However, 
with opening up of Universities, ICWA has been receiving a number of good proposals and 
it hopes to organize more such outreach conferences in the coming months. 
  The Council has made efforts to build synergies with other research 
institutions. Discussions have been held in collaboration with South Asian University, New 
Delhi, ASEAN India Centre/ RIS, USI and India Futures, New Delhi and CPPR, Kerala. 
 
iv) Internship 
In a written response , ICWA has submitted as under: 

P a g e | 50 
 To train young scholars interested in policy research on international affairs, ICWA 
promoted and expanded its internship programme to include not only paid interns who have 
completed their MA, but also non- paid interns, who are pursuing graduation and post- 
graduation. At present, 15 interns are currently engaged in the Council. 
 
2.27 The Committee sought to know about steps being taken by ICWA to attract young scholars 
and also the challenges being faced in this respect. The Ministry in their written reply have stated 
as under: 
 
“ICWA has a dynamic internship programme through which young researchers get an 
opportunity to get trained in conducting research on foreign policy and international affairs. 
Young researchers pursue research internship at ICWA for a period of 6 months 
extendable to 1 year. The Internship Programme is advertised on the Council’s website. 
Council receives applications throughout the year and Interns are selected and taken on a 
continuous basis.  
 Various steps are taken to attract young scholars. During outreach programmes at 
universities and academic institutions, ICWA representatives inform students about the 
internship opportunities.  
 The Council has entered into MoUs with universities for collaboration, including 
provision for students pursuing graduation and post-graduation in International Relations to 
intern at ICWA.  
 Some institutions from where ICWA has hosted interns recently include Delhi 
University, Pondicherry University, Christ University, Bengaluru, National Institute of 
Advanced Studies, Bengaluru, Manipal University, etc. Besides internship, ICWA has also 
started engaging students who have completed Masters as Research Associates at ICWA 
in its Research Programme to attract young scholars.”  
 
2.28 Adding further on the subject, DG, ICWA, during the sitting held on 22.11.2022 submitted 
as under: 
 
“We have been making efforts to reach out to the broader community of students and the 
others. We have signed 27 MoUs with different universities. We do reach out to those 
universities which have Departments relating to international relations. Just recently we 
have concluded two MoUs with universities which are working on international relations –
the University of Puducherry and the University of Delhi. Also, we do take students in on 
internship of three months and they also have been writing papers. We involve them to that 
extent. Apart from that, we work with some colleges and others. Not many, but we have 
done eight conferences and seminars with universities. For example, tomorrow we are 
supporting a conference in the University of Mizoram where one of our scholars would go 
and we are discussing the issue relating to Kaladan Project which is a very important 
project for India. So, we are working with other universities and we are doing seminars 
outside Delhi. We would be trying to also reach out and create greater awareness and 
profile about India 
 

P a g e | 51 
2.29 Adding further, DG, ICWA submitted as under: 
“We entirely agree that one of our mandates is also to generate interest amongst the 
younger generation on international relations and to provide a platform for them to come to 
ICWA. We engage in several ways. One is, of course, they come to join us and they work 
with us. They work with us for about six months and in those six months we try to involve 
them in diverse activities of the ICWA. They participate in conferences; they come to 
seminars. We also encourage all of them to write at least one paper. xxxx most of the 
interns who have come have written a paper on some aspect of international relations 
which we have found very useful and they have found it encouraging. When they do 
complete their internship, we do give them a kind of a letter and recommendation that they 
worked with us and many of them have come back and told us that our recommendation 
made a lot of difference and that they found good opportunities opening to them. Some of 
them even come to us before they apply for universities, I would say, overseas. They feel 
that if they work in ICWA, it gives them a certain advantage. So, the students do find it 
useful to come to ICWA. We would, of course, look at how to work with them and expand 
their association with us. Sometimes, we also try to go out to universities. We have gone 
out to several universities. We have supported conferences in different universities where 
we go and participate. The most recent one was when we out to Kanpur and spoke about 
75 years of India’s Foreign Policy. There we had a very enthusiastic participation and 
following these conferences, they get some interest or the other for these students. So, our 
effort would be to reach out as much as possible.” 
 
2.30 On the issue DG, ICWA also submitted as under: 
 
“The other point which was raised was how do we interact with the universities. We are 
working with the universities. We find it very useful because it helps them to acquaint with 
ICWA. Then, we get a lot of interest from them that can we work as interns in your 
institution. So, over the past few months, we have had interns coming in and coming to us 
from several institutions whether it was Pondicherry University, whether it was NIAS, 
Bengaluru, whether it was Manipal University. So, we do get a number of expressions of 
interest to come to ICWA and work there.”  
 
E.  Expanding Role of ICWA 
 
2.31 When asked whether the thrust areas of work of ICWA has changed since its establishment 
in the wake of India’s expanding international stakes, the Ministry in their written reply stated as 
under: 
 
 “The focus of ICWA since its inception has been on foreign policy and international affairs. 
From an initial focus on Asian Relations, Afro-Asian Solidarity and related area studies it 
has now evolved to cover area studies across the globe and thematic issues. The thematic 
and area studies that have received added focus in recent years include maritime studies, 
Indo-Pacific, Ukraine, Afghanistan, and multilateral institutions like SCO, G-20, IORA and 
the UN, Digital diplomacy, Gender issues in international affairs and SDG issues, etc.” 

P a g e | 52 
 
 (i) Special Centers set up by ICWA 
 
2.32 The Committee sought to know about Special Centers set up by ICWA to undertake 
research and analysis in specific area. The Ministry in their written reply have informed as under: 
“The Council has setup three Special Centers which include ‘Centre for Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization(SCO)’, ‘Centre on Migration Mobility and Diaspora Studies 
(CMMDS)’and ‘Centre for Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia Pacific (CSCAP)’to 
undertake focused research and dialogues on in order to contribute to emerging discourse 
on these specific areas. 
 
a) Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) Centre 
 
 The Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) Study Centre was established in 
ICWA in July 2021 at the request of the Ministry of External Affairs in view of India’s 
Presidency of SCO in 2022-23 and as a lead think tank engaged in SCO-related activities. 
In recent years, ICWA has been representing India as the nodal think tank in the Annual 
SCO Think Tank forum. SCO Secretary General Vladimir Norovhas addressed events 
organized by ICWA in 2020 and 2021. ICWA has proactively contributed to debates and 
discussions on SCO. The Centre has published research papers on themes relevant to the 
Organization. It recently organized an international conference on ‘Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization :Reconnect ~ Rejuvenate’ and SCO Resident Researcher Programme in 
collaboration with MEA as activities under the SCO presidency of India. 
 
b) CSCAP Coordination Centre 
 
 The Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia Pacific (CSCAP) serves as an 
important mechanism to build closer interaction with various countries in the ASEAN and 
the wider Indo-Pacific region. CSCAP is a Track 2 network of member institutions. Current 
members include the 10 ASEAN countries, Australia, Canada, China, India, Japan, South 
Korea North Korea, Mongolia, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Russia, the USA and the 
EU. CSCAP works by coordinating with the designated think tanks in each member 
country.  
  CSCAP Steering Committee meetings are held twice a year.  DG, ICWA, 
participated in the 55th and 56th Steering Committee meetings of CSCAP held in 
December 2021 and August 2022 respectively in virtual format. The next Steering 
Committee meeting is scheduled to be held in Jakarta in early December 2022.  
 
 
c) Centre on Migration Mobility and Diaspora Studies (CMMDS) 
  The Centre for Migration, Mobility and Diaspora Studies (CMMDS) at the Indian 
Council of World Affairs (ICWA) has come into effect on 1 August 2022 pursuant to 
decision of the Government of India to merge the erstwhile India Centre for Migration under 
the Ministry of External Affairs with the ICWA.  

P a g e | 53 
  CMMDS functions as the research unit on matters relating to international 
migration, mobility, and diaspora studies. It seeks to promote safe and orderly mobility of 
Indian nationals for employment abroad through research on mobility patterns, labour 
market assessments, procedural and data management issues, pre-departure orientation 
guidance, etc.  It undertakes empirical, analytical and policy related research on 
international migration and labour mobility as also pilot projects to document good 
practices. CMMDS follows a multi-pronged approach by organizing workshops, research 
studies and seminars including in collaboration with relevant academic institutions, State 
Governments, international organizations as feasible. 
 In the past, the Centre has collaborated with academic 
institutions/entities/organisations such as UN Women, European Union (EU), International 
Organisation for Migration (IOM), International Labour Organisation (ILO), International 
Centre for Migration Policy Development (ICMPD), Migration Policy Centre (EUI), the 
Indian Institute of Management Bangalore (IIMB), Tata Institute of Social Sciences (TISS), 
and Maastricht University (Faculty of Law) on various projects pertaining to migration and 
mobility including India-EU mobility, pre-departure orientation, safety and wellbeing of 
women workers, labour market assessments, data management, etc. 
  CMMDS envisions to lead research and analysis on international migration, mobility 
and diaspora to support informed policy making and enable strategic interventions for a 
coherent and harmonised response to the transnational movement of people from India.” 
 
2.33 The Committee sought to know the benefits being foreseen by the organization through 
merger of ICWA and ICM. The Ministry in their written reply have stated as under: 
 “Till date migration and mobility was not specifically in the research agenda of the Council. 
With the merger ICWA has started researching regularly in this area and publishing papers. 
It is also conducting programmatic activities related to the themes. It is also engaging with 
international organizations working in this area such as ILO.” 
 
2.34 The Committee also sought to know about the research findings of ICWA on the safety and 
security of the migrations of those who are unskilled. The Ministry in their written reply have stated 
as under: 
 
“The Centre for Migration, Mobility and Diaspora Studies at ICWA has carried out a range 
of studies on issues of migration and mobility. To aid policy making, Labour Market studies 
for countries in the Gulf, Southeast Asia, East Asia, Europe region have been undertaken. 
These studies provide a comprehensive assessment of economic outlook, demographic 
profile, skill gaps, shortages in labor force and entry regulations with respect to foreign 
workers in these countries. It also indicates projected increasing need for skilled foreign 
workers in many parts of the world as a result of population aging and shortages of skilled 
workers and also suggests that India is well placed to leverage this global need for workers. 
 The Centre’s research papers monitor global trends in migration and mobility 
drawing lessons for the Indian labor market. These papers provide policy relevant 
recommendations to implement migration and mobility agreements. To make India skills 

P a g e | 54 
capital of the world it is required to bridge the gap in skill certification in line with destination 
country requirements to facilitate mobility of Indian workers.” 
 
2.35 Asked about whether any tangible policy outcomes have emerged from the research and 
analysis provided by these centers, the Ministry stated as under: 
“In terms of tangible policy outcomes, the ICWA SCO center has proactively contributed to 
debates and discussions on SCO. It has represented India as the nodal think tank in the 
Annual SCO Think Tank forum. It is hosting the SCO Residents Researchers programme in 
which it hosts one scholar each month from one of the SCO countries starting December 
2022. It has organized a major international conference which saw participation of experts 
and policy makers from SCO member States, dialogue partner and observer countries, 
where debates and discussion focused on how to enhance cooperation on political, 
security, connectivity and people to people ties. It has come out with publication of research 
papers on themes relevant to the Organization by in- house faculty and eminent external 
experts which has been acknowledged to be very useful by policy makers and foreign and 
Indian scholars. 
 The Centre has carried out studies regarding safe and orderly mobility of Indian 
nationals through research on mobility patterns, labor market assessments, procedural and 
data management issues, pre-departure and orientation guidance. It has come out with 
research papers on issues related to migration and mobility for publication and also done 
research papers at the request of MEA.  
 With regard to Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia Pacific (CSCAP) ICWA 
centre participated in the 55th and 56th and 57th Steering Committee meetings of CSCAP, 
which is focused on inclusive regional security dialogue on general and specific issues and 
providing Track I with policy inputs.” 
 
ii)  CICA Think Tank Forum Coordinator  
 
2.36 The Conference on Interaction and Confidence Building Measures in Asia (CICA) is an 
initiative of Kazakhstan launched about 30 years ago and the CICA Secretariat is located in 
Astana, Kazakhstan. The CICA has established a Think Tank Forum, for interactions at the expert 
level and the Forum meets annually. ICWA has been nominated as the representative think tank to 
the Forum from India by the Ministry of External Affairs in 2021. ICWA has participated in the 
(CICA) Think Tank Forum, in December 2021 and November 2022. 
 
iii)  G-20 -Think 20 Task Force  
 
2.37 Think20 (T20) serves as an "idea bank" for the G20 bringing together think tanks and high-
level experts to contribute to the G20 agenda by providing analytical inputs for the G20’s decision-
making process. Its main activities will be spearheaded by 7 Task Forces (TFs). Each TF will 
curate the most effective proposals and solutions from researchers and institutions from the G20 

P a g e | 55 
countries to address the priorities of the Indian Presidency and build on the past Presidencies' 
work.  
 
2.38 Asked about the role of ICWA in India’s G20 Presidency, the Ministry in their written reply 
have stated that Think Tank 20 or T20 is one of the eleven Engagement Groups within G20. DG, 
ICWA is the Chair of Task Force 7 (TF7) on ‘Towards Reformed Multilateralism: Transforming 
Global Institutions and Frameworks’. In this capacity, ICWA has been participating in the T20 
meetings to advance the agenda of reformed multilateralism.  
 
2.39 They have further submitted that a curtain raiser talk on “G20 @ 2023 - The Road Map to 
Indian Presidency” by Shri V. Srinivas, Secretary, Deptt. of Administrative Reforms & Public 
Grievances, Government of India, chaired by: Shri Harsh Vardhan Shringla, G-20 Chief 
Coordinator & Former Foreign Secretary was held on 08 August 2022. ICWA has also published a 
book ‘G20@2023: The Roadmap to Indian Presidency’ written by Shri V. Srinivas, Secretary, 
DARPG, GoI and published papers by in-house faculty and external experts on themes related to 
G-20. 
 
2.40 The Committee sought to know whether ICWA has been successful in fulfilling the 
objectives of its establishment. In response the Ministry in their written reply stated as under: 
 ICWA has been successful in fulfilling its mandated objectives by stepping up efforts in 
conducting policy research in order to promote understanding on international affairs from 
an Indian perspective and act as a repository of knowledge and thinking on foreign policy 
issues. 
 The Council has a robust publication programme. It has come out with publication of 
research papers and book publications on several issues that have been at the top of 
foreign policy agenda, which have been found useful to its stakeholders. 
 It has increased the frequency of intellectual activities such as seminars, conferences, 
roundtables, and other discussions in both physical and hybrid mode. The deliberations 
have been found to be informative and useful. 
 The Council can strengthen its internship programme and its university outreach 
programme. 
 
F.  SAPRU HOUSE LIBRARY 
 
2.41 Functioning since 1955 at its present premises, the ICWA Library (popularly known as 
Sapru House Library) is a premier resource centre for Indian and foreign scholars over the past 

P a g e | 56 
seven decades. The Library is open for students, parliamentarians, legislators, academics, 
diplomats, historians, civil servants, journalists, students, subject experts, etc. 
 
2.42 It houses a rich collection on international relations, international law, international 
economy, foreign policy, political history and social sciences. Library has a stock of over 1,56,662 
books, journals, special collections of UN documents and EU documents. 
 
2.43 The Library is automated with a database searchable through Online Public Access 
Catalogue (OPAC) within the library premises and also from outside. The Library has 
arrangements with other libraries to facilitate consultation of their resources for ICWA scholars on 
the basis of ID cards issued by the Council. The Library has recently gone through a major 
renovation and the new reception and reading hall is now functional. This upgrade will make it 
more user-friendly with a better reading environment and a modern digital section. 
 
2.44 Book Committee: A Book Committee has been constituted under Chairmanship of DG, 
ICWA with academicians and former diplomats as members to serve as a mechanism to select 
books for purchase by the Sapru House Library. 
 
2.45 On being asked about the facilities available in Sapru House Library for public, 
academicians and research scholars as of now, the Ministry in their written reply have stated as 
under: 
“The Sapru House Library has been providing information services to its user in order to 
satisfy their information needs. The facilities are: 
 Bibliographic service: Bibliographies on specific topics are provided to the 
researchers on request. 
 Reference service (Traditional and Non-Traditional/Online/): Reference Service - 
Information is collected from the library against specific requests from researchers. 
 Digitized Institutional Repository Service:  One million Press clipping (275 national 
and international newspapers covering the period from 1950 onwards), Newspaper 
(The Hindu since 1933-2002), Rare Books (10 thousand, year 1727 onwards). 
 Select Dissemination of Information (SDI) (off line/online): Meant for individual 
users, mainly specialists, which is exclusively restricted to the area of interest of the 
user concerned. 
 Current Awareness Services (CAS) (off line/online):  Current awareness service 
provides current information to the user. 
 Electronic Database: Various online databases are accessible in the local network. 
 Online Public Access Catalogue (OPAC): The OPAC is a bibliographic data 
catalogue of a library's collection; it is searchable through author, title, any keyword. 

P a g e | 57 
 Computers and the internet: The Library an exclusive room for readers to access 
internet, search databases and e-journals and books. 
 Photocopying service:  The Library provides Photocopying service at nominal 
charges. 
 Personal Books: Readers are allowed to bring two personal books inside the library. 
 Inter-Library-Loan Facilities:  In case, document is not available in ICWA Library, 
the same is arranged from other libraries. This service is provided through 
DELNET. 
 Electronic Newspaper and Magazine: The Library subscribes to Magzter Database 
which contains 8,000+ magazines, newspapers etc in e-format. The newspapers 
and magazines are available in English as well as Hindi. 
 Smart Card: The Library issues smart card to its readers. 
 
2.46 The Committee also sought to know about the steps being taken for making Sapru House 
Library more accessible to a wider community of individuals, experts and scholars. In their written 
reply, the Ministry have stated as under: 
 
“Steps for making Sapru House Library more accessible to a wider community of 
individuals: 
 Remote Access: In order to provide 24x7 accesses to resources, the library is 
planning to provide remote access to it users so that they access library’s electronic 
resources 24x7 from anywhere. 
 Wi-Fi Facility: The Library has a plan to provide Wi-Fi services to its readers 
 Reader Friendly Environment: After the renovation, 
 Wider Publicity: The Library is in the process to create a handout for the library 
which would be distributed among the prospective readers 
 More and More Electronic Resources:  Keeping pace with the new environment, the 
Library will acquire more and more resources in the e-format. 
Bringing the Library’s Users Back: Due to Pandemic COVID 19, the Library was 
closed for almost two years. The readers have identified other ways to satisfy their 
information needs from other resources. Hence, bringing them back to the library 
was a challenge but now readership is back to full capacity.It houses a rich 
collection on international relations, international law, international economy, foreign 
policy, political history and social sciences. Library has a stock of over 
1,56,662books, journals, special collections of UN documents and EU documents. 
 
G.  ICWA Website/Social Media 
 
2.47 In its background note submitted to the Committee, ICWA has submitted that The Council 
is making full use of its websites in English and Hindi and social media platforms to publicize, 
project and share its research products as well as its intellectual activities. It is active on Facebook, 
Twitter, YouTube and LinkedIn. Its Twitter following has significantly risen and the Council 
continues to work to increase its social media presence and followers. 

P a g e | 58 
 
2.48 Adding further on the issue, DG, ICWA during the sitting held on 05.04.2023 submitted as 
under: 
 
“Just as a pointer, in the last year itself we have seen that our social media platform is now 
getting populated. We have got a 23 per cent increase in those who follow us on social 
media, on Twitter. We have also opened our account on LinkIt. So, we are trying to spread 
our presence in the social media platforms.” 
 
2.49 The Committee note that the Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA) work in close 
coordination with MEA to address issues that are at the top of the foreign policy agenda. As 
a statutory body, the mandate of  ICWA, inter alia, is to promote the study of Indian foreign 
policy and international affairs so as to develop a body of informed opinion; to promote 
India’s relations with other countries through discourse and exchange of ideas as well as to 
serve as a clearing house of information and knowledge regarding world affairs. Since the 
role and mandate of ICWA are quite comprehensive and  broad in scope, the Committee  
desire ICWA to continue focused research on areas of Government’s priority and  play a 
more effective role in policy formulations of the Government. In order to contribute to the 
shaping of an India narrative on foreign policy and advance India’s priorities effectively, 
ICWA should also strengthen its coordination with MEA and work in a proactive than 
reactive mode. 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
2.50 The Committee find that to fulfill its mandated objectives, ICWA has been 
undertaking a range of activities, of which research and disseminations form a core activity. 
This includes mainly the research works done by in- house faculty in the form of Issue 
Briefs, View Points and Special Reports- on topical issues having a bearing on Indian 
foreign policy interests. The Committee note that since April 2021 alone, ICWA has 
published 167 Issue Briefs, 136 View points, and 5 Special reports in addition to 25 Sapru 

P a g e | 59 
House papers which are comprehensive future- oriented policy research papers on selected 
topics related to foreign policy. In addition, guest articles and research papers by outside 
experts, research projects with MoU partners, special research projects at the request of 
Ministry of External Affairs and research projects with Ministry of Defence are undertaken 
by ICWA. The Committee find that over a period of time, ICWA has diversified its research 
both in terms of geography as well as thematic issues, keeping in view their relevance to 
India’s foreign and security policies. The areas and thematic studies that have received 
added thrust include maritime studies, Indo-Pacific, Ukraine, Afghanistan, and multilateral 
institutions like SCO, G-20, IORA and the UN. Since the research output is regularly shared 
with the Ministry and other stakeholders with an aim to influence policymakers and the 
public, the Committee recommend that ICWA should give added thrust to focused and in-
depth Research on emerging trends in international relations. At the same time, the thrust 
should be on quality output than quantity.      
(Recommendation No. 14) 
2.51 The Committee further note that the sanctioned strength of the Research Faculty in 
ICWA is 30 of which 01 post has been kept for Director (Research), 05 posts for Senior 
Research Fellows, 12 posts for Research Fellows, 01 post for Research Associate and 05 
posts for Research Interns. The Committee have been informed that one of the challenges 
being faced by ICWA in its working is getting quality researchers, especially when ICWA 
selection criteria focuses more on the expertise, knowledge and presentation skills in 
addition to academic qualifications like Ph.D, Masters, etc. In order to rope in Research 
Faculty with domain expertise and in-depth understanding of broad global themes/trends, 
proper incentive structure including provisions for annual increment and granting 
allowances is a pre-requisite. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the ICWA may 

P a g e | 60 
come up with such proposals at the earliest and implement the same after the approval of 
the Governing Body and Governing Council. The Ministry should also enhance the 
allocation accordingly. The Committee also desire that to give a younger profile to the 
Research Faculty, additional hiring of Research Associates may also be considered on a 
need basis. The Committee may be apprised of the progress in the matter. 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
2.52 The Committee note that ICWA brings out quite a wide range of publications which 
include Sapru House Papers, Special Publications, ICWA Guest Columns, Viewpoint, Issue 
Briefs, Special Reports, Oral history Project, etc. The Council also publishes books 
covering a wide spectrum of subjects which include single authored books, edited books 
and conference proceedings. Since April 2021 alone, ICWA has published 32 books which 
include 18 single authored and edited books and 14 conference proceeding books. The 
Committee find that the Council has brought out translations of some of its books/ 
publications into Hindi and regional languages. ICWA has also submitted that all 
Viewpoints, Issue Briefs, Sapru House Papers, Special Reports have been put on the ICWA 
website both in English and the Hindi version. The Committee really appreciate the initiative 
taken by ICWA towards getting its various publications translated into Hindi.  At the same 
time, the Committee though understand that it is a challenge to get quality translators who 
have knowledge of international affairs to understand the tone, tenor and the nuances of 
terminologies, however, MEA may also persuage the ICWA to look into the possibilities of 
getting its publications translated into vernacular languages as well so that their work can 
reach to maximum number of citizens.  
(Recommendation No. 16) 

P a g e | 61 
2.53 The Committee note that in pursuance of its mandate, ICWA undertakes numerous 
intellectual activities to promote India’s relations with other countries and discuss India’s 
policy towards international affairs. These activities include bilateral dialogues, 
international conferences, seminars, lectures and discussions. The Committee also note 
that since April 2021, ICWA has organized 126 events which were mix of lectures, talks, 
bilateral dialogues, international and national seminars, book launches, panel and round-
table discussions. The Committee have been informed that these events were organized in 
physical and hybrid mode. The Committee appreciate the initiative of ICWA in organizing 
the events through the digital hybrid mode too as it would have enabled easier participation 
of scholars/experts from abroad and  in turn would have had a positive impact on  making 
the conversations more engaging and productive. The Committee have been given to 
understand that a number of Council’s activities are organized in coordination with and 
support of the  MEA and its representatives have been regularly participating in a range of 
activities organized by ICWA. The Committee note that events such as the celebration of the 
50th anniversary of India-Vietnam Diplomatic Relations, ‘Maitri Diwas’ the India-UK Strategic 
Futures Forum dialogue or the international conference on Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization Reconnect ~ Rejuvenate under India’s Presidency have been conducted by 
ICWA with the support MEA. The Committee further note that a number of Council’s 
activities such as Sapru House Lectures delivered by visiting foreign dignitaries are also 
organized in support and coordination with the Ministry of External Affairs. The Committee 
appreciate that  some of the conferences and dialogues have the participation of External 
Affairs Minister, Minister of State, Foreign Secretary and Secretaries from the Ministry of 
External Affairs. The Committee have also been informed that the ICWA  conducts studies 
at Ministry’s request, for instance on Nepal, Afghanistan, Pakistan and Africa and have 

P a g e | 62 
submitted the reports. They have also contributed to discussion/research papers on IORA 
and UNSC and even carried out the publication of the book ‘Covid and Diplomacy’. The 
Committee have been informed that these ICWA publications are regularly shared with 
concerned policy makers in MEA but without sharing with Parliamentarians.  The Committee 
while recognizing the  contribution of ICWA to India’s foreign policy making process urge 
ICWA to make added efforts to increase the frequency of its intellectual activities such as 
seminars, conferences, roundtables, and other discussions, both in physical and hybrid 
mode and also ensure the participation of Parliamentarians to achieve its mandate. 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
2.54 The Committee have been informed that as part of its national outreach activities, 
ICWA has been sponsoring seminars/conferences across India on foreign policy and 
international relations. The Committee have further been informed that these outreach 
conferences are organised in collaboration with several Indian universities and think tanks 
including Council’s MoU partners across the country. The Committee, however, note that 
since April 2021, only 14 outreach conferences in Universities have been supported by 
ICWA. In this respect, ICWA has submitted that due to pandemic, joint activities conducted 
in collaboration with Universities had reduced as most of the Universities were badly 
disrupted by COVID 19 Pandemic. It has been further submitted that with the opening up of 
Universities, ICWA has been receiving a number of good proposals. The Committee are  
hopeful that ICWA is able to organize more conferences in the coming months and urge 
them to extend support for national/international conferences by recognised universities 
and UGC centres on themes of mutual interest in international relations and foreign policy. 
The Committee also desire that ICWA put in serious efforts to have more collaborations with 

P a g e | 63 
other like-minded institutions, national and foreign think tanks and universities to build 
complementarities and explore synergies.  
(Recommendation No. 18) 
2.55 The Committee understand that ICWA is the country’s oldest foreign policy think 
tank which began seriously the study of international affairs and debate on foreign policy in 
a consciously non-partisan manner.  The Committee also note that over the years ICWA has 
constantly reinvented itself with the changing times. The Committee are, however, of the 
view that despite setting new benchmark in terms of its institutional strength to influence 
the policy formulations through research and publications, policy debates and discussions, 
outreach to other institutions, including through translation of publications, the general 
public is not aware of the activities of ICWA. The Committee are of the opinion that lack of 
public awareness about the activities of ICWA will in the long run hinder its growth and 
development. The Committee, therefore, desire that ICWA should come up with more people 
centric programmes and activities which invite participation from the general public, 
especially, the student fraternity.  
(Recommendation No. 19) 
2.56 The Committee note that one of the mandates of ICWA is to generate interest 
amongst the younger generation on international relations and to provide a platform for 
them to come to ICWA. The Committee understand that the ICWA has an internship 
programme through which young researchers are invited to get trained in conducting 
research on foreign policy and international affairs. These Young researchers can pursue 
research internship at ICWA for a period of 6 months, extendable to 1 year. The Internship 
Programme is advertised on the Council’s website. The Council receives applications 

P a g e | 64 
throughout the year and Interns are selected and taken. The Committee also note that the 
Council has entered into MoUs with 27 universities for collaboration, including provision for 
students pursuing graduation and post-graduation in International Relations to intern with 
ICWA. The Committee have further been informed that to train young scholars interested in 
policy research on international affairs, ICWA has promoted and expanded its internship 
programme to include not only paid interns who have completed their MA, but also non- 
paid interns, who are pursuing graduation and post- graduation. It has also been submitted 
that during outreach programmes at universities and academic institutions, representatives 
from ICWA inform students about the internship opportunities which generally acquaints 
the student fraternity about ICWA and also generates interest in their internship 
program. The Committee have been told that the interns who join are given opportunities to 
be involved in diverse activities of the ICWA. They participate in conferences, go to 
seminars and are also encouraged to write at least one paper. Upon completion of 
internship a recommendation letter is also given to them. While the Committee appreciate 
the steps being taken by ICWA to promote its internship program, they are disappointed to 
note that the results do not commensurate the efforts as only 15 interns are seen currently 
engaged in the Council. The Committee, therefore, urge upon ICWA to evaluate their 
internship program, make more concerted efforts to reach out to the student’s community  
and take steps to put in place an eco-system wherein more and more students are 
encouraged to join the internship programme of ICWA and contribute in its mission.  
(Recommendation No. 20) 
2.57 The Committee note that since its inception the thrust areas of work of ICWA has 
evolved over the years. From an initial focus on Asian Relations, Afro-Asian Solidarity and 
related area studies it has now evolved to cover area studies across the globe and thematic 

P a g e | 65 
issues such as maritime studies, Indo-Pacific, Ukraine, Afghanistan, and multilateral 
institutions like SCO, G-20, IORA and the UN, Digital diplomacy, Gender issues in 
international affairs and SDG issues, etc. The Committee have been informed that as part of 
its expansion programme ICWA has setup three Special Centers namely Centre for 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), Centre on Migration Mobility and Diaspora 
Studies (CMMDS) and Centre for Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia Pacific 
(CSCAP) to undertake focused research and dialogues in specific areas in order to 
contribute to emerging discourse on these areas. The Committee have been told that the 
Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO) Study Centre is a lead think tank engaged in 
SCO-related activities. The Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia Pacific (CSCAP) is a 
Track 2 network of member institutions which serves as an important mechanism to build 
closer interaction with various countries in the ASEAN and the wider Indo-Pacific region. 
The Committee are also given to understand that these centres publish their own research 
papers on themes relevant to the organization which have been acknowledged by policy 
makers and foreign and Indian scholars to be very useful. The Committee appreciate the 
proactive steps being taken by ICWA to have focused research and dialogues in specific 
areas. The Committee urge ICWA to further strengthen and widen its endevours in area 
specific research through its special centres and support the MEA to address issues that 
are at the top of the foreign policy agenda more effectively. 
(Recommendation No. 21) 
2.58 The Committee note that the Centre for Migration, Mobility and Diaspora Studies 
(CMMDS) at the Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA) has come into effect on 1 August 
2022 pursuant to decision of the Government of India to merge the erstwhile India Centre for 
Migration under the Ministry of External Affairs with the ICWA. CMMDS functions as the 

P a g e | 66 
research unit on matters relating to international migration, mobility, and diaspora studies. 
It is given to understand that CMMDS seeks to promote safe and orderly mobility of Indian 
nationals for employment abroad through research on mobility patterns, labour market 
assessments, procedural and data management issues, pre-departure orientation guidance, 
etc.  and undertakes empirical, analytical and policy related research on international 
migration and labour mobility as also pilot projects to document good practices. The 
Committee find that various categories of agreements like Labour Manpower Agreements 
(LMA), Migration and Mobility Partnership Agreements (MMPA) are being signed by India on 
migration and mobility with several countries. While expressing their appreciation about 
such agreements which facilitate safe, orderly and legal migration for our workfoce, the 
Committee recommend that a robust mechanism for periodic assessment of such 
agreements may be devised and awareness about the opportunities that arise from the 
agreement  may be spread among the public. 
(Recommendation No. 22) 
2.59 The Committee note that Think Tank 20 or T20 is one of the eleven Engagement 
Groups within G20. The Committee have been informed that DG, ICWA is the Chair of Task 
Force 7 (TF7) on ‘Towards Reformed Multilateralism: Transforming Global Institutions and 
Frameworks’. In this capacity, ICWA has been participating in the T20 meetings to advance 
the agenda of reformed multilateralism.  It has also been submitted that a curtain raiser talk 
on “G20 @ 2023 - The Road Map to Indian Presidency” was held on 08 August 2022. It is 
further seen that ICWA has  published a book ‘G20@2023: The Roadmap to Indian 
Presidency’  and brought out papers by in-house faculty and external experts on themes 
related to G-20. The Committee also hope that India’s core interests are upheld during its 

P a g e | 67 
G20 Presidency by ICWA and that it utilizes this opportunity to ensure that the priorities set 
by India during its G20 Presidency are carried forward beyond the Indian Presidency.      
(Recommendation No.23) 
2.60 The Committee note that the ICWA Library (popularly known as Sapru House Library) 
has been a premier resource centre for both Indian and foreign scholars for the past seven 
decades. The Library houses a rich collection on international relations, international law, 
international economy, foreign policy, political history and social sciences. The Committee 
also note that the Sapru House Library has various user friendly facilities such as 
Bibliographic service, the Digitized Institutional Repository Service, Various online 
databases, Reference service etc. for use of public, academicians and research scholars. It 
is seen that the Library is open for students, parliamentarians, legislators, academics, 
diplomats, historians, civil servants, journalists, students, subject experts, etc. The 
Committee have also been told that the recent renovation and upgradation have made it 
more user-friendly with a better reading environment and a modern digital section. While 
the Committee are happy to note the various steps are being taken by ICWA for making 
Sapru House Library more accessible to a wider community of individuals, experts and 
scholars such as remote access, Wi-Fi Facility, reader friendly environment, etc., the 
Committee urge upon ICWA to give wider publicity of the facilities available in the Sapru 
House so that the Library is used to its full capacity. 
(Recommendation No. 24) 
2.61 The Committee note that the Council makes use of its websites in English and Hindi 
as well as social media platforms to publicize, project and share its research products and 
its intellectual activities. The Committee have also been informed that the Council is active 
on Facebook, Twitter, YouTube and LinkedIn and that there has been 23 per cent of 

P a g e | 68 
increase followers on Twitter. Since social visibility is a necessity for any organization to 
grow and social media platforms are an important tool to achieve the same,the Committee 
encourage ICWA to continue dissemination of its publications on Council’s website, and 
social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, YouTube, LinkedIn and fortnightly 
electronic notifications. The Committee also urge ICWA to take serious steps to spread their 
presence in other social media platforms such as Instagram, Snapchat as well to provide 
greater visibility to activities of ICWA. 
(Recommendation No. 25) 
 

P a g e | 69 
Chapter- III 
 
RESEARCH AND INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (RIS) 
 
I. OVERVIEW  
 
3.1 Research and Information System for Developing Countries (RIS) is an autonomous policy 
research institute that specialises in issues related to international economic development, trade, 
investment and technology. RIS is envisioned as a forum for fostering effective policy dialogue and 
capacity-building among developing countries on global and regional economic issues.  
3.2 The focus of the work programme of RIS is to promote South-South Cooperation and 
collaborate with developing countries in multilateral negotiations in various forums. RIS is engaged 
across inter-governmental processes of several regional economic cooperation initiatives. Through 
its intensive network of think tanks, RIS seeks to strengthen policy coherence on international 
economic issues and the development partnership canvas. 
 
3.3 RIS is unique among Indian policy research institutions for its global connect with 
international organisations and widest reach among developing country research scholars, 
institutions, think-tanks and universities. This is reflected in the platforms and partnerships created 
by RIS in recent years and the level of participation in its conferences and workshops, and also 
intense engagements in domestic policy debates with several Ministries, State Governments and 
institutions.  
 
3.4 Historically, RIS has been able to establish connects with economic policy hubs across the 
world and with leading economists and thinkers. Partnerships at regional forums based on its 
profile and expertise in international economics, international development, multilateral economic 
governance and regional economic cooperation has served RIS mandate well. RIS has deepened 
specific areas of research and outreach. With its research engagement and partnerships, RIS has 
evolved much beyond its role as an institution for developing country issues and for providing 
policy inputs to the Government of India as a global institution with Indian roots.  
 

P a g e | 70 
 
II. HISTORICAL BACKGROUND 
 
3.5 RIS was set up in May 1983 in New Delhi as a, registered society for leading policy 
research for developing countries on international economic policy issues. The institute is 
mandated to advise the Government of India on all matters pertaining to multilateral and regional 
economic issues that may be referred to it from time to time including collaborative arrangements 
with other developing countries.  
 
3.6 The institution owes its origin to the days of the Non-aligned Movement (NAM), and in the 
various Group of 77 (G-77), it was increasingly recognized that developing countries should have 
their own institutional support for devising policy options and negotiating strategies on international 
economic and development issues for promoting and safeguarding their interests in a more 
effective manner. In this regard, the Meeting of the Coordinating Bureau of Non- Aligned Countries, 
held in Algiers, in 1976 decided to have in place such a system. The Economic Declaration of the 
Fifth NAM Summit held in Colombo in 1976 marked the beginning of the Research and Information 
System and the first meeting of RIS was held in Belgrade, Yugoslavia on January 23-25, 1979.  
 
3.7 The Seventh Conference of Heads of State or Government of Non-Aligned Countries, held 
in New Delhi on March 7-12, 1983, recommended that RIS should pursue work relating to 
international economic relations and development of economic and technical cooperation. In order 
to give the new set up effectiveness and efficiency, RIS was established as a registered Society in 
May 1983 by the Government of India. The Governing Council of RIS has the participation of 
Ministry of External Affairs, Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Department of 
Science and Technology and Ministry of Commerce. RIS is envisaged as a multi-country forum to 
serve as a Think-Tank of the developing countries on regional and multilateral economic issues 
among other.  
 
III. FUNDING OF RIS: 
 
3.8 The Committee understand that the MEA is the nodal division for processing the grant in 
aid for RIS as well as for administrative matters pertaining to the governance of RIS. Regarding the 
total funds provided to RIS, it has been as submitted as under:- 

P a g e | 71 
Rs. In Crore 
Statement showing funds received and utilization from MEA, funds from other sources 
YEAR Grant in Aid 
From MEA 
Funds from 
Projects Grand Total Combined 
utilization 
2021-2022 22.19* 12.96 35.15 26.34 
2022-2023 14.19 7.75 21.94 24.21 (unaudited) 
Note: *Also includes one-time capital grant of Rs.10.22 crore 
 
3.9 The Ministry in this regard have submitted that the funding provided to RIS through annual 
grants is meant for the day to day functioning of the institution in terms of pay and allowances to its 
employees, including its research Faculty, which conducts its policy research studies and 
programmes on traditional and emerging issues of profound importance to the government in the 
field of its domain knowledge covering international trade, finance, investment, development, 
science, technology and innovation, apart from regional connectivity and key priorities of the 
government, including special focus on the Indo-Pacific regional and maritime economy. It also 
enables the institution to hold national and international meetings, seminars and conferences with 
participation of subject experts with the participation of national, regional and global scholars. 
 
IV. ORGANISATIONAL STRUCTURE OF RIS: 
 
  
 
 
3.10 The Governing Body/Governing Council of RIS has ex-officio participation of Ministry of 
External Affairs, Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance, Department of Science and 
Chairperson 
appointed 
by PMO 
Vice-
Chairperson 
and Director 
General 
appointed 
by MEA 

P a g e | 72 
Technology and Ministry of Commerce.  It also has representation of eminent persons nominated 
by the Government of India. 
 
3.11 Research Advisory Council of RIS comprising of eminent experts, provides guidance about 
the research agenda of the institute on regular basis keeping in view the important emerging 
economic scenario at regional, sub-regional and multilateral levels. 
 
 
V. MANDATE AND ACTIVITIES OF RIS  
 
3.12 RIS is envisioned as a forum for fostering effective policy dialogue and capacity-building 
among developing countries on global and regional economic issues. Since its inception, the focus 
of the work programme of RIS has been to promote South-South Cooperation and collaborate with 
developing countries in multilateral negotiations in various forums. RIS has also been engaged with 
several inter-governmental processes, regional economic cooperation initiatives and think tank led 
platforms across the world.  
 
a ) Aims and objectives of RIS 
 
 Promoting self-reliance among developing countries 
 Forging effective links among research institutions of developing countries 
 Undertaking analytical studies on economic cooperation among developing countries 
 Advising on multilateral and regional economic issues 
 
3.13 Explaining the mandate of RIS, DG, RIS during the sitting held on 05.04.203 submitted as 
under: 
 
 “RIS is largely focusing on issues relating to international trade, investment, technology, 
and finance. We were established in 1983 as part of India’s commitment for Non- Aligned 
Movement, and for Global South. So, our work focuses exclusively on South-South 
cooperation where we have tried to focus on four verticals which are there. One is in terms 
of the global governance and the economic architecture. We focus on issues like the WTO; 
we focus on issues that are related to WIPO. The second vertical is more about trade, 
investment, finance, and economic cooperation. There, the bilateral trade agreements that 
are coming up. Now, Government has growing emphasis on free trade agreements. So, 
RIS research teams are involved in several FTA studies which are ex ante studies. 
  These are the four verticals that we have. Global economic cooperation and 
governance is the first vertical xxxx. Within this, I was mentioning that we focus on issues 

P a g e | 73 
that are related to WTO, WIPO, etc. The second is about trade investment in economic 
cooperation where we do all the issues that are related to India’s bilateral trade agreements 
and multilateral trade agreements. So, there are several FTAs which are coming up. For 
instance, the hon. Member raised the issue about Africa. RIS just did a study for Ministry of 
Commerce and Industry which is focusing on India-Africa Free Trade Agreement as to what 
and how it could come up. We also did a study with India-Mauritius xxxx. Eventually, the 
Government took it up, and during the visit of hon. External Affairs Minister, this bilateral 
agreement with Mauritius was signed. xxxxx The third one is more about connectivity which 
hon. Prime Minister has suggested. RIS has been named to look into BIMSTEC and the 
food value chain, how agriculture can traction within a work programme, and what kind of 
food value chains may come up with Bangladesh, Bhutan, and Nepal, and there we partner 
with institutions from these countries and also with some of the others who have 
specialization in value chains. So, we are focusing on that and trying to bring in trade 
facilitation and connectivity as part of that. The fourth vertical is focusing on new 
technologies as to what is the impact of new technologies on India and other developing 
countries. There we have evolved our own analytical frameworks. For instance, there are 
issues related to access, equity, and inclusion, when we talk about new technologies. We 
are focusing on how they would pan out in terms of their impact, and for that, we had done 
the assessment of international cooperation with Department of Science and Technology. 
xxxx. We are also working very closely with AYUSH Ministry which is also there into the 
assessment. All of this falls under our fourth vertical which is there. Apart from this, we 
have launched three major initiatives which are bringing in specific actors together. For 
instance, with universities, RIS has a think-tank connect. So, what is happening is that most 
of the policy research is with research institutions. We are trying to engage universities 
building up capacities through the Ph.D. colloquiums and summer schools so that they also 
pick up the techniques and advances that are there.” 
 
b) Role of MEA in RIS 
 
3.14 Asked about the role of MEA in RIS, the Ministry in their written reply have stated as under: 
 
 “Apart from its annual financial support, MEA continues to actively assess the work 
programme of RIS so that it is in alignment with the evolving priorities and focus areas of 
India’s foreign policy goals. Foreign Secretary and Secretary (Economic Relations) in the 
MEA attend the meetings of the Governing Council of RIS and share their vision which 
forms a vital part of the work programme of RIS. 
  At the functional level, PP&R Division maintains regular contact with RIS. It also 
coordinates with various divisions of the Ministry where inputs and programmatic & 
research support might be required from RIS. Senior officials of the MEA participate in the 
wide range of conferences, dialogues and workshops organized by RIS on core areas of 
India’s interest in the geopolitics and geoeconomics, trade, finance, development, 
neighbourhood connectivity and South South Cooperation and share their perspectives on 
emerging issues of critical importance to India. 
  MEA also works with RIS to hold track 1.5 and 2 dialogues on emerging issues so 
as to promote India’s foreign policy objectives. RIS also organizes the meetings of BRICS 
and IBSA Academic and Civic forums with the support of MEA. 
 

P a g e | 74 
c) Role of RIS in MEA’s Policy Planning 
 
3.15 The Committee sought to know about the role of RIS in providing intellectual support to the 
Policy Planning and Research Division of the Ministry. The Ministry in their written reply have 
stated as under: 
 “RIS remains in regular contact with PP&R Division and other Divisions in the MEA and 
carries forward its research programme well aligned to Government’s   evolving priorities 
and focus areas of India’s foreign policy goals. 
  RIS has a comprehensive programme of research collaboration with international 
organizations and academic bodies of other countries. The outcome of such collaboration 
is usually in the form of academic research, which is published in various indexed 
academic journals and is regularly shared by RIS with PP&R Division and gets reflected in 
its compendium for wider internal circulation among policy makers.  These important inputs 
are also appropriately utilized by the Division in its bilateral and multilateral policy planning 
dialogues with other Foreign Offices, preparation of research papers, policy briefs and 
situation reports pertaining to global developments and international affairs in general and 
India’s foreign policy in particular and in the preparation of the Annual Report of the 
Ministry.   
  RIS also organizes collaborative conferences and seminars and interactions with 
the academia   on core areas of India’s interest in the geopolitics and geoeconomics, trade, 
finance, development, neighbourhood connectivity and South-South Cooperation in 
partnership with its wide network of think tanks and institutional and academic partners. 
These interactions provide the Ministry critical policy making inputs on emerging knowledge 
domains and technologies and also serve as important platforms for the articulation, 
discussion and dissemination of India’s foreign policy and views among national and global 
audiences. Senior officials of the MEA also participate in them and share their perspectives 
on emerging issues of critical importance to India. 
  RIS also conducts rigorous studies on issues connected with regional trade and 
economic integration and brings out its reports which are also utilized by the Government 
for effective policy articulation on critical issues.  Based on inputs received from various 
think tanks, including RIS, the Government structures its short, medium and long-term 
policies for its neighbouring countries. RIS also helps the government by bringing regional 
and countries experts who regularly contribute to its research programme and also take 
part in policy dialogues for a better understanding by the government of ground realities on 
such matters in the neighbouring countries. 
  In consultation with the Government, RIS also holds track 1.5 and 2 dialogues on 
emerging issues to promote India’s foreign policy objectives. 
  Under its University Connect Programme, RIS organizes a wide range of national 
seminars in collaboration with universities and academic across the country to generate 
greater awareness on foreign policy issues.  With the support of MEA, RIS is currently 
organizing its G20 Lecture Series in 75 universities across the country as part of jan 
bhagedari and connect with the youth of the country and to generate awareness about the 
importance of India’s G20 Presidency. 
  In addition, RIS also conducts IBSA Fellowship Programme with support of MER 
Division, organizes five ITEC courses annually with support of DPA-II, organizes an annual 

P a g e | 75 
international conference on South-South Cooperation with the support of MER Division, 
and Delhi Dialogue with ASEAN member states with the support of Indo-Pacific  Division in 
the MEA.  RIS also organizes the meetings of BRICS and IBSA Academic and Civic forums 
with the support of MEA.” 
 
d) RIS and issues of economic cooperation between North and South. 
 
3.16 The Committee also sought to know whether the mandate of RIS covers issues of 
economic cooperation between North and South. In response the Ministry have in their written 
reply stated as under: 
 
 “ In the emerging global scenario the sense of interdependence is gaining substantial 
importance cutting across Global South and North and the way forward for the well-being of 
Global South is to forge greater convergences with the North in areas of collective interest 
for humanity. While guiding the Global South to defend and promote its core trade and 
economic interests at bilateral, regional and global level and during intergovernmental 
negotiations, RIS works as a bridge to bring both sides together to identify best possible 
solutions for accelerated growth of Global South. RIS is nurturing the constituencies in 
Global North which are also amenable  to defend and promote the rights of Global South 
and invites such subject experts to take part in deliberations on issues affecting the core 
developmental interest of Global South with the help of Global North.  The best example of 
this is the Delhi Process pioneered by RIS which has gained global importance over the 
years with the participation of subject experts from the North and South to deliberate on 
best possible solutions for the growth of Global South with the engagement of Northern 
countries along with intensified South South Cooperation. It is also clearly reflected by the 
far closer engagement of RIS with Triangular Cooperation in association with the 
industrialized countries, including US, Japan, Germany and other interested countries, to 
take up development projects financed by Northern countries for the economic 
development of developing countries with the help of India. As developmental aid from 
Northern countries to the South is rapidly shrinking, they are showing their keen interest to 
intensify their engagement through Triangular Cooperation to retain their influence in 
Global South to the best possible extent” 
 
3.17 Asked further whether RIS has looked towards going beyond the South – South 
Cooperation to cooperation with other countries, Ministry in its written reply as under: 
 
 “In the backdrop of shrinking development assistance by Northern countries to Global 
South and lack interest by them to fulfill their financial commitments combined with the 
growing threat of financial insecurity and indebtedness posed by s ocalled development 
assistance extended by China to some of the developing countries in the South, RIS is 
proactively encouraging the  Northern Countries for accelerated development in South 
through new modalities of engagement.  Being a strong advocate for the global acceptance 
of plurality of perspectives on development issues beyond the conditionalities packed 
Western international developmental paradigm promoted by OECD DAC countries, RIS is 

P a g e | 76 
constantly working to engage them to defend and promote the interests of the developing 
countries. In the recent past, RIS has entered into research partnership agreements with 
the financial support of Northern partners to promote some of the best global practices for 
the economic development of Global South.  The establishment of Global Development 
Centre at RIS with the support of DfID (now FCDO) and its engagement of Bill Melinda 
Gates Foundation with GDC and the partnership with Deutsche Gesellschaft fuer 
Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ) to carry out research studies on Triangular 
Cooperation clearly show that RIS is moving towards the engagement of its Northern 
partners for accelerated economic development of Global South. Similarly, on attainment of 
SDGs, financial inclusion and gender equality, reformed multilateralism etc. RIS actively 
promotes the engagement of its Northern partner institutions, along with eminent voices 
from the Global South, to bring both sides together for forging working partnerships.”  
 
 
VI. FRAME WORK OF RIS WORK PROGRAMME. 
 
3.18 The broad framework of the RIS work programme is based on four pillars: 
Global Economic Governance and Cooperation 
Trade, Investment and Economic Cooperation 
Trade Facilitation, Connectivity and Regional Cooperation 
New Technologies and Development Issues 
 
 
3.19 Asked to explain how RIS has used its long-standing expertise in International Economics 
and development issues in policy-making of the country, the Ministry in its written reply have inter- 
alia stated as under: 
  “ Global Economic Governance and Cooperation 
 
 RIS since its inception has undertaken core research on multilateral trade flows and 
governance architecture and analyses global economic trends in investment, technology 
and development. RIS has particularly focused on the role of multilateral institutions like the 
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), United 
Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD), World Intellectual Property 
Organization (WIPO), World Trade Organization (WTO), United Nations Economic and 
Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UN ESCAP), United Nations Environment 
Programme (UNEP), International Monetary Fund (IMF), World Bank, World Health 
Organization (WHO), etc. from the perspective of developing countries. This places RIS 
uniquely among Indian think-tanks that have long standing expertise in International 
Economics and development issues. Research on trade, investment and technology is 
closely linked with issues of industrial development in the global South. RIS publications in 
these areas are well acclaimed and internationally recognized. 
  In the above areas, RIS has supported policy-making across relevant Ministries and 
Departments of the Government of India, in some cases with State Governments also. The 
concept, paradigm and empirics of South-South Cooperation from the Indian perspective is 
of particular significance which has strengthened the understanding of Indian development 

P a g e | 77 
cooperation. As India assumed the presidency of the G20, RIS has linked its research 
activities with G20 issues in recent years by developing a dedicated work programme that 
has organized workshops and seminars and introduced new publications. Towards 
generating robust evidence from other countries RIS has created several platforms of 
engagement with international scholars and policymakers like the - Network of Southern 
Think Tanks (NeST) and has partnered with networks like Paris Peace Forum, South Asia 
Network on the Sustainable Development Goals (SANS) and the South Asia Centre for 
Policy Studies (SACEPS). The focus areas in this pillar are: Multilateralism and Multilateral 
Institutions, World Trade Organization (WTO), International Financial Institutions (IFIs), etc.; 
Working for a multipolar world; Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs); South-South and 
Triangular Cooperation; Plurilateral Global Governance structures; Global Governance of 
Investment, Finance, Technology; Paradigm shift in the definition of development in post-
pandemic world; and Blue Economy. 
 
Trade, Investment and Economic Cooperation 
 
  Rise of mega-FTAs, inclusion of non-tariff barriers and non-trade issues such as 
IPR, labour standards, environmental standards, etc. in trade negotiations, proliferation of 
protectionist trade measures and adoption of plurilateral route has complicated trade policy 
choices of the developing countries. RIS undertakes studies, monitors the progress in 
negotiations and advises the governments and other stakeholders about the likely 
outcomes on: Rise of mega-Free Trade Agreements and Trade Policy; Bay of Bengal 
Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), Indian Ocean 
Rim Association (IORA), India, Brazil and South Africa (IBSA), Brazil, Russia, India, China, 
and South Africa (BRICS), Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), Regional 
Cooperation Mechanisms in South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), 
Africa, Central Asia, Eurasia, etc.; Fragmentation of Value Chains; Bilateral Trade 
Relations; India-GCA FTA; India-EU Connectivity Partnership; Prospects of Global and 
Regional Value Chains; Indo-Pacific Cooperation. 
 
Trade Facilitation, Connectivity and Regional Cooperation 
 
  RIS has strong expertise in theoretical exposition and empirical assessment of 
regional connectivity initiatives to assess long term gains and related issues. India does not 
have a dedicated think-tank to address regional connectivity issues which is of critical 
importance in contemporary times and hence RIS contribution in this area has been of 
great significance. India’s cross-border connectivity in the neighbourhood and extended 
neighbourhood along with regional connectivity agreements and infrastructure development 
issues has been robustly covered in RIS research. This has supported Government of 
India’s decision making in terms of regional cooperation with South Asian Association for 
Regional Cooperation (SAARC), Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and 
Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), and Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN). 
Research on connectivity also extends to maritime connectivity with specific focus on the 
Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA) region. India’s increasing role in the region in terms 
of connectivity provider and infrastructure development has promoted new research in 
these areas. RIS has supported Government of India’s track 1.5 initiatives by providing 
robust inputs in these areas. Closely linked with connectivity is trade facilitation which has 

P a g e | 78 
been studied in-depth at RIS and related publications have been an important resource for 
policy makers in the Government. 
  Focus on the RIS work programme has been on various facets of connectivity along 
the economic corridors in the context of regional initiatives, and other formats of regional 
cooperation. The focus areas are: Trade and Transport Connectivity Linkages; Economic 
Corridors in South, Southwest and Southeast Asia; Trade Facilitation, Border Infrastructure 
and Paperless Trade; Development Impact of Connectivity Corridors; Technology and 
Trade Facilitation; and E-Commerce. 
 
New Technologies and Development Issues 
 
  The development impacts of new technologies and access to science and 
technology has been a key concern for research at RIS. Under this pillar, apart from issues 
like Access and Benefit Sharing (ABS) and Socio-Economic Assessment of GMOs and 
emerging issues like negotiations on marine genetic resources, the following themes have 
been taken up; Governance of New Technologies (Biotechnology, Synthetic Biology, 
Nanotechnology, Artificial Intelligence, etc.); Responsible Research and Innovation and 
Global Ethics in Science and Technology; Human Genomics, Genome Editing and 
Developments in Life Sciences; Access to Medicine, TRIPs and IPR Regimes, and 
Innovation; and Traditional Knowledge, Genetic Resources and Traditional Medicine. 
 
Regional and Global Networks 
 
The Institute has been an active part of the following regional and global networks: 
South Asia Centre for Policy Studies (SACEPS); 
BRICS Academic Forum; 
BIMSTEC Network of Policy Think Tanks (BNPTT); 
ASEAN India Network of Think Tanks (AINTT); 
IBSA Academic Forum; 
Network of Southern Think Tanks (NeST); and 
Indian Ocean Rim Association (IORA)     
    
Focus on WTO Reforms 
 
  The need for reforms of the WTO has been well-recognized at various multilateral 
forums including the WTO Ministerial Conference (MC) and at the G20, especially in the 
context of acceleration of digitalization, the digital divide, the rapid growth in the e-
commerce sector, and the need to ensure inclusive and sustainable economic growth. 
  At RIS, various important developments in this regard were closely tracked, 
analyzed and published in its flagship ‘World Trade and Development Report (WTDR) 2021 
– Trade, Technology and Institutions - WTO @ 25: The Way Forward’ just prior to the 
MC12. The report aptly laid emphasis on the technological implications of technology for 
the future of global trade and its governance, in addition to ‘trade in goods and services’; 
‘special and differential treatment’; ‘fisheries subsidies’; and ‘WTO reforms: drivers and 
contestations’. 
  Earlier also RIS had brought out the three editions of this flagship publication viz. 
World Trade and Development Report 2015: Mega Regionals, WTO and New Issues; 

P a g e | 79 
World Trade and Development Report 2007: Building a Development-Friendly World 
Trading System; and World Trade and Development Report 2003: Cancun and Beyond 
coinciding with organization of the WTO Ministerial Conferences. 
 
Future of Multilateralism 
 
  RIS launched a series of discussion meetings and webinars on the State of 
Multilateralism.  The first dialogue was on ‘WTO@25’ and the second dialogue in this series 
focused on ‘Global Trade Governance and Multilateral Framework: The Way Forward’. A 
Dialogure on the Future of Multilateralism was also organised. The webinars brought 
together commentators and intellectuals from the North and the South to deliberate on the 
implications and way forward. 
 
Engagement with FTA Negotiations 
 
  RIS has strenuously worked in association with the Ministry of Commerce 
andIndustries (MoCI) on four different CEPA/CECA policy research studies: 
 
• India- GCC FTA 
• India-Eurasia Economic Union FTA 
• India-Australia ECTA and 
• India-Canada CEPA 
 
On each of these FTAs, the engagement of RIS has been limited to specific 
mandates depending on the distinctive needs of the negotiating team. For example, in the 
case of the India-GCC FTA, arrangements were made to have a presentation to the MoCI 
team based on comprehensive research work on trade 19 in goods, services and 
investment. Now the mandate is expanded further to prepare a full-fledged report for the 
negotiation. 
Though RIS as a Knowledge Partner of the MoCI has completed many studies and 
Joint Feasible Study Group (JFSG) reports such as JFSG for Australia, Canada and the 
Eurasian Economic Union (EaEU) in the past, our present mandate is confined to a specific 
focused area for the negotiation. For IndiaAustralia ECTA, a detailed note on specific 
issues under ‘areas of cooperation’ was prepared and shared with the MoCI. In the case of 
the India-Eurasia Economic Union (EaEU) CEPA, trade potential at the product level and 
current level of bilateral trade engagement was submitted to the concerned territorial 
division. For India-Canada CEPA, the focus has been to examine the competitiveness of 
India in specific trade in services (TIS) sectors. For this tudy, work is underway and several 
rounds of discussions are going on with the territorial division of the MoCI for data and 
other issues. 
 
Intellectual Property Rights (IPR) 
 
  RIS has been working on the issues related to IPRs. During the pandemic it came 
out with a policy brief on intellectual property rights and innovation. Earlier the institute has 
studied  issues related to technology development and national IPR; R&D capability and 
health care; climate change, technology transfer and intellectual property rights; intellectual 

P a g e | 80 
property regime,  indigenous knowledge ; Community-based rights and IPR regime; 
intellectual property rights, technology and economic development; public-private debate in 
agricultural biotechnology and new trends in the IPR Regime; intellectual property 
protection for biodiversity among others. 
 
RIS and UNESCO 
 
  RIS has been working closely with UNESCO Natural Sciences Sector, Paris to 
explore partnership and cooperation between UNESCO, The World Academy of Sciences 
(TWAS), particularly in the areas of Science Diplomacy, Science Policy and Innovation. 
Recently on the occasion of World Science Day 2021, UNESCO and RIS had jointly 
organised a webinar on “Building Climate Ready Communities” on 10 November 2021. RIS 
had also collaborated with UNESCO for publishing the Asian Biotechnology and 
Development Review (ABDR), which is an international journal on socio-economic 
development, public policy, ethical and regulatory aspects of biotechnology with a focus on 
developing countries. 
 
 
e)  Role of RIS in Trade, Investment and Economic Cooperation Issues 
 
3.20 Enquiring further on the issue, the Committee sought to know about instances wherein the 
inputs provided by RIS has helped the Government in Trade, Investment and Economic 
Cooperation. The Ministry have stated as under: 
 
 “Fostering policy dialogue on trade, investment and economic cooperation  constitutes  an 
integral part of the RIS work programme. It enables academicians, policy makers, 
practitioners and other stakeholders to carry out extensive deliberations on various 
economic issues confronting the Global South  at national, regional, sub-regional and 
multilateral level and share their insights to comeforward with possible solutions. In the 
recent past, RIS organized a number of such dialogues, meetings and discussions, 
covering these areas of profound importance to developing countries and India. Their 
themes included Energy Efficiency in Effective Energy Transition; Future Digital Currencies 
and Crypto-Currencies; Revisiting Economic Cooperation in BIMSTEC in Post-COVID-19; 
Need for Setting Up of a New Development Bank; Global Trade Governance and 
Multilateral Framework; Post-Pandemic Indian Ocean Regional Economic Cooperation; 
Global Trends in Triangular Co-operation; Role of Banking and Financial Sector for 
overcoming pandemic challenges; Wellness, Health and Traditional Systems of Medicines; 
Fishery Subsidy and the Discussions at WTO: Issues, Prospects and Way Forward; TRIPS 
Waiver: Issues and Challenges; Asia’s Post-Pandemic Order and Integration; Cross-
Country Cooperation in Digital Payment Platforms and FinTech Solutions; Maritime 
Economy in Indo-Pacific; Development Cooperation for Achieving the 2030 Agenda; India-
EU Connectivity: Partnership for Development, Demand and Democracy; Developing 
GVCs; One World One Health; 75 Years of Development Partnership – Saga of 
Commitment to Plurality, Diversity and Collective Progress; Enabling the Global Energy 
Transition; Food and Agricultural Trade in BIMSTEC; Exploring New Development 

P a g e | 81 
Paradigms and Growth Strategies: Partnerships in Times of Transition and Contestations 
and so on. 
  The outcome of these dialogues and analyses provides vital information to policy 
makers and shapers and valuable reference points to the research community on issues 
related to trade, investment, finance, technology, health, development partnership etc. 
  RIS shares a wide range of divergent views on issues of significant   importance to 
the country so that the government is able to have a multi-dimensional view on key issues, 
which is absolutely essential for the articulation of government policies and programmes. 
The range of its national and international partner institutions and body of external experts 
enables it to conduct in-depth discussions on key issues for holistic understanding of the 
issues involved and its remarkable convening power to invite subject scholars from across 
the globe with different affiliations to such deliberations.  
 
  Further, RIS work programme is shaped by not only the Ministry of External Affairs 
but by three other ministries, viz. Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MoCI), Ministry of 
Finance (MoF), Ministry of Science and Technology (MoST). 
 
 
f )  Efforts  by RIS on leveraging the external sector for domestic economic growth. 
 
3.21 The Committee also sought to know about the efforts initiated by RIS on leveraging the 
external sector for domestic economic growth. The Ministry in their written reply have inter- alia 
stated as under: 
 “As part of its knowledge sharing with Global South, RIS has taken the following key 
initiatives to leverage the external sector with domestic economic growth: 
Specialized Initiatives 
RIS hosts the Annual Delhi Process international dialogue with the support of Ministry of 
External Affairs, Government of India; United Nation Office for South-South Cooperation 
(UNOSSC); Network of Southern Think-Tanks (NeST); Forum for India Development 
Cooperation (FIDC) and with participation of eminent international development experts 
and it has become an extremely important annual event for deliberations on international 
development cooperation assistance. RIS also conducts Science, Technology and 
Innovation Policy (STIP) Forum, Forum for Indian Science Diplomacy (FISD) and Forum on 
Indian Traditional Medicine (FITM) regular lecture series. Faculty members are regularly 
invited to participate in various important events held both in India and abroad. Apart from 
the above the RIS institutional initiatives include:  
Initiative Partners 
ASEAN-India Centre (AIC) Ministry of External Affairs, Government of India 
Global Development Centre (GDC) 
 
Foreign, Commonwealth & Development Office 
(FCDO) and Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation 
(BMGF) 

P a g e | 82 
G 20 Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Agriculture 
& Farmers Welfare and Civil Society 
Blue Economy Forum (BEF) Ministry of Earth Sciences, , Government of India 
Center for Maritime Economy and 
Connectivity (CMEC) 
Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways, 
Government of India 
Network of Southern Think-Tanks 
(NeST) 
- RIS 
- South Africa Institute of International Affairs 
(SAIIA) 
- Institute for Applied Economic Research (IPEA) 
and   others 
 
ASEAN-India Centre (AIC) 
  The ASEAN-India Centre at RIS, was established in 2013. The AIC at RIS is meant 
to serve as a joint resource centre for ASEAN Member States and India to fill the 
knowledge gaps that currently limit the opportunities for ASEAN-India cooperation including 
the goal of closer economic integration. 
 
Global Development Centre (GDC) 
 
  Global Development Centre (GDC) was established in January 2019, with the 
support of erstwhile DFID (now FCDO), to institutionalise knowledge of India’s ongoing 
successful economic and societal transformational developmental initiatives for their 
possible replication among interested partners in Asia and Africa. It was also envisaged to 
collate and promote the sharing of experiences, expertise and significant development 
practices of its partners abroad as part of mutual learning. 
 
Blue Economy Forum (BEF) 
 
  Blue economy has emerged as a commonly acceptable development paradigm 
which has effectively blended economic growth with sustainable development. Blue 
Economy Forum (BEF) aims to serve as a dedicated platform for fostering dialogue on 
promoting the concept in the Indian Ocean and other regions. The forum focuses on 
conducting studies on the potential, prospects and challenges of blue economy; providing 
regular inputs to practitioners in the government and the private sectors; and promoting 
advocacy for its smooth adoption in national economic policies. The forum facilitates 
linkages between the policy makers, academicians and business community in the Indian 
Ocean and other regions. 
 
Center for Maritime Economy and Connectivity (CMEC) 
 
  We are pleased to inform that a Memorandum of Agreement was signed between 
the Indian Ports Association (IPA) and RIS on 19 January 2023 at New Delhi. As part of 

P a g e | 83 
that a new Centre for Maritime Economy and Connectivity has been set up at RIS. The 
objectives that CMEC shall pursue, derive largely from the Maritime India Vision 2030 as 
articulated by Prime Minister. The process would be: 
 To build a coherent and integrated architecture for orderly growth and diversification of 
India’s maritime sector. 
 Contribute to establishing of one or more regulatory frameworks to encourage 
investments into the sector including development of a common framework for cooperation 
and collaboration among the Indian Ocean nations. 
 Enhance the contribution of blue economy to the economy particularly for job creation, 
livelihood diversification, and empowerment of dependent coastal communities; sharing of 
best practices and establish an India signature on maritime developments. 
 Offer road maps for sustainable utilization for living and non-living marine resources 
within the maritime boundary of the country. 
 
 
VIII       RIS AND INDIA'S G20 PRESIDENCY 
 
3.22 The Committee also sought to know about the contribution of RIS to India's G20 
presidency. The Ministry in their written reply have stated as under: 
 
“RIS has been engaged in G20 work for Indian Presidency in 2023, at multiple levels in the 
‘Working Group’ as well as the ‘Engagement Group’ tracks. RIS is a knowledge partner for 
the Agriculture Working Group (AWG) and the Development Working Group (DWG). In 
addition, RIS is working with five engagement groups viz. Think 20 (T20), Science 20 
(S20), Youth 20 (Y20), Civil 20 (C20) and Parliament 20 (P20). As part of the Jan Bhagidari 
initiative of the Government of India, RIS is the nodal institution for coordinating 75 lectures 
on G20 at 75 different universities across various states and union territories, under the 
programme University Connect. 
 
Working Groups 
 
Agriculture Working Group (AWG) 
  RIS has been working as a Knowledge Partner for the MoA&FW for the Agriculture 
Working Group (AWG).  RIS prepared Issue Note, Concept notes and other papers for the 
AWG.  The Issue Note has four themes namely, Food Security and Nutrition, Sustainable 
Agriculture with Climate Smart Approach, Inclusive Agri Value chains and Food Systems 
and Digitalization for Agricultural Transformation. Earlier, RIS organised a brainstorming 
session on priorities in the agriculture sector on July 16th, 2022. At this event, experts from 
agriculture universities and research institutions, representatives from MEA, NITI Aayog, 
ICAR, IIMs, private sector stakeholders like ITC, Mastercard, SPL technologies, Ninjacart 
and International Organizations such as FAO, BMGF, etc. participated.  
  RIS regularly enriches deliberations in the meetings of the core committee of the 
Ministry on AWG issues. RIS also provided inputs towards the ‘minus one draft’ for the 
Agriculture Ministers’ Communiqué and on other aspects like Food Security and Nutrition, 
Livelihoods, Farmers’ Aggregation Models and Incomes, Food Loss and Waste, Millet 
Initiative, Agricultural Market Information System, towards G20 collaborations. 

P a g e | 84 
 
Development Working Group (DWG) 
  RIS has provided inputs and comments to various background documents prepared 
for the Development Working Group (DWG) from time to time. It includes historical analysis 
of the DWG agenda and specific comments on thematic issue notes. RIS will be organising 
a side event on April 6, 2023 at Kumarakom on the theme LiFE and just energy transition. 
Engagement Groups 
 
Think 20 
  RIS is one of the lead coordinating institutions for Think 20 (T20) during the ongoing 
Indian Presidency of G20. The Director General, RIS is a member of the Core Group of T20 
that provides overall guidance on the themes, priorities and events of T20 that would be 
organised from time to time. Besides that, RIS has been tasked as the lead institution for 
the two Task Forces of T20, viz., TF-3: Life, Resilience and Values for Wellbeing, being led 
by Professor Sachin Chaturvedi and TF-6: Accelerating SDGs- Exploring New Pathways to 
the 2030 Agenda, being led by Mr G. A. Tadas. In addition, Professor S.K. Mohanty, 
Professor T.C. James, Dr. Priyadarshi Dash and Dr. Sabyasachi Saha are serving as the 
Co-Chairs of TF-1, TF-3, TF-5 and TF-3, respectively. 
  Besides active contribution to the T20 Inception Conference held on 13-14 January 
2023 and T20 Town Hall held on 5 March, 2023, RIS also organised a Special Event on the 
theme “Global Governance with LiFE, Values and Wellbeing” in Bhopal on 16-17 January 
2023. Honourable Chief Minister of Madhya Pradesh inaugurated the event and shared his 
vision for a new world that would cherish growth in harmony with nature. This event has a 
number of plenary and technical sessions with contributions of notable international experts 
on the subject. The conference primarily covered issues within the focus TF 3 and TF 6. 
For this conference RIS partnered with Think 20, Urban 20, Government of Madhya 
Pradesh, Atal Bihari Vajpayee Institute of Good Governance and Policy Analysis 
(AIGGPA), Madhya Pradesh State Policy and Planning Commission, United Nations 
International Children's Emergency Fund (UNICEF), Global Development Centre (GDC) at 
RIS, GIZ India, Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF). With around 400 participants 
including over 90 international speakers, more than 100 experts from different parts of 
India, and enthusiastic local participation, the T20 Special Event over the two days marked 
a significant milestone for T20 India as well. 
  The conference adopted the widely acclaimed ‘Bhopal Declaration’ that calls for 
value based development paradigm towards lifestyle for environment (LiFE) and economic 
systems transformation; accelerate the SDGs through financing and localization; diversify 
global value chains with due space for developing countries; strongly focus on integrating 
one health approaches; prioritise investment in children and women led development; 
financing of resilient infrastructure; going beyond GDP towards well being measurement; 
bring on board Africa and make G20 more inclusive by addressing concerns of the Global 
South. The rich content and high quality extensive deliberations captured in the ‘Bhopal 
Declaration’ would certainly become the basis of reference and to be acted upon by the 
T20 fraternity and the G20 in the Working Group deliberations and ministerial tracks. 
 
Civil 20 
  RIS is engaged as a Knowledge Partner for the Civil 20 (C20). Besides providing 
inputs on various themes to the C20 Secretariat. RIS has been invited to several 

P a g e | 85 
consultation and strategy meetings of the C20 India. RIS is actively contributing to two 
Working Groups of C20 such as the LiFE and the Integrated Holistic Health. RIS delegation 
was present at the C20 Indonesia summit in 2022. 
Science 20 
RIS provides inputs to various activities of Science 20 (S20). The theme of S20 for Indian 
Presidency is “Disruptive Science for Innovative and Sustainable Development”. S20 will 
focus on the following themes; (i) A call for universal holistic health – with emphasis on 
prevention of disease, (ii) Adoption of clean energy for a greener future, and (iii) 
Connecting Science to Society and Culture. 
 
Youth 20 
RIS actively contributes to Youth 20 (Y20) with an aim to strengthen the engagement with 
the youth in the country. The Ministry of Youth Affairs has nominated RIS to organise 50 
brainstorming sessions in 50 cities, on five themes which include (i) Future of Work: 
Industry 4.0, Innovation, & 21st Century Skills, (ii) Peace building and Reconciliation: 
Ushering in an Era of No War, (iii) Shared Future: Youth in Democracy and Governance, 
(iv) Health, Wellbeing & Sports: Agenda for Youth, and (v) Climate Change and Disaster 
Risk Reduction. 
  RIS is collaborating with Young India, CII and National Institute of Urban Affairs 
(NIUA) and The Indus Entrepreneurs (TiE) for organising the brainstorming sessions. The 
first brainstorming session on “Industry 4.0: Building Future Ready Workforce” was held at 
AIGGPA, Bhopal on 18 January, 2023. Two more brainstorming sessions on 7 March and 
8 March 2023 in Kochi and Bangalore respectively have been held. 
 
G20 University Connect 
  As part of the ‘ Jan Bhagidari’ initiative of the G20 Indian Presidency, Prime Minister 
has advised to spread awareness about the G20 among the youth especially the students 
and engage them in the G20 activities planned for the whole year.  MEA has identified 75 
universities from different states and union territories of the country for organising lectures 
on G20 particularly on the role of and expectations from the Indian Presidency. MEA has 
nominated RIS as the Coordinating Institution for the G20 University Connect programme. 
RIS has prepared a background note on G20 called ‘G20-A Primer’ on G-20 University 
Connect which has been received well among the students and the faculty of the host 
universities. Building on the existing RIS-University linkage, the G20 University Connect 
initiative would help develop an ecosystem for RIS-University connect in the future. 
  
G20 Digest 
  G20 has emerged as an important global forum over the years, and G20 Leaders’ 
Summits are watched worldwide with keen interest. Successive presidencies of G20 have 
encapsulated a vast array of issues beyond the financial sector; each having potential 
impact on trade & investment, global governance and social sector. Each presidency has 
contributed to the summit process by adding new issues along with the routine ones 
resulting in a wider and diverse G20 Agenda. In view of the diversity of issues and complex 
challenges the world is grappling with, the expectations from G20 have multiplied. It is 
imperative to comprehend and assess the rise of G20, and its role and function in shaping 
the future global order. In order to motivate and stimulate fresh ideas on G20 and its 
implications for global economy, RIS brings out the quarterly journal, G20 Digest, as a 

P a g e | 86 
platform to compare, contrast and create new knowledge that matter for the people in the 
G20 countries and in the world, including the developing and less developed countries.” 
 
3.23 Giving an update on the matter, DG, RIS during sitting of held on 05.04.2023 stated as 
under: 
 “जी-20 के  अंतगªत हम लोगŌ ने िवĵिवīालयŌ से सÌपकª करने का ÿयास िकया है। xxx इसके  बारे म¤ तीन-चार बात¤, म§ आपके  
Åयान म¤ लाना चाहता हóँ।  
 सबसे पहली बात यह है िक िवदेश मंýालय के  सहयोग से आर आई एस ने 75 िवĵिवīालयŌ म¤ जाने का मन बनाया है। 
उनम¤ से अभी तक हम लोग 33 िवĵिवīालयŌ तक पहòंच पाए ह§। xxx इसम¤ महÂवपूणª बात यह है िक जब हम िवĵिवīालयŌ के  
Öटूड¤ट्स के  पास जी-20 के  बारे म¤ चचाª करने के  िलए जाते ह§, तो जी-20 के  बारे म¤ उनकì सोच ³या है, इसके  बारे म¤ उनकì 
जानकारी ³या है और इसके  बारे म¤ उनका शोध ³या है, इनके  बारे म¤ हम अलग-अलग ÖतरŌ पर जानकारी लेते ह§। चाहे वे 
अंडरगैजुएट लेवल के  Öटूड¤ट्स हŌ, चाहे पोÖटगैजुएट Öटूड¤ट्स हŌ या पीएचडी के  Öटूड¤ट्स हŌ, हम उनसे अलग-अलग Öतर पर 
वाताªलाप करते ह§। हम आपके  िलए कु छ ऐसे पिÊलके शंस लाए ह§, जो देश कì 12 भाषाओं म¤ ह§। हम लोगŌ ने एक ‘जी-20 ÿाइमर’ 
अंúेजी म¤ िनकाला था, उसी को हमने िहÆदी म¤ भी िनकाला। इसी तरह से, उसे तिमल, तेलुगु, मलयालम, गुजराती, मराठी आिद 
भाषाओं म¤ िनकाला, xxxx।  
 इसके  बाद आरआईएस का जी-20 के  िलए जो महÂवपूणª सहयोग है, वह यूिनविसªटी कने³ट है। इस कायªøम का नाम 
‘यूिनविसªटी कने³ट’ रखा गया है। हमारा ऐसा सोचना है िक भारत कì जी-20 कì ÿेिसड¤सी िसतÌबर के  बाद 30 नवÌबर को 
औपचाåरक łप से समाĮ होगी। लेिकन ‘यूिनविसªटी कने³ट’ हमारे िलए एक महÂवपूणª अवसर है, िजसके  माÅयम से हम देश के  
तमाम िवīािथªयŌ को अंतराªÕůीय शोध, जो अभी तक िसफª िदÐली के  कु छ िवĵिवīालयŌ के  पास ही थी, उस से बाहर िनकालकर 
ले जा सक¤गे। जैसा िक सरकार कì ओर से बार-बार कहा जा रहा है, ÿधानमंýी जी Öवयं कह रहे ह§ िक हम लोगŌ को अंतराªÕůीय 
सोच को िवकिसत करना है िवĵिवīालयŌ के  Öतर पर,  िवशेषłप से उन ±ेýŌ म¤, जो देश के  बॉडªर एåरयाज म¤ ह§ एवं उन ±ेýŌ म¤, 
जहाँ पर िवदेश से िवīाथê पढ़ने के  िलए आ रहे ह§। इसिलए अंतराªÕůीय िवषयŌ पर यह एक समेिकत सोच होगी। इस संबंध म¤ ³या 
ÿयास िकये जाने चािहए, इसके  बारे म¤ भी हम ‘यूिनविसªटी कने³ट’ के  माÅयम से चचाª कर रहे ह§।  
 दूसरा महÂवपूणª उĥेÔय यह है िक जी-20 म¤ भारत ने छ: महÂवपूणª िबÆदु रखे ह§ और उनके  बारे म¤ एक ÿारंिभक सोच 
और एक गहराई के  साथ िकये गये शोध के  आधार पर, जो वĉÓय हो सकता है, उसे िवīािथªयŌ के  सामने लेकर आना है। इस 
संबंध म¤, म§ छ: बात¤ आपके  सामने रखना चाहता हóँ, जो आर आई एस के  åरसचª एज¤डा से भी संबंिधत ह§ और ‘यूिनविसªटी कने³ट’ 
म¤ भी हम उनको आगे ले जाने का ÿयास कर रहे ह§।  
 पहली बात तो यह है, xxxx िक आआईएस ůेड के  िलए जाना जाता है। ůेड के  संबंध म¤, अंतराªÕůीय Óयापार के  संबंध म¤ 
चार महÂवपूणª िपलर ह§, िजन पर आर आई एस काम कर रहा है। पहला, जैसा िक आप देख रहे ह§ िक भारत के  जो एफ टी एज 
(Āìůेडएúीम¤ट्स) ह§, उनके  संबंध म¤, हमारी सोच म¤ बदलाव आई है। 
 अब हम Āì ůेड एúीम¤ट्स के  संबंध म¤ तेजी से आगे बढ़ रहे ह§। आरआईएस के  पास कॉमसª िमिनÖůी कì तरफ से ऐसे 
छ: अÅययन िदए गए ह§, िजसम¤ भारत का दूसरे देशŌ के  साथ जो Āì ůेड एúीम¤ट है, चाहे ऑÖůेिल या, कनाडा, बांµलादेश हो, अभी 
हम जी सी सी के  ऊपर काम कर रहे ह§, ऐसे छ: अलग-अलग समूहŌ के  राÕůŌ के  साथ हमारे Āì ůेड एúीम¤ट के  संबंध कै से हŌ, 
इसके  बारे म¤ हम लोग काम कर रहे ह§।  
 इसी के  साथ, मैåरटाइम कनेि³टिवटी का िवषय है। चाइना का जो ůेड का राइज हòआ, उसका एक बड़ा कारण यह था 
िक चाइना ने अपनी मैåरटाइम कनेि³टिवटी और ůेड फै िसिलटेशन, दोनŌ के  ऊपर अपनी पकड़ रखी। आरआईएस उसी के  संबंध 
म¤, कॉमसª और फाइन¤स िमिनÖůीज के  साथ िमलकर बहòत ही बारीकì से अÅययन कर रहा है। आप एक महÂवपूणª पåरणाम देख रहे 
ह§, िजस म¤ हम अपने ही Łप एम¤ůेड और ůांजै³शंस कर सकते ह§। हम डॉलर म¤ ůेड नहé कर¤गे। इस संबंध म¤, आर आई एस वषª 
2006 से लगातार कई शोध ÿकािशत कर चुका है। वषª 2016-17 और 2017-18 म¤ भी तेजी से हम úाउंड-बेÖडÖटडी लेकर आए 
ह§, जो आज हमारे नॉÖůो-अकाउंट्स के  łप म¤ सामने आ रहाहै।  
 तीसरा महÂवपूणª मुĥा उन िवषयŌ को लेकर है, जो अब नये भारत के  ůेड बाÖके ट म¤ आ रहे ह§, जैसे आयुष। िजस तरह 
से, भारत सरकार इसम¤ घरेलू ÿचार-ÿसार के  माÅयम से लोगŌ कì भागीदारी बढ़ा रही है, उसी तरह से हम लोग देख रहे ह§ िक 
िवदेशŌ म¤ आयुष का माक¥ट कै से िøएट हो। यहाँ ÿोफे सर मोहंती मेरे साथ ह§, उÆहŌने देश का ऐसा पहला अÅययन िकया, िजसम¤ 
पहली बार, आयुष मंýालय और कॉमसª िमिनÖůी दोनŌ को अपने अÅययन के  माÅयम से बताया िक टोटल आयुष का ए³सपोटª 
िकतना है। हमारे अÅययन से पता चला िक 18.5 िबिलयन डॉलर का भारत का आयुष का ए³सपोटª है। हमने यह तमाम आंकड़े, 

P a g e | 87 
åरपोट्ªस और हमारे जो एिÖटमेशंस ह§, उसके  आधार पर बताया है। इसी का काम आयुष मंýालय ने आरआईएस को िदया है िक 
हम सिवªसेज से³टर का भी एिÖटमेशन कर¤ और बताएं िक हम सिवªसेज का िकतना ए³सपोटª कर रहे ह§। यह एक महÂवपूणª बात है। 
 चौथा और आिखरी िवषय है िक हम ůेड म¤ जो देख रहे ह§, वे िøिटकल मैटसª और िमनरÐस ह§ । ³या िøिटकल मैटसª 
और िमनरÐस का हमारे ए³सपोटª म¤ महÂवपूणª हो सकती है, इसके  बारे म¤ कोई शंका हो नहé सकती है। चाइना ने िजस ढंग से, 
अलग-अलग जगहŌ पर ÿॉसेिसंग, माइंस को मोनोपोलाइज िकया है, उसके  संबंध म¤ ³या अÅययन होना चािहए, इसके  बारे म¤ हम 
लोग देखकर ला रहे ह§। इस तरह से, ये चार िपलसª ůेड के  ह§।  
 अगला महÂवपूणª मुĥा एसडीजीज का है। हम देख रहे ह§ िक जो एसटीआई (साइंस एंड टे³नोलॉजी इनोवेशन) है, वह 
एसडीजीज म¤ कै से मदद कर सकता है। हम िकन मुĥŌ पर काम कर सकते ह§, जैसे साफ पानी, Æयूिůसस फू ड, हेÐथ टे³नोलॉजीज 
और åरÆयूएबल एन जêये चारŌ भारत के  जी-20 के  ÿायåरटीज ह§। xxxx एक बुकलेट पिÊलश करके  हमने आपको िदया है, िजसम¤ 
आरआईएस के  नये इिनिशएिटÓस ह§, जो Öपेिशयली पािलªयाम¤ůी Öट§िडंग कमेटीज के  िलए रखे ह§। ऐसे सात इिनिशएिटÓस का हमने 
िजø िकया है, xxx। 
 इसके  साथ ही, हमने एक नया इंडे³स बनाने कì कोिशश कì है। फाइन¤स ůैक म¤ िव°मंýी जी के  साथ बंगलोर म¤ और 
आने वाली जी-20 कì फाइन¤स ůैक कì बैठक म¤ हमने एक महÂवपूणª ÿÖताव पर काम िकया है, िजसके  माÅयम से हम लोग यह 
कह रहे ह§ िक अब समय आ गया है, जब हम जी डी पी को िमजरम¤ट का राÖता छोड़कर जीडीपी को ही देश के  िवकास का पैरा 
मीटर न मान¤ और हम उससे आगे बढ़¤। जब हम जीडीपी से आगे बढ़¤गे, तो हम लोगŌ ने एक नये इंडे³स कì बात कì है, िजसे हमने 
‘वेलिबंग’ इंडे³स कहा है। वेलिबंग इंडे³स कì बात अके ला आरआईएस कर रहा है, ऐसा नहé है। हमने इसके  िलए ओईसीडी के  
साथ सÌपकª िकया। ओईसीडी और आरआईएस ने िमलकर एक åरपोटª िनकाली। जैसा िक आप जानते ह§ िक ओईसीडी डेवलÈड 
कं ůीज का एक अंतराªÕůीय िथंकट§क है। हम लोगŌ ने उन के  साथ िमलकर यह िनकाला है। देश के  जो ÿमुख अथªशाľ ी ह§, ऐसे 24 
अथªशािľ यŌ का हमने एक समूह बनाया है, उनके  सामने हमने अपने अÅययन को रखा । हमने उन लोगŌ के  साथ िमलकर काम 
िकया। अभी हमने इसके  ऊपर åरजवª ब§क ऑफ इंिडया के  साथ काम िकया। यह एक महÂवपूणª अÅययन है, िजस के  ऊपर हम 
वेलिबंग के  łप म¤ काम कर रहे ह§। कल कु माराकोम म¤ डेवलपम¤ट विक«ग úुप कì बैठक शुł हो रही है। उसम¤ आरआईएस एक 
Öपेशल ÿज¤टेशन के  łप म¤ जी-20 देशŌ के  सामने ‘वेलिबंग’ इंडे³स का यह नया Öवłप सामने रखेगा। हम उस िवषय को आगे 
लेकर जाएंगे।  
 इसके  साथ ही, हमने इसरो के  साथ एक एमओयू साइन िकया है । जो एमओयू साइन हòआ है, उसम¤ आरआईएस और 
इसरो िमलकर Öपेस माक¥ट के  अÅययन का काम शुł कर चुके  ह§। उस का पहला अÅययन सामने आ चुका है। हमने IN-SPACe 
के  साथ िमलकर एक नया एमओयू िकया है, िजसम¤ हम लोग Öपेस के  ऊपर काम कर रहे ह§। 
 इसी के  साथ जो µलोबल पिÊलक गुड्स ह§, जैसे िक Êलू इकोनॉमी, जो िक ऊÕम से संबंिधत है, उसम¤ हमने अभी 
इंटरनेशनलसी बेडअथॉåरटी के  साथ िमलकर एमओयू िकया और अब हम पहला अÅययन कर रहे ह§ िक समुþ कì गहराई म¤ जो 
बायोडायविसªटी है, जो िमनरÐस ह§, जो åरसोस¥ज ह§, उनका ÿोटे³शन कै से हो, उनका सÖटेनेबल यूिटलाइजेशन कै से हो, इसके  
ऊपर हम लोग काम कर रहे ह§। साथ ही अभी कोिवड के  समय एमएसएमईज के  ऊपर ³या असर हòआ और उÆहŌने 
िडिजटलाइजेशन को कै से अपनाया? यह भी एक नया िवषय है, िजसके  ऊपर आरआईएस ने ÿोएि³टवली काम िकया है। जैसा 
चेयरमैन साहब कह रहे थे िक ³या हम लोग ÿोएि³टवली कर रहे ह§, तो ÿोएि³टवली हमने अभी, एमएसएमईज ने िडिजटलाइजेशन 
को कै से अपनाया, ³या उसकì कॉÖट म¤ कमी हòई है और जो माइøो इंटरÿाइजेज ह§, उनके  िलए कॉÖट म¤ वृिĦ हòई है, मीिडयम 
और Öमॉल के  िलए कॉÖट म¤ कमी आयी है, तो यह जो िवरोधा भास हमारी नीित म¤ है, उनको हम कै से कम कर सकते ह§ और कै से 
हम माइøो,  Öमॉल और मीिडयम इंटरÿाइजेज को एक ही धरातल पर लेकर आ सकते ह§, यह एक महÂवपूणª चीज है। साथ ही 
आर आई एस ने भी नीित आयोग के  साथ एम ओयू िकया है। नीित आयोग म¤ आप जैसा जानते ह§, एक नई यूिनट का, माननीय 
ÿधानमंýी जी के  कहने पर गठन िकया गया है, उसका उĥेÔय 15व¤ िव° आयोग म¤ जो कहा गया िक हर िवभाग कì पॉिलसीज का 
थडª पाटê åरÓयू होना चािहए। आपको यह जानकर ÿसÆनता होगी िक आरआईएस को थडª पाटê åरÓयू के  िलए एक 
आइड¤िटफाइडइंÖटी ट्यूशन के  łप म¤ माÆयता दी गई है। नीित आयोग से िमली माÆयता के  अंतगªत हम¤ 156 अलग-अलग ÖकìÌस 
म¤ और उनको हमने अभी ³लब िकया है, उसम¤ साइंस, टे³नोलॉजी, िमिनÖůी ऑफ साइंस एंड टे³नोलॉजी, िडपाटªम¤ट ऑफ 
बायोटे³नोलॉजी, इनकì जो ÖकìÌस ह§, उनके  असेसम¤ट का हम लोगŌ को एक महÂवपूणª िजÌमेदारी दी गई है। जैसा िवदेश सिचव ने 
कहा िक अभी 12 और 13 जनवरी को जो µलोबल साउथ सिमट हòआ, उसम¤ ÿधानमंýी जी ने िजस संÖथान के  बनने कì घोषणा 
कì, आरआईएस और िवदेशमंýालय µलोबल साउथ स¤टर ऑफ ए³सील¤स फॉर डेवलपम¤ट िवषय पर काम कर रहे ह§।  
 महोदय, इस का उĥेÔय यह है िक हम जो भारत के  िवकास का महÂवपूणª पड़ाव िपछले कु छ वषŎ म¤ देख रहे ह§, लगातार 
िजन ±ेýŌ म¤ भारत ने िवकास िकया है, इन माÆयताओं को और िवकास के  इन पैरामीटसª को हम अÆय िवकासशील देशŌ के  साथ 
कै से साझा कर¤। हम कै सा मॉडल खड़ा कर¤, चाहे वह यूपीआई का हो, चाहे आयुÕमान भारत का हो, िडिजटल पिÊलक गुड्स का हो, 
उसको हम िवकासशील देशŌ के  पास कै से लेकर जाएं? कै से उन लोगŌ को, इन ÿोड³ट्स को अगर कहा जाए तो अपना ने के  िलए 
फै िसिलटेिटंग कं डीशंस, Āे मव³सª कै से हŌ और इसका महÂवपूणª अंग, जैसा म§ कह रहा था, वेल-बीइंग इंडे³स के  łप म¤, जो िवĵ 

P a g e | 88 
कì िवकास कì जो सोच है, the international financial institutions which have been governing them 
through Washington Consensus, how do we change that, how do we bring in new 
paradigm for development? So, our endeavour is also going to contribute in terms of how 
new development should look like and that is where, I think a very fundamental transition is 
going to happen and from that perspective, RIS is trying to contribute in terms of not only 
measurement which is related to GDP going beyond it but also in terms of how global 
south. It is not just about our market but also about, with the collapse of the Washington 
Consensus, how do we create new set of parameters for international financial institutions 
 
IX. Dissemination Programmes of RIS 
 
a. Capacity Building Programmes: 
 
3.24. In the background note submitted to the Committee, RIS has inter-alia stated that it 
conducts a number of capacity building programmes which include:  
 
 I. Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programmes with Ministry of 
External Affairs, Government of India on:  
 International Economic Issues and Development Policy (IEIDP);  
 Sustainable Development Goals;  
 Trade and Sustainability;  
 Learning South-South Cooperation and;  
 Science Diplomacy  
II. IBSA Visiting Fellowship Programme with Ministry of External Affairs, Government 
of India  
III. Summer School on Trade with EXIM Bank of India;  
IV. Internship Programme for university students  
 
3.25 Asked to provide details of the capacity building programmes organized by RIS in the last 3 
years, the Ministry in their written reply have stated as under: 
 “Normally, RIS organizes five ITEC programmes during a financial year, in addition to 
several programmes with the support of its partners.   However, due to COVID pandemic 
which disabled international travel and resulted in strict adherence to social distancing 
norms prescribed by the government, RIS could not conduct these programmes in a full-
fledged manner. However, during the period under review, RIS conducted the following 
ITEC capacity programmes supported by the MEA: 
 
Financial year Period Name of course Mode 
2019-2020 6-17 January 2020 Science Diplomacy In person 

P a g e | 89 
2019-2020 10 Feb - 6 March 
2020 
International 
Economic Issues and 
Development Policy 
In-person 
2022-2023 12-23 January 2023 Learning South-
South Cooperation 
In-person 
2022-2023 13-24 March 2023 Sustainable 
Development Goals 
On-line 
  
In addition, RIS also conducted the following capacity building programmes with the 
support of its other partner institutions:  
 
2022-2023 29-30 
September 
2023 
National Training on 
Agricultural Trade Policy 
Analysis in collaboration with 
Central for Research in Rural 
and Industrial Development 
and Food Security Policy 
Research, Capacity, and 
Influence (PRCI), in 
Chandigarh. 
In person 
2022-2023 17-18 
February 
2023 
Capacity Building Programme 
on BIMSTEC Regional 
Agricultural Trade Analysis  at 
Puducherry in collaboration 
with International Food Policy 
Research Institute and 
Pondicherry University 
In-person 
   
  Currently there are three candidates who have joined the IBSA Fellowship Programme at 
RIS. Finally, as part of the Internship Programme at RIS 14 students from different universities of 
India completed their Internship at RIS during the last one year.” 
 
3.26 Asked about the steps are being taken by RIS to attract young scholars, the Ministry in its 
written reply has stated as under: 
“RIS, being a premier think-tank in India on global and regional economic policy, has 
accumulated a unique expertise and knowledge base in the field of international trade, 
regional economic integration, new technologies and industrialization, regional connectivity 
and infrastructure development, blue economy, development finance and related areas.  
 RIS has a dynamic programme to connect with the young scholars. As part of its 
wider dissemination and capacity building programme, RIS offers internship to   post-

P a g e | 90 
graduates in economics from reputed institutes/universities for a period of two to three 
months free of cost mostly during the summer and winter breaks of the academic 
semesters. 
 
 Apart from its internship programme, RIS also has a University Connect 
Programme under which it invites young scholars and academicians to its major 
conferences such as annual International Conference on South-South Cooperation.  
 
 
b. RIS Publication Programme 
 
3.27 In order to disseminate its research output, RIS brings out a number of publications, viz. 
Reports, Books, Policy Briefs and Discussion Papers. The flagship RIS Publications include:  
 
 Reports  
 World Trade and Development Report (WTDR)  
 South Asia Development Cooperation Report (SADCR)  
 ASEAN-India Development Cooperation Report.  
 Journals  
 20 Digest,  
 Development Cooperation Review (DCR)  
 Science Diplomacy Review (SDR)  
 South Asia Economic Journal (SAEJ)  
 Traditional Medicine Review (TMR)  
 Asian Biotechnology and Development Review (ABDR)  
 Journal of Asian Economic Integration.  
 RIS faculty also contributes regularly to outside publications  
 
3.28 In this regard RIS have further submitted that in the recent past,  RIS brought out several 
publications on such themes, including  India-EU Connectivity: Partnership for Development, 
Demand and Democracy; Ayush Sector in India: Prospects and Challenges; Deepening 
Cooperation in IBSA Perspectives From Key Sectors; ASEAN-India Development Cooperation 
Report-2021; E-Commerce Issues at the WTO Discussions and in India; ASEAN and India 
Partners of Integration in Asia; Bulk Drug Industry in India: Challenges and Prospects; Strategising 
India’s Exports; What Ails Global Multilateralism: Prognosis and Way Forward; Need for Setting Up 
of a New Development Bank; India-EU Connectivity Partnership: Potential & Challenges; Global 
Goals (SDGs) for post-COVID: Dealing with Reversal of Gains and Spectre of Global Poverty; An 
Integrated Approach to TRIPS Flexibilities in the Post-pandemic Era; Access, Equity and Inclusion 
and Science, Technology and Innovation Policy; Global Governance of Technology and 

P a g e | 91 
Institutional Architecture; Intellectual Property Rights and Innovation in the Times of Corona 
Epidemic; Revisiting Economic Cooperation in BIMSTEC in Post-COVID-19; India’s Import 
Dependence on China in Pharmaceuticals: Status, Issues and Policy Options; Intra-Industry Trade 
in Manufactured Goods: A Case of India; Fisheries Subsidy Issues before the MC12 Lessons from 
the May Text for the July Meeting; Post-pandemic Social Security Agenda: Universalizing 
Developmental Interventions Over Universal Basic Income; Pharmaceutical Trade: India’s Growth 
Trajectories; 75 Years of Development Partnership –Saga of Commitment to Plurality, Diversity 
and Collective Progress; Developments in Agriculture Trade in the BIMSTEC Region; International 
Discussions on Indigenous People and India, among others. 
 
X. RIS Human Resources Base  
 
3.29 The sanctioned strength of regular Faculty posts of RIS consists of three Professors, three 
Associate Professors and not more than one or two Assistant Professors. RIS has not been able to 
expand its regular Faculty due to ongoing restrictions imposed by the Government on creation of 
new posts despite the strong recommendations made by its Governing Council of RIS in this 
regard. As such, RIS has to substantially rely on its contractual Faculty and continuously confronts 
the serious problem of frequent and sudden exits due to lack of job security as their contractual 
appointments can only be approved by RIS  for not more than one year at a given point of time with 
the approval of Chairman. During the period of their engagement at RIS, most of the contractual 
Faculty employees of RIS keep looking for lucrative opportunities in other institutions or in the 
corporate sector and exit from RIS after gaining basic experience. 
Table 01  
Table 2 
2010 
Human Resource RIS  
Permanent  
Faculty Staff 
7 24 
Contractual  
Faculty Staff 
17 9 
Outsourced  
Faculty Staff 
0 4 
2006 
Human Resource RIS  
Permanent  
Faculty Staff 
8 21 
Contractual  
Faculty Staff 
8 6 

P a g e | 92 
 
 
Table 3 
Table 4 
2022 
Human Resource RIS  
Permanent  
Faculty Staff 
8 19 
Contractual  
Faculty Staff 
36 11 
Outsourced  
Faculty  Staff 
0 9 
 
Table 5 
2023 
Human Resource RIS  
Permanent  
Faculty Staff 
7 17 
Contractual  
Faculty Staff 
49 9 
Outsourced  
Faculty  Staff 
0 9 
 
3.30 Asked about the challenges being faced by RIS in fulfilling their aims and objectives. The 
Ministry in their written reply have stated as under: 
 “As per RIS, the two major challenges faced by them are space crunch, and the need to 
strengthen RIS faculty/human resource.  
Space Crunch: As per RIS, the existing space at the India Habitat Centre, covering its 
initially acquired  built up area of 1000 sq. mt. allocated to it on lease at IHC in  September 
1988 and the additional built up space of 381.46 mtrs acquired by it from IHC, is still 
insufficient to meet its present and emerging requirements. RIS does not have any facility 
to house visiting scholars, including six IBSA Fellowship holders instituted by the MEA or 
around 30 ITEC course participants coming from Global South to take part in its five 
specialized courses annually. Due to lack of required conference facilities within its limited 
space, RIS has to frequently look for appropriate venues outside for holding its key 
meetings or conferences in which a large number of scholars from within the country and 
abroad participate to deliberate on policy research issues. Needless to add that the grave 
2016 
Human Resource RIS  
Permanent  
Faculty Staff 
5 30 
Contractual  
Faculty Staff 
24 4 
Outsourced  
Faculty  Staff 
0 9 

P a g e | 93 
problem of space crunch is going to seriously confront RIS with the rising stature of India 
and the growing footprint of RIS within and outside the country particularly since RIS has to 
conduct a large number of policy research studies and programmes for its in-house 
platforms such as the Global Development Centre, ASEAN India Centre, Centre for 
Maritime Economy and Connectivity(CMEC) under the Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways, which are going to play an extremely important part in the growth of the 
institution and would enable the country to leverage its domestic strength for advancement 
of its core economic interests. 
It would be best if RIS is allocated a plot of land or some built up space within the Central 
Delhi region or within the institutional areas in the capital. It needs to have its campus, 
hostel and allied facilities as an institution of excellence in the country. 
Strengthening RIS Faculty: As a credible research institution, RIS needs to have a far 
stronger regular Faculty base given the wide spectrum of its work programme requiring 
engagement of a large number of scholars with deeper domain knowledge and experience 
to conduct meaningful studies. RIS has to substantially rely on its contractual Faculty and 
continuously confronts the serious problem of frequent and sudden exits due to lack of job 
security as their contractual appointments can only be approved by RIS for not more than 
one year at a given point of time with the approval of Chairman. Over the years, most of the 
contractual Faculty employees of RIS keep looking for lucrative opportunities in other 
institutions or in the corporate sector and exit from RIS after gaining basic experience. An 
alternate mechanism to encourage and retain talent should be worked out.” 
 
 
 
 
 
XI. Overlapping of Mandate of ICWA and RIS: 
 
3.31 The Committee sought to know whether taking into account the mandate of ICWA and RIS 
whether there is any chance of overlapping of subjects. Responding to the query, Foreign 
Secretary during the sitting held on 22.11.2023 deposed as under: 
 “xxxx we segregated very consciously the differences between ICWA and RIS which we 
have just presented in three or four points here. One is governed by an Act; the other is a 
society under Societies Registration Act. The focus of ICWA is broadly on geopolitics and 
foreign policy whereas the principal worldview for RIS is economic. Now, there is 
geopolitics of economy; geopolitics of energy; geopolitics of food. In those, sometimes, 
there might be one or two specific activities; there might be a degree of overlap. If I have to 
commission a study which is focused exclusively on economic orientation where the 
principal demand is economic in nature, I will not go to ICWA; I will go to RIS because that 
is their core competence. But if I have a commissioning of studies which is predominantly 
geopolitics, there is no way I will go to RIS, I will go to ICWA.”  
 
3.32 Adding further on the matter, Foreign Secretary during the sitting held on 05.04.2023 
reiterated as under: 

P a g e | 94 
 “With regard to the overlapping or otherwise of the work of the RIS and the 
ICWA, I would simply submit, xxxx, that these two bodies have separate mandates of their 
own, and have been great successes in their own effort. 
] 
 
3.33 Adding further to the query, DG, ICWA stated as under: 
 
 “xxxx the ICWA mandate is very wide. But the scholarship we draw on is largely the 
scholarship which brings political, strategic maybe security and, to some level, economics 
also. So, we have a very broad mandate our scholars can cover. But I have to go into depth 
into economics, my scholar may not be able to bring the product that RIS can get because 
RIS has got scholars who are very much into the economic field. So, I could not really take 
up their work.”  
 
3.34 The Committee note that Research and Information System for Developing Countries 
(RIS ) is an autonomous policy research think tank that specialises in issues related to 
international economic development, trade, investment and technology.  RIS advises the 
Government on all matters pertaining to multilateral and regional economic issues referred 
to it from time to time including collaborative arrangements with other developing 
countries. Pursuant to the mandate, RIS coordinates with the Policy Planning and Research 
Division and other Divisions in the MEA and provides its inputs and programmatic/ 
research support to MEA. Since RIS provides  wide range of divergent views on issues of 
significant importance to the country which assists the government to have a multi-
dimensional view on key issues, the Committee desire that the specialized research 
programme of RIS should be strengthened further and integrated within the Government 
system. Moreover, the Committee also desire RIS to widen its outreach to vigorously 
promote India’s narrative on areas of critical importance in the evolving world where 
counter narratives need to be handled effectively through evidence-based research. 
(Recommendation No. 26)  

P a g e | 95 
3.35 The Committee understand that RIS brings out evidence-based policy research 
studies, policy briefs and research papers on emerging issues and organizes a wide range 
of events within the country and abroad under the overall guidance and support of the 
Ministry of External Affairs. The Committee note that the RIS gets Grant in Aid from MEA as 
well as other agencies. In 2021-22 , the grant was Rs. 22.19 crore including a special grant 
of Rs. 10.22 crore for acquiring an additional built up areas from India Habitat Center to 
overcome  space crunch and in the FY 2022-23, the outlay was Rs. 14.19 crore. The 
Committee have been further informed that under BE 2023- 24 the allocation is Rs. 16.64 
crore which is a substantial increase of 14.05% from last year’s budget. The Committee 
have been told that these funds are used for the day-to-day functioning of the institution in 
terms of pay and allowances to its employees and for holding national and international 
meetings/ seminars/ conferences with the participation of national, regional and global 
scholars. Taking into account the impeccable track record of RIS in utilization of funds over 
the years and the growing spectrum of its work programme including the special policy 
research studies on G20 issues and the specific requirements of being MEA’s Knowledge 
Partner for Think (T20) during India’s Presidency of G 20, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
keep monitoring the budgetary requirements of RIS and make appropriate additional 
allocation at RE stage, if required.  
(Recommendation No. 27) 
 
3.36 The Committee note that RIS is envisioned as a forum for fostering effective policy 
dialogue and capacity-building among developing countries on global and regional 
economic issues. Since its inception, the focus of the work programme of RIS has been the 
promotion of South-South Cooperation and collaboration with developing countries in 
multilateral negotiations in various forums. The Committee have been told that RIS  works 

P a g e | 96 
as a bridge to bring both Global South and Global North together to identify best possible 
solutions for accelerated growth of Global South. It has also been submitted that RIS has 
entered into research partnership agreements with the financial support of Northern 
partners to promote some of the best global practices for the economic development of 
Global South.  The establishment of Global Development Centre at RIS clearly shows that 
RIS is moving towards the engagement of its Northern partners for accelerated economic 
development of Global South.  In the emerging global scenario of interdependence amongst 
the nations, the Committee feel that forging working partnerships for attainment of 
Sustainable Development Goals (SDDGs), financial inclusion, gender equality, reformed 
multilateralism, etc. need to be upheld and  India with her rising stature in the world 
economy and politics, should support every effort towards that end. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that MEA should encourage and support RIS to continue to act as a bridge 
and be the voice of the country in its attempts to bring about convergence of Global South 
with the Global North in areas of collective interest, at the same time guiding the Global 
South to defend and promote its core trade and economic interests at bilateral, regional and 
global levels during intergovernmental negotiations.  
(Recommendation No. 28) 
3.37 The Committee understand that RIS has expertise in theoretical exposition and 
empirical assessment of regional connectivity initiatives to assess long term gains and 
related issues. The Committee note that India does not have a dedicated think-tank to 
address regional connectivity issues which is of critical importance in contemporary times. 
The Committee have been assured that RIS has supported Government of India’s track 1.5 
initiatives by providing robust inputs in these areas and that its inputs have provided 

P a g e | 97 
valuable support to Government’s decision making in terms of regional cooperation. The 
Committee understand that physical connectivity not only improves mobility between 
growth centers and hinterland but also promotes cross-border trade, foster people-to-
people movement, and enhance cultural connect with the neighbouring countries. Closely 
linked with connectivity is trade facilitation. With a robust network of physical and digital 
connectivity, trade facilitation reforms and border infrastructure in place,   trade costs gets 
reduced,  value chains gets strengthened contributing to industrialization along the 
economic corridors.  Taking into account the increasing role of India in the region as  
connectivity provider  and infrastructure facilitator, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
utilize the expertise of RIS  and encourage them to augment their expertise in the areas of 
trade facilitation and regional connectivity through new research, knowledge creation  and 
data collection on neighbouring countries and specific sectors to provide valuable inputs  
to the Government in formulating India’s connectivity strategy. 
(Recommendation No. 29) 
 
3.38 The Committee are given to understand that fostering policy dialogue on trade, 
investment and economic cooperation forms an integral part of the RIS work programme. 
The Committee note that in the recent past RIS has organized a number of dialogues, 
meetings and discussions encompassing various themes of national interest such as 
Energy Efficiency in Effective Energy Transition; Future Digital Currencies and Crypto-
Currencies; Revisiting Economic Cooperation in BIMSTEC in Post-COVID-19; Need for 
Setting Up of a New Development Bank, etc. The Committee feel that such policy dialogues 
are of profound importance for our country since these enable academicians, policy 
makers, practitioners and other stakeholders to carry out extensive deliberations on various 
economic issues confronting the Global South at national, regional, sub-regional and 

P a g e | 98 
multilateral level and share their insights towards evolving possible solutions. The 
Committee, hope that RIS would plan to organize similar in-depth discussions on regular 
basis in coordination with its wide range of national and international partner institutions on 
key issues and strengthen its connect to the Ministries of Commerce and Industry (MoCI), 
Ministry of Finance (MoF) and Ministry of Science and Technology (MoST) to bring to table 
holistic understanding of issues on trade, investment and economic cooperation 
assimilated from  subject scholars from across the globe with different affiliations and MEA 
should appropriately utilize the value of such discussions for betterment of foreign policy. 
(Recommendation No.30) 
 
3.39 The Committee note that RIS has been engaged in G20 work for Indian Presidency at 
multiple levels in the ‘Working Group’ as well as the ‘Engagement Group’ tracks. The 
Committee have been told that RIS is a knowledge partner for the Agriculture Working 
Group (AWG) and the Development Working Group (DWG) wherein it has been providing 
inputs and comments on various thematic issues concerned to each group.  The Committee 
note that in addition to the above, RIS is also actively working with five engagement groups 
viz. Think 20 (T20), Science 20 (S20), Youth 20 (Y20) and Civil 20 (C20) as one of the lead 
coordination institutions for organizing events/conferences/seminars as also providing 
valued inputs to various activities being organized by these groups. In view of the diversity 
of issues and complex challenges the world is grappling with, the Committee are aware that 
the expectations from India’s Presidency of G20 has really multiplied. While applauding the 
humongous role RIS is playing in shaping concerns of Think 20, Science 20, Youth 20 and 
Civil 20, the Committee urge RIS to infuse fresh ideas on G20 by carefully assessing its 
implications for global economy. The Committee also desire RIS to compare, contrast and 

P a g e | 99 
create new knowledge that matter for the people in the G20 countries and in rest of the 
world, including the developing countries, LDCs, SIDS, etc. 
(Recommendation No.31) 
 
3.40 The Committee note that under its University Connect Programme, RIS organizes a 
wide range of national seminars in collaboration with universities and academia across the 
country to generate greater awareness on foreign policy issues. Under the Programme it 
invites young scholars and academicians to take part in its major conferences such as 
Annual International Conference on South-South Cooperation.  The Committee are aware 
that as a part of the ‘Jan Bhagidari’ initiative of the G20 Indian Presidency, RIS has been 
organizing  G20 Lecture Series in 75 universities across the country  with the aim to 
reaching out to the youth and student fraternity of our country. The Committee view  
University Connect as an important means to connect with the youth of the country and 
generate awareness about the importance of India’s G20 Presidency. It is also an 
opportunity for young Indians to bring new ideas and perspectives to G-20-related topics. 
The Committee hope that MEA will facilitate the RIS to successfully cover all the 75 
Universities under the Jan Bhagedari Programme  and rope in the youth of the country as 
cultural ambassadors who can help build long-lasting relationships with G-20 fraternity.  
Moreover, MEA alongwith RIS should also look into the possibility of continuing to bring in 
more and more Universities under the umbrella of University Connect Programme even after 
the end of India’s G20 Presidency on 30 November 2023 and chalk out a mechanism to use 
the networks created during this period to build long-lasting relationships with the 
Universities in the country.  
                   (Recommendation No. 32) 
 

P a g e | 100 
3.41 The Committee note that as part of its wider dissemination programme, RIS has been 
conducting a number of capacity building programmes which include Indian Technical and 
Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programmes  and the IBSA Visiting Fellowship Programme 
with the Ministry of External Affairs the Summer School on Trade with EXIM Bank of India 
and Internship Programme for university students. In addition, RIS also conducted capacity 
building programmes on Agricultural Trade Policy Analysis with the support of its partner 
institutions. As regards the IBSA Visiting Fellowship Program instituted at RIS to promote 
academic exchange of young scholars in the field of economics and social sciences for 
strengthening research collaboration among India, Brazil and South Africa in the spirit of 
South-South Cooperation, the Committee find that only three candidates have  joined the 
programme in 2023. In view of the focus of this Fellowship programme on multilateral 
institutional frameworks and the diverse range of important issues that concerns IBSA, the 
Committee urge RIS and the MEA to ensure that all the available slots are filled so that 
every opportunity to do in-depth joint research and exchange of information in the fields of 
macro-economy, trade and development among India, Brazil and South Africa is fully 
utilized. 
(Recommendation No. 33) 
3.42 The Committee note that RIS offers internship to post-graduate students in 
economics from reputed institutes/universities for a period of two to three months mostly 
during the summer and winter breaks of the academic semesters. The Committee have been 
informed that 14 students from different universities of India completed their internship at 
RIS during the last one year.  The Committee feel that to inculcate interest in policy 
research on international affairs, training to budding scholars needs to be encouraged from 
a very young age. As such Committee are of the view that  being a premier think-tank in 

P a g e | 101 
India on global and regional economic policy, having accumulated unique expertise and 
knowledge base in the field of international trade, regional economic integration, new 
technologies and industrialization, regional connectivity and infrastructure development, 
blue economy, development finance and related areas, RIS should actively consider 
opening its internship programme in these specialized areas for students at graduate levels 
too.  The Committee, hence, urge upon RIS to evaluate their internship programme and   
offer more opportunities to students and apprise the Committee about the same.  
(Recommendation No. 34) 
3.43 The Committee note that RIS disseminates its research output through a wide range 
of its publications like Policy Briefs, Reports, Discussion Papers, etc. The Committee also 
note RIS has brought out several publications on various themes including India-EU 
Connectivity: Partnership for Development, Demand and Democracy; Ayush Sector in India: 
Prospects and Challenges; Deepening Cooperation in IBSA Perspectives From Key Sectors; 
ASEAN-India Development Cooperation Report-2021; E-Commerce Issues at the WTO 
Discussions and in India; ASEAN and India Partners of Integration in Asia, etc. The 
Committee concur with submission of RIS that these research publications provide vital 
information to policy makers and shapers and are valuable reference points to the research 
community on issues related to trade, investment, finance, technology, health, development 
partnership, etc. The Committee, however, feel that there is a need for wider publicity for the 
research output of RIS and hence, urge RIS to take steps to ensure wider dissemination and 
easy availability of its publications for research scholars and academicians. 
(Recommendation No. 35) 
 
 

P a g e | 102 
3.44 The Committee note that RIS has been having only a tiny regular faculty ranging 
between 5 to 8 scholars at a given point of time since 2006  in addition to contractual faculty 
hovering between eight to 36. The Committee further note that the sanctioned strength is 
three Professors, three Associate Professors and just one or two Assistant Professors. It is 
learnt that despite strong recommendations by its Governing Council, expansion of regular 
faculty could not be done due to restrictions imposed by the Government on creation of 
new posts. As such, RIS has to substantially rely on its contractual faculty who due to lack 
of job security  exits suddenly as the contractual appointments can  be approved by RIS for 
not more than one year. At times, it becomes even difficult to get well qualified scholars as 
Professors or Associate Professors. The Committee feel that as a credible research 
institution, RIS needs to have a far stronger regular faculty base given the wide spectrum of 
its work programme requiring engagement of a large number of scholars with deeper 
domain knowledge and experience to conduct meaningful studies. The Committee are of the 
considered view that RIS needs to have a larger number of young and promising scholars at 
the level of Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, apart from Research Assistants to 
ensure organic growth of RIS Faculty and give its junior and middle level members a sense 
of security and career advancement. Hence, the Committee urge RIS and the Ministry to 
take up the matter of creation of additional posts with the appropriate authority for 
appointment of regular faculty and intimate the Committee about the progress in this 
direction.  
(Recommendation No. 36) 
3.45 The Committee note that RIS functions from the India Habitat Centre (IHC) premises 
in Delhi covering an initially acquired built up area of 1000 sq. mt.  in September 1988 and 

P a g e | 103 
an additional built-up space of 381.46 metres acquired by it from IHC later. The Committee 
have been told that RIS does not have any facility to house visiting scholars, including the 
six IBSA Fellowship holders or around 30 ITEC course participants coming from Global 
South to take part in its five specialized courses annually. Due to lack of required 
conference facilities within its limited space, RIS has to frequently look for appropriate 
venues outside for holding its key meetings or conferences in which a large number of 
scholars from  the country and abroad participate. Looking into the situation, the Committee 
feel that the built-up space available with RIS is insufficient to meet its present and 
emerging requirements. The existing space provides no scope for expansion of RIS’s 
Faculty, which is absolutely essential for its organic growth to carry forward its mission of 
conducting evidence based specialized studies on trade and economic issues to give a 
boost to Government’s efforts towards Atmanirbharta. The Committee are of the considered 
view that RIS needs to have its campus, hostel and allied facilities as an institution of 
excellence in the country which is mandated to conduct a large number of policy research 
studies  for its in-house platforms such as the Global Development Centre, ASEAN India 
Centre, Centre for Maritime Economy and Connectivity (CMEC), etc. apart from the wide 
range of other studies commissioned by its partners. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry may seriously take up the issue of providing adequate infrastructure 
facilities to RIS and apprise the Committee about the specific steps taken in this regard. RIS 
may also, in consultation with Ministry of External Affairs, create a futuristic work plan and 
seek necessary budgetary allocation from the Ministry of Finance. 
(Recommendation No. 37) 

P a g e | 104 
3.46. The Committee desire that the Ministry of External Affairs may closely monitor the 
recommendations of the Committee with ICWA and RIS and submit the outcome to the 
Committee.  
 (Recommendation No. 38) 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                    Shri P.P. Chaudhary 
   August, 2023                                                                                       Chairperson   
Sravana 1945(Saka)                                                                        Committee on External Affairs 

P a g e | 105 
ANNEXURE –I 
CONFERENCES AND RESEARCH STUDIES ORGANISED BY MEA WITH VARIOUS  
THINK TANKS 
FY 2018-19: 
 
 Seminar/Conferences/Events 
 
Sl. No. Conference/Seminars/Research Studies Institute 
1 Raisina Dialogue Observer Research Foundation 
2 Indian Ocean Conference India Foundation 
3 India US Forum Ananta Centre 
4 Global Technology Summit Carnegie India 
5 India Strategy Forum Carnegie India 
6 India-Canada Track 1.5 Dialogue Gateway House 
7 India Korea Track 1.5 Dialogue Ananta Centre 
8 India-Japan Track 1.5 Dialogue Delhi Policy Group 
9 Foreign Policy Outreach Initiative Pune International Centre 
10 Conference on Trump’s Presidency Vidya Prasarak Mandal 
11 A Conference on Act East Jadhavpur Association of International 
Studies 
12 9th Biennial IAAPS Conference Indian Association for Asian and Pacific 
Studies 
13 West Asia Conference Manohar Parikar Institute for Defence 
Studies and Analyses (MPIDSA) 
 
 Research Studies 
 
Sl. No. Research Studies Institute 
1 Various research activities for understanding 
China and India-China Relations 
Chennai Centre for Chinese Studies 
(CCCS) 
2  
Research Project  
Centre for China Analysis and Strategy 
(CCAS) 
3 Research Projects and Publications  Manoharparikar Institute for Defence 
Studies and Analyses (MPIDSA) 
4 Research  Projects and  
Publications 
Association of Indian Diplomats (AID) 
5 Research on BRICS  Observer Research Foundation 
 
FY 2019-20 
 
 Events/Conferences/Seminars 
 
Sl. No. Conference/Seminars/Research Studies Institute 
1 Raisina Dialogue Observer Research Foundation 
2 Indian Ocean Conference India Foundation 

P a g e | 106 
3 India US Forum Ananta Centre 
4 Asia Economic Dialogue Pune International Centre 
5 Global Technology Summit Carnegie India 
6 India Strategy Forum Carnegie India 
7 India-Canada Track 1.5 Dialogue Gateway House 
8 India Korea Track 1.5 Dialogue Ananta Centre 
9 India-Japan Track 1.5 Dialogue Delhi Policy Group 
10 Conference on India’s Neighbourhood First 
Policy 
VidyaPrasarak Mandal 
11 India-Bangladesh Relations Jadavpur Association of International 
Relations 
12 Three day international conference on Indo-
Pacific 
MaduraiKamraj University 
13 Dialogue on Strategic Security Threats National Institute of Advanced Studies 
14 4th West Asia Conference Manoharparikar Institute for Defence 
Studies and Analyses (MPIDSA) 
 
 Research Studies 
 
Sl. No. Conference/Seminars/Research Studies Institute 
1 Various research activities for understanding 
China and India-China Relations 
Chennai Centre for Chinese Studies (CCCS) 
2 Research Project  Centre for China Analysis and Strategy 
(CCAS) 
3 Research Projects and Publications  Manoharparikar Institute for Defence Studies 
and Analyses (MPIDSA) 
4. Research  Projects and  
Publications 
Association of Indian Diplomats (AID) 
 
FY 2020-21: 
 
 Events/Conferences/Seminars 
 
Sl. No. Conference/Seminars/Research Studies Institute 
1 Conference on India- Bangladesh Jadavpur University 
2 Seminar on India’s Neighborhood First Policy Vidya Prasarak Mandal (VPM) 
3 Indian Ocean Conference  India Foundation 
4 Conference on Indo-Pacific Madurai University 
5 India-Korea Track 1.5 Dialogue  Ananta Aspen Centre 
6 NIAS-CISAC Dialogue on Strategic Security 
Threats  
NIAS 
7 Raisina Dialogue  Observer Research Foundation (ORF) 

P a g e | 107 
8 Asia Economic Dialogue  Pune International Centre 
9 4th Global Technology Summit  Carnegie Endownment 
10 4th West Asia Conference  Manoharparikar Institute for Defence 
Studies and Analyses (MPIDSA) 
11 Prabhav Impact Investor Council 
12 4th India-US Forum Track 1.5 Dialogue  Ananta Centre 
13 India-U.S. Track 1.5  Hudson Institute 
14 Global Technology Summit Carnegie Endowment 
 
 Research Studies 
 
Sl. No. Conference/Seminars/Research Studies Institute 
1. Various research activities for understanding 
China and India-China Relations 
Chennai Centre for Chinese Studies 
(CCCS) 
2. Research Project Centre for China Analysis and Strategy 
(CCAS) 
3. Research Projects and Publications Association of Indian Diplomats 
4. Research and Publications Manoharparikar Institute for Defence 
Studies and Analyses (MPIDSA) 
 
FY 2021-22 
 
 Events/Seminars/Conferences 
 
Sl. No. Conference/Seminars/Research Studies Institute 
1. Asia Economic Dialogue  Pune International Centre (PIC) 
2. 1st India-EU Track 1.5 Dialogue, 2021 Ananta Aspen Centre 
3. 5th Indian Ocean Conference  India Foundation 
4. National Seminar on “Changing contours of Indo-
US relations with special reference to issues like 
Trade, National Security Strategy, Covid 19 and 
underlying Geopolitical Trends” 
Vidya Prasarak Mandal’s Centre for 
International Studies 
5. Global Tech Summit 2021  Carnegie Endowment 
6. India-France Track 1.5 Dialogue  Gateway House 
7. 20th India-Korea Track 1.5 Dialogue  Ananta Aspen Centre 
8. 5th India-US forum Track 1.5 Dialogue  Ananta Aspen Centre 
9. Kolkata- Dhaka Dialogue HP Ghosh Research Centre (Bandhan 

P a g e | 108 
Konnagar) 
10. India Japan Forum  Ananta Centre 
11. Asia Economic Dialogue 2022 Pune International Centre (PIC) 
12. 4th India-Japan Indo-Pacific Forum  Delhi Policy Group (DPG) 
13. Bimstec- A Vehicle for Growth and Development  ISCS 
14. Foreign Relations Study on Indo-Pacific  European Council on Foreign Relation’s 
(ECFR) 
 
 Research Studies 
 
Sl. No. Conference/Seminars/Research Studies Institute 
1. Various research activities for understanding 
China and India-China Relations 
Chennai Centre for Chinese Studies 
(CCCS) 
2. Research Project Centre for China Analysis and Strategy 
(CCAS) 
3. Research and Publications Manoharparikar Institute for Defence 
Studies and Analyses (MPIDSA) 
4. Research Projects and Publications Association of Indian Diplomats (AID) 
5. Research Project Delhi Policy Group (DPG) 
 
FY 2022-23 
 
 Events/Seminars/Conferences 
 
Sl No. Conference/Seminars/Research Studies Institute 
1. NADI Dialogue, Guwahati on 28-29 May, 2022 Asian Confluence 
2. Annual Seminar at its Annual General Meeting  CIRC 
4.. 7th Raisina Dialogue 2022 Observer Research Foundation 
6. 2nd India-EU Track 1.5 Dialogue Ananta Aspen Centre 
7. 1st Raisina Forum for Future of Diplomacy, 
2022 in Delhi and Varanasi 
Observer Research Foundation 
8. Policy Dialogue “Act East to Indo-Pacific: Role 
of North-east Indian states in ‘Connecting the 
Connectivities’ at Imphal 
Asian Confluence 
9. 8th India Japan Track 1.5 Dialogue Delhi Policy Group 
10. 6th India-US Forum Ananta Aspen Centre 
11. 8th Raisina Dialogue 2023 2-4 March 2023 Observer Research Foundation 

P a g e | 109 
12. 21st India-Korea Dialogue Ananta Aspen Centre 
13. Global Tech Summit 2022 in Nov-Dec 2022 Carnegie Endowment 
14. India & Her Neighbours Vidya Prasark Mandal 
15. 7th Asian Economic Dialogue Pune International Centre 
16. India-Global Forum in December, 2022 India Inc. Forum 
 
 Research Studies 
 
Sl. No. Research Studies Institute 
1 Various research activities for understanding 
China and India-China Relations 
Chennai Centre for Chinese Studies 
(CCCS) 
2 Research Project  Centre for China Analysis and Strategy 
(CCAS) 
3 Research and Publications Manoharparikar Institute for Defence 
Studies and Analyses (MP-IDSA) 
4 Research and Publications Association of Indian Diplomats (AID) 
5 MEA Chair of Excellence  USI 
6. Study on connectivity projects b/w the North-
eastern States of India and Neighbouring 
Countries FY 2022-23) 
NEDFi 
 
 
 

P a g e | 110 
APPENDIX - 1 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2022-23) HELD ON 22 NOVEMBER, 2022 
 
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1750 hrs. in Committee Room ‘2’,  Extension Building, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary   –  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt. Preeneet Kaur 
3. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
4. Shri P.C. Mohan 
5. Dr. Ritesh Pandey 
6. Shri Rebati Tripura 
7.  Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
8. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
9. Shri Anil Desai 
10. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
11. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 1. Shri Vinay Kwatra   : Foreign Secretary 
 2. Ms. Vijay Thakur Singh  : DG,ICWA 
 3. Dr. Sachin Chaturvedi  :  DG, RIS 
 4. Shri Soumen Bagchi  : DDG,ICWA 
 5. Shri Anil Kumar Rai   : JS (Parl. & Coord.) 
 6. Dr. Sumit Seth   : JS (PP&R)  
 7. Ms. Kajaria Biswas   : Director (PP&R) 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary 
 2. Ms. Maya Menon   - Under Secretary 
 

P a g e | 111 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs, ICWA and RIS to the sitting of the Committee 
convened to have a briefing on ‘India’s Policy Planning and Role of Think Tanks with Special 
Reference to ICWA and RIS’. After outlining the subject for deliberation, the Chairperson drew the 
attention of the witnesses to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding 
confidentiality of the proceedings. 
3. Thereafter, the Foreign Secretary gave a power point presentation covering areas such as 
the history of policy planning in Ministry of External Affairs from the constitution of Policy planning 
division through its advancement over the years, its role within the Government functioning, its 
mandate, execution of the same, how the mandate of the policy planning division is delivered as 
specific policy product and policy recommendation and the various Track Dialogues that India 
currently has. The Foreign Secretary also briefed the Committee on the Flagship conferences 
organized by MEA, in – house and commissioned publications of MEA and various discourses held 
by MEA outside Delhi. Thereafter, the representatives of ICWA and RIS each gave brief 
presentation covering their mandate and working.  
 
4. During the course of briefing, Members of the Committee raised several queries which 
inter-alia included the Raisina Dialogue of ORF and its relation to the Government, non 
representation of elected representatives to the Track 2 dialogue, factoring of issue of fake 
currencies supplied by China and narcotics supplied by neighboring countries in policy planning, 
absence of dialogues with Africa or neighboring countries of India, North America and South 
America except USA and Brazil, overlapping of mandates of ICWA and RIS etc.  
  
5. The representatives from the Ministry of External Affairs responded to the queries of the 
Members. The Committee also desired that replies may be furnished to the points raised by the 
members of the Committee at the earliest. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of 
the Ministry for valuable and insightful inputs on the topic. 
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim proceeding of the Sitting has been kept on record. 

P a g e | 112 
APPENDIX – II 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS                
(2022-23)  HELD ON 12 DECEMBER, 2022 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 12 December, 2022 from 1515 hrs. to 1705 hrs. in Committee 
Room No. ‘2’, Parliament House Annexe, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
  Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.     Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.     Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
4.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
5.    Smt. Preneet Kaur 
6.     Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
7.     Smt. Poonam Pramod Mahajan 
8.   Shri P. C. Mohan 
9.   Smt. Queen Oja 
10.   Shri N.K. Premachandran 
11.   Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
12.   Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
13.  Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
Rajya Sabha  
 
14.   Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
15.   Shri Anil Desai 
16.   Shri Prakash Javadekar 
17.   Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
18.   Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
 
INDIAN COUNCIL OF WORLD AFFAIRS (ICWA)  
 
 1. Ms. Vijay Thakur Singh     -  DG,ICWA  
 2. Shri Soumen Bagchi    -  DDG,ICWA  

P a g e | 113 
 3. Ms. Nutan Kapoor     -  JS (ICWA) 
 4. Ms. Kajaria Biswas    -  Director (PP&R) 
 5. Dr. Vaibhav Tandale    -  DS(ICWA) 
 6. Dr. Nivedita Ray    -  DR(ICWA) 
 
RESEARCH AND INFORMATION SYSTEM FOR DEVELOPING COUNTRIES (RIS) 
 1. Professor Sachin Chaturvedi   -  Director General, RIS 
 2. Dr. S. K. Mohanty    -  Professor 
 3. Dr. Beena Pandey    -  Assistant Professor 
 
Secretariat 
 1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishna  - Director 
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Maya Menon   - Under Secretary 
 
2. xxxx  xxxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx 
3. xxxx  xxxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx 
4. xxxx  xxxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx 
5.  xxxx  xxxxxx  xxxxx  xxxxx 
The representatives of ICWA and RIS were called in. 
6. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of ICWA and RIS to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to have briefing by the representatives of the ICWA & RIS on the subject 
‘India’s Policy Planning and Role of Think Tanks with Special Reference to ICWA and RIS’. After 
outlining the subject for deliberation, the Chairperson drew the attention of the witnesses to 
Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the 
proceedings. 
 
7. Thereafter, DG, ICWA gave a power point presentation covering the history of ICWA, its 
vision, its composition, activities of ICWA encompassing details of its publication, research areas, 
programmes, details of Track 1.5/2  bilateral dialogues  it is party to, its outreach initiatives, its 

P a g e | 114 
national and international partners etc. Therefter DG, RIS also gave a power point presentation 
touching upon the history of RIS, details the Governing Council and Research Advisory Council of 
RIS, its vision, aims and objectives, its activities, its outreach programmes, its contribution to 
India’s G20 presidency etc.  
 
8. During the course of briefing, Members of the Committee raised several queries which 
inter-alia included the mandate of ICWA & RIS especially with reference to overlapping of areas of 
interest and research and how the same have been dealt with, the role of both the organisations in 
the articulation and promotion of India’s foreign policy goals, the details of the total funds received 
by  both the think tanks during the last five years and the purpose for which the funds have been 
utilized, preparedness of both the organizations to G20 Presidency of India etc.  
 
9. The representatives from the ICWA and RIS responded to the queries of the Members. The 
Committee also desired that replies may be furnished to the points raised by the members of the 
Committee at the earliest. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the Ministry for 
valuable and insightful inputs on the topic. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
 
  
 

P a g e | 115 
APPENDIX – III 
 
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2022-23) HELD ON 05 APRIL, 2023 
 
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1700 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament House 
Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary   –  Chairperson 
 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Shri. Dileshwar Kamait 
3. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
4. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
5. Dr. K. C. Patel 
6. Shri N. K. Premachandran 
7. Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
8. Shri Rebati Tripura 
9. Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
10. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
11. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
12. Shri Anil Desai 
13. Shri Abdul Wahab 
14. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 1. Shri Vinay Kwatra  : Foreign Secretary 
 2. Ms. Vijay Thakur Singh : DG,ICWA 
 3. Dr. Sachin Chaturvedi  :  DG, RIS 
 4. Shri Soumen Bagchi  : DDG,ICWA 
 5. Ms. Nutan Kapoor Mahawar : JS (ICWA) 
 6. Shri Anil Kumar Rai  : JS (Parl. & Coord.) 
 7. Dr. Sumit Seth   : JS (PP&R)  
 8. Shri Rohit Mishra  : Dir (FSO) 

P a g e | 116 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan  - Director  
3. Ms. K Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Maya Menon   - Under Secretary  
 
XXXXXX  XXXXX XXXX 
 
             (XXXX XXXX XXXX) 
(Witnesses were called in) 
2.  After welcoming the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs, ICWA and RIS, the 
Chairperson gave a brief outline of the subject for deliberation and also drew the attention of the 
witnesses to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of 
the proceedings. 
 
3. The Foreign Secretary then gave an overview of the subject covering inter-alia the mandate 
of Policy Planning Division, an update on the its recent activities, strategy in place for direct 
interaction with universities and academic institutions for research, effectiveness of output provided 
by think tanks in foreign policy formulation etc. Thereafter, the representatives of ICWA and RIS 
each gave a brief overview covering their mandate, an update on their activities, interaction with 
various universities and academic institutions, concerns of the Committee regarding overlapping of 
activities of the two organizations etc.  
 
4. During the course of briefing, Members of the Committee raised several queries which 
inter-alia included the objectives of extension of mandate of policy planning division in 2015, 
getting and retaining quality research faculty in ICWA and RIS, steps taken by ICWA and RIS to 
attract young scholars, challenges being faced by ICWA and RIS in fulfilling their objectives, 
participation of young parliamentarians in foreign policy making etc.  
  
5. The representatives from the Ministry of External Affairs responded to the queries of the 
Members. The Committee also desired that replies may be furnished to the points raised by the 

P a g e | 117 
members of the Committee at the earliest. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of 
the Ministry for valuable and insightful inputs on the topic. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim proceeding of the Sitting has been kept on record. 
 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

P a g e | 118 
APPENDIX - IV 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY SECOND SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2022-23) HELD ON 03 AUGUST, 2023 
 
The Committee sat from 1030 hrs. to 1100 hrs. in Room No. 116 (Chairperson Room) Block ‘B’, 
Extension Building, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary   –  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
2. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
3. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
4. Shri P. C. Mohan 
5. Smt. Queen Oja 
6. Dr. K. C. Patel 
7. Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
8. Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
9. Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Anil Desai 
11. Shri Abdul Wahab 
12. Dr. Ashok Mittal 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan  - Director  
3. Ms. Maya Menon   - Under Secretary 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the subject “India’s Policy 
Planning and Role of Think Tanks with Special Reference to ICWA and RIS.  

P a g e | 119 
4. The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation in 
the draft Report. The members suggested some minor modifications. The Committee adopted the 
draft Report with these minor modifications. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report incorporating the 
suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
 
 