 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2023-24.] 
 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023 /Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2023-24) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
25 
 

 
 
 
TWENTY FIFTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2023-24) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants of 
the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2023-24.] 
 
  
 
  
 
           Presented to Lok Sabha on 6.12.2023 
            Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 6.12.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
December, 2023 /Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
COEA No. __     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2023-24)……............................................................  (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………… (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report……………………………………………………………………………. 1 
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the                            
  Government……………………………….........................................................  15 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...………………………………… 75   
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..………………………..  77 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited…………………………………… 79 
  
       
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the Fifth Sitting of the Committee held on   04 December, 2023……...        81                                                    
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the Committee  
on External Affairs  (17th Lok Sabha)……………………………………………....      83 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2023-24) 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 2.    Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 3.    Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.    Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 6.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
7.    Smt. Preneet Kaur 
8.    Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 9.    Smt. Poonam Pramod Mahajan 
10.  Shri Srinivas Reddy Manne 
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan 12.  Smt. Queen Oja 
13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey 
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel 15.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
16.  Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
17.  Shri Soyam Bapu Rao 18.  Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
19.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
20.  Dr. Harsh Vardhan 21.  Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan 23.  Smt. Misha Bharti 
24.  Shri Anil Desai 25.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
26.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
27.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 28.  Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
29.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
30.  Shri Kapil Sibal 31.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
Secretariat  
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    –  Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   –  Director  
3. Ms. Maya Menon   -  Under Secretary 
  (iii) 
   
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2023-24) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-Fifth Report (17th Lok Sabha) 
on action taken by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations contained in the 
Twentieth Report of the Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for 
the year 2023-24. 
 
2. The Twentieth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of the Rajya 
Sabha on 21st March, 2023. The Action Taken Replies of the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 2 August, 2023 (English 
Version) and 17 August, 2023 (Hindi Version). 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their Sitting held on    
04 December, 2023. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee has been given at Appendix-I to 
the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twentieth  Report of the Committee on External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                             P.P. CHAUDHARY,                      
4 December, 2023                                                                                                       Chairperson,                                 
13 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)                                                 Committee on External Affairs 
 
(iii) 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
  
This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in their Twentieth Report on the 
subject ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2023-24’ which was 
presented to the Lok Sabha and laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on 21st March, 2023. 
  
2.        The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs on all the 
63 observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as 
follows: - 
  
i. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government: - 
                        Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,12, 13, 14, 15, 
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 
41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 63. 
  
Total- 57 
Chapter-II 
(ii)    Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
          Recommendation No. 31                                                 
        Total- 1 
Chapter-III 
  
(iii)    Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration: - 
          Recommendation Nos. 16, 17 and 53                                     
Total- 3  
Chapter-IV 
iv. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of Government are 
still awaited: - 

2 
 
Recommendation Nos. 60 and 62         
Total- 2 
Chapter-V 
3.        The Committee desire that the final replies to the comments contained in Chapter-I 
and observations/recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report may be furnished 
to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report.  
  
4.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
observations/recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
  
Overall Budgetary Proposals , Allocation and Utilisation 
 (Recommendation No. 4) 
  
5.        The Committee in their twentieth report had observed/recommended as under:           
  
                        “The Committee are happy to note that the Report being prepared by 
Research and Information System for Economic Development (RIS) analysing the 
budgetary allocations of Ministries/Departments conducting foreign policies of important 
countries as per the expanded mandate of the study, has been completed and would be 
shared with the Committee shortly. The Committee desire that the Ministry should study the 
Report carefully and initiate action based on the findings of the study.’ 
  
6.        The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
 “Hon’ble Committee’s recommendations have been noted. As desired, the Report 
prepared by Research and Information System for Economic Development (RIS) 
analysing the budgetary allocations of Ministries/Departments conducting foreign 
policies of important countries as per the expanded mandate of the study has been 
shared with the Hon’ble Standing Committee. Ministry would carefully study the 
conclusions & recommendations in the Report as well as share the findings of the 
Report with various stakeholders in the Government, particularly Ministry of 
Finance.” 

3 
 
  
7.        The Committee had specifically desired that the Report of the Research and 
Information System for Economic Development (RIS), analysing the budgetary allocations 
of Ministries/Departments conducting foreign policies of important countries be studied 
carefully by the Ministry and action initiated based on the findings of the study. The 
Committee appreciate that the Report submitted by RIS in the matter has been shared with 
the Committee. But the Ministry has not expressed its response to the conclusions and 
recommendations drawn in the report. The Committee, therefore desire that before sharing 
the findings of the report with various stakeholders in the Government, particularly Ministry 
of Finance, MEA should sort out the points to be pursued with each stakeholder and decide 
a strategy for proper time bound follow up for implementation of the findings. The 
Committee may be kept apprised of the progress in the matter regularly. 
  
 
 
 
Classification of the Budget of MEA 
 (Recommendation No. 7)  
  
8.        The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:           
  
                        ‘The Committee find that a high-level mechanism is in place in the Ministry 
to monitor the implementation of development partnership programmes and weekly reviews 
are being done by the officials at different levels. It is further understood that the Ministry is 
planning to establish a Contract and Procurement Management Unit. As a part of that , an 
online dashboard is being built to see with the click of a button how far the project has 
progressed, even in the last 48 hours. The Committee are extremely happy to see the 

4 
 
efforts to mark all projects on line and monitor their implementation in a manner which links 
well with how the budget is spent on these projects. The Committee desire that the online 
dashboard is made operational and the Contract and Procurement Management Unit is set 
up in the Ministry at the earliest and the progress in this regard is intimated to the 
Committee.’ 
  
9.        The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
                        “Ministry has appointed EXIM Bank as Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) 
for Grant in aid projects. Ministry in the process of creating a dashboard for real-
time online monitoring of grant in aid projects being extended by Government of 
India" 
  
10.      With a view to providing impetus to the Ministry’s monitoring mechanism for 
implementation of development partnership programmes, the Committee had desired that 
the online dashboard being built for the purpose be made operational and the Contract and 
Procurement Management Unit be set up by the Ministry at the earliest. The Ministry have 
informed that EXIM Bank has been appointed as Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) for Grant in 
aid projects. The Ministry have further informed that it is in the process of creating a 
dashboard for real-time online monitoring of grant in aid projects being extended by 
Government of India. The Committee understand that real time online monitoring would 
enable quick detection of anomalies, performance issues and potential problems while 
providing corresponding mitigating measures. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry 
to expedite the process and keep the Committee apprised of the progress in this regard.  
  
  
Embassies and Missions 
Recommendation No. 16  
  

5 
 
11.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:           
  
                        ‘The Committee note that an amount of Rs 3528.85 crore has been 
allocated in the BE 2023-24 under the Head ‘Embassies and Missions’ which is even lesser 
than the BE 2022-23 outlay of Rs. 3769.06 crore. The Ministry has stated that the allocated 
funds seem to be adequate to ensure the smooth operation of Missions and Posts abroad. 
The Committee have also been apprised those proposals for expanding India’s diplomatic 
presence in important partner countries including in the neighbourhood, the Latin Americas 
and Caribbean region, the Pacific Island region and Europe are under process. In the 
opinion of the Committee, opening of resident Indian Missions in these countries is in line 
with the broad foreign policy vision of the Government to maximise India’s presence abroad 
in the most optimal manner and to achieve our foreign policy objective of building a 
conducive environment for India’s growth and development through partnerships with 
friendly countries. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to expedite the process 
involving logistics, deployment, and creation of infrastructure as well as coordination and 
liaison with the host Governments so that resident Indian Missions are opened in these 
countries at the earliest.’ 
  
12.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
                        “The recommendation of the Standing Committee is duly noted. The 
scope and depth of the bilateral relations with the countries where India does not 
have a resident Mission or Post are regularly reviewed, and Mission/Post are 
opened in these countries accordingly” 
  
13.      Cognizant of the importance of opening Indian Missions in countries where there are 
no Indian missions, the Committee had urged the Ministry to expedite the proposals for the 
establishment of missions involving logistics, deployment, and creation of infrastructure as 
well as coordination and liaison with the host Governments so that resident Indian Missions 
are opened particularly in the neighbourhood, the Latin Americas and Caribbean region, the 
Pacific Island region and Europe in at the earliest. However, the Committee note the 

6 
 
Ministry’s reply merely states that the recommendation of the Standing Committee is duly 
noted and that the scope and depth of the bilateral relations with the countries where India 
does not have a resident Mission or Post are regularly reviewed, and Mission/Post opened 
in these countries accordingly. The Committee are of the considered view that more 
proactive action is necessitated on the part of the Ministry to expand India’s diplomatic 
footprint, deepen political relations, enable growth of bilateral trade, investment and 
economic engagements, facilitate stronger people-to-people contacts, bolster political 
outreach in multilateral fora and help garner support for India’s foreign policy objectives. 
The Committee, therefore reiterate their earlier recommendation and desire that Ministry 
should take concrete steps to expedite the process of establishment of Indian missions 
where there are no Indian Missions involving logistics, deployment, and creation of 
infrastructure as well as coordination and liaison with the host Governments apprise the 
Committee accordingly.  
  
 (Recommendation No. 17) 
  
14.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
                         
                        ‘The Committee note that 181 Indian Missions/Posts have so far been 
integrated into the Passport Seva Programme through the Global Passport Seva Project 
(GPSP). This integration, the Committee understand, will enable centralised passport 
issuance for our citizens in India and Diaspora abroad. The Committee desire that the 
process of integration of the remaining Missions/posts in to the GPSP applications should 
be completed at the earliest for smooth, expeditious and transparent delivery of passport 
services. The status of integration may be communicated to the Committee within three 
months.’ 

7 
 
  
15.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
                         
  “The total number of Indian Missions/Posts integrated into the PSP through GPSP 
is 181. This covers practically all our Missions/Posts except few countries striven by 
civil strife, newly opened Missions/Posts etc” 
  
16.      The Committee had noted that 181 Indian Missions/Posts had been integrated into the 
Passport Seva Programme through the Global Passport Seva Project (GPSP). The 
Committee were given to understand that and the Ministry was in touch with the remaining 
Missions/Posts i.e. Mission & Consulates in Afghanistan and Embassy of India, Pyongyang, 
DPR Korea to complete the process of integration With the aim to boost centralised 
passport issuance for our citizens in India and Diaspora abroad. The Committee had 
desired that the process of integration of the remaining Missions/posts in to the GPSP 
applications should be completed at the earliest for smooth, expeditious and transparent 
delivery of passport services From one reply of the Ministry, it seems that the integration 
process is still remains incomplete and no step has been taken to complete the same in all 
these months. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge 
the Ministry either with same coverage declare the process of integration as completed or 
make concerted efforts to ensure completion of process of integration of the remaining 
Missions/posts in to the GPSP under intimation to this Committee.  
  
Pre-Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) 
 (Recommendation No. 29) 
  
17.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:      

8 
 
             ‘The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry conducts pre- orientation 
programme for students also before they join their institutes abroad. It is also observed that 
Indian Embassies/Posts abroad do not possess complete details and addresses of 
students abroad. The gravity of this situation was brought home during the Ukraine crisis 
when the Ministry needed to contact all the Indian students in Ukraine. The Ministry has 
informed the Committee that Indian nationals abroad, particularly Indian students, are 
reticent about registering themselves with the Indian Embassies/Posts abroad. The 
Committee desire that the Ministry, through the PDOT sessions, should impress upon all 
the students as well as other Indian nationals going abroad that it is in their own interest 
and for their safety/security that they are required to register with the Indian 
Embassies/Posts abroad. Since it is with the Ministry and the Missions abroad to make 
them aware about the facilities/assistance provided to them including resolving of their 
grievances, the Committee recommend that the Indian Embassies/Posts abroad may also 
be pursued to do greater outreach and establish close connect with Indian nationals abroad 
including students through social media platforms so that an authentic database of students 
as well as Indian nationals abroad is available and maintained in the Ministry.’ 
  
18.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
                         
The Ministry wishes to inform the Committee that PDOT sessions are not organised 
in India for students going abroad. However, as part of their outreach to students, 
Missions/Posts abroad collaborate with Universities and tertiary education 
institutions and student associations to organise welcome ceremonies and 
familiarisation sessions for new students, wherein students are also encouraged to 
register with the Mission/Post.  
  
                                    Indian Missions/Posts abroad attach great priority to having a 
reliable database of Indians nationals, including students. Missions/Posts use every 
available opportunity, including all events with participation of diaspora and social 
media platforms, to encourage the diaspora members and students to register with 
the Mission/Post”   
  
19.      With a view to ensuring greater safety/security of Indians going abroad, the 
Committee, had recommended that the Indian Embassies/Posts abroad be pursued to do 

9 
 
greater outreach and establish close connect with Indian nationals abroad including 
students through social media platforms so that an authentic database of students as well 
as Indian nationals abroad is available and maintained in the Ministry. The Ministry in the 
reply  has informed that as part of their outreach to students, Missions/Posts abroad 
collaborate with Universities and tertiary education institutions and student associations to 
organise welcome ceremonies and familiarisation sessions for new students, wherein 
students are also encouraged to register with the Mission/Post. They have further informed 
that the Missions/Posts use every available opportunity, including social media platforms, 
to encourage the diaspora members and students to register with the Mission/Post. The 
Committee, while appreciating the efforts being put across by the Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad, are of the view that the database of the Indian nationals going abroad especially 
students needs to be available promptly in the event of crisis like the one we faced recently 
in Ukraine. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to come up with a foolproof strategy 
for securing an authentic database of students as well as Indian nationals abroad and 
inform about the outcome. 
  
Aid to Sri Lanka 
 (Recommendation No. 44) 
  
20.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:  
  
 ‘The Committee note that the Budgetary Allocation under ‘Aid to Sri Lanka’ has 
been reduced since 2020-21 as implementation of projects had been impacted due to the 
COVID-19 pandemic followed by unprecedented economic crisis in that country. The 
economic crisis has also posed a challenge in terms of disbursement and utilization of 

10 
 
funds as well as currency crunch in the country. The Committee further note that the 
Government is trying to put in place an institutional framework for settlement of trade in 
Indian Rupee so that even in the absence of hard currency, trade may not be disrupted. In 
the opinion of the Committee, such a mechanism which facilitates trade in Indian rupee 
would be beneficial, not only for Sri Lanka but for other countries in the neighbourhood as 
well, that are facing economic crisis. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to finalize 
all the modalities, in consultation with other Departments and Agencies concerned, at the 
earliest in this regard. The Progress made to advance the prospects of trade settlement 
with partner countries in Indian Rupee, especially in countries of our neighborhood may be 
communicated to the Committee within three months.’ 
  
21.            The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
“Following the Government of India’s decision to allow settlement of trade 
transactions in INR in July 2022, a number of Sri Lankan banks applied for 
Vostro/Nostro accounts in Indian banks. As per available information, at least six 
banks from Sri Lanka currently have functional vostro/nostro accounts for facilitating 
trade transactions in INR. Separately, Sri Lanka has included INR in its list of 
designated foreign currencies which has also facilitated INR denominated economic 
transactions between the two countries. In March 2023, High Commission of India, 
Colombo had organized a interactive seminar on the use of INR for economic 
transactions between India and Sri Lanka, involving officials from Central Bank of 
Sri Lanka, Government of Sri Lanka, RBI, Government of India apart from 
representatives from business and industry including tourism sector, media 
personnel, bank representatives, economists and journalists, trade and industry 
associations and export promotion councils.” 
  
22.      With a view to advancing the prospects of trade settlement with partner countries in 
Indian Rupee, especially in countries of our neighborhood, the Committee had urged the 
Ministry to finalize the modalities, in consultation with other Departments and Agencies 
concerned, at the earliest. The Committee are pleased to note that following the Indian 
Government’s decision to allow settlement of trade transactions in INR in July 2022, a 
number of Sri Lankan banks have applied for Vostro/Nostro accounts in Indian banks and 

11 
 
that Sri Lanka has included INR in its list of designated foreign currencies facilitating INR 
denominated economic transactions between the two countries. The Committee may also 
be apprised of  the steps being taken by the Government in the finalization of the modalities 
in this regard for global acceptance of the Indian Rupee and outcome of the efforts  for 
International trade settlements and promote growth of global trade with an emphasis on 
Indian exports.  
Indian Council For Cultural Relations (ICCR) 
Recommendation No. 52 
  
23.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
                        ‘The Committee observe that ICCR’s Cultural Centres are the principal 
instrument of India’s institutional outreach. As of now, ICCR is operating 37 Indian Cultural 
Centres (ICCs) abroad and is in the process of opening a new centre in Paris during the 
upcoming financial year. The Committee further understand that the property acquired at U-
Street in 2013 to set up ICCs in Washington is yet to be utilized due to structural challenges 
in the building and delay during COVID period. Recognizing that public and cultural 
diplomacy are among the key tools in the formulation and implementation of India’s foreign 
policy, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should undertake a review of all its 
Cultural Centres to rationalize them with a view to identifying countries where we need to 
have a greater presence and requirement for increased linkages by establishing such 
centre. The Committee also hope that the new centre in Paris is opened as per timelines 
and the one at Washington too is made functional at the earliest.’ 
  
24.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
“The Ministry through its Mission in Paris is progressing to operationalize 
the Cultural Centre in Paris, with over 94% work completion. Ministry acknowledges 
Standing Committee recommendation on reviewing & rationalizing presence of 
Cultural Centres across the world while exploring feasibility & impact of increased 
linkages through cultural centres.  ” 

12 
 
  
25.      The Committee had recommended that the Ministry undertake a review of all its 
Cultural Centres to rationalize them with a view to identifying countries where we need to 
have a greater presence and requirement for increased linkages by establishing such 
centre. The Committee had also hoped that the new centre in Paris is opened as per 
timelines and the one at Washington made functional at the earliest. The Committee are 
happy to note that the Ministry through its Mission in Paris is progressing to operationalize 
the Cultural Centre in Paris, with over 94% work completion. The Committee are optimistic 
that the Ministry would take concrete steps towards reviewing & rationalizing the presence 
of Cultural Centres across the world along with exploring feasibility & impact of increased 
linkages through cultural centres. The Committee urge the Ministry to expedite the process 
of review of its Cultural Centres and desire to be kept apprised of the progress in this 
regard. 
  
Recommendation No. 53 
  
26.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
 ‘The Committee also note that there are 11 operational Chairs of ICCR on different 
subjects in the universities in Croatia, Mauritius, Jamaica, Tajikistan, Papua and Guinea, 
Cambodia, Poland, Bangladesh, Iceland and UK. In addition to them, 17 Chairs have 
already been established and are in the process of being operationalized. Further, the 
proposals for setting up of 09 more Chairs are under consideration. The Committee, while 
according top priority and importance to the task of projecting cultural heritage of India 
through ICCR, recommend that a review of the functioning of the academic chairs instituted 
by ICCR in foreign universities may be done with a view to assessing their achievements 

13 
 
against the objectives of instituting them. The Committee may be apprised of the findings of 
such a review within three months of the presentation of this Report’ 
  
27.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
“The observations/recommendations of the Committee with regard to 
establishment of Chairs abroad are noted” 
  
28.      Having noted that proposals for setting up of 09 more ICCR Chairs are under 
consideration, the Committee had recommended that a review of the functioning of the 
academic chairs instituted by ICCR in foreign universities may be done with a view to 
assessing their achievements against the objectives of instituting them. The Committee 
however, note that the Ministry’s reply is silent on the action taken/proposed to be taken in 
this regard. As the Ministry are well aware, the ICCR through its centres and Chairs play an 
important role in projecting Indian culture through public and cultural diplomacy. The 
strategic significance of the work done by ICCR through public and cultural diplomacy is 
amongst the key tools in the formulation and implementation of India’s foreign policy. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and strongly urge the Ministry 
to review the functioning of the academic chairs instituted by ICCR in foreign universities at 
the earliest. The Committee may be apprised of the findings of such a review.  
  
Recommendation No. 60 
  
29.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
  
 “The Committee lay great emphasis on the role of research inputs on foreign policy 
as well as on economic, social, scientific and technological issues, etc. The Committee 
understand that apart from ICWA and RIS, the Ministry is collaborating with research 
institutes, think tanks and has also started outreach to universities through its Policy 
Planning Division. In the opinion of the Committee, research in the field of funding 
requirement, allocation and spending is one area the MEA needs to work upon. The global 
trends in this regard would enable the Ministry to make a realistic assessment of our 

14 
 
present needs and what we lacked. The Committee are also of the view that universities 
possessing the academic expertise and talent are most suited to carry out research in this 
field and desire that the Ministry should move towards direct interaction with universities 
and provide appropriate funding for research. For this purpose, the Committee recommend 
that the Ministry should open/create a new Budget Head for research funding to universities 
in the country.  
  
30.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
            “Recommendation noted for compliance.” 
  
  
31.      With a view to boosting research in the field of funding requirement, allocation and 
spending, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry open/create a new Budget 
Head for research funding to universities in the country. The Ministry, in their action taken 
reply, have submitted that the recommendation has been noted for compliance.  The 
Committee are hopeful that compliance in this regard shall be ensured by making 
appropriate provision from the very beginning in the budgetary process.  The Committee 
may be apprised of the specific steps taken in this regard  
  

15 
 
Chapter-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED Y THE GOVERNMENT 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
The Committee note that despite its challenging mandate in making India 
into a leading power and influential entity among the nations of the world, MEA 
remains one amongst the least funded Central Ministries and its revised budget 
hover around just 0.4 per cent of the total budgetary allocation of the Government 
of India since 2020-21. In B.E 2019-20, MEA had a share of 0.64% of GoI’s total 
budget. The Committee further note that despite them recommending that the 
allocation for the Ministry should be at least 1 % of the overall Budget of the GoI 
and India holding the G20 presidency, the budgetary allocation in BE 2023-24 has 
rather dropped by 0.04% from 0.44% in BE 2022-23 and not increased. Keeping in 
view the magnitude and extent of India’s diplomatic outreach and foreign policy 
objectives, the Committee continue to feel that an allocation of at least 1 % out of 
the overall Budget of the GoI to the Ministry is reasonable and achievable. The 
Committee, hence, desire that the Ministry should strive to enhance its financial 
resources in line with its diplomatic responsibilities globally. However, the 
increased allocation per se without the capacity to utilize the amount would be 
meaningless. The Committee, therefore urge the Ministry to work out a roadmap 
for enhancing its capacities and capabilities, whether it is in the form of structural 
change in the Ministry or a complete revamp of its organizational structure. Based 
on the roadmap prepared, a detailed proposal may be placed before the Ministry of 
Finance. Steps taken in this regard may be communicated to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has noted the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee. It is further 
submitted that the existing mechanism of holding Quarterly Budget Management 
Meetings with major Divisions and Spending Units, chaired by Foreign Secretary 
or Financial Advisor has assisted the Ministry in projecting realistic demands for a 
given financial year for the Revised Estimates and for the subsequent financial 
year for the Budget Estimates. Ministry acknowledges Hon’ble Committee’s 
recommendation to develop a structured roadmap for availing higher budgetary 

16 
 
resources. Our efforts to deepen our  implementation efficiencies keeping in view 
our Partner countries requirements underline the basis for our budgetary 
requirements. Further, Ministry will focus on achieving anticipated implementation 
progress in all key result areas and ensuring robust expenditure consistently 
throughout the Financial Year. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
The Committee observe that as against the overall Budgetary Demand of Rs. 
19095.45 crore for RE 2022-23 and Rs. 21,276.65 crore for BE 2023-24 in respect 
of MEA, the Ministry of Finance had allocated Rs. 16,972.79 crore and Rs. 
18050.00 crore respectively. As per the Demand-Allocation statistics, the Ministry 
of Finance has been slashing down the Budgetary Demands of the Ministry of 
External Affairs since 2020-21. The Committee acknowledge that the BE 2023-24 
allocation is 6.4% higher than the RE allocation and over 5% higher as compared 
to BE 2022-23. But, the allocation of Rs. 990 crore for G20 India Presidency 
Summit alone is more than the difference between the BEs of 2022-23 and 2023-
24. Though the Demand-Allocation ratio of RE 2022-23 and BE 2023-24 stands at 
89% and 84% indicating an improvement over the last five years, it appears to the 
Committee that the shrinking of the gap between demand and allocation over the 
last few years is due to lower demand sought by MEA and not by better allocation 
given by the Government. Moreover, the fact remains that if the Budgetary 
requirements of the Ministry are not met, some of the 
schemes/projects/programmes would definitely be affected during 2023-24 also. 
The Ministry would also have to resort to various instruments for re-appropriating 
money, such as supplementary requests, permission for re-prioritization and 
reallocation/rationalization of funds for Budget Heads, etc. Taking various factors 
into consideration like India’s international obligations, expansion of its global foot 
print, assumption of Presidency of the G20 and the expectation that 
projects/schemes of the Ministry would pick up speed in the Post-COVID world, 
the Committee are of the view that the BE 2023-24 allocation is inadequate to 
carry out all the important activities of the Ministry. The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Ministry to make further improvements in its Budgetary planning process 
and impress upon the Ministry of Finance to provide adequate Budgetary 
provisions so that it is able to fulfill all its international commitments without 
being hindered by financial constraints. The Committee also urge the Ministry to 

17 
 
maintain constructive engagement with the Ministry of Finance so that additional 
Budgetary allocation, as and when sought, may be granted during the FY 2023-24.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry would like to assure the Hon’ble Committee that it will continue to 
engage with the Ministry of Finance at all levels to emphasize the importance of 
providing adequate budgetary allocations to the Ministry and to ensure that there is 
no shortage of funds for the Ministry in the pursuit of its international 
commitments. As submitted earlier and noted by the Committee, sustained 
engagement with the Ministry of Finance has resulted in increased allocation of Rs. 
17250 Cr for BE 2022-23 has been made and it was enhanced to Rs. 17472.79 Cr 
at RE 2022-23 stage. The BE 2023-24 allocation of Rs, 18050 Cr has been made, 
with an increase of 4.64% over BE 2022-23 and 3.30% over RE 2022-23. 
Ministry’s constructive liaison with Ministry of Finance is underscored by 
Contingency Advance approved for Rs 50 crores for evacuation of Indians from 
Sudan civil strife and Rs 4655 crores advance to cater to RBI mandated 
provisioning requirements for India’s Line of Credits to various countries. In the 
face or urgent requirements of the Ministry, Ministry of Finance has thus been 
understanding of Ministry’s international obligations and addressed through 
Contingency advances.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
 The Committee note that despite getting lesser funds against its Demand for 
both BE and RE over the years, the Ministry has not been able to achieve full 
utilization of the allocated funds. The unspent balance surrendered during 2020-21 
was Rs. 634.16 crores. During 2021-22, the actual expenditure of the Ministry was 
88% and the unspent balance was Rs. 1828 crores. In the current Financial Year, 
the anticipated expenditure by 31 March, 2023 is 94%. Against this backdrop, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry should make constant endeavour to achieve full 
utilization of the RE allocation year after year and work towards this end during 
quarterly budgetary and spending evaluations. Only full utilization of allocated 

18 
 
funds can justify a compelling case to the Ministry of Finance for enhanced BE in 
the next FY. 
 
Reply of the Government 
Hon’ble Committee’s recommendations are duly acknowledged. This is to further 
submit that the projected demand & allocation of RE 2022-23 and BE 2023-24, is 
based on exhaustive unit wise discussions with respective Divisions, careful 
assessments of progress in projects and realistic assessment of budgetary 
utilization in respective Financial Years. The past 3 years being unusual, given 
COVID related lockdowns and Cash Management guidelines in place, in 
consonance with country’s fightback to COVID, Ministry’s efforts have been to 
keep establishment expenses in accordance with GOI’s guidelines. Barring the 
COVID years, Ministry’s expenditure has in fact ranged closed to 99-100% 
utilisarion of RE allocations.  Ministry’s improved utilisation in FY 2022-23 is 
reflected in Actuals 2022-23 (estimated.) of Rs 16714.35 crores (96% of enhanced 
FE 2022-23 & 98% of RE 2022-23). Our expectation & endeavor is to fully utilize 
the allocation and revert to utilization trend of pre-Covid years in the Current 
Financial Year.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 The Committee are happy to note that the Report being prepared by 
Research and Information System for Economic Development (RIS) analysing the 
budgetary allocations of Ministries/Departments conducting foreign policies of 
important countries as per the expanded mandate of the study, has been completed 
and would be shared with the Committee shortly. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry should study the Report carefully and initiate action based on the findings 
of the study. 
Reply of the Government 
Hon’ble Committee’s recommendations have been noted. As desired, the Report 
prepared by Research and Information System for Economic Development (RIS) 
analysing the budgetary allocations of Ministries/Departments conducting foreign 
policies of important countries as per the expanded mandate of the study has been 

19 
 
shared with the Hon’ble Standing Committee. Ministry would carefully study the 
conclusions & recommendations in the Report as well as share the findings of the 
Report with various stakeholders in the Government, particularly Ministry of 
Finance.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
 The Committee note that as per the Budget Circular dated 06 September 
2022, Ministries/Departments have been requested to take special note of data 
being captured under Estimated Committed Liabilities (ECL) in Ministry of 
Finance Portal for projecting allocations. The ECL module envisages to capture all 
committed liabilities of Government of India, internationally and domestically in a 
single place and map them to budgetary outlays and commitment of execution 
period. The Committee desire that the MEA should fully comply with the 
stipulations in the said Circular so that its Budgetary Allocations are aligned with 
the actual commitments made. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The Budget Circular 2023-24 dated 06 September 2022, wherein among 
other things, Ministries/Departments have been requested to take special note of 
data being captured under Estimated Committed Liabilities (ECL) in MoF Portal 
for projecting allocations. The ECL module envisages to capture all committed 
liabilities of Government off India, internationally & domestically in single place 
and map them to budgetary outlays & commitment execution period. This in turn 
is expected to align budgetary allocation with actual commitments made. This 
Ministry has already submitted the data as per the prescribed format on the portal 
designed by Ministry of Finance.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 The Committee note that the Budget classifications of the Ministry are in 
terms of Revenue and Capital Heads and Scheme and Non-Scheme sections. The 

20 
 
allocations under Revenue and Capital Heads have been reduced at the RE stage 
during 2022-23. However, in the BE 2023-24, both the Revenue and Capital 
components are enhanced. The outlay for capital expenditure has been increased 
from ₹1,416.23 crore in 2022-23 to ₹1,520.21 crore in 2023-24. Under Scheme 
section, RE 2022-23 and BE 2023-24 have been reduced. However, RE 2022-23 
and BE 2023-24 in respect of NonScheme section have been enhanced. The 
Committee take note of the reasons put forth by the Ministry such as, pace of 
expenditure, careful assessments of progress in projects and realistic assessment of 
budgetary utilization in respective Financial Years, etc., for these reductions or 
enhancements. Though the development partnership portfolio comprising the 
MEA's "aid-heads", continues to be a priority of the budgetary allocation as it 
aggregated at 32.40 per cent of total budget allocation, it is a concern that the 
allocations under the budget heads ‘Aid to Sri Lanka’, ‘Aid to other Developing 
countries’, ‘Aid to ITEC Programme’ ‘Aid to African Countries’ and ‘Aid to 
Seychelles’ have consistently decreased from BE to RE since 2020-21. The 
Committee also note the slow pace of various projects. Since financial assistance 
or aid to other countries is not just about altruism but a lot about strategic 
partnership with a view to maximum dividends, the Committee desire that MEA’s 
development aid to no country should be affected hampering the scope of India’s 
rising stature and prominence amongst nations. The Committee also desire that 
with near normalization of the COVID situation, the Ministry should make all out 
efforts to improve the pace of expenditure in the current year.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry's anticipation of expenditure progress in the current fiscal years is 
regularly assessed, which makes budgetary demand and allocation a dynamic 
process. Instruments for re-appropriating money, such as Supplementary requests, 
permit re-prioritization and re-allocation of funds in order to allocate budgetary 
resources fully and effectively. Therefore, funding provided to the Ministry in RE 
2022–23 reflects a fair evaluation of our current international obligations, predicted 
spending growth, and realistic assessment of requirements in BE 2023–24 – 
including likely increase in its activities in the post-COVID times. The quarterly 
budgetary and spending evaluations put in place by the Ministry in the form of 

21 
 
Quarterly Budget Management Meetings reinforce the beneficial reallocation of 
budgetary distribution with a preference towards the Ministry's development 
partnership portfolio. The allocated outlays shall suffice current international 
obligations and if need be, Ministry will take all necessary steps to seek additional 
outlays from Ministry of Finance. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 
 The Committee find that a high-level mechanism is in place in the Ministry 
to monitor the implementation of development partnership programmes and 
weekly reviews are being done by the officials at different levels. It is further 
understood that the Ministry is planning to establish a Contract and Procurement 
Management Unit. As a part of that , an online dashboard is being built to see with 
the click of a button how far the project has progressed, even in the last 48 hours. 
The Committee are extremely happy to see the efforts to mark all projects on line 
and monitor their implementation in a manner which links well with how the 
budget is spent on these projects. The Committee desire that the online dashboard 
is made operational and the Contract and Procurement Management Unit is set up 
in the Ministry at the earliest and the progress in this regard is intimated to the 
Committee. 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry has appointed EXIM Bank as Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) for 
Grant in aid projects. Ministry in the process of creating a dashboard for real-time 
online monitoring of grant in aid projects being extended by Government of India.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 
 The Committee observes that the pace of expenditure has been slow during 
1st and 3rd quarter of 2021-22 and 2022-23. The Ministry, however, has stated that 
in Financial Year 2022-23, Ministry has ensured smooth and balanced pace of 

22 
 
expenditure during each quarter, to the extent possible. The quarterly expenditure 
by the Ministry in FY 2022-23 was in consonance with Cash Management 
Guidelines of Ministry of Finance, last quarter ceiling of 33% and 15% in March 
2023. The percentage of expenditure is over 61% at the end of December 2022. 
The Committee desire that it should be the endeavour of the Ministry to constantly 
improve its performance and pace of utilization of funds and make all possible 
efforts to achieve full and complete utilization of the allocated funds within the 
Financial Year.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 For effective quarterly expenditure management, all expenditure is closely 
monitored and fund releases are made in line with physical and financial progress 
of projects to ensure that there is no parking of funds with implementing agencies. 
To ensure optimal utilization of budgetary resources during each quarter of the 
financial year, expenditure is closely and regularly monitored by the Financial 
Advisor in consultation with Division Heads, including through quarterly budget 
management & expenditure review meetings. In these meetings, the expenditure 
plans of the Ministry’s various Divisions and Spending Units are discussed and the 
importance of ensuring balanced expenditure during each quarter of the financial 
year is emphasized & monitored. Divisions/Spending Units accordingly make all 
efforts to ensure evenly paced expenditure, within the constraints of majority of the 
Ministry’s spending being in foreign countries, where diverse local conditions, 
inter-alia including geological, security, administrative, legal & economic 
ecosystems and varying project development and implementation schedules posing 
significant challenge for alignment of expenditure to our own budget cycle. 
Ministry’s budgetary & expenditure management, thus is unlike any other Ministry 
in Government, with global diversity of various ecosystems, in which our projects 
are executed & expenditure managed. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
 
 The Committee note that India’s Diplomatic Service is perhaps the most 
short-staffed in comparison to many other countries whose economy and stature is 

23 
 
much leaner than that of ours. The total strength of 4888 is distributed across 
different cadres of the Ministry such as the Indian Foreign Service (IFS), IFS 
General Cadre, Branch B, Stenographers Cadre, Interpreters Cadre, Legal & 
Treaties Cadre, among others. The cadre strength of Indian Foreign Service 
Officers is only 1011 which is just 22.5% of the total strength. Out of IFS ‘A’ 
cadre, 667 are posted at our Missions abroad and 334 are manning the headquarters 
in Delhi which at present has 57 divisions. The 42 Committee feel that we have far 
too less number of IFS “A” Officers than actually required to represent India’s 
interests at the Headquarters and at our Missions abroad, including various 
multilateral agencies. The Committee are of the view that with the profound 
changes taking place in the Foreign Policy from Indian perspective it is imperative 
that the cadre strength of the Ministry commensurate with India’s expanding 
international stakes. To work towards global leadership as envisaged and for 
executing foreign policy strategy effectively across countries, our missions must be 
staffed with highly skilled/trained diplomats. With the felt need of having Missions 
in all the UN member countries, there is an increased requirement of manpower in 
the diplomatic cadre. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry should get 
their cadre review done at the earliest to build capabilities for shouldering the 
expanded mandate while enriching the capacity of its existing personnel. The 
Committee may be apprised of the efforts taken in this regard. The Committee may 
also like to see that this review should primarily be based on a comparative 
analysis of the strength of the diplomatic corps of our country with major 
developing countries, countries in the neighbourhood and China. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Ministry of External Affairs regularly reviews human resource requirement 
in Missions and Posts abroad. The Ministry accords highest priority to optimize the 
deployment of its human resources to fulfill its growing responsibilities through 
recruitment and cadre management of the Indian Foreign Service and other Cadres 
of the Ministry, and also through deputation of officers from other Ministries and 
Departments. Vacancies in Missions/Posts abroad are regularly reviewed, and 
officers/officials are posted against these vacancies. With respect to cadre review, 

24 
 
the meeting of the Cadre Review Committee has been held, and the proposal is 
under consideration. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry keeps reorganising its 
divisions and their responsibilities to account for new developments and functional 
priorities such as the creation of G 20 Division. The Committee are of the view 
that filling up of vacancies should be taken up on priority basis. The Committee 
also observe that the Ministry have been taking a series of affirmative action such 
as increasing the indent to UPSC, engaging consultants and bringing in talents 
from non MEA Departments and Ministries through deputation. Time and again 
the Ministry have taken a plea that manpower crunch is on account of the delay in 
timely filling up of vacancies which is being done by UPSC and SSC. The 
Committee urge the Ministry to take it up at the highest levels of the Government 
to consider the human resource requirements of MEA favorably and also pursue 
vigorously with Staff Selection Commission (SSC) and Union Public Service 
Commission (UPSC) to fill up the vacancies on priority basis. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 The recommendation of the Standing Committee is duly noted. Keeping in 
mind the requirements of Ministry, and to fill up the vacancies on a priority basis, 
Ministry has increased our indent with the UPSC, and over 300 officers have 
joined the Indian Foreign Service since 2014 by direct recruitment through the 
Civil Services Examination. Ministry had also placed an indent of around 700 
vacancies in 2021 and 2022 for direct recruitment of officials through SSC, and the 
recruitment is expected to be completed in the coming months. For the year 2023, 
a total of 37 vacancies for UPSC and around 150 vacancies for SSC have been 
indented. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 

25 
 
 
 The Committee note that out of the allocation of Rs 320 crore in 2022-23 for 
G20 India’s Presidency Summit, the expenditure incurred so far under this Head is 
Rs 92.59 crore and an amount of Rs 990 crore has been provisioned in the BE 
2023-24. The Committee understand that the BE 2023-24 allocation is not 
adequate based on current estimations and projections and G20 Secretariat/MEA 
would seek additional outlay for implementation of G20 meetings during the 
course of FY 2023-24. Being aware of the magnitude and scale of 
events/programmes planned all over the country during India’s G20 Presidency, 
the Committee expect timely availability of funds for effective implementation of 
events and programmes scheduled for the current year. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Ministry should remain vigilant and keep close and diligent watch 
on the trend of expenditure while holding G20 meetings/events and make careful 
regular analysis for funding requirements so that a realistic projection of 
anticipated expenditure is arrived at well in advance and the Ministry can get the 
desired funds from the Ministry of Finance well on time to meet all the expenses in 
this regard.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 Note for Cabinet on Revised and enhanced Estimated expenditure for 
conducting G20 Meetings and Leaders’ Summit under India’s G20 Presidency 
after Inter Ministerial Consultations is being submitted for the consideration of 
Cabinet with the approval of External Affairs Minister. Consequent to Cabinet 
Approval, MEA will obtain allocation of funds through its annual budgetary 
exercise at BE and RE stages / advance from Contingency and appropriation under 
Supplementary provision for revised expenditure requirement for conducting G20 
meetings. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
 

26 
 
 The Committee note that the G20 Presidency is India’s most high profile 
international endeavour ever. It is also a unique opportunity to present a face of 
leadership, diversity, success and our development template to the world. The 
Committee feel that in order to showcase the best of India to the world, and to live 
up to India’s vision of becoming ‘Viswa Guru’ each and every personnel to be 
engaged from the stakeholder organisations for G20 programmes need to be 
groomed appropriately. Hence, the Committee desire that formal training for all the 
officials involved in the upcoming events should be held at regular intervals, in 
addition to inter-ministerial training and familiarisation programmes held by the 
G20 Secretariat. As citizen engagement and large-scale public participation 
through various ‘Jan Bhagidari’ activities are also being planned and conducted 
across the country, follow up training for the officials of all line Ministries as well 
as the Protocol Officers of States should also be conducted so that the 
decentralized activities and programmes are brought in alignment with the G20 
initiatives and programmes. Further, no stone should be left unturned in creating 
awareness among the citizens about the mission and vision of G20 to be upheld as 
a country before the visiting delegations.  
 
Reply of Government 
 
 Formal trainings have been organized by the G20 Secretariat which include 
training module for Liaison Officers, with sessions on Protocol, personal grooming 
and practical aspects/ duties of Liaison Officers; Session on Logistical, Branding 
and Security matters for Logistics Nodal Officers (DS/Director/JS level) of Line 
Ministries; and multiple training sessions on the operational matters of G20 
Website and Accreditation process of foreign delegates and on G20 Website. G20 
Secretariat in collaboration with Bureau of Police Research and Development 
(BPRD), MHA organized training of trainers on soft skills and other security 
related issues for Nodal Officers of State Governments who in turn organized 
extensive trainings at State Police Training colleges for State Police personnel 
deployed at the G20 Meetings. For creating awareness amongst citizens, about the 
vision and mission of G20, ‘Jan Bhagidari’ activities have been taken up that 
include G20 University Connect lecture series in 75 Universities across the 
country, Selfie with Monuments, ‘Know Your G20’ quiz through MyGov, 

27 
 
dissemination of a G20 ‘School Connect’ brochure, setting up of G20 pavilion and 
exhibition at the New Delhi World Book Fair and other select venues, a G20 
themed Food Festival, Flower show, vintage car rally, golf tournament, G20 
themed painting, quizzes, slogan writing competitions, panel discussions, beach 
cleaning activitiesetc. Engaging activities such as runs, rallies, cyclothons, tree 
plantation drives, exhibitions, Model G20 series, etc. have also been organised by 
various State/UT governments. Further, to carry the message of G20 to the masses, 
extensive outdoor, TV, social media, radio, and print publicity is being carried out 
by the G20 Secretariat. Use of Regional languages in branding and publicity across 
media (print, outdoor, radio, television, etc.) has also strengthened outreach. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
 
 The Committee find that as a premier diplomatic training institution, the 
Sushma Swaraj Institute of Foreign Service (SSIFS) cater to the professional 
training requirements of the Indian Foreign Service (IFS) officers, members of 
other civil services and foreign  diplomats. The Committee have been informed 
that the Budgetary Allocation of Rs 21.19 crore provided for the FY 2023-24 is 
sufficient and all the training programmes, both mandatory and skill development 
programmes, will be conducted as per the training calendar of SSIFS. The 
Committee, however, note that since 2020- 21, the actual utilisation and the pace 
of utilisation of funds on training by the SSIFS has been slow. Though a few 
courses for Foreign Diplomats have been rescheduled due to COVID-19 lockdown 
and travel restrictions, all regular training programmes were conducted. Since the 
COVID situation has eased out, the Committee expect that more training 
programmes for Foreign Diplomats would be conducted during 2023-24 and as a 
result, utilisation of funds under the Head would also improve. The Committee 
desire that the Ministry should begin the process of consultation with 
interested/participating countries early so that the schedule for training courses are 
finalised and training could commence at the beginning of the Financial Year 
itself. 
Reply of Government 
 

28 
 
 Since FY 2022-23, subsequent to pandemic induced restrictions during the 
past couple of years, SSIFS has picked up speed in conducting courses for Foreign 
Diplomats, in consultation with participating countries. Since April 2022, country 
specific and region-specific training programmes for diplomats from South Sudan, 
Mexico, Central Asia, Iran, Pacific Island Countries were conducted.  Further, ‘3rd 
Annual Disarmament and International Security Affairs Fellowship’ and two 
editions of ‘Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats’ were also conducted.  In 
the CFY 2023-24, SSIFS has already conducted a special course for diplomats 
from Eritrea and Zambia in April 2023.  Going forward, a number of special 
courses for foreign diplomats from countries in the Developing South, particularly 
from Asia, Africa and Latin America are being planned to be conducted during the 
year.   
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
 
 The Committee note that SSIFS has introduced a new training module on 
‘India and its Neighbourhood’ during the 96th Foundation course at the Lal 
Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration, Mussoorie in March 2022 
and the same has become a part of SSIFS’s Annual Calendar. The Committee 
understand that the first ever training module of this nature for the IAS Officers is 
part of the Government’s efforts to mainstream Neighbourhood First Policy in the 
functioning of all Ministries and Departments of the Government of India. While 
expressing their deep appreciation about this training programme, the Committee 
hope that the SSIFS will keep updating and upgrading the contents/structure of this 
training to help every IAS officer imbibe the spirit of India’s Neighbourhood First 
Policy. 
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
The Training Module on ‘India and its Neighbourhood’ has been institutionalized 
as an integral part of the Foundation Course at the Lal Bahadur Shastri National 

29 
 
Academy of Administration (LBSNAA), Mussoorie for all civil service officer 
trainees including IFS, IAS, IPS and other All India and central services.  The 
second edition of this training module was held in September 2022 as part of the 
97th Foundation Course at LBSNAA.  SSIFS updates this training module after 
due consultations with neighbourhood territorial divisions of MEA and 
incorporates appropriate changes based on the feedback received from the 
participants.  The overall aim is to make all Indian civil servants understand the 
strategic importance of the neighbourhood and the various steps taken by 
Government of India to improve ties with our neighbouring countries such as 
connectivity initiatives, better border infrastructure, trade & economic cooperation, 
developmental projects, security cooperation, people to people contacts, etc.   
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
 
 The Committee further note that as announced in the Global South Summit, 
SSIFS would be conducting training programmes for Diplomats of the Global 
South under Global South Young Diplomats Forum. This, the Committee 
understand, would open up our training programmes to all the 134 countries of 
Global South. Since courses and programmes for foreign diplomats are a way to 
build bridges of friendship with other countries, the Committee desire that our 
footprint as member of the International Forum on Diplomatic Training (IFDT) is 
increased in coming years. The Committee further desire that the modalities for 
training Diplomats of the Global South should be worked out at the earliest so that 
the training could commence from the first quarter of FY 2023-24.  
 
 
Reply of Government 
 
SSIFS has been a pro-active member of the International Forum on Diplomatic 
Training (IFDT).  SSIFS hosted the 48th Annual Meeting of the IFDT in New Delhi 
as part of the Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav (AKAM) celebrations from 14-18 
November, 2022.  The meeting was attended by 65 participants from 45 diplomatic 

30 
 
training academies and academic institutions drawn from 40 countries.  SSIFS will 
endeavour to conduct special training programmes for all the countries of the 
Global South in two or three batches in the Current Financial Year 2023-24.    
 
  

31 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
 
 The Committee note that the Performance Evaluation and Monitoring 
System (PEMS) 2.0 portal which is a centralized online monitoring mechanism to 
evaluate the functioning of Missions/Posts abroad on an annual basis, was 
launched in 2021 followed by the launch of  PEMS 3.0 questionnaire in May 2022. 
Out of 188 Missions/Posts evaluated through the PEM 3.0 questionnaire, 184 
Missions/Posts have taken further action on the basis of remedial actions suggested 
by the Ministry after the Final Evaluation while 4 Mission/Posts are in the process 
of submitting their responses. The Committee desire that these four Missions/Posts 
should be pursued to submit their further action taken report expeditiously so that 
the responses received from them are evaluated for further improvement in their 
performance. The Committee further desire that evaluation of the functioning of 
Indian Missions/Posts should be a continuous process and it should be the 
endeavour of the Ministry to bring about qualitative improvements in their 
performances through upgradation of the questionnaire and physical inspection, if 
required. 
 
Reply of Government 
The Ministry has been regularly following up with all the Missions/Posts abroad 
w.r.t submission of responses on the PEMS 3.0 portal. All of the aforementioned 
four Missions/Posts have duly submitted their responses and the same are being 
evaluated to enable further improvement in their performance. 
 
The process of the evaluation of the functioning of Missions/Posts abroad has been 
developed by Ministry of External Affairs as an annual exercise. An updated 
questionnaire is being prepared for the evaluation of the functioning of 
Missions/Posts for FY 2022-23 and the evaluation exercise for FY 2022-23 will be 
started shortly.  
 

32 
 
This is to reiterate that the objective of the PEMS is not punitive but 
recommendatory in nature so as to improve the performance of the Missions/Posts 
over time.  
The Ministry has made significant progress in the annual performance appraisal of 
Missions/Posts abroad and efforts are continuously being made for improving their 
efficiency. Additionally, the PEMS initiative has minimized the need of onsite 
inspections resulting in saving time and resources.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
 
 The Committee note that the BE 2023-24 under the Head ‘Passport and 
Emigration’ has been kept at Rs 1002.78 crore which is even lesser than the RE 
2022-23 allocation of Rs. 1154.76 crore. In this regard, the Ministry has stated that 
the proposal is to start from a lower base with augmentation of funds to be sought 
at the RE stage as the bills/invoices related to the printing and procurement of 
travel documents for that year are expected to be raised later in the Financial Year 
only. The Committee feel that anticipated expenditure should have been accounted 
for in the BE stage itself. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to ensure 
that lack of funds do not impede the delivery of passport related services as well as 
the scheduled launch of the e-Passport Project in the current year. The Committee 
also desire that the Ministry should maintain smooth and efficient utilisation of 
funds from the beginning of the Financial Year itself so that based on the pace of 
expenditure, augmentation of Budgetary Allocation may be got concurred by the 
Ministry of Finance.  
Reply of the Government 
As against the proposed BE 2023-24 of Rs. 900 crores under the minor head, 
Printing and Publication of Travel Documents has been allocated Rs 230 crores. 
Based on Ministry’s genuine felt needs for funds, Ministry of Finance has 
approved a Contingency Advance of Rs 500 crores for Printing & Publication and 
Rs 150 crores for Passport Sewa project. Ministry’s endeavor will be to efficiently 
utilise allocated resources to advance public service interest of passport sewa.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20) 

33 
 
 The Committee observe that in addition to 430 POPSKs operational in the 
country, 4 POPSKs in the Lok Sabha Constituencies of Guna, Ettawah, Aliburg 
and Nandurbar are likely to be opened in the current year. The Committee urge the 
Ministry to expedite the process of opening these POPSKs in the said 
Constituencies. The Ministry should also maintain regular follow-up with the 
Department of Posts for allotment of space so that POPSKs are opened in all the 
remaining Parliamentary Constituencies in the country where PSK or POPSK have 
not been opened as yet.  
Reply of  the Government 
 As on date 430 POPSKs are operational across the country. In the remaining 
51 Lok Sabha constituencies the POPSKs are yet to be opened. The Ministry is 
assiduously working on the same. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry’s Flagship Programme, ePassport 
Project is facing several challenges which include, complex technical infrastructure 
and participation of multiple stakeholders; technical limitation of PSP version 1.0’s 
ability to take on the additional load, etc. The Committee understand that the 
Ministry is now proposing to launch only the pilot of the project in the first stage. 
Once the PSP Version 2.0, which has the technical ability to take on the additional 
load is launched, e-Passport will be rolled out in stages at all passport offices 
across India and at Missions/Posts abroad. The tentative date for Go-live for PSPV 
2.0 is 7 July 2023. The Committee desire that the Ministry should maintain close 
coordination with all the stakeholders and get the technical concerns resolved for 
smooth/ early launch of the e-Passport Project. The progress in this regard may be 
communicated to the Committee.  
Reply of the Government 
Present status with regard to e-Passport Project is as under - 
 
E-Passport project involves setting up of complex technical ecosystem, including 
Public Key Infrastructure (PKI), Key Management System (KMS), Inter-
operability test bed, Project Management Unit, e-Personalisation, as also creation 
of e-Passport verification set-up at Immigration Check Points. 

34 
 
ISP Nashik has placed an order of 4.5 Crore RFID Chips and started production of 
e-Passport blank booklets. PKI, KMS and e-Personalisation have since been 
finalized and presently integration testing is going on, which will be followed by 
performance and security audit of the project. It is estimated that two-thirds of the 
project has since been completed. 
E-Passports will be launched in a pilot mode at one of the RPOs and thereafter 
would be made available in phases at all passport offices across India and at Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad.  
The Ministry is striving for a smooth and early launch of the e-Passport Project. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22) 
 The Committee note that mPassport Police App for the expeditious 
submission of Police Verification Report (PVR) has been launched in 24 
States/UT. In States/UT where the App has been launched, the PVR is received 
within 3-5 working days. Since the use of the mPassport Police App reduces the 
overall issuance time for passports, the Committee urge the Ministry to pursue the 
remaining States/UTs vigorously so that the mPassport Police App is launched by 
them without further delay. The Ministry and its Passport Offices may also extend 
all the needed assistance in terms of infrastructure and technical expertise/training 
to the police Departments of these States/UTs for its early launch in all the States 
and UTs in the country.  
Reply of the Government 
 As on date mPassport Police App has been launched in 24 
States/UTs  across the country. For the remaining States/UTs, the Passport Officers 
in the concerned State/UT is coordinating with the police authorities to initiate the 
launch of mPassport Police App. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23) 
 The Committee understand that the integration of the Passport Seva Program 
with DigiLocker in 2021 is a major digital transformation in the delivery of 
Passport Services in India. DigiLocker, a key initiative under Digital India is a 
platform for issuance and verification of documents/certificates in a digital way 
thereby eliminating the use of physical documents. Since the integration of 

35 
 
Passport Seva Project with DigiLocker, a total of 16,69,335 applicants have 
utilized the facility. The Committee understand that the DigiLocker facility has 
helped in reduction of paper work and verifying the documents in the source 
database, which in turn results in expeditious delivery of passport services to the 
citizens and hence, urge the Ministry to disseminate awareness regarding the 
DigiLocker facility on a country-wide basis. 
Reply of the Government 
 As on date a total of 18,24,346 applicants have utilized the facility of 
uploading documents through DigiLocker. Further awareness of use of DigiLocker 
is being disseminated. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24) 
 The Committee note that out of the sanctioned strength of 2741 personnel in 
Central Passport Organisation (CPO) cadre, the working strength is only 1749 
personnel resulting in 992 vacancies. This shortage of 36% personnel in CPO is 
also one of the major challenges being faced by the Ministry in the expansion of 
the Passport Seva Programme. The Committee had recommended, in their previous 
Reports on Demands for Grants that the issue of human resource constraints in 
CPO should be taken up with the Department of Personnel and Training. However, 
not much progress has been made in this regard. The Committee feel that as the 
Passport Seva Programme is the largest citizen-centric project in the MEA, the 
Ministry should mpress upon the DoPT of the urgency for filling up the vacancies 
in CPO at the earliest. The Ministry may also continue to take all remedial 
measures within the Department to ensure that shortage of personnel do not 
hamper the smooth and efficient implementation of the Passport Seva Programme. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry is taking all remedial measures for filling up the vacancies as per the 
procedure laid down by the Government. As Direct Recruitment in CPO is carried 
out by the Staff Selection Commission (SSC), all the indents have been timely 
placed by the Ministry to SSC as and when called for. Vacancies upto the year 
2023 have been indented to SSC. Ministry has received dossiers of 59 Assistant 
Superintendents by SSC against the vacancy year 2021 for which appointment 
orders have been issued. SSC has also declared the result of Combined Higher 

36 
 
Secondary Level Examination (CHSLE) 2021 and Combined Graduate Level 
Examination (CGLE) 2022 against which 68 Junior Passport Assistants (JPAs) and 
23 Assistant Superintendents, respectively are expected to join in 2023. 
Promotions through Department Promotion Committees (DPCs) meeting are being 
carried out timely. For the vacancy year 2023, 98 Junior Passport Assistants (JPAs) 
were promoted to the post of Senior Passport Assistants (SPAs) and 05 Assistant 
Superintendents were promoted to the post of Superintendent. 140 Superintendents 
were also promoted on ad-hoc basis to the grade of Senior Superintendent against 
the vacant posts. 
Promotions through Limited Departmental Competitive Examination (LDCE) for 
the post of JPA and SPA are conducted by SSC. All the indents are being placed 
by the Ministry to SSC as and when called for. As far as LDCE for the post of 
Assistant Superintendent is concerned, Ministry recently conducted the exam upto 
the year 2023 and promoted 31 Officials. 
The Ministry has also hired 347 Data Entry Operators (DEOs) and 51 Multi 
Tasking Staffs (MTSs) from Outsourced Agency as an interim measure to fill the 
gap against the vacant non-Gazetted posts for smooth functioning of the Passport 
Offices. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 25) 
 The Committee note that the Protector of Emigrants (PoEs), responsible for 
granting emigration clearance to the intending emigrants performs the functions 
assigned to them under the Emigration Act, 1983. Presently, there are 14 offices of 
the PoE located at Mumbai, Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata, Chandigarh, Hyderabad, 
Cochin, Thiruvananthapuram, Jaipur, Rai Barelli, Patna, Bengaluru, Guwahati and 
Ranchi. The Ministry has also stated that the setting up of new PoE offices in the 
States of Tripura, Jharkhand, Odisha, Gujarat and Uttarakhand is underway, in 
consultation with the State authorities concerned. In view of the fact that large 
number of blue collar workers, nurses, DSWs, etc. migrate abroad for employment 
every year, the Committee desire that the process of setting up new PoE offices 
should be completed at the earliest for facilitating and providing protection to the 
intending migrant workers as well as emigrants . The Committee also urge the 
Ministry to identify the migration hot spots in the country and open PoE offices in 
such locations.  

37 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has already identified migration hotspots (in terms of Emigration 
Clearance issued) which includes the states of Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, West 
Bengal, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh & Telangana. Protector of Emigrant 
(PoE) offices have already been opened in these areas. PoE Hyderabad has 
jurisdiction over Telangana and Andhra Pradesh. The Ministry has also established 
the eMigrate portal which is a digital platform for regulation of recruitment of 
Indian workers having ECR category passports as per the provisions of the 
Emigration Act 1983. The eMigrate portal provides a contact less, paperless and 
cash less mechanism for issuing of Emigration Clearances (ECs). 
The Ministry, through the PoE board, has already advertised vacancies pertaining 
to PoEs of Tripura and Orissa.  The selection of suitable officers for these PoE 
offices is under process, while PoE office in Ranchi (Jharkhand) is already 
functional. Financial approval for the establishment of PoE office in Gujarat is also 
under process.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 26) 
 The Committee note that for the matters relating to overseas Indians an 
amount of Rs. 13.21 crore has been allocated under the Sub Head ‘Welfare of 
Overseas Indians’ and Rs. 37.00 crore under another Sub Head ‘Engagement with 
Indian Diaspora’ in the BE 2023-24. The allocation under these two Sub Heads has 
been brought down as compared to RE 2022-23. For the BE 2023-24, the 
allocations under Scholarship Scheme for Diaspora Children and Awareness 
Campaigns, etc. have also been brought down. Since the Indian Diaspora 
comprising of over 18 million PIOs and 13 million NRIs, spread across the globe is 
one of the largest overseas community of any country and comprises a diverse 
range from laborers/workers, traders, political leaders, professional and students 
etc., the Committee have been continuously recommending the Ministry to make 
requisite Budgetary Allocation for the schemes and programmes related to their 
welfare and protection. However, the Committee note that the Budgetary 
Allocation for scheme/programmes related to Welfare of Overseas Indians in the 
BE 2023-24 has been reduced considerably even after coming out of the COVID-
19 pandemic situation. The Committee, hence desire that the Working Group 
constituted for the evaluation of various Schemes and Programmes for the welfare 
of the Indian Diaspora should review the adequacy of financial allocations made 

38 
 
under each programme and make appropriate recommendations under intimation to 
the Committee so that a smooth and timely implementation of 
schemes/programmes for the welfare of overseas Indians is done through efficient 
and optimum utilization of the same in the post-COVID world.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry wishes to inform the Committee that adequate budgetary allocation is 
being done for all schemes/programmes related to welfare of Overseas Indians. 
The budgetary allocation for diaspora engagement schemes/programmes depends 
on several factors, including the projected requirements and the expenditure 
incurred. The overall allocation for BE 2023-24 seems reduced compared to RE 
2022-23 due to the expenditure incurred on 17th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas 
Convention (which is a biennial event) during the last Financial Year. The diaspora 
schemes/programmes are reviewed on regular basis and Ministry always allocates 
adequate fund as per the requirements projected after any such review. The 
Working Group has reviewed the fund allocation for diaspora schemes and no 
instance of inadequate fund allocation  has been noticed. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 27) 
 The Committee note that the Budgetary Allocation under the head ‘Welfare 
of Overseas Indians’ is Rs. 13.21 crore for 2023-24 out of which Rs. 3 crore has 
been provisioned for ‘Pre-Departure Orientation Training and Skill Up-gradation 
of Emigrant Workers’. The Committee note that for this purpose an amount of Rs. 
7 crore was allocated at BE 2021-22 which was revised to Rs. 2 crore at RE stage 
but there was ‘nil’ expenditure on this programme during 2021-22. Similarly, 
against the BE and RE of Rs. 3 crore during 2022- 23 only Rs. 0.26 crore has been 
spent for the purpose. The Committee desire that such trend should be reversed and 
the full Budget of Rs. 3 crore allocated for this purpose for 2023-24 should be 
appropriately utilized. The Committee further desire that the Ministry and 
Missions/Posts abroad should actively engage the Indian Diaspora and intimate the 
Committee about the initiatives taken to facilitate their active involvement in the 
socio-economic, political and technological development of the country, at regular 
intervals.  
Reply of the Government 

39 
 
The Ministry and Missions/Posts abroad utilise all available platforms of 
interaction with Diaspora to encourage them to contribute to India’s growth and 
development in all sectors, including socio-economic and technological 
development. Diaspora business community is key component of trade and 
investment promotion efforts of Missions/Posts abroad. Invest India has launched a 
PIO Help Desk with objective of facilitating trade and investment-related services 
for PIO individuals and businesses. Initiatives such as Global Initiative of 
Academic Networks (GIAN), Pravasi Bharatiya Academic and Scientific Sampark 
(PRABHASS), and proposed Vaishwaik Bharatiya Vaigyanik (Vaibhav) 
fellowships would be facilitating diaspora contribution in the fields of academia, 
scientific and technological research.  
Ministry had anticipated that the pace of PDO Training will pick up post Covid-19. 
However, the number of emigrants has not seen a sharp rise post Covid-19 which 
has resulted in reduced expenditure on PDOT Programme. So far the State 
Governments have met the expenditure on PDOT from funds already released to 
them by the Ministry in previous financial years.  The Budget Estimate of the 
PDOT Programme for the F.Y 2023-24 is expected to be utilized during the current 
F.Y. as many centres out of 58 approved PDOT Centres are expected to be 
operationalised shortly.  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 28) 
 The Committee observe that presently, 32 PDOT centres are operational in 
29 cities in 15 States of the country. The Ministry has informed that opening of 58 
additional PDOT centres in 8 States viz., Rajasthan, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, 
Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Haryana, Uttar Pradesh and Punjab has been approved in 
the current Financial Year. However, the Committee note that the funds for 
operating PDOT centres have so far been released to the State Government of 
Telangana only. The Committee understand that execution of various schemes and 
programmes related to the welfare of overseas Indians as well as migration of 
workers abroad have been hampered due to the COVID-19 pandemic. However, in 
the post-COVID world, since more and more workers would seek employment 
abroad, the Committee expect the Ministry to help enhance the soft skills of such 
workers, sensitize them about the pathways to safe and legal migration and educate 
them about the various Government programmes for their welfare and protection 

40 
 
through the Pre-Departure Orientation Training and Skill Upgradation programme. 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to undertake vigorous follow-up 
action with the remaining 7 States so that the funding requirement for opening of 
PDOT centres are received from the States and the centres are operationalised 
without further delay. In view of the popularity of the online training and the 
positive response from participants, especially women participants to it, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry offer more online PDOT trainings along with 
in-person trainings in the Financial Year 2023-24. They also desire that the details 
of such trainings since inception may also be furnished to them.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry is continuously following-up with state agencies for operationalising 58 
PDOT Centres. Recently, 6 PDOT Centres have been operationalised in Punjab. 
The Punjab state agency has assured that the recommendation for the remaining 16 
centres will be conveyed to this Ministry soon. The demand for funds has been 
received from the state agencies of Telangana and Punjab. Accordingly, the 
requisite funds are being released to the respective states agencies. On receipt of 
the recommendations for operationalization of remaining centres from the state 
agencies, prompt action will be taken by the Ministry to operationalise the PDOT 
Centres by granting additional requisite funds.   
 Ministry is also constantly making efforts to make the PDO Training 
available in online mode. Most of the PDOT Centres have been equipped with the 
online training facility in order to facilitate women participants and to increase the 
reach of PDOT programme to distant regions of the country.  
  Since the inception of the PDOT centres in 2018 a total number of 1,27,127 
workers including women have been imparted PDO training till April, 2023. The 
Ministry also launched the first online Pre-Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) 
Programme on 7 April 2021.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 29) 
 The Committee are happy to note that the Ministry conducts pre- orientation 
programme for students also before they join their institutes abroad. It is also 
observed that Indian Embassies/Posts abroad do not possess complete details and 
addresses of students abroad. The gravity of this situation was brought home 
during the Ukraine crisis when the Ministry needed to contact all the Indian 

41 
 
students in Ukraine. The Ministry has informed the Committee that Indian 
nationals abroad, particularly Indian students, are reticent about registering 
themselves with the Indian Embassies/Posts abroad. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry, through the PDOT sessions, should impress upon all the students as well 
as other Indian nationals going abroad that it is in their own interest and for their 
safety/security that they are required to register with the Indian Embassies/Posts 
abroad. Since it is with the Ministry and the Missions abroad to make them aware 
about the facilities/assistance provided to them including resolving of their 
grievances, the Committee recommend that the Indian Embassies/Posts abroad 
may also be pursued to do greater outreach and establish close connect with Indian 
nationals abroad including students through social media platforms so that an 
authentic database of students as well as Indian nationals abroad is available and 
maintained in the Ministry.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry wishes to inform the Committee that PDOT sessions are not 
organised in India for students going abroad. However, as part of their outreach to 
students, Missions/Posts abroad collaborate with Universities and tertiary 
education institutions and student associations to organise welcome ceremonies 
and familiarisation sessions for new students, wherein students are also encouraged 
to register with the Mission/Post.  
Indian Missions/Posts abroad attach great priority to having a reliable database of 
Indians nationals, including students. Missions/Posts use every available 
opportunity, including all events with participation of diaspora and social media 
platforms, to encourage the diaspora members and students to register with the 
Mission/Post. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 30) 
 The Committee also note that the Ministry is making efforts to establish a 
system to regulate migration to such countries where greater possibility of 
exploitation is felt, like the Gulf countries as well as to countries where skills and 
talents are needed. The Committee desire that this exercise may be completed at 
the earliest so as to obviate exploitation of Indian migrant workers abroad.  
Reply of the Government 

42 
 
A robust system to address grievances/complaints and mechanism to ensure safety 
and welfare of blue collar Indian workers holding ECR category passports and 
migrating to 18 ECR countries(including the 6 GCC countries) has been 
established by the government through the eMigrate portal. The portal has 
registered over 1900 Recruiting Agents(RAs) and over 2 lakh Foreign 
Employers(FEs). There are provisions for compensation from the RA/FE in case 
the terms and conditions of the employment contract are breached during the 
contract period. 
2. Other benefits available to the Indian migrant workers are as under:-  
(i) Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) has been set up in all Indian 
Missions and Posts abroad to assist Indian nationals in distress abroad. Fund is 
used to provide legal assistance, boarding & lodging, emergency medical care, air 
passage to stranded Indians and transportation of mortal remains of Indian 
nationals. 
(ii)  (Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY) is a mandatory insurance scheme 
for all Emigration Check Required (ECR) category workers going to ECR 
countries. The scheme provides an insurance cover of Rs.10 Lakhs in case of 
accidental death or permanent disability and other benefits. 
(iii) In addition, there are other mechanisms like MADAD, Pre-Departure 
Orientation Training, Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras, 24x7 Helplines at 
Indian Missions and Posts, Shelter Homes etc. for the welfare and protection of 
Indians abroad. 
(iv)  Besides, Labor and Manpower Cooperation Agreements are in place with 
the Gulf Cooperation Council countries and Jordan and have provision of 
implementation through Joint Working Groups. All the labor and manpower-
related issues are discussed during these JWG meetings. Further, to safeguard the 
specific interest of domestic workers in GCC Countries, agreements on Labor 
Cooperation for Domestic Sector have been signed with Saudi Arabia, UAE and  
Kuwait. 
(v)  Finally, the proposed Emigration Bill of 2023 envisages comprehensive 
emigration management, institutes regulatory mechanisms by developing a regime 
for safe and orderly migration governing overseas employment of Indian nationals 
for their protection and welfare. The purpose is to establish a robust, transparent 

43 
 
and technically advanced structure and maintain a shared database for emigration 
to facilitate and promote overseas employment. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 32) 
 The Committee find that under the scheme ‘Promotion of Cultural Ties with 
Diaspora’, a new initiative ‘Felicitation of Armed Forces Veterans Abroad’ has 
been started by the Ministry to engage retired veterans from Indian Armed Forces. 
The Defence Wings of our Missions/Posts organize ‘Varistha Yodhha’/‘Yodhha 
Samman Divas’ events and recall the service/sacrifice of our distinguished 
veterans by honoring them and their spouses with the presentation of mementoes. 
The Committee understand that such events have so far been organised in US, 
Canada and Australia and the participation of Diaspora leaders and local political 
leadership in them has been so encouraging. In view of the importance of 
organizing such events and the enthusiastic response from the Diaspora, the 
Committee recommend that more such events to honour our armed forces veterans 
and veterans of other fields may be organized in other countries too where the 
Diaspora presence is high and the outcome may be shared with the Committee in 
due course.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry accords priority under the scheme ‘Promotion of Cultural Ties with 
Diaspora’ to proposals from Missions/Posts to engage with retired veterans from 
Indian Armed Forces. In 2022-23, Missions/Posts in Canada, US, UK, and Saudi 
Arabia organised ‘Varistha Yodhha’/‘Yodhha Samman Divas’ events to honour 
veterans. These functions by Missions/Posts received enthusiastic response from 
veterans, and appreciation within the Indian community. The Ministry continues to 
encourage Missions/Posts to organise more such events to engage with veterans’ 
community and the Ministry is hopeful that in future more Missions will organise 
such events.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 33) 
 The Committee note that the Government has undertaken several initiatives 
such as, Vaishwaik Bharatiya Vaigyanik (VAIBHAV) Summit, Global Initiative of 
Academic Networks (GIAN) and Pravasi Bhartiya Academic and Scientific 
Sampark (PRABHASS) to facilitate active engagement of leading Diaspora 
academicians and scientists to the scientific and technological development of 

44 
 
India, tap the talent pool of scientists and entrepreneurs internationally and bring 
on board the Global Indian S & T community. Further, the Department of Science 
and Technology is working towards announcing VAIBHAV fellowships 
programme for collaboration projects identified under the VAIBHAV initiative. 
Under the GIAN Scheme, 2163 collaboration projects have so far been approved 
and 1716 projects have been completed. The PRABHASS initiative has also 
resulted in a few collaborations. The Committee welcome these initiatives as they 
serve the purpose of enhancing India’s educational, scientific and technological 
capacities. The Committee acknowledge that such engagements would result in 
more collaboration projects with academicians and scientists from the Diaspora 
community. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to deepen its 
engagements with the said community and strengthen its collaboration efforts with 
an outcome oriented approach and enhance its scientific, technological, educational 
and economic capacities using Indian talent abroad.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry continues to work with Department of Science and Technology and 
other stakeholders to facilitate contribution of diaspora academia and scientists to 
India’s educational, scientific and technological capacities. VAIBHAV fellowships 
have been announced exclusively for Diaspora scientists and researchers to 
facilitate academic and research collaborations between Indian institutions and the 
best institutions in the world through mobility of diaspora faculty/researcher from 
overseas institutions to India.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 34) 
 The Committee have always felt the need to sensitize the Indian Diaspora on 
the crucial role played by them in India’s soft power diplomacy and in exercising 
economic and political influence in their host countries so as to build up and 
strengthen the existing relationship between their home and host country. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry and the Indian Council for 
Cultural Relations, which supplements its efforts to leverage the Indian Diaspora in 
soft power projection, should come out with a blueprint to utilise the Indian 
Diaspora as a ‘resource’ in projecting India’s soft power, culture and values 
abroad. 
Reply of the Government 

45 
 
The Ministry works closely with the Indian Council for Cultural Relations in 
leveraging the Indian Diaspora as a resource to project India’s soft power abroad. 
Missions prepare the country specific calendar of events or action plan based on 
local interest including the presence of diaspora and recommend activities which 
should be effective in promotion of the soft power. All activities of the Ministry & 
Indian Council for Cultural Relations, including those conducted through its 
extended arms of Indian Cultural Centers, the Chairs of Indian Studies in Foreign 
Universities, and the foreign students’ scholarships programme, are conducted in 
close coordination with Indian Missions/posts in the country concerned. For 
greater coordination among other stake holders, Ministry and ICCR also work with 
other departments involved in projection of soft power such as Ministries of 
Culture, Education, Sports and Youth Affairs, Textiles, AYUSH, and Information 
and Broadcasting. The above mechanism broadly takes care of tapping and 
harnessing the opportunity provided by the enormous and diverse Indian diaspora 
in furthering India’s interest and influence globally. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 35) 
 The Committee find that India's international development cooperation, 
inspired by the spirit of ‘Vasudhaiva Kutumbakam’ has expanded significantly in 
the recent years in its geographical reach as well as in the areas of cooperation. 
India’s development engagement in various countries includes Grant assistance, 
Lines of Credit (LOC), technical consultancy, disaster relief, humanitarian aid, 
heritage restoration, educational scholarships and a range of capacity-building 
programmes including short-term civilian and military training courses. The 
Committee find that the development partnership portfolio or the Technical and 
Economic Cooperation (TEC), which constitutes India’s Aid to various countries, 
continues to be the focus and priority with the largest allocation in the Ministry’s 
Budget. In FY 2023-24, out of the total budget of Rs. 18050 crore, the TEC outlay 
is 32.40% , i.e. Rs. 5848.58 crore, out of which Rs. 5080.24 crore (28.14%) is for 
grant programmes and Rs. 768.34 crore (4.25%) is for loans. However, the 
Committee find that the percentage share of outlay under development partnership 
portfolio has been declining and has reached the lowest in the current financial 
year from 42.06% in B.E 2021-22. From B.E of 2022-23, the reduction in 
allocation is 6.73%. Since the Committee have always stood for the expansion of 
our development partnership footprint, the consistent reductions in the TEC outlay 
year after year, needs attention. In view of the fact that our development assistance 
has been a major catalyst for creation of much needed infrastructure such as 

46 
 
railway links, roads & bridges, waterways, border related infrastructure, 
transmission lines, power generation, hydropower, etc., in the partner countries and 
goodwill towards India, the Committee recommend that the development 
partnerships with countries needs to be reinforced with adequate Budgetary 
provisions especially in view of the increasing interest and influence of Regional 
players like China in the neighbourhood. The Committee, therefore, desire that 
additional Budgetary requirements under these international scheme Heads may be 
taken up with the Ministry of Finance through Supplementary Demands for Grants 
or an increased RE by putting forth a compelling case for enhanced funds. 
 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry’s will continue its efforts with the Ministry of Finance to secure 
additional funds in order to give effect to the various foreign policy initiatives at 
the highest levels. Our endeavour towards achieving higher resource allocation for 
Scheme heads will be based on realistic assessments of fund requirements for 
projects, implantation efficiencies in execution of project and overall international 
commitments.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 36) 
 While observing the pace of expenditure under aid to various countries, the 
Committee note that the utilisation in respect of ‘Aid to Bhutan’ which is the 
largest financial assistance among the countries is only Rs 701.11 crore till 
December 2022 out of BE 2022- 2023 allocation of Rs. 2266.24 crore. An amount 
of Rs. 1.05 crore only has been incurred in respect of ‘Aid to Latin American 
Countries’, while expenditure is nil for ‘Aid to Mongolia’ up to December, 2022. 
Barring two countries viz, Myanmar and Afghanistan out of the rest, utilisation of 
funds hover around 30-40 percent in the current Financial Year. The Committee 
are aware that the execution of projects and utilisation of funds have been impacted 
due to the COVID-19 pandemic during 2020-21 and 2021- 22. They, however, fail 
to understand as to why the pace of implementation of projects and utilisation of 
funds has not picked up with the easing of the COVID-19 situation during 2022-
23. The Committee also find that despite the political turmoil in Myanmar and 
Afghanistan, more than 50% of the allocated funds have been utilised. Taking all 
the above into consideration, the Committee conclude that there are certain gaps in 
project implementation and monitoring and desire that such gaps/loopholes should 

47 
 
be identified and remedial measures taken to plug the same. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Ministry to strengthen its coordination with the Implementing 
Agencies so that in the post-COVID world, schemes  that cater to India’s global 
image may be executed smoothly and efficiently.  
Reply of the Government 
To ensure optimal utilization of budgetary resources during each quarter of the 
financial year, expenditure is closely and regularly monitored by the Financial 
Advisor in consultation with Divisional Heads, including through quarterly budget 
management & expenditure review meetings. In these meetings, the expenditure 
plans of the Ministry’s various Divisions and Spending Units are discussed and the 
importance of ensuring balanced expenditure during each quarter of the financial 
year is emphasized & monitored. Divisions/Spending Units accordingly make all 
efforts to ensure evenly paced expenditure, within the constraints of majority of the 
Ministry’s spending being in foreign countries. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 37) 
 The Committee understand that the ‘Technical and Economic Cooperation 
with Other Countries’ caters also to Aid for Disaster Relief. Besides Turkey and 
Syria recently, the Committee find that Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster 
Relief (HADR) was given to over 150 countries. In the Financial Year 2023 alone, 
HADR assistance was provided to Afghanistan, Bhutan, Botswana, Cambodia, 
Comoros, Equatorial Guinea, Fiji, Kiribati, Maldives, Mozambique, Timor-Leste, 
Thailand, Tonga, Ukraine, etc. While wholeheartedly applauding the humanitarian 
assistance and disaster relief activities of the Ministry, the Committee desire that 
the possibility of having a separate fund for disaster relief operations may be 
looked into. The Committee also desire that India continue to remain first of the 
block in extending humanitarian assistance to people and countries whenever there 
is a need. 
Reply of the Government 
This separate head towards ‘Aid to Disaster Relief’ was created to provide for 
humanitarian/relief assistance to countries hit by natural calamities. Under this sub-
head, the budgetary allocation for BE 2023-24 was Rs. 5 Cr. Further, an additional 
allocation of Rs. 50 Cr has been sought on contingency basis to cater to 

48 
 
expenditure towards Humanitarian Assistance and Disaster Relief in Turkey, Syria, 
Sudan.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 38) 
 The Committee note that the BE 2023-24 under ‘Aid to Bangladesh’ has 
been retained at Rs. 200 crore in anticipation of completion of some of the ongoing 
projects such as the IndiaBangladesh Friendship Pipeline. In respect of the 
Akhaura-Agartala Rail Link Project which has been delayed due to multiple 
factors, physical progress of 70% has been achieved and extension of time has 
been granted to the contractor till June 2023. The Government has also been 
providing Grant assistance for implementation of High Impact Community 
Development Projects (HICDPs) related to socioeconomic development aimed at 
creating maximum impact for local communities. So far, 74 HICDPs have been 
completed while 15 HICDPs are ongoing. Under Line of Credit (LoC), 9 projects 
are currently under execution and 10 projects are currently under preparation by 
the Government of Bangladesh (GoB) while 10 projects are under tendering by 
GoB. The Committee further note that out of a concessional credit line of 
approximately 10 billion dollars, utilization so far is only to the tune of 2.8 to 2.9 
billion dollars. The Ministry has also stated that some new projects in the areas of 
education, health, water and sanitation, urban development, conservation of 
environment, sports and cultural heritage, women empowerment, child welfare, 
community and livelihood development are under consideration for 
implementation in FY 2023-24. The Committee expect the Ministry to improve the 
pace of expenditure for all the projects during 2023-24 as the COVID situation has 
normalized. Expeditious completion of all the pending/ongoing HICDPs projects 
as well as projects taken up under Line of Credit is required to avoid time and cost 
overruns. In view of the benefits of HICDPs to the local community, new projects 
under consideration for implementation in FY 2023-24 may also be finalized at the 
earliest. As Line of Credit (LoC )projects are likely to play a significant role in the 
development of critical infrastructure and overall development of Bangladesh, the 
Ministry may also extend all assistance for finalization of those projects under 
preparation/tendering by the Government of Bangladesh for speedy execution. 
 
Reply of the Government 

49 
 
The India-Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline, a flagship project under GoI grant, has 
been commissioned and was jointly inaugurated by both Prime Ministers in a 
virtual ceremony held on 18 March 2023.  
The Agartala-Akhaura rail link project, a 6.77 km line, from the border to 
Gangasagar Station in Bangladesh, has seen 84% physical progress and is expected 
to be commissioned before end of this year. Periodic review meetings involving all 
stakeholders are being held on regular basis to monitor the progress of the project. 
The last such meeting was held on 4 June 2023.  
Apart from ongoing High Impact Community Development Projects (HICDPs), 
five new project proposals in areas of skill development and training institutes, 
orphanages and restoration of common cultural heritage are under consideration.  
All possible assistance for finalization of LoC projects undertaken by the 
government of Bangladesh is being extended by GoI through bilateral mechanisms.  
The points pertaining to LOCs extended to Bangladesh are duly noted. The 
Division is extending all assistance for finalization of the projects under 
preparation/tendering by the Government of Bangladesh for speedy execution.  
Akhaura-Agartala Rail Link is a cross-border rail connectivity project to connect 
the existing station of Agartala in India to the Gangasagar station in Bangladesh. 
MEA is handling the 6.78 km long Bangladesh portion on the rail link. Till date, 
physical Progress of 84% has been achieved. The Indian portion of the rail link is 
funded by Ministry of Development of North Eastern Region (DONER) and 
implemented by Ministry of Railways through M/s IRCON. The project has been 
hampered by multiple factors including short working period due to prolonged 
monsoons season, COVID pandemic and the weak financial position of the 
Contractor appointed by the Government of Bangladesh. Multiple review meetings 
have been conducted by MEA and by Ministry of Railways to increase the pace of 
progress. The latest Joint review of the project has been conducted on 5th June  
2023 by MEA with concerned Bangladesh officials and PMC, M/s IRCON. 
Extension of time has been granted to the contractor till June 2023. Further GoB 
has granted EoT till June 2024 including Defect Liability Period DLP.   
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 39) 

50 
 
 The Committee observe that Bhutan is the recipient of the highest 
developmental aid amongst our neighbouring countries. Currently, India is having 
more than 600 projects in Bhutan across various domains and under various Heads. 
India’s aid and assistance programmes in Bhutan are currently covered under both 
Grants and Loans totalling of Rs. 2400.58 crore in the BE.2023-24 which is 41% 
of the total development cooperation budget for the FY. The Grant in Aid 
component in the BE 2023-24 is Rs. 1632.24 crore and the loan component is Rs. 
768.34 crore. The fund requirements under ‘Aid to Bhutan’ has been fluctuating 
due to the impact of COVID-19 related restrictions and strict lockdown in Bhutan 
as late as April 2022, as well as unforeseen geological conditions in case of 
hydroelectric power projects. The Committee have been informed that most 
projects are now back on track with smooth and seamless flow of material and 
human resources. The Committee, therefore, feel that the Budgetary allocation for 
2023-34 may be inadequate and the Ministry might have to seek additional funding 
through Supplementary Demands for Grants. As the allocation of more funds 
through supplementary grants or an  increased RE would hinge on utilization 
pattern and anticipated expenditure in the last quarter of the Financial Year, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to ensure efficient utilization of funds in every 
quarter of the FY 2023-24.  
Reply of the Government 
MEA continues to prioritize the special relationship with Bhutan by ensuring 
completion of all the ongoing projects in a time bound manner. MEA is making 
sure that fund release to all GoI assisted projects in Bhutan including GoI funded 
HEPs are kept aligned with fund requirements as projected by the Project 
Implementing Authorities based on the project's physical progress achieved. All 
efforts are being made to ensure efficient and target bound fund utilization for 
every quarter of the FY. Ministry will seek additional resource requirement based 
on realistic requirements for the projects in Aid to Bhutan. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 40) 
 The Committee are aware that cooperation in Hydroelectric Power Projects 
is a very crucial area of our partnership with Bhutan and significant Budgetary 
Outlays have been provisioned over the years. The Ministry has informed that 
Mangdechhu Hydroelectric Power Project of 720 MW has been commissioned and 
handed over to Bhutan. As of January 2023, the physical progress in respect of 

51 
 
Punatsangchhu-I (1200 MW HEP) is 87.61% and that of Punatsangchhu-II (1020 
MW HEP) is 93.84%. Currently, Punatsangchhu-I is facing unforeseen geological 
conditions and technical discussion in this regard are underway while 
Punatsangchhu-II is scheduled for completion in December 2023. The Committee 
desire that all out efforts should be made to resolve the technical problem being 
faced in the implementation of Punatsangchhu-I so that it is back on track. The 
Committee also desire that the scheduled date of completion for Punatsangchhu-II 
should be met.  
Reply of the Government 
Punatsangchhu-I HEP has been delayed due to severe geological challenges 
encountered at the project site. An Inter-Governmental Group (IGG) of experts is 
looking into the issues to find a technical solution to the matter. Puna-II HEP is 
back on track and the project is expected to be completed shortly. All efforts are 
being made to ensure timely completion of the construction and commissioning of 
the project. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 41) 
 The Committee note that under the GoI’s committed assistance of Rs 4500 
crore to Bhutan’s XII Five Year Plan for 2018- 23, Project Tied Assistance (PTA) 
and Small Development Projects are implemented in Bhutan. Out of India’s 
commitment for the said Plan, Rs 3721.19 crore has been released so far. The 
Committee desire that the committed funds should be fully utilized in the specified 
period for which it was committed and urge the Ministry to ensure that execution 
of projects gain momentum from the start of the FY 2023-24 itself so that based on 
the pace of expenditure, the remaining funds could be released in this last year of 
the said 12th FYP. 
Reply of Government 
GoI is implementing Projects including through Project Tied Assistance and Small 
Development Projects in Bhutan under the GoI‘s committed assistance of INR 
4500 Cr to Bhutan‘s XII Five Year Plan for 2018-23. Out of this, Rs. 4201.52 Cr 
has been released so far. Post the disruption due to COVID-19, upon request by 
RGoB, MEA in consultation with the Project Implementing Authorities of RGoB, 
have been reallocating funds and re-prioritizing projects, through the inter-
governmental mechanism of Plan Talks. Through mutually agreed quarterly 

52 
 
targets, MEA is pacing expenditure throughout the FY to ensure full and efficient 
utilization of the funds allotted for Bhutan’s 12th FYP. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 42) 
 The Committee observe that the requirements of funds under ‘Aid to Nepal’ 
has been low i,e Rs 550 crore for the FY 2023-24 as some of the major projects are 
in advanced stage of completion or have been completed. Some of the ongoing 
projects like Integrated Check Post Phase-II at Nepalgunj, Post-earthquake 
reconstruction in health, education and cultural heritage sectors, Jogbani-
Biratnagar rail link, etc. are likely to be completed in 2023. In respect of the Terai 
Roads packages, 9 out of 14 were handed over to the Government of Nepal on 
March 2021 and 5 are yet to be handed over to Nepal. Hydro electric power 
projects in which the power generated can have linkages back to India include 
Arun III hydroelectric power project, lower Arun Hydroelectric power project, 
Arun IV hydro electric power project, Upper Karnali Project, etc. The Committee 
also note that work on some projects are yet to commence. Further, there were 
issues related to land acquisition by the Government of Nepal on some of the 
projects. The Committee desire that the GoI should impress upon the Government 
of Nepal to resolve all the pending land acquisition issues at the earliest so that the 
work on these projects could commence. As connectivity is one of the key features 
of India’s Neighbourhood First Policy, the Committee desire that all out efforts 
may be made to complete all the ongoing projects as per the timeline/target. The 
Committee also urge the Ministry to expedite the handing over of five Terai road 
packages which have already been completed to boost people to people contact 
between the border areas of the two countries. progress in this regard may be 
communicated to the Committee.  
Reply of the Government 
i. Jogbani - Biratnagar rail link project comprises of Two (2) phases . Phase 
– 1 of the project spans from Bathnaha (near Jogbani) to Nepal Custom 
yard (7.6 km. Phase – 1 is completed and jointly inaugurated by both PM 
on 1 June 2023. Phase-II of the project connecting from Nepal Custom 
Yard to Biratnagar (11 km) is currently under execution but delayed due 
to land acquisition issues for about 1.2 km stretch which is pending with 
Govt. of Nepal authorities. MEA had recently conducted a Joint Project 
Steering Committee meeting with officials of Govt. of Nepal on 20 April 

53 
 
2023 to resolve such issues. All efforts are being taken and monitored at 
highest level to expedite the project progress. 
ii. Jaynagar – Bijalpura – Bardibas Rail Link project comprises of Three (3) 
phases. Phase – 1 of the project spans from Jaynagar (India) to Kurtha 
(Nepal). Phase – 1 is completed and jointly inaugurated by both PMs on 
2 April 2022. Phase-II of the project connecting from Kurtha to Bijalpura 
was handed over on 1st June 2023 to Govt of Nepal during recent visit of 
PM of Nepal to India. Phase-III of the project connecting from Bijalpura 
to Bardibas yet to be commence as land acquisition  is yet to be 
compeleted by  Govt of Nepal. MEA had recently conducted a Joint 
Project Steering Committee meeting with officials of Govt. of Nepal on 
20 April 2023 to resolve the outstanding issues. All efforts are being 
taken and monitored at highest level to expedite the project progress. 
iii. Integrated Check Post at Nepalgunj; Integrated Check Post at Nepalgunj 
has been virtually inaugurated by Prime Ministers of both India and 
Nepal on 01.06.2023 during latest visit to India.  
iv. The construction of an another ICP at Bhairahawa in Nepal along Indo-
Nepal International border has commenced from 11.05.2023 and is to be 
completed within the prescribed period of 24 months. Ministry regularly 
monitors and follows up with all stakeholders to ensure timely 
completion of projects.  
v. The Committee’s recommendations are well noted. There are oversight 
mechanisms at various levels which monitor and review the progress of 
the GOI assisted and funded projects in Nepal. These include high-level 
mechanism at Ministerial level as well as working level mechanism at 
senior officials’ level. There are also Joint Project Monitoring 
Committees with Government of Nepal to regularly oversee and ensure 
smooth and expeditious implementation of projects and achievement of 
targets within specified timelines. Through these mechanisms, GoI has 
been regularly taking up issues pertaining to land acquisition as well as 
handing over of various projects including Terai roads project. 
 
 

54 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 43) 
 The Committee acknowledge the post-earthquake reconstruction work taken 
up by the Government of India in Nepal in addition to constructive interventions in 
health, education and cultural heritage sectors. A significant project in health space 
has been the successful setting up of dialysis machine infrastructure in Nepal with 
the supply of 200 kidney dialysis machines along with the consumables which go 
with it. The Committee are also pleased at the humanitarian assistance provided to 
Nepal in the form of 1.1 million doses of Made in India Covishield Vaccine as well 
as essential medicines, equipments and medical supplies for combating the 
COVID-19 pandemic. The Committee are optimistic that the Government will 
continue to prioritize its relationship with Nepal and extend all assistance – 
financial, technical or humanitarian whenever needed and be a first responder to 
our immediate neighbour in times of need.  
Reply of the Government 
Government of India continues to prioritize its relationship with Nepal and extend 
all assistance – financial, technical or humanitarian whenever needed and 
endeavors to be the first responder to our immediate neighbour in times of need. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 44) 
 The Committee note that the Budgetary Allocation under ‘Aid to Sri Lanka’ 
has been reduced since 2020-21 as implementation of projects had been impacted 
due to the COVID-19 pandemic followed by unprecedented economic crisis in that 
country. The economic crisis has also posed a challenge in terms of disbursement 
and utilization of funds as well as currency crunch in the country. The Committee 
further note that the Government is trying to put in place an institutional 
framework for settlement of trade in Indian Rupee so that even in the absence of 
hard currency, trade may not be disrupted. In the opinion of the Committee, such a 
mechanism which facilitates trade in Indian rupee would be beneficial, not only for 
Sri Lanka but for other countries in the neighbourhood as well, that are facing 
economic crisis. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to finalize all the 
modalities, in consultation with other Departments and Agencies concerned, at the 
earliest in this regard. The Progress made to advance the prospects of trade 
settlement with partner countries in Indian Rupee, especially in countries of our 
neighborhood may be communicated to the Committee within three months. 

55 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
Following the Government of India’s decision to allow settlement of trade 
transactions in INR in July 2022, a number of Sri Lankan banks applied for 
Vostro/Nostro accounts in Indian banks. As per available information, at least six 
banks from Sri Lanka currently have functional vostro/nostro accounts for 
facilitating trade transactions in INR. Separately, Sri Lanka has included INR in its 
list of designated foreign currencies which has also facilitated INR denominated 
economic transactions between the two countries. In March 2023, High 
Commission of India, Colombo had organized a interactive seminar on the use of 
INR for economic transactions between India and Sri Lanka, involving officials 
from Central Bank of Sri Lanka, Government of Sri Lanka, RBI, Government of 
India apart from representatives from business and industry including tourism 
sector, media personnel, bank representatives, economists and journalists, trade 
and industry associations and export promotion councils.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 45) 
 The Committee note that a series of new projects like renewable energy 
projects, power line between Sri Lanka and India, housing projects, refinery 
projects, fuel bunkering units, etc. are in the pipeline with Sri Lanka. Moreover, 
various other high profile infrastructure projects are under tendering stage. The 
Committee desire that all such projects should be finalized and implemented 
during the FY 2023-24.  
Reply of the Government 
Government of India is working closely with the Government of Sri Lanka in 
implementing new projects in the field of renewable energy, housing, refinery and 
fuel etc. This includes discussions on Inter-grid connectivity project, Sampur 
Power plant project and constructing a multi-product petroleum pipeline project. 
Similarly, Phase III of Indian Housing Project has seen 95% physical progress, and 
for Phase IV, selection of Implementing Agency is underway and in parallel, 
approvals for cost escalation per unit is being processed. In addition, projects such 
as Unique Identity Document and Three Islands projects are at tender stage and 
installation of solar panels on religious sites is under preliminary stages of 
consideration.  

56 
 
 
The Indian Housing Project is a Government of India (GOI) flagship Housing 
project in Sri Lanka to address the housing needs of Internally Displaced Persons 
(IDPs) and Indian Origin Tamils (IOTs) through the construction/ 
renovation/repair of houses. A commitment of a total of 60,000 houses has so far 
been made by GOI and IHP has been divided into four (4) different phases. Phase-I 
and II has been completed in 2012 and 2016 respectively. Under Phase III of the 
project, India is constructing 4000 houses under a community-driven approach in 
Central and Uva Provinces in Sri Lanka.  As on date 3859 houses have been 
completed and the construction of the remaining 141 houses is at various stages of 
implementation. Under phase- IV India will construct 10000 houses in different 
regions of the plantation areas of Sri Lanka for IOT plantation workers.  The 
selection of implementing agencies for the execution of the project of 10000 
houses has been completed on 16 June 2023.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 46) 
 The Committee note that the RE 2022-23 under ‘Aid to Myanmar’ was 
reduced to Rs. 500 crore from the BE Allocation of Rs. 600 crore based on actual 
pace of project implementation and budget utilization pattern and also taking into 
consideration the challenging security situation in Myanmar. The BE 2023-24 has 
been pegged at Rs. 400 crore on the basis of anticipated expenditure to be incurred 
during the Financial Year. The Committee further note that due to the ongoing 
security situation in Myanmar, pace of work in the developmental projects 
including Kaladan Multi Modal Transport Project and India-Myanmar-Thailand 
Highway have been impacted. The Committee desire that the pace of project 
implementation should gain momentum in the post COVID world and hence urge 
the Ministry to step up its diplomatic efforts with the authorities in Myanmar to 
secure their support for smooth and expeditious implementation of all the ongoing 
development projects in that country. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry has noted the observations in the recommendations of Hon’ble 
Committee in its Report on Ministry’s Demand for Grants 2023-24. One of the 
flagship projects under grant-in-aid being executed with respect to Myanmar is the 
Kaladan Multimodal Transit Transport Project (KMTTP). The Sittwe Port, which 
is an important component under the KMTTP, was jointly inaugurated on 9 May 

57 
 
2023 and work is continuing on the Paletwa-Zonrinpui Road under the Kaladan 
Project. Work on India-Myanmar-Thailand Highway has been impacted because of 
the ongoing security situation in Myanmar.  
Activities under Border Area Development Programme (BADP) in Chin State and 
in the Naga Self-administered Zone in Myanmar, and under Rakhine State 
Development Programme (RSDP) have continued.  
In May 2023, GoI has also sent relief supplies including medicines, food and 
shelter kits to Myanmar in the aftermath of the Cyclone Mocha.  
All efforts are being undertaken to expedite the ongoing development projects in 
Myanmar. The matter has been taken up at the highest level through our Mission in 
Yangon and at various relevant bilateral mechanisms to ensure expeditious 
implementation of the GoI funded projects in Myanmar.   
(I) MEA is taking all the necessary diplomatic efforts to expedite the project 
progress in Myanmar. However, prevailing security challenges and local 
conditions are posing intermittent hindrances and at times, access to site 
is also restricted to Indian nationals for both Kaladan project and Tri-
lateral highway projects. However, inspite of challenges, MEA has 
successfully completed the operationalisation of the Sittwe port under 
Kaladan Multi-Modal Transit Transport project in May 2023. The Road 
component of Kaladan project is also in progress since the project was 
awarded to IRCON in March 2023and. Both these projects are being 
monitored regularly by our Mission in Myanmar and, also, at the 
Ministry and regular consultations are being held with the concerned 
agencies/leadership in the Government of Myanmar.    
(II) Construction / upgradation of Kalewa-Yargi Road section of the 
Trilateral Highway in Myanmar: The current law and order situation in 
Myanmar has slowed the project execution. However, bituminous 
Concrete work is progressing between Km 60 – 112 with frequent 
intermittent disruptions. The Physical progress in the project is 50% as on 
date. 
(III) Construction of 69 bridges including approach roads in the Tamu-
Kyigone-Kalewa section of the Trilateral Highway in Myanmar: The 
contractor for implementing the project was appointed on 28 November 

58 
 
2017. Contract was terminated on 24 December 2018 in view of Nil 
progress. Manipur high court on 20.08.2020 dismissed the contractor’s 
appeal and upheld the termination. The DPR for 69 Bridges has been 
updated on cost and technical parameters. NHAI on 28.02.2022, has been 
appointed as new Technical Executing Agency. NHAI invited tender in 
July 2022. Evaluation of Financial bid is under process. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 47) 
 The Committee note that ITEC has been one of the world’s longest running 
structured capacity building programme and has now evolved as an important 
strand of India’s Development Partnership. For the current Financial Year, 188 
courses are approved to be offered to ITEC partner countries and during the last 
three years 161 countries and 18 Secretariats have been benefitted from ITEC 
programmes. In respect of customised courses, 63 inperson/physical courses and 
19 e-ITEC/ virtual courses have been approved for partner countries. The Ministry 
has also stated that it is trying to graduate to full-fledged online degree 
programmes . The Committee are further happy to note that ITEC programmes 
have gained popularity and the positive feedback from participants posted on the 
ITEC website and social media is testimony to it. ITEC being an integral part of 
India’s development partnership, the Committee desire that new training modules 
catering to the specific requirements of partner countries should be evolved to 
make the programme more relevant and impactful. The Committee also urge the 
Ministry to work out the modalities for a full-fledged ITEC online degree 
programme in collaboration with the various stakeholders so that the same is 
introduced at the earliest. The feedback from participants in the training 
programme may also be incorporated in the training modules to the extent possible. 
Reply of the Government 
Keeping in mind the training needs and development requirements of our partner 
countries, ITEC has developed the following specific modules: 
(i) A QUAD Infrastructure Fellowship (QIF) package of ITEC courses, which will 
provide infrastructure related training to our partner countries in the Indo-Pacific 
(ii) SAGAR-AMRUT scholarships under ITEC which will provide 1000 training 
slots over the next five years for island countries in the Pacific region; 

59 
 
(iii) a package for Latin American and Caribbean countries which will provide 
ITEC courses on Digital public infrastructure, flagship agriculture schemes of 
India, PM-BJP programme and technical courses in Spanish on themes like SDG, 
South Cooperation and IT.     
 
Under the QIF, Division has offered certain 2-year degree in-person courses. 
Collaboration with other stakeholders has been initiated to ascertain the 
requirements of partner countries and accordingly develop the modalities for the 
full-fledged online degree courses. 
4.95 The Committee note that under the Head 'Aid to African Countries', the BE 
2022-23 of Rs. 250 crore was reduced to Rs.160 crore at RE stage as 
implementation of most of the projects/activities slowed down resulting in lesser 
expenditure and subsequent reduction in allocation due to the prolonged COVID-
19 pandemic situation. The Budgetary Allocation has been kept a t t h e s am e l e 
ve l o f Rs. 250.00 crore in BE 2023-24. Under projects relating to Line of Credit 
(LoC), the Ministry is facing challenges as there are 17 high risk countries in 
Africa. The Committee further note that there has been delay in setting up of 
institutions in Africa as per the commitments under the India- Africa Forum 
Summit (IAFS)-I,II & III due to various problems in the host countries. Moreover, 
the IAFS –IV which was expected to be held in September 2020 was also 
postponed due to the COVID-19 pandemic. The Committee desire that in the post 
COVID world, all out efforts should be made by the Government for expeditious 
execution of projects including LoC projects in African countries and also for 
fulfilling all commitments under the IAFS. The Committee further desire that 
consultations with the African Union Commission may also be initiated without 
delay for holding of IAFS –IV and the outcome may be shared with the 
Committee. 
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry has noted the concerns and recommendations of the Hon’ble 
Standing Committee.  The Ministry would like to reassure the Hon’ble Committee 
that Africa is receiving high priority by the Government.  
India has maintained a vibrant relationship with African countries, which is evident 
with 36 outgoing visits since 2014 [President (13), Vice President (14) and Prime 
Minister (9)] and around 100 incoming visits at ministerial level. EAM has also 

60 
 
undertaken visit’s to Ethiopia & Rwanda (June 2022), Egypt (October 2022), 
Kenya & Mozambique (April 2023) and South Africa & Tanzania (June 2023).  
The 10 guiding principles enunciated by the Prime Minister in Uganda in 2018, 
have continued to guide India-Africa relations and to take our engagement to the 
next higher level.  These guiding principles have been given ‘top priority’ in 
various areas including digital & IT, agriculture, trade & investment, development 
partnership, especially designed people-centric projects, enhance local capacity 
and assist African youth, capacity building, climate change, cooperation in 
terrorism & maritime issues, etc.   
In order to enhance our diplomatic presence in African continent, GOI has opened 
18 new Missions.  After opening of the 18 new Missions in Africa, India now has 
resident Missions in 47 out of 54 African countries. 
The IAFS-IV was expected to be held in September 2020 but was postponed due to 
the COVID-19 pandemic.  In consultation with African Union, this Ministry is 
exploring various options to hold the IAFS-IV at the earliest. 
The Ministry, with the budgetary allocation of Rs. 250 crore for the financial year 
2023-24 provisioned under the Head “Aid to African Countries”, would continue 
to focus on catering to the setting up of Institutes; offering Scholarships/Training 
programmes under IAFS-III; ICCR Scholarships; Food Aid, Medical aid including 
equipment; humanitarian aids to fight natural disasters; Books; Vehicles; 
organising Events/Seminars/ Studies/Visits; Cash Grants; development assistance 
projects; etc. in order to further strengthen our friendly relations with African 
countries. The Ministry will continue to vigorously follow up and review the 
projects announced during IAFS-I, IAFS-II and IAFS-III which are presently at 
various stages of execution. In order to augment our development partnership with 
the friendly African countries, India would continue to extend LoCs and Grants to 
African countries.  
The Ministry will ensure for effective utilisation of funds for expeditious 
implementation of our ongoing projects in Africa and seek enhanced allocation 
under the budgetary Head “Aid to African countries” at Revised Estimates (RE) 
stage, if necessary; and/or on finalisation of the dates of the IAFS-IV. We have 
noted Hon’ble Committee’s observations on the reduced allocation and the slow 
pace of progress in projects under this budget sub-head.  During the fiscal year 
2022-23, we made utmost efforts to spend the funds allocated under the budgetary 

61 
 
Head “Aid to African Countries”. In view of the COVID-19 induced restrictions, 
many of our aid projects in Africa could not make optimal progress.  However, as 
the COVID-19 pandemic has subsided now and the situation has returned to 
normal, the Ministry will make all out efforts for expeditious execution of projects 
in African Countries and also for fulfilling commitments made under the IAFS. 
The Ministry has taken a note of all the recommendations of the Hon’ble 
Committee.  
In relation to the projects in countries in Africa financed under the Lines of Credit 
scheme, these are being monitored for their expeditious implementation through 
Project Management Consultants, review meetings held in consultation with Exim 
Bank of India, bilateral review meetings, visits by Ministry of External Affairs and 
Exim Bank officials and continuous supervision through concerned Indian 
Missions and Posts in concerned countries. These efforts are aimed at achieving 
the project completion targets in time. 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 49) 
 The Committee note that the e-VidyaBharati and eAarogyaBharati Network 
Project (e-VBAB) project, approved by the Union Cabinet in November 2015, for 
a period of 5 years from 2016- 21, with a project cost of Rs. 951.22 crore provided 
tele-education and tele-medicine services through the medium of internet using 
specially developed web-based platforms. Under the tele-education component, 
scholarships have been awarded to 14,390 African students, who have been 
pursuing online higher education from Indian Universities while the tele-medicine 
component of the project is yet to be launched. The Ministry has stated that it is in 
the process of finalizing the courses, creation of content and identifying the 
specialties, hospitals in India as well as partner hospitals in Africa, etc. It is also 
working on the tender document for finalizing an agency to create a dedicated 
portal for offering Tele-Consultation and Continued Medical Education with the 
Implementing Agency. The Ministry has further informed that an inter-Ministerial 
meeting will be held soon to discuss the modalities and the way forward. The 
Committee note the delay in launching the tele-medicine component of the e-
VBAB project though it was approved way back in 2015 and urge the Ministry to 
commence discussion on the modalities so that the same may be finalized and 
implemented at the earliest.  

62 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
An Inter-Ministerial meeting was held on 2 May 2023 to discuss the way forward 
for implementation of the tele-medicine component of e-VBAB project. The need 
to take stock of current status in Africa of IT infrastructure, connectivity, data 
storage requirement of radiology images and specialties required has been 
highlighted. A meeting shall be organized with all the stakeholders to take stock of 
the above, thereafter the customization of e-Sanjeevani portal could be undertaken 
and the project could be launched. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 50) 
 The Committee find that the Ministry of External Affairs, India’s Missions 
abroad and ICCR constitute the triangle within which the task of projecting Indian 
culture through public and cultural diplomacy is fulfilled. All activities of ICCR 
including those conducted through its extended arms like Indian Cultural Centers, 
the Chairs of Indian Studies in Foreign Universities, and the foreign students’ 
scholarships programme, are conducted in close coordination with MEA and 
Indian Missions/posts in the country concerned contributing substantially towards 
overall formulation of India’s foreign policy. The Committee understand that the 
ICCR is fully funded by MEA through Grants-in-Aid as the promotion of soft 
power and cultural diplomacy cannot be based on profit generation. As regards 
budget grants given to ICCR, the Committee observe that an allocation of Rs. 
345.21 crore has been made in BE 2023-24 against the BE and RE 2022-23 of Rs. 
320 crore. This enhanced allocation in BE 2023-24 to the tune of 25.21 crore has 
been made on account of expanding research & academic activities, expanding 
scope of cultural diplomacy under ICCR as well as the revision in scholarship 
rates, cultural hospitality norms, etc. However, the Committee are not sure about 
the adequacy of the allocation especially in view of the new initiatives of ICCR 
like ‘Gyan-Setu’ for connecting Culture through Knowledge, ‘Gen-Next 
Programme’, Blog competitions, etc. in addition to the revision in scholarship rates 
and cultural hospitality norms. Moreover, the soft power and cultural diplomatic 
activities being undertaken by other countries are way above ours despite India 
aspiring to be a very strong soft power player in the years ahead. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their stance on augmented funding to ICCR to enable 
sponsoring proactive and effective conduct of our country’s soft power and cultural 

63 
 
promotion. The Committee also recommend that an assessment be made by the 
Ministry to find where our country stands in the global ranking of soft power 
projections as compared to major developed and developing countries. 
Reply of the Government 
Ministry acknowledges recommendation of Hon’ble Standing Committee and will 
endeavor to enhance additional budgetary resource allocation based on realistic 
assessment of ICCR Schemes & programmes requirements with the objective of 
advancing India’s cultural diplomacy. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 51) 
 The Committee are happy to find that in consonance with an earlier 
recommendation of theirs, ICCR has made efforts to reorganise its structure and 
accordingly merged seven Regional Offices, namely Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, 
Chennai, Goa, Hyderabad, Trivandrum and Varanasi with the Zonal Offices on 1st 
July, 2022. Consequent upon this restructuring, at present ICCR has its Zonal, Sub-
Zonal and other offices only in 11 cities of the country instead of 18. This means 
that the work hitherto being carried out by the Regional Offices is now being 
carried out by Zonal Offices. While appreciating the restructuring of ICCR, the 
Committee further wish that the same will bring in the much required efficiency 
and effectiveness in ICCR’s operations in India and ensure optimum utilization of 
the funds allocated.  
Reply of the Government 
 The appreciation of Standing Committee on External Affairs that it is 
satisfied with efforts made by ICCR in the direction of restructuring of its Regional 
Offices from 18 to 11 under Zonal System, is kindly taken on record. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 52) 
 The Committee observe that ICCR’s Cultural Centres are the principal 
instrument of India’s institutional outreach. As of now, ICCR is operating 37 
Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) abroad and is in the process of opening a new 
centre in Paris during the upcoming financial year. The Committee further 
understand that the property acquired at U-Street in 2013 to set up ICCs in 
Washington is yet to be utilized due to structural challenges in the building and 
delay during COVID period. Recognizing that public and cultural diplomacy are 

64 
 
among the key tools in the formulation and implementation of India’s foreign 
policy, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should undertake a review of 
all its Cultural Centres to rationalize them with a view to identifying countries 
where we need to have a greater presence and requirement for increased linkages 
by establishing such centre. The Committee also hope that the new centre in Paris 
is opened as per timelines and the one at Washington too is made functional at the 
earliest.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry through its Mission in Paris is progressing to operationalize the 
Cultural Centre in Paris, with over 94% work completion. Ministry acknowledges 
Standing Committee recommendation on reviewing & rationalizing presence of 
Cultural Centres across the world while exploring feasibility & impact of increased 
linkages through cultural centres.   
Recommendation (Sl. No. 54) 
 The Committee note that the ICCR has executed a new process for 
admission of Foreign National on scholarship slots and the same has helped ICCR 
in improving its academic and intellectual activities. It has been informed that the 
"A2A" (Admissions to Alumni) Portal was developed in 2018 to digitize various 
scholarship schemes administered by ICCR for foreign students. The Committee 
further understand that the portal consists of all relevant information including the 
details of State and Central Universities/Institutes, availability of various academic 
courses, guidelines, eligibility criteria, availability of hostels, etc., that help foreign 
students in making a decision while applying to Universities/Institutes. The 
Committee are happy that this portal has led to expeditious, timebound and 
accountable method of admissions and brought in transparency to a very large 
scholarship programme offered by our country. However, the Committee note with 
concern that despite the introduction of A2A portal which digitized the entire 
admission process, a large number of scholarship slots are left unutilized over the 
years. Since these scholarships are meant to create goodwill about India and 
project to the world what India has to offer in the cultural and academic fields, it is 
not a discerning trend that the slots are not fully taken. The Committee, therefore 
desire that an independent study be made before the next academic intake to 
understand the reasons for the same so that improvement in the effectiveness of the 
scholarship programme is brought in without further delay. 

65 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 It is mentioned that to address the issue of less utilization of slots, the 
following steps have been undertaken:- 
(i) Admission process has been digitized. Applications are now received online 
on Admission to Alumni (A2A) Scholarship portal. It gives easy and transparent 
access to the aspirants for availing ICCR scholarships. 
(ii) Students can now apply in five Universities/Institutes instead of three 
Universities/Institutes. 
(iii) Governing Body has approved to and fro air fare to all the students in 
General Scholarships Scheme (GSS) from 2022-23. (Earlier air fare was provided 
to the students of a few countries under GSS) 
(iv)  Any number of students can apply on the portal. 
 Above steps have not only led to transparency and increased utilization of 
slots but  also the quality of students has improved. The slots utilization of 
scholarship for last  three years is given below: - 
Sl. Academic Year Total Slots offered Utilization 
1 2020-21 3851 2059 
2 2021-22 3822 2837 
3 2022-23 3878 3198 (acceptance) 
 
It could be seen from the above chart that with the implementation of above steps, 
the utilization of slots has been steadily increasing. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 55) 
 The Committee note that the Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA) work 
in close coordination with MEA to address issues that are at the top of the foreign 
policy agenda and in making dialogues and discussions of MEA more policy 
effective and impactful. To fulfill its mandated objectives, ICWA has been 

66 
 
undertaking a range of activities, which include research, publications, dialogues 
with international partners, holding of conferences, seminars, lectures, discussions 
and undertaking outreach activities. The Committee note that in the last 3 years, 
since April 2020, ICWA has organized a total of 175 International and National 
Seminars/Bilateral dialogues/Lectures/ Panel discussions and book discussions in 
online, physical and hybrid mode. The publications of ICWA include Sapru House 
Papers, issue briefs, view points, special reports, journals and books. In the last 
three years the Council has published 204 issue briefs, 149 view points, and 8 
special reports. As regards the allocation of funds, the Committee find that in the 
FY 2023-24, a budgetary allocation of Rs. 14.02 crore has been made for ICWA 
which is lower than the RE 2022-23 of Rs. 14.24 crore. The Ministry has stated in 
this regard that the slightly reduced allocation has been on account of expenditure 
trends. As regards the utilization trends, the Committee note that in 2019-20, 
ICWA had managed complete utilization of funds and in the next two years, due to 
COVID-19 pandemic, the actual spending had shown a decline. In FY 22-23, up to 
December 2022, the actual expenditure is Rs. 9.95 crore which is about 71% of the 
RE allocation. The Committee hope that the ICWA may be able to reach the pre 
COVID standards in utilization of funds as the activities of ICWA are in full steam 
now. The Committee also desire ICWA to play a more effective role in policy 
formulations of the Government while continuing focused studies on specific areas 
of Government’s priorities. 
Reply of the Government  
1. ICWA would work towards complete utilization of the allocated budget. 
 
2. The Council consistently makes an effort to contribute to policy formulation 
through its various activities such as research work, publication, dialogue & 
communication, and interface with policy-makers. In consonance with 
government priorities, the Council in the preceding years has, for instance, 
worked on themes such as SCO, G20, Indo-Pacific, Ukraine, Afghanistan 
etc. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 56) 
 

67 
 
 The Committee understand that Research and Information System for 
Developing Countries (RIS) is a think tank specializing in international economic 
relations and development cooperation.RIS conducts in-depth research on 
multilateral issues, primarily on economic, social, scientific and technological 
matters. It brings out evidence-based policy research studies, policy briefs and 
research papers on emerging issues and organize a wide range of events within the 
country and abroad under the overall guidance and support of the Ministry of 
External Affairs. In the FY 2022-23 , an outlay of Rs. 14.59 crore was earmarked 
for RIS and under BE 2023- 24 the allocation is Rs. 16.64 crore which is a 
substantial increase of 14.05% from last year’s budget. The enhanced allocation, as 
the Committee understand is on account of some special tasks RIS is going to 
undertake during India’s Presidency of G20. Accordingly, RIS is expected to focus 
on India’s development cooperation with Global South and Triangular Cooperation 
and utilize its network of national and global partner institutions to ensure that the 
priorities set by India during its G20 Presidency are carried forward beyond the 
Indian Presidency. The Committee are happy to see that RIS has been ensuring 
optimum utilization of funds during FY 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2022-23. In view of 
their track record of utilization of funds and also of their network of partner 
institutions across the world, the Committee hope that India’s core interests are 
upheld during its G20 Presidency by RIS. Since the Government of India seeks 
advise from RIS on matters pertaining to multilateral economic and social issues 
from time to time, the Committee desire that the specialized research programme 
of RIS should be strengthened further and integrated within the Government 
system. They also desire RIS to widen its outreach to vigorously promote India’s 
narrative on areas of critical importance to the country in the evolving world where 
counter narratives need to be handled effectively through evidence-based research.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 RIS is undertaking several steps to strengthen its specialized research 
programme and integrate its research inputs with India’s foreign policy objectives. 
Some examples of steps taken in this regard are: 
i. Ministry enhanced the annual grant in aid to RIS during the current financial 
year to meet the requirements of the institution and strengthen its policy 
research programme, including organization of meetings, dialogues and 

68 
 
conferences and evidence-based research programme with the help of 
subject experts and scholars and its own expanded Faculty. 
ii. Ministry has assigned the task of organizing the G-20 Lecture Series to RIS 
under its University Connect Programme. It would also result in forging 
closer partnership of the institution with their faculty and scholars and 
strengthen its policy research progamme to have a much wider national 
perspective on critical issues facing the country. 
iii. MEA has approved five 2-week ITEC programmes for 30 participants from 
ITEC partner countries proposed by RIS. In addition, RIS has been advised 
to organize an ITEC programme in French language on South South 
Cooperation. RIS has also been advised to conduct an Executive Level ITEC 
programme for senior officials from ITEC partner countries of the level of 
JS and above to familiarize them about India’s flagship programmes. These 
capacity building programmes are bound to deepen closer policy research 
linkages of RIS with these countries, their think tanks and other institutions 
and widen the spectrum of its policy research perspectives on trade and 
economic issues confronting the Global South. 
iv. Similarly, MEA had assigned the task of conducting the IBSA Fellowship 
Programme at RIS. The 3rd Round of the Fellowship programme is now 
underway. It is bound to strengthen its engagement with research scholars of 
IBSA partner countries and contribute to the strengthening of the IBSA 
process. 
RIS is also conducting policy research studies for the Department of Science & 
Technology through its Science Diplomacy programme, Ministry of Agriculture 
for knowledge partnership on G-20 issues, IN-SPACe for providing consultancy 
service for "Strategy for Expanding India's Space Sector Footprint Globally", 
Ministry of Ayush through the Forum for Traditional Medicines to promote 
linkages with external partners in this field, Ministry of Ports, Shipping and 
Waterways with the establishment of its Centre for Maritime Economy and 
Connectivity to ensure an integrated devilment of this sector in the country, and the 
Department of Youth Affairs to organize “Brainstorming Sessions” for Y20 
engagement group under the overall framework of G20. 
RIS has also intensified its policy research on issues impacting the core interests of 
India with the engagement of a wide range of policy and subject experts from 

69 
 
within the country and abroad and its research studies on emerging issues are being 
widely disseminated through the print and electronic media to effectively put 
forward India’s standpoint on important issues in the backdrop of growing Western 
narrative that their ideas, strategies and frameworks for social and economic 
development of developing countries are the best way forward for integrated global 
development. 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 57) 
 
 The Committee note that the Policy Planning and Research (PP&R) Division 
of MEA collaborates with its network of autonomous bodies like ICWA and RIS; 
think tanks and academic institutions for the purpose of policy planning and 
research in foreign affairs and for creating policy products and policy 
recommendations. Policy formulation, whether it is foreign policy or domestic, 
economic or social policy, depends on research inputs from a range of actors. The 
Committee, however, find that not much stress has been laid on research in the 
country. The Committee, therefore, desire that the MEA should take the lead in 
developing research culture through its PP&R Division, create more think tanks 
and directly interact with universities in the country. The current interaction and 
collaboration with think tanks and universities should also be scaled up 
exponentially with proper assessment of funding requirement for research and 
provisioning of adequate Budgetary Allocation for the same. 
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendation is noted for compliance. PP&R Division is working 
towards greater collaboration with think tanks and universities in the country.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 58) 
 The Committee desire that the Ministry should submit to them a list of 
think–tanks across India, along with a programme of engagement to be undertaken 
with them. Focus areas may also include efforts to identify and nurture emerging 
think- tanks in North Eastern India with the aim of improving implementation of 
Government of India's Act East Policy. Outreach may also be made to institutions 

70 
 
that specialize in international legal issues. The steps taken and progress made in 
this regard may be communicated to the Committee within three months. 
Reply of the Government 
 Some of the recent and established engagements of the PP&R Division with 
Think Tanks across the country are tabulated below. The Division would continue 
to engage and support events by Think Tanks in a demand-driven and outcome-
oriented approach. 
India-Canada Track 1.5 Dialogue Gateway House: Indian Council of 
Global Relations 
Asia Economic Dialogue  Pune International Centre 
Kolkata-Dhaka Dialogue 2021 Bandhan Konnagar 
Virtual symposium on “BIMSTEC: A 
Vehicle for Growth and Development”  
Institute of Social & Cultural 
Studies, Kolkata 
Webinar on ‘Blockchain Technology’ 
(Advance payment) Policy 4.0 Research Foundation 
Indian Ocean Conference India Foundation 
Raisina Dialogue Observer Research Foundation 
Global Technology Summit Carnegie Endowment for 
International Peace 
Indo-US Forum Ananta Aspen Centre 
‘Act East to Indo-Pacific: Role of 
northeast Indian States in connecting 
the connectivities’ (Imphal Dialouge- 
200 
Asian Confluence, Shillong, 
Meghalaya 
NADI Dialogue on theme ‘Celebrating 
our Shared Riverine Heritage’ 2022 
Asian Confluence, Shillong, 
Meghalaya 

71 
 
India-Canada Track 1.5 Dialogue Gateway House: Indian Council of 
Global Relations 
India-EU Track 1.5 Dialogue Ananta Aspen Centre 
India-Japan Track 1.5 Dialogue Delhi Policy Group 
India-Korea Track 1.5 Dialogue Ananta Aspen Centre  
Raisina Forum for Future of Diplomacy Observer Research Foundation 
Study on Connectivity Projects between 
the North-East India and Neighbouring 
Countries 
NEDFi, Guwahati 
India-France Track 1.5 Dialogue Gateway House  
Dialogue on “Northeast India and Bay 
of Bengal in the Indo-Pacific” 2023 
Asian Confluence, Shillong, 
Meghalaya 
 
With an effort to identify and nurture emerging think tanks in North Eastern India 
as recommended by the esteemed Committee, the recent initiatives undertaken by 
the Division are placed below. Such efforts would continue to be strengthened 
going forward. 
Study on Connectivity Projects between 
the North-East India and Neighbouring 
Countries 
NEDFi, Guwahati 
Kolkata-Dhaka Dialogue 2021 Bandhan Konnagar 
Virtual symposium on “BIMSTEC: A 
Vehicle for Growth and Development”  
Institute of Social & Cultural 
Studies, Kolkata 

72 
 
Study on Connectivity Projects between 
the North-East India and Neighbouring 
Countries 
NEDFi, Guwahati 
‘Act East to Indo-Pacific: Role of 
northeast Indian States in connecting the 
connectivities’ (Imphal Dialouge- 200 
Asian Confluence, Shil long, 
Meghalaya 
NADI Dialogue on theme ‘Celebrating 
our Shared Riverine Heritage’ 2022 
Asian Confluence, Shillong, 
Meghalaya 
Dialogue on “Northeast India and Bay 
of Bengal in the Indo-Pacific” 2023 
Asian Confluence, Shillong, 
Meghalaya 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 59) 
 The Committee desire that the Ministry should maintain closer interaction 
and more collaboration with the Policy Planning Divisions of other countries, 
particularly developed countries and continuous efforts for absorption of the 
outcome of such collaborations in India’s foreign policy making/goals, may be 
made. As the PP&R Division is also our window for interaction with the Policy 
Planning Divisions of other countries, it should be reinforced with sufficient 
manpower and adequate resources. 
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendation noted for compliance. In April-June 2023, The Policy 
Planning Division has undertaken 4 Policy Planning Dialogues: with Germany, 
EU, Israel and Vietnam, and would soon participate in the QUAD Policy Planning 
Dialogue, followed by Policy Planning Dialogue with Armenia, Republic of Korea, 
etc. 
 Recommendation noted for compliance.  
 
  

73 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 61) 
 The Committee also desire that the MEA should prepare a programme of 
engagement with universities across the country including through jan bhagidari. 
The objective of such an engagement should be twofold: one to broad base the 
making of the Indian foreign policy; and two, to disseminate Indian foreign policy 
narratives and priorities into the academia. The progress made in this regard may 
be communicated to the Committee within three months.  
Reply of the Government 
 Since 2010, XPD Division of the Ministry has been organizing its 
prestigious Distinguished Lecture Series to address the need to have a regular 
dialogue with major academic institutions in India and thereby improve the quality 
of discourse on subjects related to Indian foreign policy.  Under this initiative, 
retired officers of the MEA interact with students from various 
universities/institutions on foreign policy related issues on a regular basis. 
As part of celebrations of Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav, MEA successfully organized 
a special lecture series - India@75: Videsh Niti Distinguished Lecture Series, 
between January 2022 and March 2023. Under this special initiative, lectures on 
foreign policy by retired Indian diplomats were organized in 75 
Universities/institutions spread across India, with the objective of demystifying 
foreign policy for the youth. The initiative covered a large number of Central/State 
Universities and institutions including the IITs, IIMs, NITs, NLUs etc. 
As part of India’s G-20 Presidency, MEA, through RIS, is organizing the G-20 
University Connect- a wide range of national seminars in collaboration with 75 
Universities and academic institutions across the country- to generate greater 
awareness on foreign policy issues. These seminars are expected to continue until 
the end of India’s G-20 Presidency in 2023.  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 63) 
The Committee note that various Departments within the MEA 
communicate with other Ministries, Departments and Institutions of the Central 
and State Governments regarding issues relating to India's foreign relations. The 
Committee feel that being the principal Ministry in charge of India’s Foreign 
policy, the Ministry should establish an institutional mechanism for consultation 
and coordination with all other relevant Ministries, Departments and Institutions 

74 
 
and strengthen the mechanism of Inter-Ministerial Meetings for effective 
management of our foreign affairs.  
Reply of the Government 
Ministry deeply appreciates the recommendation of the Committee and has to 
inform that the Parliament & Coordination Division of the Ministry of External 
Affairs is the nodal Division for coordination related issues within and outside the 
Ministry including with the Ministries of the Union Government, State 
Governments, Autonomous Institutions and private entities.  In addition, the 
specialized divisions like UNES for Economic and Social issues of UN related 
subject matters; UNP for Political and Security Council related issues of United 
Nations; ED Division for economic related engagements; MER Division for 
multilateral economic issues, CPV Division for consular and visa issues;   PP&R 
Division for Public Policy & Research issues on Foreign Policy, are designated to 
do coordination on specialized topics.   A wide range of coordination within the 
Government is carried out through e-Samiksha portal which deals with issues 
requiring regular updates. The Joint Secretary (Parliament & Coordination) is the 
focal point for MEA on coordination related issues.  
 
***** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

75 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO 
NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 31) 
The Committee note that the 17th Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) 
Convention, organised from 8-10 January 2023 in the physical format after a gap 
of four years has witnessed enthusiastic participation of more than 3500 overseas 
Indians from about 70 countries. The participants included more than 800 
businessmen, 500 professionals and a sizeable number of unskilled workers. 
Moreover, for the first time, a delegation of over 200 students and 100 blue collar 
workers from companies in the UAE participated in the said Convention. The exact 
number of the most vulnerable section of migrant workers who participated in 
PBD has not been disclosed. Similarly, the Committee also note that the number of 
blue collar workers who participated in the Convention is, however, far too little, 
i.e., a mere 2.86 % of the total and confined to workers from the UAE only. It has 
always been the desire of the Committee to see the maximum participation of the 
most vulnerable sections of the Indian Diaspora from various countries in the PBD 
events. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to ensure the participation of 
skilled/unskilled/blue collar Indians workers, in greater number, in the upcoming 
PBD celebrations and events. The feasibility of holding PBD celebrations and 
events annually may also be explored as it would also contribute to promotion of 
trade, investment and tourism in the country.  
Reply of the Government 
The Ministry makes efforts to encourage the participation of all sections of Indian 
diaspora, including the unskilled and blue collar workers, in the Pravasi Bharatiya 
Divas Conventions. However, participation of blue collar workers is limited by 
many factors, including taking time out of their working commitments and 
monetary factor. The Committee would appreciate that in most cases, the employer 
or diaspora association will have to sponsor the visit of the worker to India to 
participate in the Convention. In context of these limitations, participation of 100 
blue collar workers from UAE is a significant achievement. Blue-collar workers 
were also part of diaspora participation from other Gulf countries in 17th PBD 
Convention, although not at same scale as from UAE. 

76 
 
 
It was Ministry’s considered decision to revise the format of Pravasi Bharatiya 
Divas Convention in 2015 to celebrate Pravasi Bharatiya Divas once every two 
years and to hold theme-based PBD Conferences during the intervening period 
with participation from overseas diaspora experts, policymakers, and stakeholders 
 
  

77 
 
CHAPTER- IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
The Committee note that an amount of Rs 3528.85 crore has been allocated in the 
BE 2023-24 under the Head ‘Embassies and Missions’ which is even lesser than 
the BE 2022-23 outlay of Rs. 3769.06 crore. The Ministry has stated that the 
allocated funds seem to be adequate to ensure the smooth operation of Missions 
and Posts abroad. The Committee have also been apprised those proposals for 
expanding India’s diplomatic presence in important partner countries including in 
the neighbourhood, the Latin Americas and Caribbean region, the Pacific Island 
region and Europe are under process. In the opinion of the Committee, opening of 
resident Indian Missions in these countries is in line with the broad foreign policy 
vision of the Government to maximise India’s presence abroad in the most optimal 
manner and to achieve our foreign policy objective of building a conducive 
environment for India’s growth and development through partnerships with 
friendly countries. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to expedite the 
process involving logistics, deployment, and creation of infrastructure as well as 
coordination and liaison with the host Governments so that resident Indian 
Missions are opened in these countries at the earliest. 
Reply of the Government 
 The recommendation of the Standing Committee is duly noted. The scope 
and depth of the bilateral relations with the countries where India does not have a 
resident Mission or Post are regularly reviewed, and Mission/Post are opened in 
these countries accordingly. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
The Committee note that 181 Indian Missions/Posts have so far been integrated 
into the Passport Seva Programme through the Global Passport Seva Project 
(GPSP). This integration, the Committee understand, will enable centralised 
passport issuance for our citizens in India and Diaspora abroad. The Committee 
desire that the process of integration of the remaining Missions/posts in to the 
GPSP applications should be completed at the earliest for smooth, expeditious and 

78 
 
transparent delivery of passport services. The status of integration may be 
communicated to the Committee within three months.  
Reply of the Government 
 The total number of Indian Missions/Posts integrated into the PSP through 
GPSP is 181. This covers practically all our Missions/Posts except few countries 
striven by civil strife, newly opened Missions/Posts etc. 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 53) 
The Committee also note that there are 11 operational Chairs of ICCR on different 
subjects in the universities in Croatia, Mauritius, Jamaica, Tajikistan, Papua and 
Guinea, Cambodia, Poland, Bangladesh, Iceland and UK. In addition to them, 17 
Chairs have already been established and are in the process of being 
operationalized. Further, the proposals for setting up of 09 more Chairs are under 
consideration. The Committee, while according top priority and importance to the 
task of projecting cultural heritage of India through ICCR, recommend that a 
review of the functioning of the academic chairs instituted by ICCR in foreign 
universities may be done with a view to assessing their achievements against the 
objectives of instituting them. The Committee may be apprised of the findings of 
such a review within three months of the presentation of this Report. 
      Reply of the Government 
 The observations/ recommendations of the committee with regard to 
establishment of Chairs abroad are noted. 

79 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 60) 
The Committee lay great emphasis on the role of research inputs on foreign policy 
as well as on economic, social, scientific and technological issues, etc. The 
Committee understand that apart from ICWA and RIS, the Ministry is 
collaborating with research institutes, think tanks and has also started outreach to 
universities through its Policy Planning Division. In the opinion of the Committee, 
research in the field of funding requirement, allocation and spending is one area 
the MEA needs to work upon. The global trends in this regard would enable the 
Ministry to make a realistic assessment of our present needs and what we lacked. 
The Committee are also of the view that universities possessing the academic 
expertise and talent are most suited to carry out research in this field and desire that 
the Ministry should move towards direct interaction with universities and provide 
appropriate funding for research. For this purpose, the Committee recommend that 
the Ministry should open/create a new Budget Head for research funding to 
universities in the country.  
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendation noted for compliance. 
 
  

80 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 62) 
The Committee observe that under the Ministry’s Flagship Conference, the Raisina 
Dialogue, there has been increase in high level foreign participation year on year. 
Besides the participation of global policy makers including heads of States, 
Cabinet Ministers and local Government officials, the Dialogue also welcomes 
major private sector executives as well as members of the media and academia. 
The Committee feel that the Raisina Dialogue is an appropriate forum for debate, 
dialogue and sharing of ideas between the domestic strategic community and 
international participants and desire that the scale and scope of the Conference 
should be expanded. The outcome of conferences and dialogues held and 
publications brought out may be utilized by the Ministry in further policy 
formulation.  
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendation noted for compliance. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                             P.P. CHAUDHARY,                      
4 December, 2023                                                                                                       Chairperson,                                 
13 Agrahayana, 1945 (Saka)                                                 Committee on External Affairs 

81 
 
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2022-23) HELD ON 4 DECEMBER, 2023 
 
The Committee sat on Monday, 4 December, 2023 from 1500 hrs. to 1515 hrs. in Committee 
Room No. ‘1’, Parliament House Annexe, Extension Building, New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait 3.    Smt. Preneet Kaur 
4.    Smt. Poonam Pramod Mahajan 
5.    Shri P. C. Mohan 6.    Smt. Queen Oja 
7.    Shri K.C. Patel 
8.    Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 9.    Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
10.  Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
Rajya Sabha  
 
11.  Shri Anil Desai 
12.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
13.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
14.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
 
Secretariat 
 1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary  
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishna  - Director 
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Maya Menon   - Under Secretary 
 
   

82 
 
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee.  
3. The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on Action Taken by the 
Government on the Observations /Recommendations contained in the Twentieth Report of the 
Committee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2023-24. 
4. The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation 
in the draft Report. The Members suggested some minor modifications. The Committee adopted 
the draft Report with these minor modifications. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action Taken Report 
incorporating the suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
 The Committee then adjourned. 
 
  

83 
 
Appendix II 
(Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE 
OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE 
TWENTIETH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (17TH LOK SABHA) 
                                     
(i) Total Number of Recommendations                                                                   
              
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
 
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 
40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47, 48, 49, 50, 51, 52, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58, 59, 61, 
63. 
          Total-57 
Percentage: 90.48 % 
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not 
desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
  
  Recommendation No. 31        
           Total- 01 
 Percentage: 1.59% 
 
 (iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government  have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 16, 17 and 53                                     
       Total-03 
 Percentage: 4.76 % 
 
(v) Observation/Recommendation in respect of which final reply of 
 Government is still awaited. 
 
Recommendation Nos. 60 and  62. 
                                            
Total- 02 
Percentage:  3.17% 