 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
COUNTERING GLOBAL TERRORISM AT REGIONAL AND INTERNATIONAL 
LEVELS 
 
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2024 / Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2023-24) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
28 
 

 
 
TWENTY EIGHTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2023-24) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 COUNTERING GLOBAL TERRORISM AT REGIONAL AND 
INTERNATIONAL LEVELS 
 
 
 
  
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 05 February, 2024 
            Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 05 February, 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2024 / Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO.       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

 
 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
   COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2020-21)……............................................................  (ii) 
   COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2021-22)……............................................................  (iii)
   COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23)……............................................................  (iv)                                        
                              COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2023-24)……............................................................  (v)       
    Chapter I         Dimensions of Terrorism…………………………………………………………………1 
  
A.    Global Terrorism Scenario 
B.    Domestic Terrorism Scenario 
 
 Chapter II   Guiding Principles and Legal Frameworks for Countering Terrorism………………31  
 
 A. Guiding Principles of India’s Counter terrorism Strategy 
 B.    Legal Frameworks for Countering Terrorism at Regional and International Levels 
 C.    Legislative Frameworks and Institutional Mechanisms for Countering Terrorism at the National Level  
  
 `  (i)                      Framework under MHA 
(ii)                    Mechanism under Department of Revenue  
(iii)                  Institutional Framework under MEITY 
(iv)                   Cyber Diplomacy Division of MEA 
(v)                    Inter-Ministry Cooperation 
  
   Chapter III      Countering Global Terrorism at Regional Level………………………………………….56 
A.    BIMSTEC 
B.    SAARC 
C.    ASEAN Regional Forum 
D.    RATS-SCO 
E.    BRICS 
F.     QUAD 
G.    CICA 
  
               Chapter IV    Countering Global Terrorism at International Level……………………………………..67 
            A.    India and the United Nations 
B.    India and FATF 
C.    NMFT Ministerial Conference 
D.    Counter Terrorism under India’s G20 Presidency 
 

  
 
APPENDICES 
 
 Annexure I Minutes of the Eleventh Sitting of the Standing Committee on External Affairs  
   (2021-22) held on 22 June, 2022………………………………………………. 94 
 
 Annexure II Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (2022-
   23) held on 10 November,  2022………………………………………………... 98     
 
 Annexure III Minutes of the Fifteenth Sitting of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (2022-
   23) held on 29 March, 2023……………………………………………………… 101  
  
Annexure IV Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Standing Committee on External Affairs (2023-
   24) held on 31 January, 2024………………………………………………………  107 
 
 
   
  

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2020-21) 
 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 2.  Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.  Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.  Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.  Kunwar Pushpendra Singh Chandel  
6.  Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
7.  Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
8.  Smt. Preneet Kaur   
9.  Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
10.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan  
12.  Ms. Chandrani Murmu 
13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey   
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel  
15.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
16.  Shri Navneet Ravi Rana  
17.  Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
18.  Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
19.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
20.  Vacant$ 
21.  Vacant* 
Rajya Sabha  
22.  Shri K. J. Alphons  
23.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
24.  Smt. Misha Bharti    
25.  Shri P. Chidambaram  
26.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
27.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta# 
28.  Shri Kapil Sibal  
29.  Shri Abdul Wahab@@  
30.  Shri Brij Lal 
31.  Vacant@ 
 
$ Shri Ram Swaroop Sharma passed away on 17 March, 2021. 
* Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi ceased to Member of the Committee on her appointment as Minister w.e.f. 07.07.2021. # Shri Swapan Dasgupta resigned on 17.03.2021 and has been re-nominated w.e.f. 11.06.2021. @@ Shri Abdul Wahab retired on 21.03.2021 and has been re-nominated w.e.f. 11.06.2021. 
@ Shri Jyotiraditya M. Scindia ceased to be Member of the Committee on his appointment as Cabinet Minister w.e.f. 
07.07.2021.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2021-22) 
1. Shri P.P. Chaudhary - Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.   Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.   Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.   Shri Dileshwar Kamait  
6.   Shri Suresh Kumar Kashyap 
7. Smt. Preneet Kaur   
8. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
9.  Smt. Poonam Mahajan  
10.   Shri P. C. Mohan  
11.   Smt. Queen Oja 
12.   Shri Ritesh Pandey   
13.   Dr. K. C. Patel  
14.   Shri N.K. Premachandran 
15.   Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana  
16.   Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
17.   Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
18.   Shri Rebati Tripura 
19. Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
20.   Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer* 
21.   Vacant 
Rajya Sabha  
 
22.   Shri K. J. Alphons  
23.   Smt. Jaya Bachchan  
24.   Smt. Misha Bharti   
25. Shri Brijlal  
26.   Shri P. Chidambaram  
27.  Shri Swapan Dasgupta 
28.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
29. Shri Sanjay Raut 
30. Shri Kapil Sibal  
31.   Shri K. Somaprasad 
 * Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer, Member of Parliament, Lok Sabha nominated to the Committee 
w.e.f. 7.02.2022.    
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2022-23) 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary - Chairperson 
 
    Lok Sabha  
 2.    Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 3.    Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 5.    Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
6.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
7.    Smt. Preneet Kaur 8.    Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
9.    Smt. Poonam Pramod Mahajan 
10.  Shri Srinivas Reddy Manne 11.  Shri P. C. Mohan 
12.  Smt. Queen Oja 
13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey 14.  Dr. K. C. Patel 
15.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
16.  Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 17.  Shri Soyam Bapu Rao 
18.  Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
19.  Shri Rebati Tripura 20.  Dr. Harsh Vardhan 21.  Vacant 
    Rajya Sabha  
 
22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan 23.  Smt. Misha Bharti 24.  Shri Anil Desai 
25.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
26.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 27.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
28.  Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
29.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 30.  Shri Kapil Sibal 31.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2023-24) 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary - Chairperson 
 
    Lok Sabha  
 2.    Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 3.    Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.    Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 6.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
7.    Smt. Preneet Kaur 
8.    Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 9.    Smt. Poonam Pramod Mahajan 
10.  Shri Srinivas Reddy Manne 
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan 12.  Smt. Queen Oja 
13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey 
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel 15.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
16.  Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
17.  Shri Soyam Bapu Rao 18.  Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
19.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
20.  Dr. Harsh Vardhan 21.  Vacant 
    Rajya Sabha  
 22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan 23.  Smt. Misha Bharti 
24.  Shri Anil Desai 25.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
26.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
27.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 28.  Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
29.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
30.  Shri Kapil Sibal 31.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
Secretariat  
1.      Shri Anjani Kumar    –   Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   –   Director  
3. Ms. K Muanniang Tunglut  -  Deputy Secretary 
 
 
  
 
 
   
 
      

      
      
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2023-24) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty Eighth Report (17th Lok 
Sabha) on the subject ‘Countering Global Terrorism at Regional and International Levels’ 
2. The Committee selected the subject for detailed examination during 2020-21 and 
continued the examination during 2021-22, 2022-23 and 2023-24. Briefing by the 
representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs and Home Affairs on the subject was held 
on 22 June 2022. Thereafter, the Committee took oral evidence of the representatives of both 
the Ministries on 10 November, 2022. The Committee further took oral evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs, Electronics and Information Technology 
and Department of Revenue on 29 March, 2023.  
3. The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 31 
January, 2024. The Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report. 
4. The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the Ministry of External Affairs, the 
Ministry of Home Affairs, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology and the 
Department of Revenue for placing material information as well as tendering evidence and 
views before the Committee.  
5. For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have 
been printed in bold letters in the Report.  
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                             P.P. CHAUDHARY,                      
31 January, 2024                                                                                                           Chairperson,                                
11 Magha, 1945 (Saka)                                                        Committee on External Affairs 
 

1 
 
     CHAPTER I 
 
    DIMENSIONS OF TERRORISM 
 
A. Global Terrorism Scenario 
 
1.1 Terrorism continues to remain the gravest threat to humanity, in spite of efforts by the 
international community, including those led by the UN Security Council in the past two decades 
to combat and curb this menace. The threat of terrorism is not only growing and expanding at a 
rapid pace into new areas, particularly in Asia and Africa, but is also exacerbated by exploitation 
of new and emerging technologies by terrorist groups to achieve their vicious goals.   
 
1.2 In the recent past, terrorist groups and their proxies are increasingly adapting to the use of 
new and emerging technologies such as Internet, social media, encrypted messaging services, 
crypto currencies, crowd funding platform to disseminate propaganda, recruit cadre and raise and 
transfer funds for financing terror activities. There has been notable increase in use of drones for 
cross-border trafficking of arms and drugs as well as launching terror attacks. In Africa, drones 
have been used by the terrorist groups to monitor movements of security forces and peacekeepers 
making them vulnerable to terrorist attacks.  
         
1.3 Aerial terrorism is gradually emerging as a potent form of terrorism capable of causing 
massive damage to human life and infrastructure. Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)/drones are 
being easily procured commercially and modified for cross border delivery of contraband like 
arms, Improvised Explosive Devices (IEDs)/Weapons/Narcotics. In recent past, terrorists 
launched cross-border drone attacks on UAE and Saudi Arabia targeting civilians and civilian 
infrastructure, which have resulted in loss of lives and injuries to Indian nationals as well. 
Drones were used for attacks on Jammu Air Force Station and frequent flying of drones near 
border areas has been noticed.  
 
1.4 As virtual/crypto currencies crawl towards the mainstream, the share of digital mode of 
terror financing also increases. Most of them take measures like IP Masking and tout themselves 
to be "secure, private and untraceable". Continuing advancements in evolving technologies have 
immense potential to be abused by terrorists. 
 
1.5 On being asked whether there is an universally accepted definition of terrorism, global 
terrorism and terrorist activities, the Ministry has informed that there is no universally accepted 
definition of terrorism or global terrorist or terrorist activities. Countries define terrorist activities 
as per their domestic laws.  
 
1.6 In 1996, India proposed to the UN General Assembly the adoption of the Comprehensive 
Convention on International Terrorism (CCIT). Due to the position of some members on 
qualifying the definition of terrorism in CCIT, consensus on the draft text has not been achieved.  
In September 2005 at the World Summit, leaders stressed the need to make every effort to reach 
an agreement and conclude CCIT in that session itself.  Following India’s efforts, several 
countries have expressed support for CCIT.  Following persistent efforts by India, leaders of 

2 
 
prominent multilateral groupings –NAM Summit (September 2016), BRICS (October 2016) and 
SCO (June 2017) have also called for an early finalization of CCIT. 
 
         
(i) Global Terrorist Groups   
1.7 Despite various counter terrorism efforts across the globe, the Global Terrorist Groups 
such as ISIS & AQ are still major challenges for the global peace and security. These groups 
remains a significant terrorist threat in Central, South Asia including North Africa region. It 
continues to harbour ambition to build capabilities to conduct external operations. After the 
debacle of IS, it has decentralized its approach of waging war across the world through intense 
radicalizing the youths using cyber space, social media etc. FTFs returnees from the conflict 
theatre have inclination toward IS ideology, act as epicenter of radicalization, recruitment and 
have the potential to carry out lone wolf attack. 
1.8 GTGs like IS and AQ are aligned with the regional terror groups like LeT and JeM and 
trying to exploit the opportunity of communal tensions in India for instigating attacks in India 
through its misinformation and radical practices. Since 2016, IS has been unsuccessfully trying 
to extend its territory into J&K as a part of Islamic State of Khorasan Province (ISKP) and in 
order to show its presence in Indian territory IS-Core made propaganda of establishment of 
‘Wilayah Hind’ in May 2019. 
1.9 Recently, a module to IS has been busted in Addu city Maldives and 8 ISIS affiliates 
were arrested. In June 2023, an ISIS inspired terror financing module was also busted. In Italy, 
an ISIS inspired, Albanian national was arrested in 2022. The links of recent Coimbatore blast 
was also traced backed to ISIS inspired Sri Lankan youth. These worldwide incidents of ISIS 
indicates its global presence. Since the Taliban takeover of Afghanistan in August 2021, a 
renewed vigour was observed in Al Qaeda (AQ) propaganda activities. The lenient approach 
from Taliban had enabled AQ to rebuild the organizational capabilities along with re-orienting 
its propaganda strategies through ‘As-Sahab Media’ (official media wing of AQ). 
1.10 The AQ remains a long terms threat because of its radical jihadi ideology oriented 
propaganda activities and ability to work with other terror groups. The attacks of GTSs are 
primarily targeted against political and religious personalities. They pose threat to large public 
events, international events, religious places. 
1.11 The modus operandi of the Global Terrorist Groups is as under: 
 There has been a quantum shift in terms of access to advanced technology by terrorist 
groups that has given terrorist groups a tactical edge to carry out their operations 
seamlessly. 
 GTGs are highly dependents on the encrypted messaging platforms for instructions and 
preparations of terror attacks, revival of their sleeper cells. 
 Crowd funding and virtual currencies like bitcoins are heavily used for terror financing.  

3 
 
 GTGs continue to urge sympathizers and followers across the world to carry out lone 
wolf attacks. 
 They radicalized youth through misinformation and false narrative via extensive use of 
social media platforms. 
 
1.12 The global response to GTGs are enumerated below: 
 United Nations passed various resolutions like 1267(1999), 1989(2011) and 2253(2015) 
that are taken as guiding principles to adopt a preventive measures against GTGs viz. 
ISIL (Daesh), AQ and associated individuals. UNSC 1267 prescribes the travel ban, 
assets freeze and arms embargo for the GTGs.                                                                                                                           
 FATF though its grey and black list also encourage member state to regularize the 
financial discipline in case of  money laundering/terror financing. Due to non-response 
behavior of FATF norms Pakistan had been in the grey list for a long time. Iran is still in 
the black list of FATF. This may  pose additional restriction of the GTGs financing. 
 Terrorist Designation by United Nations is another mechanism to prevent the 
mushrooming the activities of GTGs world wide. India has made efforts to secure 
terrorist designations at the United Nations (UN) and through bilateral channels. 
 The Global Community have had a consensus to prohibit the accesses of advanced 
technologies in the hands of terrorist. Regular interactions among global leaders were 
held on the issues. Recently held UNCTC and 3rd NMFT meeting in India had a theme of 
countering misuse of technology for terrorist purposes. 
 Bilateral/joint operations were also made for investigating  terror related cases. India and 
Maldives, in a joint operation, busted a ISS Module in Addu City, Maldives in 2022. 
Recently (August 2023), a joint CT operation (Germany + Netherlands) arrested 9 
individuals of Central Asian Origin having linked with ISKP. 
 (ii) Cyber Terrorism 
1.13 In its Background note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Electronics & 
Information Technology (MEITY) has stated that with the emergence of new technology and rise 
in the usage of Internet, increase in cyber incidents is a global phenomenon. 
1.14 The MEA, in a written reply furnished to the Committee, has stated that there is lack of 
global regulations in the use of cyberspace for terrorism and terrorist related activities. Cyber 
Diplomacy Division of the Ministry has been raising the issue of misuse of information 
communication technology in the cyber environment including cyber terrorism. Cyber terrorism 
is yet to be defined in any of the UN convention. In the ongoing process of UN Ad Hoc 
Committee to elaborate a comprehensive international convention to counter the use of ICTs for 
criminal purposes, India proposed to include terrorism as a separate crime under the proposed 
convention but there was no significant support from Member States to include ‘cyber terrorism’ 
as a separate crime. However, effort is still being made to include ‘serious crime’ which may 
indirectly include cases related to terrorism on dual criminality basis and subject to certain other 

4 
 
conditions and safeguards as would be agreed upon in the proposed convention by member 
States. 
1.15 When during the course of evidence on 29 March 2023 the Committee sought to know 
the number of countries coordinating in the field of cyber security, the DG CERT-In responded 
as under: 
 “…. ransomware is one of these things for terrorism.  In counter ransomware, there are 
 36 member States and EU who are coordinating with each other globally”.   
1.16 On further asked the reasons why the other countries are not participating/coordinating in 
this regard, the DG CERT-In submitted: 
 “….there could be a combination of reasons. One is, sometimes the political will changes 
 after signing it to ratify it or the composition of Legislature may change.  Secondly, the 
 domestic laws may not comply or yet to comply. That process itself may take some time.  
 But in this sphere, not many countries can feel or prempt or probably, with their 
 infrastructure, they do not feel that they are digitized enough.  They do not feel the threat.  
 They feel that they are too poor to be affected but everybody else is compromised in that 
 sense but you are right that we will have to make more efforts”. 
1.17 Elaborating on the need for a comprehensive and coordinated approach for countering 
global cyber terrorism, the DG CERT-In during the said evidence stated: 
 “….countering global cyber terrorism requires a multifaceted approach.  It requires 
 responsible involvement of stakeholders at regional and international levels.  The 
 borderless nature of cyberspace is widely exploited by terrorists for their activities.  For 
 countering cyber terrorism, efforts at the regional and international levels require a 
 comprehensive and coordinated approach.  By working together, countries can enhance 
 their capabilities to prevent, detect and respond to terrorist threats.   
 Countries need to work together to develop joint strategies, cyber threat intelligence 
 sharing mechanisms and cross border initiatives to combat cyber terrorism.  Regional 
 organisations such as the African Union, the EU, the Association of Southeast Asian 
 Nations, and the UN can play a crucial role in promoting regional cooperation along with 
 global cyber security and law enforcement organizations”. 
1.18 During the course of evidence on 10 November 2022, the Additional Secretary in the 
Ministry of Home Affairs expressed concern over the increasing misuse of internet and social 
media platforms for proliferation of global terrorism as under: 
 “….increased misuse of internet and social media platforms for proliferation of global 
 terrorism through radicalisation, recruitment, planning and execution of lone wolf attacks 
 is also a cause of concern.   
 Crypto currencies and virtual assets too are prone to terror financing owing to anonymity 
 and untraceability”.   
      

5 
 
1.19 When asked the global scenario regarding use of social media platforms and cyberspace 
for terrorism related activities and the coordinated global response, the MEA has stated that the 
announcement of the Christchurch mosque attacks in New Zealand and live streaming them on 
Facebook and repeatedly posting them on other social media platforms showed how terrorists 
use social media. Pursuant to its criminal and general law, for better or for worse, the US 
government has almost entirely outsourced its responsibility for content removal to the private 
sector. This means that the third parties, entrusted and duty-bound by law are responsible for the 
removal of content related to terrorism and related activity from the social media intermediaries.  
1.20 Globally, after the Christchurch Call to Action Summit, which was a political summit 
initiated by New Zealand Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern that took place on 15 May 2019 in 
Paris, France two months after the Christchurch mosque shootings of 15 March 2019, States are 
making changes to their laws for tackling the online content on terrorism and related activities.  
1.21 The issue related to use of social media platforms and cyberspace for terrorism related 
activities is very complex. Large number of countries especially western countries look at these 
issues in the light of freedom of expression; human rights; etc. The regulation of content in the 
cyberspace is very divisive internationally. Among international community, there is strong 
reservation on regulation and shutting down of internet. There is no broad consensus among 
international community how to deal with the social media platforms and its content. The issue 
goes beyond freedom of expression; human rights; etc and gets linked to geo-politics also. Social 
media platforms are used by State Actors, quasi State Actors, non-State Actors, organizations, 
individuals, etc. 
1.22 Radicalization has been increasingly used as tool by regional and global terrorist 
organization around the world to attract vulnerable sections of the society like impressionable 
youth. Hate speech, misinformation and false narratives like terrorism, radicalization and violent 
extremism knows no geographical boundaries. World over, prisons have emerged not only as a 
centre of radicalization but also as hotbed of regrouping of violent extremist groups and 
ideologies. In Jan 2022, Gweiran prison, consisting of 3-4 thousand ISIS prisoners was broken in 
a targeted ISIS attack and released thousand of radicalized prisoners. Regaining power of 
Taliban in Afghanistan and returnees FTFs from conflict theatre also pose a serious threat of 
growing radicalization in the parent countries. Most of the African countries are presently facing 
this menace. 
1.23 Following emergence of ISIS, there has been significant impact of ideologies of ISIS on 
Muslim youth. ISIS has been able to successfully penetrate the cyberspace and has launched 
propaganda offensive through social media sites by posting inflammatory messages/videos and 
spreading misinformation etc. which has gained a degree of popularity in international arena 
including India. Like elsewhere in the world, India also is faced with problem of radical and 
extremist thoughts influencing the populace, particularly youth. However, due to the principle 

6 
 
process in India are less visible. Radicalization instances in India are having oversea connections 
like Sikh extremism. 
1.24 The coordinated global response in this regard are as under: 
 Radicalization has emerged as a central theme of multilateral meetings of UN CTC, 
GCTF, SCO-RATs etc. 
 Best practices have have been shared by GCTF on the issues of countering violent 
extremism. 
 India is also participating in SAN-PVE and Colombo Security Conclave (CSC) on the 
issues of Counter Radicalization measures. 
 EU has started project based collaboration led by EU countries to foster exchange and 
cooperation prevention of radicalization. 
 Various initiative are underway by multilateral organizations like GIFCT, EU etc for 
Cyber patrolling to prevent misuse of internet by terrorist to spread radicalization.  
 Trail of Dedicated Institution based mechanism in the vulnerable areas are undergoing. 
 
(iii) Financial Terrorism/Digital Mode of Terror Financing 
1.25 With respect to financial terrorism, mostly, all jurisdictions have the crime of financial 
terrorism categorized under three stages of raising (collecting and storing), moving and using 
funds. Despite the different stages, the ways in which terrorism financing is done is similar and, 
in some cases, may be identical to the methods used to launder money. 
1.26 The sources of terrorist funding vary. Firstly, they may originate from illegal activities, 
ranging from low-scale criminality to organised crime (e.g. trafficking in drugs, weapons or 
human beings.)  
1.27 The origin of the funds might, however, also be legitimate, being provided for example 
by the members of the organisation (usually the newcomers) or obtained through the abuse of 
non-profit organisations. New funding techniques of terrorist organisations were recently 
identified by the FATF in respect of Da’esh (also known as the “Islamic State”). Given the way 
of its functioning, Da'esh recurred to new methods of funding which could be considered more 
inherent for a state, such as levering taxes or exploiting natural resources (such as in this case 
natural gas and oil). 
1.28 The funding of terrorist activities often requires funds to be moved within or across 
jurisdictions. This might be done through official channels of the financial market and money 
remittances, through unregulated channels or hawala with the use of cash couriers. A clear 
similarity can be identified between terrorist financing and money laundering, as in both cases 
efforts are made to hide the funds from the scrutiny of state authorities. The techniques to do so 
are also often similar. After initial consideration of counter-terrorist financing measures together 
with the AML measures, the FATF more recently focuses on identifying the differences between 

7 
 
the two phenomena, with the view of adapting its standards to the particularities of terrorist 
financing (for example, based on the fact that not all terrorist financing sources are from illicit 
origin, such as the emphasis set on the abuse of NPOs).  
1.29 The Federal Reserve (of the USA) and the European Central Bank have stated that 
Bitcoin is a highly speculative asset used in illegal financing activities (e.g., money laundering). 
Hence, a global regulatory consensus on Bitcoin is required. However, improving regulatory 
capacity usually lags behind financial technology innovation, providing new opportunities to 
finance terrorism. With the continuous development of internet technology, virtual currency, 
online payment, and dark web transactions have attracted great attention from terrorist 
organizations. International terrorist organizations, including the “Islamic State” (IS), use 
emerging technologies (e.g., the blockchain), to raise and transfer illegal funds. In October 2015, 
the Financial Action Task Force on Money Laundering released a report entitled “Emerging 
Terrorism Financing Risks,” which specifically analysed the terrorist financing risks of virtual 
currency. This report highlighted that virtual currencies, such as Bitcoin, have increasingly 
become “accomplices” to various illegal and criminal activities, facilitating money laundering 
and terrorist financing. 
1.30 When the criminalization of terrorism financing was first addressed in an international 
instrument through the International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of 
Terrorism in 1999, drafters were faced with the challenge of establishing a regime that would 
criminalize the funding of an act that had not been previously defined in a comprehensive 
manner. Making the financing of terrorism a legal offence separate from the actual terrorism act 
itself gives authorities much greater powers to prevent terrorism and it is a separate offence in 
almost all the developed and developing economies.  
1.31 The Financial Action Task Force (FATF) 40 Recommendations on Money Laundering 
Terrorist Financing are recognized under Security Council resolution 1617 (2005) and the Plan 
of Action annexed to General Assembly resolution 60/288 (2006) as important tools in the fight 
against terrorism. The FATF Recommendations are a comprehensive set of measures for an 
effective national regime to fight money laundering and terrorism financing. They call for the 
criminalization of the financing of terrorism in accordance with the International Convention for 
the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, among other actions.  
1.32 Several regional treaties and bilateral agreements on counter-terrorism and tackling of 
organized crimes have mechanisms in place to assist the member states in combating financial 
and digital terrorism.  
1.33 The United Nations General Assembly’s Ad Hoc Committee to Elaborate a 
Comprehensive International Convention on Countering the Use of Information and 
Communications Technologies for Criminal Purposes in its Sixth session held at New York 
between 21 August–1 September 2023 is the latest document under negotiation which is a 

8 
 
concerted response of the nations as a matter of priority, to develop a common criminal policy 
aimed at the protection of society against cybercrime, the use of information and 
communications technologies for criminal purposes by, inter alia, adopting appropriate 
legislation, establishing common offences and procedural powers and fostering international 
cooperation to prevent and combat such activities more effectively at the national, regional and 
international levels. India had also participated in this negotiation.  
 (iv) CRBN Threats 
1.34 Potential threat from Chemical, Radiological, Biological and Nuclear (CRBN) includes 
use of CRBN materials by non state actors in the form of dirty bombs, dispersal devices and bio 
weapons. The 9th Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) Review Conference was held in 
Geneva from 28 November–16 December 2022. It decided to establish a Working Group (WG) 
open to all States Parties to identify, examine and develop specific and effective measures, 
including possible legally-binding measures, and to make recommendations to strengthen and 
institutionalize the Convention in all its aspects. The WG will meet annually. The first 
substantial meeting of the WG took place in Geneva from 7-18 August 2023. Notably, and in a 
positive departure from work in previous BWC Review Conference intersessional periods, one 
of the mandates of the WG has been identified as ‘measures on compliance and verification’. 
The 9th BWC Review Conference decided to develop with a view to establishing a mechanism 
open to all States Parties to facilitate and support the full implementation of international 
cooperation and assistance. The WG will make recommendations in order for this mechanism to 
be established. The 9th BWC Review Conference also decided to develop with a view to 
establishing a mechanism to review and assess scientific and technological developments 
relevant to the Convention and to provide States Parties with relevant advice. The WG will make 
recommendations in order for this mechanism to be established. The 9th BWC Review 
Conference created one new position at the BWC Implementation Support Unit (ISU) to 
strengthen its working. 
1.35 The steps taken by India in collaboration with international community to meet the global 
challenge of CBRN terrorism are given below:-  
 
 India’s annually tables a resolution in the United Nations General Assembly First Committee 
titled "Measures to prevent terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction”. The 
resolution calls upon UN Member States to take measures aimed at preventing terrorists from 
acquiring weapons of mass destruction and to support international efforts in this regard. 
 
  India is party to all the 13 universal instruments against terrorism, including the International 
Convention for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism (ICSANT). 
 
  India is a party to the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material (CPPNM) 
and its Amendment. 

9 
 
 
  India has been implementing commitments under UN Security Council Resolutions 1540 and 
1373, in its resolve to fight against terrorism and proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.   
 
 India participates as a member of multilateral export control regimes towards the goals of non-
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and its delivery systems, related materials, 
equipment and technologies. This includes sharing of our best practices or implementation 
experiences in the area of export controls; participation in the development of guidelines for 
export controls and lists of materials, equipment and technologies regulated under the Missile 
Technology Control Regime (MTCR), Wassenaar Arrangement (WA) and Australia Group (AG); 
and harmonizing our national export control list (SCOMET) with that of these regimes and the 
Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG). India also engages with relevant committees of the UN on 
specific matters relating to the measures on non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction 
decided by the UN Security Council.  
 
 India continues to participate and support the work of the Global Initiative to Combat Nuclear 
Terrorism (GICNT). 
 
  India participates in the relevant work of the Nuclear Security Contact Group (NSCG).  
 
 India is committed to combating illicit trafficking of nuclear and other radioactive material, 
including through enhanced radiological surveillance; voluntary information sharing within the 
frame of relevant databases including Incident and Trafficking 36 Database (ITDB) to which 
India contributes; and ensuring that the material cannot be used by non-State actors in criminal 
or terrorist acts or non-peaceful purposes.  
 
 With regard to biological and chemical security, India actively participates in discussions at 
Biological Weapons Convention (BWC) and the Chemical Weapons Convention (CWC) aimed 
at preventing or mitigating the proliferation of biological or chemical weapons to non state actors. 
In BWC, India has made proposals for strengthening the national implementation and national 
export controls (under Article III). Likewise, India has made a proposal for strengthening the 
assistance mechanism through actualization of Art VII database in BWC in case of a bio-incident. 
We have also called for institutional strengthening of the BWC, and affirmed the need to 
negotiate a legally binding protocol for BWC and establish a compliance mechanism. 
 
          
B. Domestic Terrorism Scenario 
1.36 Terrorism in India is mainly the cross-border terrorism, sponsored by neighboring 
country. The means and methods adopted by terrorists includes infiltration through the land 
borders, sea routes, illegal immigration through sea/land routes etc.   
 
1.37 The Committee observed that India has been a victim of terrorism for more than three 
decades and enquired about the factors contributing to terrorism in India. They have been 
informed that the problem of terrorism in India is largely sponsored from across the border. 
Pakistan’s Inter Service Intelligence (ISI) has close links with terrorist outfits like Lashkar-e-

10 
 
Taiba (LeT), Jaish-e- Mohammad (JeM), Hizb-ul-Mujahideen (HM), Indian Mujahideen (IM), 
etc. and provides them safe havens, material support, finance and other logistics to carry out 
terrorist activities in India. 
         
1.38 The Ministry of Home Affairs, in a written reply furnished to the Committee, has stated 
that the  issue of cross-border terrorism sponsored from across the border had been raised with 
the Government of Pakistan, when situation was conducive for talks between the two countries. 
The last Home Secretary level talks between India and Pakistan were held in the year 2011. 
There has been no high-level interaction with the Government of Pakistan in the last three years.  
 
1.39 However, Government consistently raises the issue of Pakistan’s continuing support to 
cross-border terrorism and terrorist infiltration at the bilateral, regional and multilateral level. 
Government has also briefed its Counter Terrorism partner countries and the international 
community at large on the continued concerns of cross-border terrorism emanating from Pakistan.  
 
1.40 When enquired about the dimensions of terrorism prioritized by India and stressed upon 
regularly at the regional and international fora, the Ministry stated that India has highlighted 
cross-border terrorism regularly at the regional and international fora. On 12 January 2021, 
speaking in the Security Council at an open debate on counter-terrorism, the External Affair 
Minister, S. Jaishankar called for greater commitment of international community towards zero 
tolerance for terrorism, effective action by member states and proposed an eight-point action 
plan to counter the menace of terrorism, which include, i) summon the political will – no 
justification or glorification of terrorism, ii) no double standards - terrorists are terrorists, 
distinctions are made only at our own peril, iii) no political instrumentalization of UN Sanctions 
regimes – no blocking or holding on listing requests without any reason, iv) objective enlisting 
and delisting of terrorists, terrorist entities in UN sanctions regimes – not to be done on political 
or religious considerations, v) discourage exclusivist thinking and be on guard against new 
terminologies and false priorities, vi) recognize the linkage to organized crime, vii) support and 
strengthen the international counterfinance standards such as those propagated by FATF, and viii) 
strengthen multilateral counter terrorism architecture under purview of UN office for counter 
terrorism by providing greater funding and resources to it.  
 
1.41 Recently, India organized a special meeting of UN CTC in India on 28-29 October 2022. 
The Special Meeting of the CTC discussed a wide-range of counter terrorism related issued 
under the following three themes: countering terrorist exploitation of Information and 
Communication Technologies (ICTs); countering terrorism financing – threats and opportunities 
related to new payment technologies and fundraising methods and threats poses by terrorist use 
of Unmanned Aerial Systems (UAS). 
 
1.42 Responding to a query regarding India’s position in relation to other countries in the 
Global Terrorism Index 2022 and the action plan being formulated to improve India’s status in 
this regard, the Ministry has stated that in the Global Terrorism Index 2022 prepared by the 
Institute of Economics and Peace, India is ranked at number twelve (12). The Govt. has taken 
various steps to curb the menace of terrorism in the country, including strengthening of legal 
framework, streamlining of intelligence gathering mechanism, setting up of NIA for 

11 
 
investigation and prosecution of terror related cases, establishment of various hubs of NSG, 
stepping up of border and coastal security, modernization of police forces. 
 
1.43 India’s efforts at counterterrorism has been highlighted by the Secretary (West) in the 
Ministry of External Affairs during the course of evidence on 29 March 2023 as given below: 
 “….our efforts at counterterrorism began in 1996 by proposing the Comprehensive 
 Convention on International Terrorism which is still a work in progress. It still has not 
 been accepted by several countries for a variety of  reasons. Thereafter, I think globally 
 9/11 gave an impetus to the counterterrorism narrative. In our case, it was 26/11. You 
 could also argue that Mumbai in 1993 was also one of the major reasons why we have 
 taken this narrative to our heart and there is no multilateral, bilateral, or regional interface 
 that India has which does not touch on the subject of counterterrorism. 
 As of today, we have 50 extradition treaties. We have additional extradition arrangement 
 with 12 countries. Agreements on mutual legal assistance in criminal matters are 
 enforced with  39 countries. We have 28 bilateral agreements and MoUs in security 
 cooperation. India’s Financial Intelligence Unit has signed 48 agreements with its 
 counterpart FIUs in other countries.  
 I am happy to report that the Delhi Declaration is now part of the lexicon of counter-
 terrorism narrative globally, and it will keep finding space for itself; And, the fact is that 
 the Delhi Declaration focused on envisaging the way forward for addressing the 
 challenges faced with emerging technologies for terrorist purposes. So, this is looking 
 ahead”. 
1.44 Regarding international cooperation to counter terrorism, the Additional Secretary in the 
Ministry of Home Affairs during the course of evidence on 10 November 2022 stated: 
 “As regards international cooperation to counter terrorism, our agencies have been 
 cooperating with sister agencies of other countries on counter terror capacity 
 enhancement.   NSG conducts joint training and capacity building courses for friendly 
 foreign countries in the field of counter terrorism and counter improvised explosive 
 devices.  Till now, it has trained 1590 personnel of friendly countries. NIA also organizes 
 various workshops, training programmes with agencies of other countries.   
 It has arrangements with Federal Bureau of Investigation of United States, French experts 
 and European Union. NIA has also entered into Memorandum of Understanding with the 
 Royal Canadian Mounted Police for swift exchange of information and collaboration for 
 capacity building among other investigational matters.  
 Efforts for enhanced cooperation with neighbouring countries to check smuggling of fake 
 currencies, which is one of the channels for terror financing, are being made. A 
 Memorandum of Understanding has been signed between India and Bangladesh to 
 prevent and counter smuggling of fake currency notes. Standard Operating Procedure has 
 been agreed upon by the two countries designating the nodal contact points in the border 
 districts of both the countries for exchange of information. Joint Task Force meetings are 
 held regularly in India and Bangladesh to review the action taken on issues of fake 
 currency notes”.  

12 
 
1.45 When asked about the efforts made by the Government to check use of drones, virtual 
currencies and encrypted communications by terrorists and the nature of international 
cooperation in this regard, the Ministry has provided the following information: 
 
(i) Implementation of Drone Rules by Ministry of Civil Aviation.  
 
(ii) Drone and Anti-Drone courses are being run by NSG for State Police Forces and Central 
Armed Police Forces (CAPFs).  
 
(iii) Procurement of Anti-Drone equipment's to counter Rogue Drones.  
 
1.46 To combat the menace of virtual assets, India's law enforcement infrastructure, both at 
the Centre and in all States and Union Territories (UTs), is developing its capacity and 
infrastructure. Besides, RBI issued advisories to regulate the crypto currency market in India.  
 
1.47 As regards encrypted communications, the Information Technology Act 2008, Section 
66(F); IT rules 2009, IT Rules (Intermediary Guidelines and Digital Media Ethics Code) Rules 
2021 and subsequent amendment of 2022 provide Legal Framework for Encrypted 
Communications.  
 
1.48 Concerns have been raised by India in various bilateral and multilateral security related 
meetings including meetings of Joint Working Group (JWG) on Counter Terrorism, BIMSTEC, 
SCORATS, BRICS, UN, FATF, Colombo Security Conclave etc. 
 
1.49 In a written reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has stated that there is 
adequate focus to counter the threat from cyber terrorism. The URL/Domains & signature of 
malicious mobile based applications associated with suspicious terrorist activities are promptly 
being blocked under Section 69A of IT Act 2000 through MeitY.   
 
1.50 The mandate of the National Investigation Agency has been expanded by including 
Cyber Terrorism in the list of scheduled offences.  
 
1.51 Apart from the agencies working in the area of cyber security, a National Counter 
Ransomware Task Force has been constituted to mitigate the ransomware attacks in the country.   
 
1.52 India is making concerted efforts for collaborating with countries and agencies at 
international level to enhance the cooperation in the area of cyber security through exchange of 
information, capacity building etc. A more collaborative effort is also being made within the 
country to enhance the capabilities of agencies working in the area of cyber security and cyber 
crime.   
 
1.53 Elaborating on the strategy/approach of the Government as well as the challenges in 
prevention of use of cyberspace for terrorism and terrorist related activities, the Ministry, in a 
written reply, has informed that Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In), has 
been designated under Section 70B of the Information Technology Act, 2000 to serve as the 
national agency in the area of cyber security incident response.  

13 
 
 
(i) CERT-In has formulated Cyber Crisis Management Plan (CCMP) for countering cyber-
attacks and cyber terrorism for implementation by all Ministries/Departments of Central 
Government, State/UT Governments and their organizations. In addition, guideline documents 
and templates have been published to assist development and implementation of sectoral Crisis 
Management Plans. CCMP provides strategic framework to coordinate recovery from a cyber-
crisis.  
 
(ii) Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) has created a panel of ‘IT 
security auditing organizations’ for auditing, including vulnerability assessment and penetration 
testing of computer systems, networks & applications of various organizations of the 
Government and organizations across sectors. 
 
(iii) National Cyber Coordination Centre (NCCC) project has been launched by CERT-In with 
the objective to generate situational awareness of existing and potential cyber security threats 
and enable timely information sharing for proactive, preventive and protective actions by 
individual entities. Among others, Intelligence and Investigation agencies are also involved as 
stakeholders in the National Cyber Coordination Centre (NCCC) of CERT-In. 
 
(iv) Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) is collected, studied, analysed & generated by CERT-In 
and provided to Law Enforcement and intelligence agencies for immediate appropriate actions.  
 
(v) Strengthening International cooperation to effectively deal with cyber security issues has 
been one of the main focus areas of the Government. 
 
 This aspect is being dealt with by way of security cooperation arrangements in the form 
of Memorandum of Understandings (MoUs) between Indian Computer Emergency Response 
Team and its overseas counterpart agencies that are willing to work together and share 
information in a timely manner for preventing cyber incidents and cyber-attacks as well as 
collaborating for providing swift response to such incidents.  
 
 CERT-In entered into cooperation agreements in the area of cyber security with CERTs of 
11 countries. At present such Memorandum of Understandings (MoU) have been signed with 
Bangladesh, Brazil, Egypt, Estonia, France, Israel, Japan, Maldives, Nigeria, Uzbekistan and 
Vietnam. 
 
(vi) Cyber security mock drills are being conducted to enable assessment of cyber security 
posture and preparedness of organisations in the Government and critical sectors. CERT-In 
participates and contributes in the cyber security drills and exercises conducted by international 
forums such as QUAD and Counter Ransomware Initiative. 
 
1.54 Lack of global regulation in use of cyberspace for terrorism and terrorist related activities 
is a challenge. Without proper regulation, virtual assets, crowd funding are becoming a virtual 
safe haven for the financial transactions of criminals and terrorists. It requires responsible 
behaviour and cooperation within the States to counter the challenges.  

14 
 
1.55 During the course of evidence on 29 March 2023, the Committee pointed out the need to 
be proactive in regard to cyber attacks and sought to know the coordination between India and 
ICANN as well as the outcome of negotiations for having internet root servers in India.  The DG 
CERT-In responded as under: 
 “We had a major negotiation on the root server.  They have agreed for putting up a 
 cluster.  We are negotiating with them….Probably, we will get a cluster of 18 servers 
 which will be now based somewhere in India.  That is a good beginning….. 
 Looking at the way India is developing -- our digital systems, internet, 5G, telecom, 
 digital infrastructure, etc. -- they are now looking at India and they cannot ignore India. 
 Now, we are negotiating with a bit of strength and we are hopeful that we should be able 
 to get some part of it to start. We are hopeful that we will be seeking some kind of a 
 board  level position in the coming AGM, which is likely to take place early next year. 
 So, we  are moving in that direction. That is important”. 
 
1.56 On the role of social media platforms/networks towards radicalization and recruitment of 
youth in terrorism and the precautionary measures proposed to be taken by the Government to 
curb the same, the Ministry has stated as under:- 
 The prevalence of internet, especially the Social Media and OTT platforms has been exploited 
by the terrorist groups and terrorists for the radicalization and recruitment of vulnerable and 
brainwashed youths. In order to mitigate and confront the problem of such radicalization and 
violent extremism, the country has adopted whole-of-the-Government approach taking all potent 
stakeholders of the society, especially community and the family, on board. 
 
 The easy availability of radicalizing materials (audios, videos and literature), preaching 
extremism and openly denouncing other religions has contributed to radicalisation. The 
Government recognizes the misuse of internet and social media platforms for proliferation of 
global terrorism through radicalisation, recruitment, planning and execution of lone wolf attacks.   
 
 On one hand, measures to confront institutions, individuals and ideas that promote 
radicalization and violent extremism are being adopted, while on the other hand, efforts are being 
made to create an environment conducive to individuals and institutions committed to bring 
communal harmony and peaceful co-existence in the society. These two strands form the 
bedrock of Indian approach towards countering radicalization. Most importantly, a large majority 
of such measures are primarily Community-owned and Community-driven. 
 
 The Graded Police Response, like other counter and de-radicalization initiatives, takes on 
board the affected community by involving the local community representatives in the process. 
This adds to the legitimacy of the Policing Process in the eyes of affected communities. Family 
members are one of the most potent stakeholders in the process of counter radicalization. They 
are extremely efficient a player as far as Signaling, Mitigation or Countering Radicalization is 
concerned. Realizing the importance of family members, Graded Police Response actively 
involves them in counter radicalization process. 
 

15 
 
1.57 The steps/initiatives being taken by India to strengthen international cooperation in 
countering and exploitation of cyber space for propaganda, radicalization and recruitment by 
terrorist groups including global terrorist groups are given below:  
 
i. Strengthening cooperation with all stakeholders to effectively deal with cyber security 
issues has been one of the main focus areas of the Government. As such, this aspect is being 
dealt with by way of security cooperation arrangements in the form of Memorandum of 
Understanding (MoU) between Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) and its 
overseas counterpart agencies that are willing to work together and share information in a timely 
manner for preventing cyber-attacks as well as collaborating for providing swift response to 
cyber security incidents.  
 
ii. Currently, the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) has 11 active 
Bilateral agreements in the form of MoUs in the area of cyber security with counterpart agencies 
in Bangladesh, Brazil, Egypt, Estonia, France, Israel, Japan, Maldives, Nigeria, Uzbekistan, 
Vietnam.  
 
iii. Cyber security mock drills are being conducted to enable assessment of cyber security 
posture and preparedness of organisations in the Government and critical sectors.  
 
(a)  CERT-In contributed and participated in QUAD Counter-Terrorism working group exercise 
in October 2022. The objective of the exercise was to build consensus on developing 
framework to counter terrorism including cyber terrorism, information exchange and 
harmonization of crisis response plan. 
(b)  CERT-In in collaboration with Cyber Security Agency (CSA), Singapore conducted an 
International cyber security exercise “Synergy” for 13 Countries as part of the International 
Counter Ransomware Initiative- Resilience Working Group in August 2022. 
(c)  CERT-In along with European Centre of Excellence for Countering Hybrid Threats 
conducted a Joint Workshop and Table Top Exercise (TTX) on Cyber Vectors of Hybrid 
Influencing and Countering Hybrid Influencing in August 2018 in New Delhi. Hybrid 
influencing involves coordinated and synchronized actions that deliberately targets 
democratic states’ and institutions’ systemic vulnerabilities through a wide range of means. 
During the program multiple sessions were conducted for creating situational awareness on 
Global Cyber Norms & Legal Framework for countering Hybrid Influencing including 
radicalisation and best practices to counter influencing through cyber venues.  
 
1.58 When enquired whether the Government is considering/has made use of soft 
interventions with the objective of reducing the lure of terrorism, especially among the youth, 
the Ministry has stated that India follows a holistic and comprehensive approach to counter 
religious extremist activities based on the tenets of the Indian Constitution which enshrines the 
inalienable Fundamental Rights of its citizens, Rule of Law, etc.  The strategy to counter 
radicalization is holistic; from addressing the underlying conditions that promotes the growth 
and spread of violent extremism and building community resilience to radicalization through 
education and support, early intervention and rehabilitation programs and implementing 
appropriate legal regimes, consistent with ensuring respect of human rights and fundamental 

16 
 
freedoms.  Family members are one of the most potent stakeholders in the process of counter 
radicalization. They are extremely efficient a player as far as Signaling, Mitigation or 
Countering Radicalization is concerned and therefore are involved in counter radicalization 
process.   
 
1.59 Measures to neutralize institutions/individuals spreading radicalization and 
simultaneously promoting an environment, conducive to individuals committed to communal 
harmony and peaceful co-existence have been the bedrock of Indian approach. Most importantly, 
all such endeavors are primarily community-owned and community-driven thus covering all 
sections of the society.  Further, Government’s welfare measures are aimed at the uplifting 
minority communities towards progress and mainstream, which are also being carried out 
through varied exercises like, ensuring universal coverage of various govt. welfare schemes 
without discrimination, Special schemes for un-served and undeserved communities/areas, 
Promotion of composite culture and co-existence among various communities, efforts for 
ensuring fair representation of minorities and other less represented communities in all spheres 
of life. 
 
1.60 On the issue of terror financing, the MEA in its background note has stated that India's 
Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU-IND) has signed 48 agreements with its counterpart FIUs of 
other countries for exchange of financial intelligence.   
 
1.61 The Department of Revenue, in a written reply furnished to the Committee, has stated 
that the Government of India is committed to tackle the menace of terror financing in the country 
and prepare strategies accordingly. Further, it keeps on evolving its strategies to be on par with 
the terrorists’ organizations.  In terror financing cases, Directorate of Enforcement (ED) has a 
very important role both in tracing the proceeds of crime and its laundering by the terrorists. ED 
not only attaches the proceeds of crime and takes possession of the same, thus deprives the 
accused of enjoying fruits of crime. Further, Prosecution Complaints is also filed against the 
terror accused under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act (PMLA) for confiscation of 
proceeds of crime and conviction of accused. The Directorate of Enforcement takes action both 
under the provisions of PMLA and the Foreign Exchange Management Act (FEMA), 1999 to 
disrupt the TF activities in India.   
 
1.62 Regarding the mechanism for countering the use of crypto currencies and virtual assets in 
terror financing, the Department of Revenue has stated that Virtual Digital Assets (VDA) Service 
Providers (SPs)  have been notified as Reporting Entities (REs) with effect from 07.03.2023 
under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act 2002. 
 
1.63 Further, in order to enable the service providers to effectively detect and report suspicious 
transactions to FIU-IND, FIU-India has factored in various scenarios that could be indicative of 
terror financing into the Red-Flag indicators to be issued for the said Reporting Entities.  
 
1.64 Directorate of Enforcement has the requisite expertise to investigate cases involving 
crypto currencies and virtual assets and has successfully identified trail of money laundering 
done by the use of crypto currencies and virtual assets in several money laundering cases other 
than TF cases. However, as on date, in none of the cases related to terror financing being 

17 
 
investigated by the Directorate of Enforcement, use of crypto currencies and virtual assets have 
been noticed/identified. 
 
1.65 India’s preparedness regarding threats of Chemical, Biological, Radiological and Nuclear 
(CBRN) weapons as instruments of terrorism has been enumerated below: 
 
 India has system for prevention and detection of threats of malicious acts involving radioactive 
and nuclear materials, and also preparedness for response to such emergencies. Department of 
Atomic Energy (DAE) along with Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA) is the nodal 
department/ministry for any crisis arising due to release of radioactivity in public domain within 
country (including any release due to malicious act using radioactive material). 
 
  DAE has prepared its ‘Crisis Management Plan’ which includes response during any crisis 
scenario arising due to malicious act during transport of radioactive/nuclear material or explosion 
of RDD (Radiological Dispersal Device). A ‘Crisis Management Group’ exists at DAE, to deal 
with any nuclear or radiological emergency in public domain. A 24x7 ECR (Emergency 
Communication Room) is maintained at DAE for emergency communications. 
 
  The Atomic Energy Regulatory Board (AERB) provides robust regulatory measures for the 
security of nuclear and radiological material through continuous oversight carried out by a large 
pool of highly trained and specialized manpower dedicated for this purpose.  
 
 In line with its commitment to maintaining effective security of radioactive sources throughout 
their life cycle, India has recently carried out an exercise on a campaign mode towards 
identification and safe disposal of unused radioactive -3- sources of Category 1 & 2.   
 
 India has also recently further strengthened its national procedures for both export and import 
of radioactive sources based on the supplementary guidelines.  
 
 To augment the national Nuclear Detection Architecture in India, 10 more Emergency 
Response Centers (ERC) have been set up in addition to the existing 25 ERCs. India has also 
developed “State of the Art” Radiation Monitoring Systems for large areas with radioactive 
contamination in case of nuclear and radiological emergencies/threats. The system can search, 
detect and provide quick qualitative and quantitative assessment of orphan radioactive sources. 
Training courses on 'Preparedness and Response to Radiation Emergencies' are routinely carried 
out for the response agencies and radiation emergency exercises are conducted at regular 
intervals.  
 
 India has an inter-ministerial Counter Nuclear Smuggling Team (CNST) to strengthen the 
nuclear security regime by covering prevention, detection, and investigation including forensic 
support, and prosecution of the act of smuggling, and to strengthen the inter-agency platform for 
the exchange of information, coordination, cooperation to counter nuclear smuggling incidents to 
prevent illicit movement of radioactive material. 
 
  NDRF is the lead Federal agency mandated to deal with all natural and man-made disasters in 
the country except fire.  It is one of the agencies that responds to CBRN contingencies in the 

18 
 
public domain in coordination with other stakeholders under the supervision of Nodal 
Ministries/Agencies. 180 CBRN Teams each with a strength of 47 are authorized in NDRF and 
placed at various locations across the country.  
 
 So far 9134 NDRF Officers and men have undergone CBRN Training including 61 
Radiological Safety Officers (RSOs), 255 Training of Trainers (ToTs) Course, 120 Master 
Trainers (MTs) Course and 34 Mobile Radiation Detection System (MRDS) Course.  
 
 NDRF conducts capacity building by conducting training of first responders including the 
SDRF, other stakeholders, Community and Volunteers.  Besides awareness generation is also 
conducted by NDRF during the conduct of the Community Awareness Programme (CAP).   
 
 NDRF also conducts Mock Drill Exercises in coordination with other stakeholders and expert 
agencies in CBRN. So far 316 Mock Exercises in CBRN contingencies have been conducted 
with 97,603 beneficiaries.  
 
 CBRN Equipment profile of NDRF is periodically upgraded in coordination with DAE/DRDO.  
 
 The National Authority Chemical Weapons Convention (NACWC) is a national focal point for 
effective implementation of the chemical weapon Convention. To ensure that India meets all its 
obligations under the international treaty, India has mainstreamed a lot of legal instruments to 
ensure its implementation.  
 
 The NACWC is entrusted with the responsibility of fulfilling the national obligations of India 
under the Convention.  
 
 Because the threat of chemical terrorism stems largely from the accessibility of toxic chemicals, 
the NCCWC addresses necessary measures to prohibit or restrict the accessibility of dual-use 
chemicals to indirectly address the challenge of countering terrorism.  
 
 To raise awareness and to mitigate any possible chemical emergencies, a mobile application 
has been created by NACWC on the UMANG platform in October 22 and can be searched under 
the name of the National Authority Chemical Weapons Convention.  
 
 The efforts of NACWC resulted in India becoming the world's fourth country to have both a 
Single Small Scale Facility for Protection Purpose (SSSF) and an Other Facility for Protection 
Purpose (OFPP).   
 
 India is one of the initial signatories of the Chemical Weapons Convention. The Convention 
facilitates the exchange among States Parties of information and equipment that can help protect 
populations against the effects of a chemical weapons attack. It also mandates the Technical 
Secretariat to provide assistance to States Parties that request it. The OPCW’s Rapid Response 
and Assistance Mission (RRAM) fulfils this task and can be deployed upon request of a State 
Party to the Chemical Weapons Convention that is in need of emergency assistance due to a 
chemical attack.   
 

19 
 
 The OPCW conducts a number of training courses either by itself or in collaboration with other 
States Parties for more effective implementation of the provisions of the Convention.  
          
1.66 When during the course of evidence on 10 November 2022, the Committee sought to 
know the internal situation with respect to resource management, capacity enhancement on 
countering terror funding and inter-department and inter-agency coordination on cyber security, 
the Additional Secretary in the Ministry of Home Affairs stated: 
 “….efforts have been made on sharing resources by using common platforms, enhancing 
 capacity by training of agencies and State Police forces and pooling available experts of 
 the central agencies. This task is mainly being implemented by Intelligence Bureau, 
 National Investigation Agency and National Security Guard.  
 The Police Modernisation Scheme of MHA has been the major channel through which 
 the State Police forces are helped in modernising their equipment and other things so that 
 they can also take a lead in this fight against terrorism as a first responder. Multi Agency 
 Centre at IB has seen a constant upgradation in its capacity. All the agencies at the Centre 
 as well as at the State level are meeting regularly at Delhi and at the State level also once 
 in a week or fortnight.  
 As regards the coordination on cyber security front, cyber space has been a complex and 
 dynamic environment for interaction among the people. It requires proactive protection of 
 networks, IT infrastructure and critical information. National Cyber Security Coordinator 
 at the National Security Council Secretariat has been assigned the responsibility of 
 coordinating with different agencies at the national level for cyber security policy 
 matters.  
 National Critical Information and Infrastructure and Protection Centre, NTRO has been 
 tasked for taking required measures including research and development of cyber security 
 of critical information and infrastructure. The Indian Computer Emergency Response 
 Team(CERT-In) is the nodal agency responding to computer security incidents and 
 dissemination of information on cyber incident forecasts and alerts of cyber security 
 incidents and also formulating emergency measures for checking cyber security 
 incidents.  
 In the Ministry of Home Affairs, Cyber and Information Security Division was created in 
 2017 keeping in view the current scenario. Its mandates include cyber security. Indian 
 Cybercrime Coordination Centre (I4C) has been established. This works particularly for 
 coordination on the front of cybercrime which may affect the cyber security also. 
 National Intelligence Grid is functional now with the objective to tackle and bolster 
 counter terrorism capacity of the country. Intelligence Bureau is the domestic agency 
 responsible for analysing cyberspace contents relating to extremism, cyber terrorism and 
 anti-national agenda. State liaison agencies are also being helped by way of training 
 programme, modernisation and enhancing their capabilities by many central agencies”.  
1.67 When asked to state the extent to which India’s approach and strategy towards combating 
terrorism in the country during the last three decades has been able to achieve the desired results, 

20 
 
the Ministry has stated that as a result of India's persistent efforts, there is enhanced concern in 
the international community at terrorism emanating from across our borders including the 
continuing activities of internationally designated terrorist entities and individuals such as 
Jamaat-ud Dawa (JuD), Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), Hizbul Mujahideen,  
Al Qaida and other global terrorist groups. 
 
1.68 Many terrorist entities and individuals who find shelter in neighbouring countries and are 
also engaged in terrorism against India have been proscribed by the United Nations (UN), the 
European Union and other countries. On 01 May 2019, the United Nations 1267 Sanctions 
Committee designated Masood Azhar, the self styled leader of Jaish-e-Mohammad as a UN 
proscribed terrorist.  
 
1.69 Whole of the society approach along with the concerted and coordinated efforts of 
agencies/stakeholders and the actions taken by the Govt., the menace of terrorism has been 
curbed to a larger extent in the country. 
 
1.70 While summing up his opening statement during evidence on 29 March 2023, the 
Secretary (West) in the Ministry of External Affairs stated: 
 
“To conclude, I may suggest that MEA is approaching holistically to counterterrorism at 
 regional and international level. Such an approach has helped us to bring our core 
 concerns of cross-border terrorism to mainstream national discourse, which has led to the 
 isolation of Pakistan and force it to take action on the terrorists operating and supported 
 by Pakistan. At the same time, India is at the forefront of global standards setting on the 
 issue of counterterrorism. Delhi Declaration is a testimony to that. Meanwhile, India’s 
 leadership in countering terror financing will be well established once No Money for 
 Terror Ministerial Conference Secretariat becomes functional in India. By having the No 
 Money for Terror Secretariat in India, we will take ownership and leadership of the 
 counterterrorism financing process.  
Our agencies have gained a lot over the years to international cooperation, particularly 
 cooperation in intelligence sharing and capacity building. This leads to an overall robust 
 response of the Government of India”.  
1.71 The Committee note that despite efforts by the international community, including 
those led by the UN Security Council, terrorism continues to remain the gravest threat to 
humanity. The threat of terrorism is also expanding at a rapid pace into new areas, 
particularly in Asia and Africa. Aerial terrorism is gradually emerging as a potent form of 
terrorism while the share of digital mode of terror financing also increases. The 
Committee, however, note that there is no universally accepted definition of terrorism or 
global terrorist or terrorist activities. India had proposed the adoption of the 
Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism (CCIT) to the UN General 
Assembly in 1996,  but  a consensus could not be achieved so far due to the position taken 
by some member countries on qualifying the definition of terrorism. The Committee 
understand that several countries have expressed support for CCIT and the leaders of 

21 
 
prominent multilateral groupings–NAM, BRICS and SCO have called for an early 
finalization of CCIT. The Committee are of the firm view that a comprehensive and 
coordinated approach is the need of the hour for countering global terrorism, especially as 
terrorists are increasingly making use of advancements in technologies to achieve their 
vicious goals. It also goes without saying that a formal Convention within the UN Counter 
Terrorism Architecture would be the most appropriate forum to start with. The 
Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to step up its diplomatic efforts at multilateral, 
regional and bilateral levels stressing the need for the international community to reach an 
agreement on the draft text of the CCIT at the earliest. The Government may also take 
initiatives for a global counterterrorism movement focusing on abuse of new and emerging 
technologies like internet, social media platforms, encrypted messaging services, crypto 
currencies, unmanned aerial vehicles/drones, etc. for preventing and neutralizing terrorist 
threats and activities.  
        (Recommendation No. 1) 
 
1.72 The Committee note that Global Terrorist Groups (GTGs) such as ISIS and Al 
Qaida are highly dependent on the encrypted messaging platforms for instructions and 
preparations of terror attacks, revival of their sleeper cells and have  heavily made use of 
crowd funding and virtual currencies like bitcoins for terror financing. In addition to 
instigating lone wolf attacks, GTGs also radicalize youth through misinformation and false 
narrative via extensive use of social media platforms. The global response to GTGs includes 
passing of UN Resolutions, designation as terrorists, inclusion in the FATF grey and black 
list, prohibition of accesses of advanced technologies in the hands of terrorist, 
bilateral/joint operation in investigation of terror related cases, etc. Despite counter 
terrorism efforts across the globe, GTGs remain as a major challenge for global peace and 
security. In view of the threat to the global community and to humanity at large, the 
Committee desire that collective global efforts against GTGs should be strengthened and 
intensified through active coordination and effective implementation of the various UN 
resolutions and strict adherence to FATF norms for restricting the source of their 
financing. The Committee also urge the Government to initiate vigorous campaigns for 
collective action against these terrorist groups to prevent them from building capabilities to 
carry out terrorist attacks and disturbing global peace and security. 
         
        (Recommendation No. 2) 

22 
 
 
1.73 The Committee note that with the emergence of new technology and rise in the 
usage of internet, increase in cyber incidents is a global phenomenon. However, there is 
lack of global regulations in the use of cyberspace for terrorism and terrorist related 
activities. Though India proposed to include terrorism as a separate crime under the 
ongoing process of UN Ad Hoc Committee towards having  a comprehensive international 
convention to counter the use of ICTs for criminal purposes, there was no significant 
support from member States to include ‘cyber terrorism’ as a separate crime. The 
Committee further note that  effort is still being made to include ‘serious crime’ which may 
indirectly include cases related to terrorism on dual criminality basis and subject to certain 
other conditions and safeguards as would be agreed upon, in the proposed convention by 
member States. The Committee are of the view that a multifaceted approach involving the 
active participation of stakeholders including global cyber security and law enforcement 
organizations at regional and international levels is imperative to counter global cyber 
terrorism. The Committee, therefore, stress the need for the Government to make 
persistent efforts at the UN Ad Hoc Committee and work towards deeper cooperation 
amongst UN member countries so that a comprehensive international convention to 
counter the use of ICTs for criminal purposes is evolved at the earliest. The Committee also 
urge the Government to take initiatives for promoting regional and international 
cooperation in developing joint strategies, cyber threat intelligence sharing mechanisms, 
cross border initiatives, capacity building etc. to combat cyber terrorism. 
        (Recommendation No. 3) 
 
1.74 The Committee note that ransomware attack is one of the methods used in cyber 
terrorism. In counter ransomware, there are 36 member States and EU who are 
coordinating with each other globally. The Committee further note that there is a 
combination of reasons for non participation of the other countries in the coordinated 
global efforts to counter cyber terrorism. The Committee understand that some countries 
do not perceive the threat or feel that they would actually be affected by cyber attacks.  
However, the fact remains that cyber terrorism is a global phenomenon and the borderless 

23 
 
nature of cyberspace demands effective coordination amongst the international community 
to ensure that no country is compromised causing a cascading effect on the other countries. 
The Committee, therefore, urge the Government to make all out efforts for bringing the 
remaining countries under the coordinated efforts in countering ransomware for global 
cyber security.        
         (Recommendation No. 4) 
1.75 The Committee note that regional and global terrorist organizations around the 
world have increasingly been using radicalization as tool to attract vulnerable sections of 
the society like impressionable youth. Radicalization has been taken as a central theme in 
the meetings of multilateral bodies like UN CTC, GCTF, SCO-RATs, etc. The GCTF has 
shared Best Practices on the issues of countering violent extremism and counter 
radicalization measures have been taken up in SAN-PVE and Colombo Security Conclaves. 
Project based collaboration has been started by EU countries to foster exchange and 
cooperation in prevention of radicalization. The Committee further note that various 
initiatives are underway by multilateral organizations like GIFCT, EU etc., for cyber 
patrolling to prevent misuse of internet by terrorists to spread radicalization. Trail of 
Dedicated Institution based mechanism in the vulnerable areas are also undergoing. The 
Committee are aware of the challenges being faced by India due to radical and extremist 
thoughts influencing the populace, particularly the youth and desire that the Government 
should be proactive and maintain close coordination with multilateral and regional bodies 
engaged in the prevention and spread of radicalization. India should also play a prominent 
role in working out/evolving counter radicalization measures and institution based 
mechanisms in collaboration with the international community for preventing the spread 
of radicalization and extremist ideology.  
        (Recommendation No. 5) 
 
1.76 The Committee note that virtual currency, online payment and dark web 
transactions have attracted great attention from terrorist organizations. As per the report 
of the Financial Action Task Force(FATF) on Money Laundering entitled ‘Emerging 
Terrorism Financing Risks,’ virtual currencies such as  Bitcoin, has increasingly been used 

24 
 
in various illegal and criminal activities, facilitating money laundering and terrorist 
financing. The Committee are aware of the rapid stride in financial technology innovation 
by terrorists/terrorist groups and desire that the Government should work in close 
coordination with FATF and other bodies to bring about qualitative improvement in the 
regulatory capacity so that terrorists/terrorist organizations do not get new opportunity for 
financing of terrorism and related activities. Underlining the need to evolve a global 
regulatory consensus on bitcoin, the Committee urge the Government to make coordinated 
efforts amongst the global community in this regard.  
        (Recommendation No.6) 
1.77 The Committee note that 40 recommendations on Money Laundering and terrorist 
financing of the FATF are recognized under the UN Security Council Resolution 1617 and 
the Plan of Action annexed to General Assembly resolution 60/288 as important tools in the 
fight against terrorism. These recommendations call for the criminalization of the 
financing of terrorism in accordance with the International Convention for the 
Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism, among other actions. The Committee further 
note that several regional treaties and bilateral agreements on counter-terrorism and 
tackling of organized crimes have mechanisms in place to assist the member States in 
combating financial and digital terrorism. The Committee are of the view that effective 
implementation of the FATF recommendations as well as the actionable points under the 
International Convention for the Suppression of the Financing of Terrorism by the global 
community would go a long way in combating money laundering and terrorist financing 
and hence, urge the Government to spread awareness on the need to take prompt action in 
this regard. The Committee also urge the Government to take initiatives for strengthening 
the mechanisms for combating financial and digital terrorism under various regional 
treaties and bilateral agreements.  
        (Recommendation No. 7) 
1.78   The Committee note that potential threat from Chemical, Radiological, Biological 
and Nuclear (CRBN) includes use of CRBN materials by non state actors in the form of 
dirty bombs, dispersal devices and bio weapons. India actively participates in the 
discussions at the Biological Weapons Convention and the Chemical Weapons Convention 

25 
 
aimed at preventing or mitigating the proliferation of biological or chemical weapons to 
non state actors. The Committee further note that in the 9th Biological Weapons 
Convention Review Conference held in Geneva from 28 November–16 December 2022, it 
was decided to establish a Working Group open to all States Parties to identify, examine 
and develop specific and effective measures, including possible legally-binding measures 
and make recommendations to strengthen and institutionalize the Convention in all its 
aspects. The Committee desire that the Government should extend all support and 
cooperation towards establishing a legally binding protocol and compliance and 
verification mechanism for the Biological Weapons Convention and the Chemical Weapons 
Convention to check the proliferation of biological and chemical weapons in the hands of 
terrorists.   The Committee also desire that India should closely cooperate and collaborate 
with the UN and its relevant Committees/agencies as well as the member States in 
preventing terrorists from acquiring weapons of mass destruction. 
        (Recommendation No.8) 
1.79 The Committee note that the problem of terrorism in India is largely sponsored 
from across the border. Terrorist outfits are provided safe havens, material support, 
finance and other logistics by Pakistan’s ISI to carry out terrorist activities in India. The 
Committee are of the firm view that terrorist attacks in the country can only be curbed by 
dismantling all terrorist networks and safe havens and recommend that an action 
plan/mechanism may be worked out at the earliest for effective sharing of resources, 
capacity enhancement and pooling of available experts of the Central agencies as well as 
coordinated global efforts to root out terrorist networks and safe havens in the 
neighbouring countries.  
        (Recommendation No. 9) 
1.80 The Committee note that the issue of cross-border terrorism in India was raised 
with the Government of Pakistan when situation was conducive for talks between the two 
countries. There has been no high-level interaction with the Government of Pakistan in the 
last three years. However, the Government consistently raises at the bilateral, regional and 
multilateral levels, the issue of Pakistan’s continuing support to cross-border terrorism and 
terrorist infiltration and has also conveyed its continued concerns of cross-border 
terrorism emanating from Pakistan to its Counter Terrorism partner countries and the 

26 
 
international community at large. The Committee desire that the Government should keep 
up its diplomatic efforts to expose the nefarious activities of Pakistan and its links with 
various terrorist outfits at every fora while strengthening its land borders and sea routes to 
prevent terrorist infiltration. The Committee also desire that the Government should make 
regular assessment on whether the situation is conducive for resumption of high-level 
interaction with the Pakistan Government and take steps accordingly. 
        (Recommendation No. 10) 
1.81 The Committee note that the Government has made various efforts to check the use 
of drones, virtual currencies and encrypted communications by terrorists such as, 
implementation of Drone Rules by Ministry of Civil Aviation; Drone and Anti-Drone 
courses being run by NSG for State Police Forces and Central Armed Police Forces; 
Procurement of Anti-Drone equipments to counter Rogue Drones; developing capacity and 
infrastructure of India's law enforcement infrastructure, both at the Centre and in all 
States and Union Territories to combat the menace of virtual assets; issuance of advisories 
by RBI to regulate the crypto currency market in India; legal framework under the 
Information Technology Act 2008, IT Rules 2009, IT Rules 2021 and subsequent 
amendment of 2022, etc. The Committee further note that concerns have been raised by 
India in various bilateral and multilateral security related meetings. The Committee 
acknowledge the important steps taken by the Government in providing legal framework 
to check the use of drones, virtual currencies and encrypted communications by terrorists 
but further desire that collaborative efforts amongst different Ministries and agencies 
should be strengthened and enforcement of existing laws should be strictly monitored to 
ensure its effective implementation. Efforts may also be made at various bilateral, regional 
and multilateral fora to work out a Joint Action Plan to curb the use of drones, virtual 
currencies and encrypted communications by terrorists. 
 
        (Recommendation No. 11) 
1.82 The Committee note that the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-
In) which has been designated under Section 70B of the Information Technology Act, 2000 
to serve as the national agency in the area of cyber security incident response, has been 
undertaking a number of measures including formulation of Cyber Crisis Management 

27 
 
Plan (CCMP) for countering cyber-attacks and cyber terrorism for implementation by all 
Ministries/Departments of Central Government, State/UT Governments and their 
organizations; creation of a panel of IT security auditing organizations; launching of 
National Cyber Coordination Centre  project; Cyber Threat Intelligence, Cyber security 
mock drills, etc. CERT-In has also entered into cooperation agreements in the area of 
cyber security with CERTs of 11 countries, viz, Bangladesh, Brazil, Egypt, Estonia, France, 
Israel, Japan, Maldives, Nigeria, Uzbekistan and Vietnam. The Committee further note 
that such MoUs have also been signed at the industry level. Keeping in view the fact that 
cyber attacks have become a global phenomenon, the Committee feel that greater global 
cooperation on cyber security is needed and urge the Government to secure the 
participation of all the countries in this regard. The Committee also urge the MEA and 
Indian Missions abroad to facilitate signing of such MoUs between CERT-In and CERTs 
of other countries as well as MoUs at the industry level. 
        (Recommendation No. 12) 
1.83 The Committee further note that negotiations are ongoing with ICANN for setting 
up cluster of internet root servers in India. The Committee desire that the negotiations 
should be concluded at the earliest so that internet root servers are based in India to enable 
immediate response to cyber/malware attacks and contain/check such attacks at the ISP 
gateways itself. In view of the increasing incidents of cyber/malware attacks perpetrated by 
terrorists/terrorist organizations, the Committee stress the need to be proactive and not 
merely reactive towards such incidents and urge the Government to evolve a strong 
mechanism for collaborative efforts amongst the agencies concerned. The capabilities of 
these agencies to counter cyber/malware attacks in the country may also be enhanced. 
        (Recommendation No. 13) 
 
1.84 The Committee note the misuse of internet and social media platforms by 
terrorists/terrorist groups for the radicalization and recruitment of vulnerable and 
brainwashed youths. The easy availability of radicalizing materials like audios, videos and 
literature; preaching extremism and openly denouncing other religions have contributed to 
radicalization. The Committee further note that a whole-of-the-Government approach 

28 
 
taking on board all potent stakeholders of the society, especially community and the family, 
has been adopted to mitigate and confront the problem of radicalization and violent 
extremism. Under the Graded Police Response, family members of affected persons have 
actively been involved in counter radicalization process. The Committee acknowledge the 
important role of the community and family towards countering  radicalization, but desire 
that legal measures for prevention of radicalization and recruitment of vulnerable and 
brainwashed youths should be put in place/enforced effectively. The Committee also desire 
that suitable action may be taken against those persons responsible for disseminating 
audios, videos and literature preaching extremism and openly denouncing other religions.  
 
        (Recommendation No. 14) 
1.85 The Committee note that India's Financial Intelligence Unit (FIU-IND), responsible 
for coordinating and strengthening the efforts of national and international intelligence, 
investigation and enforcement agencies in pursuing the global efforts against money 
laundering and terrorist financing has signed 48 agreements with its counterpart FIUs of 
other countries for exchange of financial intelligence. The Committee are aware of the 
increasing use of internet technology, virtual currency, online transactions, etc. by 
terrorists/terrorist groups and desire that the Government should maintain active 
coordination with the FIUs of other countries to ensure seamless flow of financial 
intelligence so as to prevent money laundering and financing of terrorism in the country. 
The Government should also explore the opportunity of signing more agreements with the 
remaining countries and constantly work towards strengthening the collection and sharing 
of financial intelligence through effective networking of FIUs at national, regional and 
international levels. 
        (Recommendation No. 15) 
 
1.86 The Committee note that the Government is committed to tackling the menace of 
terror financing in the country and keeps on evolving its strategies to be on par with the 
terrorists’ organizations.  To counter the use of crypto currencies and virtual assets in 
terror financing, Virtual Digital Assets Service Providers have been notified as Reporting 
Entities with effect from 07.03.2023 under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act 2002. 

29 
 
Further, in order to enable the service providers to effectively detect and report suspicious 
transactions, FIU-India has factored in various scenarios that could be indicative of terror 
financing into the Red-Flag indicators to be issued for the said Reporting Entities. The 
Committee also note that as on date, use of crypto currencies and virtual assets have not 
been noticed/identified in any of the cases related to terror financing being investigated by 
the Directorate of Enforcement. The Committee, however, desire that the Government 
should remain vigilant in the matter and tighten its detection and identification mechanism 
so that no cases of terror financing through crypto currencies and virtual assets occur in 
the country. The Committee also urge the Government to keep one step ahead of the 
financial technology innovation of terrorists/terrorist organizations.  
        (Recommendation No. 16) 
 
1.87 The Committee note that the Atomic Energy Regulatory Board provides robust 
regulatory measures for the security of nuclear and radiological material through 
continuous oversight. India also has an inter-ministerial Counter Nuclear Smuggling 
Team to strengthen the inter-agency platform for the exchange of information, 
coordination, cooperation to counter nuclear smuggling incidents to prevent illicit 
movement of radioactive material. The Committee further note that the National Disaster 
Response Force under the Ministry of Home Affairs is one of the agencies responding to 
CBRN contingencies in the public domain in coordination with other stakeholders while 
the National Authority Chemical Weapons Convention is a national focal point for 
effective implementation of the Chemical Weapons Convention to which India is one of 
the initial signatories. The Committee acknowledge the mechanisms/systems put in place 
by the Government to deal with CBRN threats from terrorist organizations but desire that 
coordination amongst all the agencies and stakeholders concerned should be streamlined 
for prevention and quick response to CBRN contingencies. As there has been a quantum 
shift in terms of access to advanced technology by terrorist groups, the Committee 
undescore the need to remain vigilant and keep abreast of such terrorist groups through 
continuous updation/induction  of advanced technology, intelligence sharing, capacity 
enhancement through training of agencies and security personnel, CBRN security 
exercises, increased collaborations and close cooperation with the international 

30 
 
community in this regard. The Committee also desire that assessment of India’s 
preparedness for response to CBRN threats in the country should be a continuous process 
so that the Government is fully prepared to face such threats and is not found wanting in 
the event of CBRN emergencies/attacks.  
        (Recommendation No. 17) 
 
1.88 The Committee note that the Ministry’s holistic approach to counterterrorism at 
regional and international level has helped in bringing our core concerns of cross-border 
terrorism to mainstream national discourse. Many terrorist entities and individuals who 
find shelter in neighbouring countries and are also engaged in terrorism against India, 
have been proscribed by the United Nations, the European Union and other countries. The 
Committee understand that India is now at the forefront of global standards setting on the 
issue of counterterrorism and our agencies have also gained a lot over the years through 
international cooperation. The Committee, however, feel that a lot more needs to be done 
especially in the light of the prevailing domestic terrorism scenario. The Committee stress 
the need to build up on what we have gained after due assessment of the areas which are 
lacking, and focus on Joint efforts and strengthening international cooperation in the fight 
against the scourge of terrorism.  
 
        (Recommendation No. 18) 
 
     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
GUIDING PRINCIPLES AND LEGAL FRAMEWORKS FOR COUNTERING 
TERRORISM 
 
A.  Guiding Principles of India's Counter Terrorism Strategy 
 
2.1 India's counter terrorism doctrine is based on the principle recognized by the UN that 
terrorism in all its forms is a criminal activity and is not justified on any ground be it political, 
religious, ethnic, social, etc.   
 
2.2 The guiding principles and salient features of India’s counter-terrorism doctrine/strategy 
are enumerated below:  
 
•     India is guided by its policy of 'zero tolerance' towards terrorism and is committed  
to combating terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. 
• India has a federal structure, where the primary responsibility for 'Public Order' and 
'Police' rests with the State Governments as per the 7th Schedule of the Constitution 
of India. However, in matters such as terrorism, the Central Government assists the 
State Governments acknowledging it as a shared responsibility. 
• The problem of terrorism in India is largely sponsored from across the border. The 
Pak I SI has close links with terrorist outfits like Lashker-e-Toiba (LeT), Jaish-e-
Mohammad (JeM), Hizbul Mujahideen (HM), Indian Mujahideen (IM), etc. and 
provides them safe havens, material support, finance and other logistics to carry out 
terrorist activities in India. 
• India has adopted multi-pronged CT approach. There are various laws to back Counter 
Terrorism efforts of the Government. However, Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 
(UAPA), 1967 and the National Investigation (NIA) Act, 2008 are at the fulcrum of 
Indian legal framework dealing with challenges from terrorism. 
• The UAPA is the flagship law to deal with terrorist activities and matters connected 
therewith.  The Act has been amended in 2004, 2008, 2013 and 2019 to make it more 
stringent. 
• NIA was constituted under the NIA Act 2008 as a Special Agency for investigation 
and prosecution of terror related offences. The Act was amended in year 2019 to 
expand its jurisdictions  to  Indian property/citizens outside  India and to include 
certain new offences to its schedule. 
   There is close and effective coordination amongst intelligence agencies/security agencies 
of the Centre and the State levels through Multi Agency Centre (MAC) platform for 
prompt action. 
 
  India is a staunch supporter of the United Nations' Global Counter-terrorism Strategy 
(GCTS) adopted in 2006. India is party to the 13 sectoral conventions on terrorism 

32 
 
adopted by the United Nations and is complying with the UN sanction regime against 
individuals and entities  vide UNSCR 1267, 1373 and subsequent resolutions. India has 
entered Joint Working Group (JWG) on counter terrorism with 26 countries and 3 
international organizations, namely, the European Union (EU), Bay of Bengal Initiatives 
for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) and BRICS.  
 
   Terror Finance is oxygen for terrorism and to disrupt its channels effectively, the UAPA 
has criminalized the whole gamut of terrorist financing, which is aligned with the UN 
Security Council Resolutions 1267 and 1373. MHA has issued comprehensive 
guidelines for implementation of this provision. 
 
   India has become a full member of the Financial Action Task Force (FATF), an inter-
Governmental Body, which makes recommendations relating to Combating of 
Financing of Terrorism, Money Laundering, etc. In June, 2010. India is also a 
member of FATF Styled Regional Bodies (FSRBs), viz., Eurasia Group on Combating 
Money Laundering and Financing of Terrorism (EAG) and Asia Pacific Group on 
Money Laundering (APG). 
 
   India actively engages with various regional bodies like ASEAN, ARF, SCO, EAS, 
G-20, BRICS and SAARC on counter terrorism. India is also member of several 
regional groups, on counter terrorism subjects, such as ASEAN, ARF, SCO, EAS, G-20, 
BRICS and SAARC. 
 
2.3 The factors shaping India’s counter-terrorism strategy are as under: 
 
 India faces cross border terrorism. India's troubled neighbourhood, especially 
Afghanistan, Pakistan etc poses significant risk to India's security and has implications 
upon Counter Terrorism strategy of India 
 Besides, India remains a recruitment target for global terror groups that are operating in 
South Asia, viz. AQ & ISIS. These groups are active in cyber space and radicalizing the 
vulnerable population to conduct terror attacks. 
      
2.4 The Government has also taken the following initiatives in counter terrorism unilaterally 
and through multilateral approach :- 
 
 Counter Terrorism strategy of the country is multi-pronged. This includes removing the 
conditions conducive to terrorism through a whole-of society approach, identification of 
vulnerable sections prone to exploitation by the radical elements, disseminating counter- and 
alternative narratives in close association with Civil Society/NGOs, as well as coordinated 
counter-radicalisation and CT efforts by different law enforcement agencies. 
 
 The UA (P) Act, 1967 is the principal legal regime for CT purposes with NIA as the Lead 
Investigating Agency to investigate terror related cases. Government of India through relevant 

33 
 
amendments has made terror related laws more effective to deal with the emerging terrorist 
threats and challenges. 
 
  Multi Agency Centre (MAC), the nodal agency at the centre coordinates and disseminates 
threat inputs with its member agencies including state Police for prompt counter action. Besides, 
agencies like FIU, ED, DRI, FICN Coordination Group (FCORD), Narco Coordination Centre 
(NCORD), etc. deal in a coordinated manner with the menace of Money laundering/Terror 
Financing.  
 
 India is fully compliant with various United Nations Security Council Resolutions on 
terrorism. Besides agency-to-agency liaison, India has entered into various structured co-
operation and dialogue mechanisms like JWG on CT, MLAT, ET etc. with the countries of 
interest. In addition, CT and other security concerns are also pursued through various 
regional/multilateral forums like SAARC, BIMSTEC, SCORATS, BRICS, UN, FATF etc. The 
fundamental rationale of all anti-terrorism measures is to protect human rights and democracy. 
The values of human life, dignity and freedom are enshrined in and guaranteed by the 
Constitution of India and any divergence is addressed in the court of law. India has set-up an 
overarching mechanism for monitoring human right violations covering all aspects of UN 
Charter, with institutions like NHRC, SHRCs, etc. An independent media as well as robust 
internal oversight mechanisms complement each other in keeping over reach on the part of 
executive under check.  
 
Multilateral  Approach  
 
  India is a staunch supporter of the United Nations’ Global Counter-terrorism Strategy (GCTS) 
adopted in 2006. India is party to the 13 sectoral conventions on terrorism 7 adopted by the 
United Nations. India is not only fully complying with the UN sanction regime against 
individuals and entities vide UNSCR 1267, 1373 and subsequent resolutions, but has also, 
under its existing laws, declared 44 entities as terrorist organizations and 56 individuals as 
designated terrorists.   
 
 India has entered Joint Working Group (JWG) on counter terrorism with 27 countries and 
three international organizations, namely, the European Union (EU), Bay of Bengal Initiatives 
for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC) and BRICS.  
 
 India has Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty with 45 countries, Extradition Treaties with 50 
countries.  
 
  India has become a full member of the Paris-based FATF on the 25th June, 2010.  India is 
also a member of FATF Styled Regional Bodies (FSRBs), viz., Eurasia Group and Asia Pacific 
Group (APG). India actively engages with various regional bodies like ASEAN, ARF, SCO, 
BRICS and SAARC on counter terrorism.  
 
 India is also member of several regional groups, on counter terrorism such as ASEAN, ARF, 
SCO, BRICS and SAARC. 

34 
 
 
2.5 When asked whether India’s counter terrorism doctrine has undergone any change in the 
recent years, the Ministry has informed that due to emerging challenges in Counter Terrorism 
domain with increasing use of technology, drones, misuse of internet by terrorists, crypto 
transactions, use of encrypted communication platforms and social media by terrorists, the 
counter terrorism mechanism has been evolving continuously in terms of amendments in 
legislations, facilities and equipments for Law Enforcement Agencies, technological 
upgradation, skill enhancement of personnel etc. 
 
2.6 In its Background note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has also stated that 
India’s call for zero tolerance to terrorism, rejection of any justification for any act of terror, 
delinking terror from religion, need for all countries to unite in the fight against terrorism, has 
found greater acceptance among the international community and is reflected in a number of 
outcome documents issued after bilateral Summits and other meetings with various countries and 
at regional and multilateral fora. 
 
2.7 The outcome documents issued after bilateral summits and other meetings with various 
countries and at regional  and multilateral fora are as under:  
 (a) 1st India-Australia Annual Summit : Joint Statement (March 2023) 
(b) India-Italy Joint Statement during the State Visit of the President of the Council of 
Ministers (Prime Minister) of the Italian Republic to India (March 2023) 
(c) India-Egypt Joint Statement during the State visit of President of Egypt to India 
(January 2023) 
(d) Press Statement of the BRICS Minister of Foreign Affairs  and International Relations 
on the margins of the 77th Session of the United Nations General Assembly (September 2022) 
(e) Samarkand Declaration of the Council of Heads of State of Shanghai Coopertion 
Organisation (September 2022) 
(f) India-Maldives Joint Statement during the Official visit of President of Maldives to 
India (August 2022) 
(g) XIV BRICS Summit Beijing Declaration (June 2022) 
(h) India-France Joint Statement during the visit of Prime Minister to France (May 2022) 
(i) Quad Joint Leaders’ Statement (May 2022) 
(j) Joint Statement : 6th India-Germany Inter-Governmental Consultations (May 2022) 
(k) Joint Statement on the Visit of the Prime Ministr of UK to India: Towards shared 
security and prosperity through national resilience (April 2022) 
(l) Joint Statement : India-Australia Virtual Summit (March 2022) 
 

35 
 
2.8 On being asked whether any review/monitoring has been done on the status of 
implementation of such outcome documents, the Ministry has informed that counter-terrorism 
is an ongoing issue. It is regularly monitored at various levels. 
 
2.9 The Committee enquired whether the evolving India’s counter terrorism 
strategy/mechanism has been able to keep pace with emerging challenges in counter terrorism 
domain with increasing use of technology, drones, misuse of internet by terrorists, crypto 
transactions, use of encrypted communication and social media platforms by terrorists, etc. the 
Ministry responded that the following have been successful due to the India’s CT efforts on 
global arena: 
 
 The UN CTC visited India for the first time to review Mumbai Terror Attack and its 
aftermath in order to bring perpetrators to justice. 
 
 Last year India held annual Chair-ship of BRICS to deliberate and address issues related 
to Counter Terrorism, in unison with GCTF members. 
 
 India is a participant in several prominent virtual meets of UNOCT, UNODC, BRICS 
and GCTF, explicitly to condemn and eradicate terrorism in all its forms and 
manifestations through coordinated international efforts. 
 
 There is regular exchange of information with foreign partners/agencies and efforts are 
underway to setup recognized CT Nodal points for expeditious exchange of actionable 
inputs. 
 
 India assumed the rotating Presidency of G20 from 01 December 2022 to 30 November, 
2023 wherein the issues of counter terrorism and radicalization were deliberated. 
         
B.  Legal Frameworks for Countering Terrorism at Regional and International Levels 
 
2.10 The legal framework for combating transnational crimes and terrorism includes Mutual 
Legal Assistance Treaties (MLATs) in Criminal Matters, Extradition Treaties, Memoranda of 
Understanding/Agreements on Security Cooperation and Memoranda for setting up Joint 
Working Group on Countering Terrorism which are signed between India and other countries, 
etc. Such Treaties/ Agreements are signed with a view to securing cooperation and assistance to 
enable India to counter terrorism, organised crimes, drug trafficking, money laundering, 
counterfeiting of Indian currency notes, etc. Legal action against wanted terrorists in other 
countries is also pursued through the INTERPOL. Till date India has signed extradition treaties 
with 50 countries (yet to be ratified by Kazakhstan and Morocco) and has extradition 
arrangements with another 12 countries. 
 
      

36 
 
2.11 During the course of evidence on 10 November 2022, when the Committee enquired 
whether a uniform convention at the United Nations level was visualized at any point of time 
instead of signing extradition treaty with respect to various States, the Secretary (East), MEA 
submitted:  
 “…. the challenge in the United Nations is this. In the comprehensive convention on 
 terrorism, you know, there are issues of definition and also other issues. So, getting all 
 the 193 members agreeing on a particular document becomes a long grown out process. 
 Not to say, it does not happen. I think, the Biological and Chemical Weapons Convention 
 and other treaties are case in point where things are done. So, while that could be 
 followed, I think, we have been approaching the bilateral method. We have other 
 countries I know where we have ongoing discussions and negotiations to conclude the 
 extradition treaty. But your point is well taken, Sir. That is something to be considered 
 upon”.  
2.12 The Ministry has also stated that Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty (MLAT) in Criminal 
Matters is one of the significant instruments to improve and facilitate effectiveness of contracting 
countries in the investigation and prosecution of crimes, including crimes related to terrorism by 
providing necessary legal framework for rendering/ receiving legal assistance in criminal 
matters. As on date, Treaties/Agreements on Mutual Legal Assistance in criminal matters are in 
force with 41 countries. 
2.13 The names of the countries with which India signed Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty 
Agreement in Criminal Matters are given below: 
 
S.No.  
NAME OF COUNTRY 
1. Turkey 2. Switzerland 3. United Kingdom 
4. Canada 
5. Russia 6. France 7. United Arab Emirates 
8. Kyrgyz Republic 
9. Kazakhstan 10. Uzbekistan 11. United States of America 
12. Mongolia 

37 
 
13. Tajikistan 14. Ukraine 15. South Africa 
16. Kuwait 17. South Korea 
18. Bahrain 19. Thailand 20. Singapore 21. Mauritius 
22 . Belarus 23. Spain 
24. Bulgaria 25 . Vietnam 
26. Mexico 27 . Egypt 28. Australia 29. Iran 30. Hong Kong SAR 
31. Bosnia & Herzegovina 
32. Bangladesh 33. Sri Lanka 
34 . Myanmar 35 Indonesia 36. Malaysia 
37 . Azerbaijan 38. Israel 39. Oman 
40 . Cambodia (Not in Force) 
41 . Morocco (Not in Force) 
42 Maldives 

38 
 
43 . Brazil (Not in Force) 
44 . Belgium  
45 . BIMSTEC Convention (Not in Force) 
46. Poland (Not in Force) 
2 . 1 4  T h e  details of Agreements/MoUs signed by India on Security Cooperation with 
other countries are as under: 
S. No. Name of country and subject of the Agreement/MoU 
1.  Agreement on cooperation and interaction between the Ministry of Home Affairs of Republic of India and the Federal Security Service of the Russian Federation. 
Note: Amendments to this Agreement were made vide Protocol signed on 28.11.2017. 
2.  Agreement between India and Bulgaria for cooperation in combating organized crime, international terrorism and illicit participating in Narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances 
3.  Agreement between the Government of the Republic of India and Government of Romania regarding cooperation in combating organized crime, international terrorism, illicit trafficking of narcotics drugs and psychotropic substances and other illegal activities 
4.  Cooperation Agreement between The Government of the Republic of India and The Government of the Arab Republic of Egypt to Combat all forms of Criminal Acts particularly Terrorist, Transnational and Organized Crimes. 
5.  Memorandum of Understanding on Joint cooperation for combating crime between Government of the Republic of India and the Government of Oman 
6.  Agreement on cooperation to combat Terrorism organized crime and illicit Trafficking in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances between the Government of the Republic of India and The Government of the Italian Republic 
7.  Cooperation agreement between Government of Republic of India and Government of Republic of Croatia on Combating International Illicit Trafficking in Narcotics Drugs and psychotropic substances, international terrorism and organized crime 
8.  Agreement between The Government of the Republic of India and The Government of Republic of Poland on cooperation in 

39 
 
combating organized crime and international terrorism 
9.  Agreement on combating international terrorism, organized crime and illicit drug trafficking between India and Cambodia 
10.  Agreement between India and Cyprus on combating international terrorism, organized crime and illicit drug trafficking. 
11.  MoU between India and Qatar on cooperation on Security and Law enforcement matters. 
12.  Agreement on combating international terrorism , organized crime and illicit drug trafficking between India Bangladesh 
13.  India-US counter terrorism cooperation initiative. 
14.  MoU  between  India  and  Maldives  on  combating  international terrorism, illicit drug trafficking and enhancing bilateral cooperation in capacity building, disaster management and coastal security 
15.  Agreement  on  security  cooperation  between  India  and  United 
Arab Emirates (UAE) 
16.  Agreement on security cooperation between India and Mozambique 
17.  Agreement  on  combating  international  terrorism  and  illicit  Drug 
Trafficking with Sri Lanka 
18.  Agreement  on  combating  international  terrorism  and  illicit  Drug 
Trafficking with Sri Lanka 
19.  Memorandum of Understanding between The Ministry of Home 
Affairs of the Republic of India and The Ministry of Justice of 
Mongolia for enhancing co-operation in Border guarding , policing 
and surveillance 
20.  Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) between the Ministry of 
Home Affairs of the Republic of India and the Federal Ministry of 
the Interior of the Federal Republic of Germany on Security 
Cooperation 
21.  Agreement between GoI and Govt. of Kingdom of Bahrain on 
cooperation in combating International terrorism, Transnational 
organized Crime and trafficking in illicit drugs, narcotic drugs, 
narcotic and psychotropic substances and precursor chemicals. 
22.  Memorandum of Understanding between the Government of the 
Republic of India and the Government of Australia on cooperation 
in combating international terrorism and transnational organized 
crime (Valid up to 10 vears w.e.f. 10.04.2017) 
23.  Agreement on Cooperation between the Ministry of Home Affairs of 
the Republic of India and the Ministry of the Interior of the Russian 

40 
 
Federation 
 
24.  Memorandum of Understanding between The Ministry of Home 
Affairs of the Republic of India and The Home Office of the United 
Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland Regarding Co- 
operation and the Exchange of Information for the Purposes of 
Combating International Criminality and Tackling Serious 
Organized Crime. (Not in force) 
25.  Agreement on Cooperation between Ministry of Home Affairs of the 
Republic of India and Ministry of Public Security of the People's 
Republic of China. (Valid upto 21.10.2029) 
 
26.  Memorandum of understanding between the Ministry of Home 
Affairs of the Republic of India and the Korean National Police 
Agency of the Republic of Korea on combating  transnational crime 
and developing police cooperation (Not in force) 
27.  Agreement on Security Cooperation between the Government of 
the Republic of India and the Government of Kingdom of Saudi 
Arabia 
28.  Agreement between the Ministry of Home Affairs of the Republic 
of India and the Ministry of Internal Affairs of the Republic of 
Uzbekistan on Cooperation in the field of Combating Transnational 
Organized Crime and International Terrorism 
  
2.15 When enquired whether any proposal is under consideration for signing such 
Treaties/Agreements currently and assessment of the requirement for signing such 
treaties/Agreements with the remaining countries, the Ministry has stated that signing of 
Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty in Criminal Matters with Germany & Mozambique are at 
final stage. Further, negotiation meetings are going on with Kenya, Philippines and Nepal for 
finalisation of text of the Treaty. Proposals for signing of Security Cooperation Agreements 
etc. with USA, Brazil, Mongolia, Belarus etc. are in pipeline. 
                                                                                         
2.16 The Committee sought to know how far such Treaties/Agreements h a v e  b e e n  
beneficial in countering terrorism and related activities in India, they have been informed that 
MLAT in Criminal Matters is one of the significant instruments to improve and facilitate 
effectiveness of contracting countries in the investigation and prosecution of crime, 
including crimes related to terrorism by providing necessary legal frame work rendering I 
receiving legal assistance in criminal matters. These bilateral instruments improve the 
effectiveness of both countries in prevention, investigation, prosecution and suppression of 

41 
 
crimes and to continue cooperation between the intelligence and law enforcement agencies of 
the participants. 
 
2.17 Security Cooperation Agreements between India and other countries are signed with 
a view to establish an institutional mechanism to enhance cooperation for combating 
transnational crimes and international terrorism, cyber crimes, drug trafficking, money 
laundering, counterfeiting of Indian currency notes, human trafficking etc. These platforms 
which are established  under the security cooperation agreements etc. are used to raise 
issues of mutual concerns and explore the possibilities to address these security concerns .  
 
2.18 On the measures taken for capacity enhancement on counter terrorism, the Ministry has 
stated that in order to enhance capacity on Counter Terrorism, India has established Joint 
Working Groups on Counter Terrorism (JWG-CT) with 27 countries  namely  Australia, Canada, 
China, Egypt, France, Germany, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, Japan, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Maldives, 
Mauritius, Morocco, Netherlands, Nigeria, Philippines, Russia, Singapore, Tajikistan, Tanzania, 
Turkey, Saudi Arabia, United Kingdom, United States of America and Uzbekistan.  
2.19 India has been engaged with regional bodies such as Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-
Sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), South Asian Association for 
Regional Cooperation (SAARC), Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional 
Forum, Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO), BRICS and QUAD forum.  
2.20 Regular training courses, conferences and joint exercises are conducted in 
collaboration with State police and foreign partners to keep abreast of latest security 
methods/solutions and best practices to counter terrorism as well as in the field of emerging 
technologies. New technological tools are being procured for enhancing capacity in Counter 
Terrorism operations. 
2.21 The ambit of Multi Agency Centre dealing with Counter Terrorism has been expanded 
to include linkages of other crimes with terrorism. National Security Guard (NSG) and NIA 
nodes and capacities have been expanded to deal with Counter Terrorism responses. 
 
2.22 India has been engaged with regional multilateral bodies such as BIMSTEC, SAARC, 
and ASEAN. 
Coordination with INTERPOL 
 
2.23 When enquired about the mechanism for coordination with INTERPOL for taking 
legal action against wanted terrorists in other countries, the achievements in this regard 
including the number of legal action proposed to INTERPOL and actually taken against wanted 
terrorists in other countries, the Ministry has stated that each of member countries hosts an 
INTERPOL National Central Bureau. This connects their national law enforcement with 
other countries and with the General S ecretariat via secure global police 
communications network. Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) is designated as National 
Central Bureau for India. 

42 
 
2.24 INTERPOL Notices are used to share criminal intelligence and geolocate terrorists. INTERPOL Red Notice is used for locating and detaining criminals with the member countries.  INTERPOL maintains various database relating to terrorist and terror offences. 
2.25 NIA is the central investigation and prosecution agency for terror related offences. 
A total of 91 Red Notices relating to terror offences have been published by INTERPOL 
on behest of NIA through NCB. 
Countering Terrorism at Bilateral Level 
 
2.26 India has established Joint Working Groups on Counter Terrorism (JWG-CT) with 27 
countries namely Australia, Canada, China, Egypt, France, Germany, Indonesia, Israel, Italy, 
Japan, Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, Morocco, Netherlands, Nigeria, Philippines, 
Russia, Singapore, Tajikistan, Tanzania, Turkey, Saudi Arabia, United Kingdom, United States 
of America and Uzbekistan.   
 
2.27 Since November 2022 till date, India has organised meeting on JWG-CT with USA, 
Morocco, Canada and Egypt. In the JWG-CT meetings, India and the counterparts discussed 
issues of shared interests in combating terrorism, strengthening counter-terrorism collaboration, 
exchange of good practice and sharing of information.  
 
2.28 India-UK Round-Table on ‘Preventing Terrorist Use of Internet (PTUI) and End to End 
Encryption (E2EE)’ was held on 19 January 2023 in virtual mode.  
 
2.29 When asked whether any study on best international practices on countering terrorism has 
been conducted by the Government, the Ministry has informed that on the basis UN Counter 
Terrorism Strategy, a draft National Counter Terrorism Strategy has been formulated and shared 
with MHA. Besides, during the regular JWG-CT and other bilateral meetings best practices on 
CT have been exchanged with the participating countries. 
 
C. Legislative  Frameworks and Institutional Mechanisms for Countering Terrorism at 
the National Level 
 
(i) Framework under MHA 
 
2.30 The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (UAPA), is the flagship law to deal with 
certain unlawful activities of individuals and associations and for dealing with terrorist activities 
and matters connected therewith.  The Act defines the terrorist act as any act done with intent to 
threaten or likely to threaten the unity, integrity, security or sovereignty of India or with intent to 
strike terror or likely to strike terror in the people or any section of the people or in any foreign 
country. The Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967, has been amended in 2004, 2008, 2013 
and 2019 to make it more stringent.  
 
2.31 The UAPA Act empowers  the Central government to  declare an organization or 
individual as terrorist organization or terrorist, if it or he/she commits or participates in acts of 
terrorism, prepares for terrorism, promotes or encourages terrorism or otherwise involves in 

43 
 
terrorism.  Till date, the Government of India has declared 44 organizations as terrorist 
organizations and 56 individuals as terrorists under the said Act.   
               
2.32    The National Investigation Agency (NIA) was constituted under the NIA Act of 2008 as a 
Special Agency for investigation and prosecution of terror related offences. The NIA 
headquarters is at New Delhi and  it has  18 branch offices which are located at Hyderabad, 
Guwahati, Kochi, Lucknow, Mumbai, Kolkata, Jammu, Raipur, Chandigarh, Chennai, Imphal , 
Ranchi, Ahmadabad, Jaipur, Bhubaneshwar, Bengaluru, Patna and Bhopal. A total of 50 NIA 
Special Courts have been constituted in the States/Union Territories for speedy trial of NIA cases. 
The Central Govt. has given 568 cases to the NIA for investigation and prosecution, so far.   
 
2.33  The National Security Guard acts as the federal counter terrorism response force. NSG 
has its hubs at various places like New Delhi, Chennai, Kolkata, Hyderabad, Mumbai and 
Gandhinagar.  
 
2.34 There is close and effective coordination amongst intelligence agencies at the Centre and 
the State levels. 
2.35 Institutions like Multi Agency Centre (MAC) and Subsidiary Multi Agency Centre 
(SMAC) have been re-organized to enable it to function on 24x7 basis for real time collation and 
sharing of intelligence with central security agencies and law enforcement agencies of States for 
prompt action.  
(ii)          Mechanism under Department of Revenue  
 
2.36  The Department of Revenue is actively engaged in countering the financing of 
terrorism, both as the nodal body for international cooperation under the aegis of Financial 
Action Task Force, and as an apex coordination body for action against financing of 
terrorism.  
 
2.37  Financial Intelligence Unit–India (FIU-IND) is the Central National Agency 
responsible for receiving, processing, analyzing and disseminating information related to 
suspected financial transactions. It is also responsible for coordinating and strengthening 
efforts of national and international intelligence, investigation and enforcement agencies in 
pursuing global efforts against terror financing. FIU disseminates Suspicious Transaction 
Reports (STRs) and Cash Transaction Reports (CTRs) to intelligence and enforcement 
agencies on a regular basis. FIU-IND has negotiated and entered into bilateral MoUs with 47 
FIUs in foreign jurisdictions. It is also a member of Egmont group and exchanges 
intelligence on terrorist financing with other FIUs. 
      
2.38  When enquired about the role played by the MEA to foster international cooperation for 
facilitating exchange of financial intelligence, the Ministry has informed that India’s Financial 
Intelligence Unit (FIU-IND) has signed 48 agreements with its counterparts FIUs of other 

44 
 
countries for exchange of financial intelligence. MEA during its various interaction with foreign 
counterparts invites FIU India as per requirements of agenda. Issues of Intelligence Cooperation 
including exchange of Financial Intelligence are discussed in various Joint Working Group-
Counter Terrorism meetings. MEA also facilitates FIU to FIU exchanges between friendly 
foreign countries.  
2.39 Regarding the coordination that exists between the other investigating agencies and the 
financial intelligence unit, the Additional Secretary (Revenue) during the course of evidence on 
29 March 2023, stated as under: 
 
 “we have a multi-agency centre which is constantly working together, which includes 
 Intelligence Bureau, Cabinet Secretariat, FIU, all the law enforcement agencies, including 
 NIA, State Police, and CBI. We are all connected, and the information is shared on real-
 time basis. There are regular meetings to have an assessment of the information. The 
 report is published regularly for these agencies to share the information with each other 
 and act on it. As I said, if there is any credible information that comes out, which needs 
 action, that is shared through this inter-agency coordination to the law enforcement 
 agency to act on that”.  
(iii)        Institutional Framework under MEITY 
2.40 Government of India under the Information Technology Act, 2000 has established two 
distinct institutional mechanisms for prevention of the use of cyberspace for terrorism and 
terrorist related activities: 
I.  National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC) has been set up 
 under Section 70A of IT Act 2000 and notified as the national nodal agency in respect of 
 Critical Information Infrastructure Protection. 
 
II.  Under the provisions of section 70B of the Information Technology Act, 2000, the Indian 
 Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) is designated as the national agency for 
 responding to cyber security incidents. 
 
2.41 CERT-In entered into cooperation agreements in the area of cyber security with CERTs of 
11 countries. At present such Memorandum of Understandings (MoU) have been signed with 
Bangladesh, Brazil, Egypt, Estonia, France, Israel, Japan, Maldives, Nigeria, Uzbekistan and 
Vietnam. 
 
(iv)        Cyber Diplomacy Division of MEA 
2.42 The Committee observed that the Cyber Diplomacy Division of the MEA is the nodal 
point for discussions on cyber security issues, data protection, cyber crime and internet 
governance in consultation with other Government of India stakeholders and sought to know the 
issues discussed and consultations held with the stakeholders along with the outcome during the 

45 
 
last two years and in the current year along with the manner in which the Division coordinates 
with the stakeholders. The Ministry responded that Cyber Diplomacy Division, MEA leads the 
Cyber Diplomacy Dialogues with participation of various Government of India stakeholders like 
MHA, MEITY, CERT-In, NCIIPC, DRDO, CBI, NSCS, etc. It leads the UN Open Ended 
Working Group on Security in the use of ICTs (OEWG). The OEWG has the mandate for 2021-
25. Its meetings are held in New York. Till now 5 substantive meetings have taken place and the 
Chair of OEWG has issued two consensus annual reports. The OEWG is engaged in negotiating 
more confidence building measures, capacity building of nation states, strengthening the existing 
norms, rules and principles of State behavior, etc. The ongoing discussions in OEWG process 
have become highly politicized due to current geo-political situation, acrimonious and progress, 
if any, is extremely slow. India as proposed to establish a universal directory under the OEWG 
progress which could provide information related to initiatives, programmes, points of contact, 
etc. at one place. The Indian initiative has been taken note of. 
2.43 UN Ad Hoc Committee to elaborate a comprehensive international convention to counter 
the use of ICTs for criminal purposes (UN AHC) was established by a UNGA Resolution which 
was co-sponsored by India along with Russia and other countries. The UNGA Resolution was 
opposed by Western countries and those who were members of Budapest Convention on 
cybercrime, a regional convention. India is not a member of Budapest Convention on 
Cybercrime. Indian view was that a UN Convention on ICT crimes would have a universal 
application and hence preferable. Cyber Diplomacy Division, MEA led the Indian delegation in 
UN Ad Hoc Committee to elaborate a comprehensive international convention to counter the use 
of ICTs for criminal purposes (UN AHC) till 3rd Session. 4th and 5th Session of UN AHC was co-
led by MEA and MEITY. The 6th Session of UN AHC was co-led by MEITY and MHA as deals 
with the crimes issues and Cyber Diplomacy Division provided the diplomatic support. The draft 
text convention was discussed during the 6th Session of UN AHC but member States moved 
large number of amendments to it. Hence, Chair of UNAHC decided that she will circulate a 
final draft text convention prior to 7th and last Session of UN AHC scheduled in January / 
February 2024. MHA, MEITY and other stakeholder will examine the draft text of convention as 
and when it made available sometime in December 2023 to prepare Indian response. 
2.44 NSCS have separate Cyber Security Dialogues to specifically deal with the Cyber 
security issues. Issues related to data protection and internet governance are core areas where 
MEITY has been leading the policy making. The policy making in Cybercrime is specifically 
being dealt by MHA. On all these issues Cyber Diplomacy Division, MEA does provide 
diplomatic support in international forums on the basis of inputs received from these 
stakeholders. Cyber Diplomacy Division has been leading the working groups on ICT in BRICS, 
SCO and ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF). There has not been much progress in these forums 
due to diverse priorities of participating countries and their inter-personal relationships. The 
tangible progress under BRICS in the last working group meeting held in Johannesburg was that 
BRICS countries have exchanged the Points of Contact of their CERTs who could eventually be 

46 
 
contacted on cyber incidents. Participation in ARF forum on ICT is very diverse which includes 
major countries like USA, EU, Russia, China, Japan, Australia, some countries of Asia and 
Africa also and this forum is lead by Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN). There 
is some progress on establishing Points of Contact in this forum on voluntary basis. From India, 
NSCS and CERT-In are the Points of Contacts for reporting the cyber incidents. 
2.45   To strengthen the Indian cyber security, Cyber Diplomacy in MEA is at the forefront in 
facilitating the MOU/MOCs for CERT-In. It has been encouraging CERT-In to have 
MOU/MOCs with more and more countries. In 2020, CERT-In had 16 number of MOU/MOCs.  
Cyber Diplomacy Division has proposed to CERT-In another 27 number of MOU/MOCs in last 
two years i.e. 2022 and 2023 and the current CERT-In  MOU/MOCs are 13 and another 12 are in 
various stages of renewal.  Cyber Diplomacy Division continues to encourage and recommend 
CERT-In to initiate discussions/negotiations with majority of countries as it will help India in 
cyber security. In this regard other GOI stakeholders could help CERT-In by providing necessary 
and urgent clearances. 
                                                  
2.46 On the role played by the Cyber Diplomacy Division to secure international 
cooperation on cyber related issues along with the cyber dialogues held with other countries and 
the outcome thereof, the Ministry has informed that the developments in the Cyberspace are 
evolving. There is no specific international law that governs the cyberspace. The diplomatic 
outreach made by Cyber Diplomacy Division through Cyber Dialogues and its various 
engagements in regional, multilateral and UN processes is an ongoing process. All these efforts 
are made to put forth the Indian perspective at all these forums. In the regional, multilateral and 
UN processes, no single country determines the outcomes. Some of the tangible outcomes 
where Indian delegation participation contributed are: (i) UN GGE report 2015, (ii) UNOEWG 
2021-25 – two annual consensus reports, (iii) UN AHC ongoing negotiations, (iv) Exchange of 
CERT Points of Contacts in BRICS format, etc.  
  
2.47  On being asked to suggest ways and means for a more pro-active role by the Cyber 
Diplomacy Division globally and in collaboration with the National Critical Information 
Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC) and the Indian Computer Emergency Response Team 
(CERT-In) under the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology at the national level to 
prevent cyber attacks by terrorists/terrorist organizations, the Ministry has stated that  Cyber 
space is increasingly becoming important for all countries. Realizing its importance, all the 
major countries like USA, Russia, China, UK, France, Germany, EU, Japan, Brazil, etc have 
deployed large diplomatic teams to safeguard their interests and articulate their views in the field 
of cyber space at the international level. The efficiency and effectiveness of Cyber Diplomacy 
Division in MEA could be increased by providing enhanced man power so that it can play more 
pro-active role globally.  

47 
 
2.48 National Critical Information Infrastructure Protection Centre (NCIIPC) and the Indian 
Computer Emergency Response Team (CERT-In) under the Ministry of Electronics and 
Information Technology should proactively provide regular updates to the Cyber Diplomacy 
Division on the incidents that come to their knowledge and their origins so that the information 
could be leveraged diplomatically at appropriate time and level. This can also open up 
opportunities for international collaboration, capacity building and building trust. 
2.49 Regarding the efforts made by the MEA for cooperation and coordination with MeitY 
and other stakeholders/agencies in the country to address the cyber security challenges 
emanating from terrorist threats/activities are lack of cyber security skilled manpower, lack of 
indigenous cyber security products, lack of global regulations in the use of cyber space for 
terrorism and terrorist related activities, the Committee have been informed that  Cyber 
Diplomacy Division, MEA leads the Cyber Diplomacy Dialogues with participation of various 
Government of India stakeholders like MHA, MEITY, CERT-In, NCIIPC, DRDO, CBI, NSCS, 
etc. Issues related to data protection and internet governance are core areas where MEITY has 
been leading the policy making. The policy making in Cybercrime is specifically being dealt by 
MHA. On all these issues Cyber Diplomacy Division, MEA does provide diplomatic support in 
international forums on the basis of inputs received from these stakeholders. CT Division of 
MEA also invites MEITY, CERT-IN, NTRO, NSCS etc in various counter terrorism related 
meetings as per requirements of agenda. 
2.50   When enquired whether MEA has an institutionalized mechanism for cooperation and 
coordination with CERT-IN, the Ministry has stated as under:- 
 
(i) CERT-In coordinates with Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) of MEA for 
any cyber security incidents pertaining to MEA.   
(ii) CERT-In has conducted cyber security exercise on detecting & countering cyber 
threats for officials of MEA in October, 2022.  
(iii) CERT-In also contributed as part of MEA led delegation for QUAD Counter 
Terrorism Workstream meeting and Tabletop Exercise 2022 hosted by Australia in 
26-29 October, 2022.   
(iv) CD Division, MEA has been facilitating the international cooperation of CERT-In 
with other countries. 
   
  
(v) Inter-Ministry Cooperation  
 
2.51 All concerned Ministries, Departments and Agencies of Government of India are 
represented in the JWG-CT meetings depending on the agenda of the meetings.  These include, 
inter alia, Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Intelligence Bureau, Cabinet 
Secretariat, National Investigation Agency, National Security Guard, Bureau of Police Research 

48 
 
and Development, Financial Intelligence Unit, Department of Revenue, National Security 
Council Secretariat, Central Bureau of Investigation, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security etc, thus 
presenting a whole of the Government approach in countering terrorism.   
 
2.52 On being asked to elaborate on the mechanism for coordination and cooperation amongst 
various agencies of the Government as well as with foreign intelligence agencies for checking 
radicalization of youth, planning attacks and executing terror strikes by Global Terrorist Groups 
and their affiliates through social media platforms/cyberspace, the Ministry has stated that 
Government has increased its engagements of experts of CT related efforts bilateral as well as 
multilaterally. During bilateral engagements like Joint Working Groups on CT, among other 
issues, topics like countering misuse of internet by terrorist groups, including misuse of latest 
and advanced technologies viz Crypto currencies, Virtual Assets, Darknet Unmanned Aerial 
Systems etc. are regularly discussed with a view to bring together a common consensus, 
exchange of best practices including mutual agreement on training programmes, etc. 
Government of India also regularly raise these issues on multilateral forums such as SCO-RATS, 
UNOCT, GCTF other UN allied meetings, BIMSTEC, BRICS, EU etc. 
 
2.53 India hosted special session of UNCTC (October 28-29,2022) wherein the overarching 
theme was countering the use of internet and drones by terrorist groups, In another meeting, 
NMFT (November 18-19, 2022), the issues of emerging technologies in the field of terror 
financing were discussed. On Regional level, Government adopted pro-active approaches to 
identify and accordingly, countering the use of modern technologies by terrorist groups. Apart 
from amending legislations, Government institutions have been dedicating substantial resource 
to prevent the Cyber access for procuring the latest technologies and use by terrorists. Besides, 
social monitoring cell, graded police response for countering online radicalization were initiated. 
MAC platform is also being used for capacity building as well as for real time coordination 
among LEAs responsible for counter terrorism. 
2.54 When enquired whether there is any mechanism for coordination amongst MEA, 
Ministry of Home Affairs and Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), Enforcement 
Directorate to prevent the menace of terrorist financing and use of cryptocurrencies and virtual 
assets, the Ministry has informed that MAC platform is being used as a coordinated platform 
among various ministries including MHA, MEA and MoF etc on the issue of CT including 
terror financing. FCORD in IB also provide a platform for dissemination of information related 
to terror financing. A Standing Focus Groups (SFGs) on Economic Intelligence has also been 
functional on MAC platform for coordination among stakeholder on the issue of terror 
financing. 
2.55 Regarding the mechanism for cooperation amongst various 
Ministries/Departments/Agencies for dealing with terror financing, monitoring and intelligence 
sharing, the representatives of the Department of Revenue stated during the course of evidence 
on 29 March 2023 as under:  
 “In India, the mechanism for intelligence sharing is a MAC mechanism. It is called Multi 
 Agency Coordination Network, which is created under the Ministry of Home Affairs. So, 

49 
 
 under the MAC mechanism, all the intelligence agencies in the country are part of the 
 information sharing protocol. Regarding all the information that is coming from the 
 suspicious transaction, reports are generated from the financial system and we get the 
 reports from EGMONT Protocol, where all the FIUs are interconnected. Any alert that is 
 raised from the financing point of view, which can point out to any terror activity, that 
 gets reported to Indian FIU. Then, FIU India shares that information in the MAC 
 platform. In the MAC, the Intelligence Bureau, RAW and State police agencies also 
 come in. So, this information gets collated and if there is any credible actionable 
 information, that gets  passed on to the law enforcement agencies to act on it.  
 
 There have been a number of cases where intelligence has been found to be credible and 
 action has been taken , both, as part of the preventive part for terror financing as well as 
 for the investigation purpose. It is because, if there is a case registered of terror financing, 
 then, in investigation, the information of intelligence agencies has been used and FIU is 
 actually an agency which also helps the investigation agencies to have detailed forensic 
 investigation of financial flow of any funding that comes to any terror suspect or any 
 terrorist organisation.  There  has been a recent spurt in activity of terror financing 
 through technology as has been rightly pointed out. There has been a perceptible increase 
 in activity of terror financing  through virtual currencies which includes bit coin etc.  
 There was a recent instance in Bangalore in November 2022 where there was a bomb 
 blast in a three-wheeler and there was a suspect called Mohd. Sharikh who was arrested.  
 When we did the investigation in the financial flows in his account, we found that small 
 amounts of money had come through the virtual assets. Through the international virtual 
 asset exchange the money had come. It was tracked but the travel rule, that is the 
 originator information from where the money has come in, was not accessible because of 
 the protocol of information sharing not being very clear. Internationally, on money flow 
 or through virtual assets, that is a major challenge that we are facing.  As has been 
 pointed that the Ministry of IT has brought guidelines for implementation of KYC and 
 CDD of the virtual asset service providers, the Ministry of Finance has also issued a new 
 notification under the Prevention of Money Laundering Act where all virtual asset service 
 providers have been covered as a service which has to now to take the KYC and CDD of 
 all customers who are there on their portal and they also have to become reporting 
 entities to report to suspicious transactions to FIU. It has been implemented from  7th of 
 March this year.  Now, we have brought all the virtual service providers on board and the 
 red flag indicators are being finalised. Now, they will be reporting  to us in case any 
 suspicious transaction through virtual assets including bit coins are transacted”.   
      
2.56 The Committee note that India's counter terrorism doctrine is based on the 
principle recognized by the UN that terrorism in all its forms is a criminal activity and is 
not justified on any ground be it political, religious, ethnic, social, etc.  India is guided by 
its policy of 'zero tolerance' towards terrorism and has adopted a multi-pronged 
approach in regard to counter terrorism. Besides being fully compliant with various United 
Nations Security Council Resolutions on terrorism, India has entered into various 

50 
 
structured co-operation and dialogue mechanisms like Joint Working Group on Counter 
Terrorism, Mutual Legal Assistance Treaties, Extradition Treaties, etc. with the countries 
of interest. India also pursue counter terrorism and other security concerns through 
various regional/multilateral forums like SAARC, BIMSTEC, SCO RATS, BRICS, UN, etc. 
and is also a full member of the Paris-based FATF and FATF Styled Regional Bodies viz, 
Eurasia Group and Asia Pacific Group. The Committee further note that due to emerging 
challenges in c ounter terrorism domain with increasing use of technology, drones, misuse 
of internet by terrorists, crypto transactions, use of encrypted communication platforms 
and social media by terrorists, India’s counter terrorism mechanism has been evolving 
continuously in terms of amendments in legislations, facilities and equipments for Law 
Enforcement Agencies, technological up-gradation, skill enhancement of personnel, etc. 
The Committee acknowledge the efforts made by the Government to upgrade its counter 
terrorism apparatus but stress the need for continuous review of such mechanisms to keep 
pace with new and emerging challenges in the counter terrorism domain such as aerial 
terrorism, encrypted messaging services, digital mode of terror financing, etc. Going by the 
modus operandi of global terrorist groups, the Committee desire that the Government 
should keep one step ahead and create a pool of dedicated experts for new and emerging 
technologies, cyber related matters and financial technology innovation in coordination 
with all the Ministries/Departments /Agencies concerned.  
         (Recommendation No. 19) 
2.57 The Committee note that a number of outcome documents have been issued after 
bilateral Summits and other meetings with various countries and at regional and 
multilateral fora. The Ministry of External Affairs has also stated that counter terrorism is 
an ongoing issue and the status of implementation of such outcome documents is regularly 
monitored at various levels.  The Committee are of the considered view that the desired 
impact in countering terrorism can only  be seen in the effective implementation of the 
outcome documents by all the countries concerned and recommend that a mechanism for 
Joint assessment at bilateral and multilateral levels should be proposed/evolved and follow 
up action taken on a continuous basis.    
         (Recommendation No. 20) 

51 
 
2.58 The Committee note that as a result of India’s counter terrorism efforts on the 
global arena, there is regular exchange of information with foreign partners/agencies and 
efforts are underway to setup recognized CT Nodal points for expeditious exchange of 
actionable inputs. The Committee desire that the exercise of setting up Nodal points for 
counter terrorism should be completed at the earliest to facilitate seamless flow of 
intelligence on terrorist threats and for initiating prompt response against the ruthless 
designs of terrorists/terrorist groups. 
         (Recommendation No. 21) 
2.59 The Committee understand that extradition treaty is one of the legal frameworks 
for combating transnational crimes and terrorism. India has signed extradition treaties 
with 50 countries (treaties with Kazakhstan and Morocco are yet to be ratified ) while 
extradition arrangements are in place with another 12 countries. The Committee hope that 
these treaties would  serve as an effective tool to secure cooperation and assistance to 
enable India in countering terrorism, organized crimes, drug trafficking, money 
laundering, counterfeiting of its currency notes, etc.  The Committee are also aware that 
successful operation of extradition treaties hinge upon harmonious working relations 
between the signatory countries and desire that the Government should work towards 
strengthening its diplomatic ties and maintaining closer cooperation with each one of them. 
The scope for signing more extradition treaties with other countries may be assessed and 
concrete steps taken in that direction. Despite the challenges in arriving at a consensus in 
the United Nations, the Committee recommend that the Government should consider 
pitching for a uniform Convention on Extradition at the United Nations.    
          
         (Recommendation No. 22) 
2.60 The Committee note that Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty (MLAT) in Criminal 
Matters is in force with 41 countries. India has also signed 28 Agreements/MoUs on 
security cooperation with other countries. The Ministry has also stated that signing of 
Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty in Criminal Matters with Germany & Mozambique 
are at final stage while negotiation meetings are going on with Kenya, Philippines and 
Nepal for finalisation of text of the Treaty. Proposals for signing of Security 

52 
 
Cooperation Agreements etc. with USA, Brazil, Mongolia, Belarus etc. are in the pipeline. 
The Committee understand that MLAT in Criminal Matters would improve the 
effectiveness of the contracting countries in prevention, investigation, prosecution and 
suppression of crimes and enable continued cooperation between the intelligence and law 
enforcement agencies of the participants. At the same time, Security Cooperation 
Agreements provide an institutional mechanism to enhance cooperation for combating 
transnational crimes and international terrorism, cyber crimes, drug trafficking, 
money laundering, counterfeiting of Indian currency notes, human trafficking etc. 
T h e  C o m m i t t e e ,  t h e r e f o r e ,  d e s i r e  t h a t  the ongoing process of 
negotiations and signing of MLATs and Security Cooperation Agreements should be 
completed at the earliest. The potential for signing of such treaties/agreements with the 
remaining countries should also be explored and efforts made for effective 
operationalization of these treaties/agreements. 
          (Recommendation No. 23) 
 
2.61  In order to enhance its capacity on counter terrorism, India has established Joint 
Working Groups on Counter Terrorism (JWG-CT) with 27 countries. It has engaged with 
regional bodies such as BIMSTEC, SAARC, ASEAN Regional Forum, SCO, BRICS and 
QUAD forum. Regular training courses, conferences and joint exercises are conducted 
in collaboration with State police and foreign partners and new technological tools are 
being procured for enhancing capacity in Counter Terrorism operations. The ambit of 
Multi Agency Centre dealing with Counter Terrorism has been expanded to include 
linkages of other crimes with terrorism. National Security Guard (NSG) and NIA 
nodes and capacities have been expanded to deal with Counter Terrorism responses. 
Besides, legal action against wanted terrorists in other countries is also pursued through 
the INTERPOL. The Ministry has further informed that on the basis of the UN Counter 
Terrorism Strategy, a draft National Counter Terrorism Strategy has been formulated and 
shared with MHA. Besides, during the regular JWG-CT and other bilateral meetings, best 
practices on CT have been exchanged with the participating countries. The Committee 
while acknowledging all the efforts made by the Government, desire that in view of 
India’s continued vulnerability to terrorism and its consequences, the Government should 

53 
 
improve its counter terrorism strategy by incorporating best practices on counter 
terrorism of other countries, enhance its domestic counter terrorism infrastructure by 
infusing resources, upgrading its capabilities and making use of new technological tools. 
Stressing the need to make the JWGs and regional bodies more effective and outcome 
oriented, the Committee recommend that a comprehensive assessment of their working 
may be carried out and an action plan be prepared accordingly. The Committee also urge 
the Government to strengthen its coordination with the INTERPOL and utilize its 
database relating to terrorist and terror offences to pre-empt and respond to terrorist 
strikes/attacks in the country swiftly and decisively.  
          (Recommendation No. 24) 
2.62 The Committee note that both legislative frameworks and institutional mechanisms 
exist under various Ministries like Home Affairs, Finance, Electronics and Information 
Technology, etc. for countering terrorism in the country. All concerned Ministries, 
Departments and Agencies of the Government including, inter alia, Ministry of External 
Affairs, Ministry of Home Affairs, Intelligence Bureau, Cabinet Secretariat, National 
Investigation Agency, National Security Guard, Bureau of Police Research and 
Development, Financial Intelligence Unit, Department of Revenue, National Security 
Council Secretariat, Central Bureau of Investigation, Bureau of Civil Aviation Security etc, 
are represented in the JWG-CT meetings depending on the agenda of the meetings. The 
Committee appreciate the ‘whole of Government approach’ in countering terrorism but 
are of the considered view that the challenges in coordination amongst multiple agencies in 
the execution of counter terrorism measures should be overcome and seamless flow of 
intelligence and real time sharing of inputs be ensured so that the desired impact is felt on 
the ground. The Committee urge the Government to maintain close inter-Ministry and 
inter-agency cooperation amongst all the stakeholders involved in counter terrorism to 
anticipate and respond to all forms of terrorist threats and terrorist attacks in the country 
promptly. It should be the endeavour of the Government to strengthen and upgrade its 
institutional mechanisms on a continuous basis through induction of trained personnel and 
experts in the field of new and emerging technologies, innovative technological tools and 
international collaborations.           
         (Recommendation No. 25)  

54 
 
2.63 The Committee note that the Cyber Diplomacy Division of the MEA leads the Cyber 
Diplomacy Dialogues with the participation of various Government of India stakeholders 
like MHA, MEITY, CERT-In, NCIIPC, DRDO, CBI, NSCS, etc. The Division also leads 
the UN Open Ended Working Group on Security in the use of ICTs (OEWG) and working 
groups on ICT in BRICS, SCO and ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF). The Committee 
further note that the Cyber Diplomacy Division provide diplomatic support in 
international forums on the basis of inputs received from NSCS, MHA and MEITY which 
specifically deals with cyber security dialogues, policy making in cyber crime and on issues 
related to data protection and internet governance respectively. The Committee are of the 
view that greater cooperation and coordination must exist amongst all the 
agencies/stakeholders on cyber related issues and urge the MEA/Cyber Diplomacy Division 
to play a more proactive role in obtaining real time cyber related inputs from the 
agencies/stakeholders concerned so as to leverage the same in its diplomatic outreach 
through Cyber Dialogues and its various engagements in regional, multilateral and UN at 
appropriate time and level.  The Committee also urge the MEA to actively work at 
facilitating new opportunities for international collaboration, capacity building and 
building trust in the area of cyber security and take fresh initiatives to activate/energise the 
working groups on ICT in BRICS, SCO and ARF so that so that tangible progress may be 
made in these forums. 
         (Recommendation No. 26)  
2.64 The Cyber Diplomacy Division in MEA is also at the forefront in facilitating the 
MoUs/MoCs for CERT-In and has been encouraging CERT-In to have MoUs/MoCs with 
more and more countries. During 2022 and 2023, Cyber Diplomacy Division has proposed 
27 MoUs/MoCs to CERT-In. Currently, the number of MoUs/MoCs of CERT-In are 13 
while another 12 are in various stages of renewal.  The Committee desire that the 
MEA/Cyber Diplomacy Division and Indian Missions abroad, where required should 
actively facilitate negotiations/signing of MoUs/MoCs by CERT-In with the remaining 
countries so as to strengthen cyber security in the country. The Committee further desire 
that the MEA/Cyber Diplomacy Division should proactively coordinate with other GOI 

55 
 
stakeholders so that necessary and urgent clearances are given to CERT-In for 
MoUs/MoCs with other countries smoothly and promptly.  
         (Recommendation No. 27)  
 
2.65 The Committee note that the Multi Agency Centre (MAC) platform is being used as 
a coordinated platform among various Ministries including MHA, MEA and MoF, etc. on 
the issue of counter terrorism including terror financing. MAC platform is also being used 
for capacity building as well as for real time coordination among Law Enforcement 
Agencies responsible for counter terrorism. Further, the ambit of MAC dealing with 
counter terrorism has been expanded to include linkages of other crimes with terrorism. 
Multi Agency Centre and Subsidiary Multi Agency Centre have also been re-organized to 
function on 24x7 basis for real time collation and sharing of intelligence with central 
security agencies and law enforcement agencies of States for prompt action. The 
Committee further note that a Standing Focus Groups on Economic Intelligence has also 
been functional on MAC platform for coordination among stakeholders on the issue of 
terror financing. The Committee acknowledge the pivotal role played by the MAC as a 
coordinated platform on the issue of counter terrorism and desire that it should be 
strengthened and fortified with adequate resources, infrastructure and infusion of teams of 
IT experts. The functioning of Multi Agency Centre and Subsidiary Multi Agency Centres 
should be made more responsive through enhancement of its capabilities, optimum use of 
artificial intelligence and new technological solutions.  The Committee also stress the need 
for Government agencies to keep abreast of the latest technologies and technological tools 
used by global terrorist groups through identification of new instruments of terrorism, 
adopting pro-active measures to counter it effectively and sharing of real time intelligence 
on terrorist threats. Coordinated efforts may also be made amongst the Ministries 
concerned for continuous upgradation of the counter terrorism mechanism and 
technological tools in the country. 
         (Recommendation No. 28)  
 

56 
 
CHAPTER III 
 
  COUNTERING GLOBAL TERRORISM AT REGIONAL LEVEL 
 
3.1 At the Regional Level, India actively participates in the discussions and regional efforts 
made to counter terrorism at Bay of Bengal Initiative for Multi-Sectoral Technical and Economic 
Cooperation (BIMSTEC), South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), 
Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Forum, Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (SCO), BRICS and QUAD forum. Also India has JWG-CT with 5 regional bodies, 
viz. ASEAN, BIMSTEC, BRICS, European Union (EU) and the Quad. Besides, India also 
participates in the meetings of BRICS and BIMSTEC Joint Working Group on Counter 
Terrorism and their sub-groups.   
 
A. BIMSTEC 
 
3.2 BIMSTEC regional organization Cooperation in Counter Terrorism is an area of high 
priority in the BIMSTEC framework. India is the lead country for security issues under the 
BIMSTEC framework. India has been regularly participating in the meetings of the BIMSTEC 
JWG-CT on Counter Terrorism and Transnational Crime and also in its sub-groups.  
 
3.3 The Seventh Meeting of BIMSTEC Sub-Group on Prevention of Illicit Trafficking in 
Narcotic Drugs, Psychotropic Substances and Precursor Chemicals was held in Chiangmai, 
Thailand, from 7-9 December 2022. India hosted the 10th Meeting BIMSTEC Joint Working 
Group on Counter Terrorism on 12 & 13 January 2023 in New Delhi. All representatives from 
BIMSTEC Member Countries, including BIMSTEC Secretariat attended the meeting.  
 
3.4 On being asked about the efforts made to counter terrorism, major resolutions adopted 
and status of implementation of the  resolutions adopted in respect of BIMSTEC, the Ministry has 
stated that cooperation in Counter-Terrorism within the BIMSTEC framework is a work in 
progress. India leads the security pillar in regional cooperation under BIMSTEC of which 
Counter Terrorism and Transnational Crime (CTTC) is a sub-sector. 
 
3.5 The principal dialogue mechanism for the CTTC sub-sector of cooperation under the 
Security pillar is the Joint Working Group (JWG) on CTTC which was mandated by the 1st  
BIMSTEC Summit in 2004. So far 10 meetings of the JWG were held. The 10th meeting was 
hosted by India in January 2023.  
3.6 The CTTC sector has 06 sub-groups, i.e. (i) Sub-Group on Intelligence Sharing (SGIS); 
(ii) Sub-Group on Legal and Law Enforcement Issues; (iii) Sub-Group on Anti- Money 
Laundering and Combating the Financing of Terrorism (SGAML-CFT); (iv) Sub-Group on 
Narcotic Drugs, Psychotropic Substances and Precursor Chemicals (SGNDPSPC); (v) Human 
Trafficking and Illegal Migration (set up at 7th JWG on CTTC, Bangkok, August 2015); and (vi) 
Cooperation on Countering Radicalization and Terrorism (set up at 17th Senior Officials Meeting 
in 2017). 

57 
 
3.7 The 15 th BIMSTEC Foreign Ministers Meeting (August 2015, Kathmandu) approved the 
Terms of Reference (ToR) on future cooperation in combating drug trafficking, including 
sharing and exchange of information and intelligence in the field of narcotics, capacity building 
programmes, sharing of yearly drug control report by Member States and publishing of 
BIMSTEC Annual Drug Report. All countries have designated nodal points for exchange of 
intelligence and for informal interaction among intelligence agencies. 
3.8 The BIMSTEC Convention on Cooperation in Combating International Terrorism, 
Transnational Organized Crime and Illicit Drug Trafficking, signed in December 2009 in 
Myanmar, has entered into force on 16 March 2021. 
3.9 The BIMSTEC Convention on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters was signed 
at the 5th BIMSTEC Summit (Colombo, March 2022). 
3.10 NSCS is the nodal agency on security sector cooperation under BIMSTEC. BIMSTEC 
National Security Chiefs (NSCs) have held three Meetings so far (March 2017 in New Delhi; 
March 2018 in Dhaka and March 2019 in Bangkok). 
3.11 In addition, a track 1.5 BIMSTEC Security Dialogue Forum was organized by IDSA in 
September 2017. India organized training programmes in order to build capacities of personnel 
in countering terrorism and other security related activities in the region. India offered 100 
training slots for capacity building at SVP NPA, Hyderabad. The first batch of 36 officers were 
trained in February-March, 2019. Training for the second batch is due to commence shortly. A 
Track II conference in the security domain was organized by Vivekananda International 
Foundation, New Delhi on 27-29 November 2019. 
B. SAARC 
 
3.12 The SAARC Member States identified the need for cooperation in matters related to 
terrorism.  Collective action in fighting the menace or terrorism was emphasized in many 
SAARC meetings while condemning terrorism, in all its forms and manifestations.  Accordingly, 
the following SAARC mechanisms have been created, viz. 
i) SAARC Regional Convention on Suppression of Terrorism (signed in 1987) and its additional 
protocol signed in 2004 and came into effect in 2006; 
ii) High Level Group of Eminent Experts to strengthen the SAARC Anti-Terrorism Mechanisms; 
iii) SAARC Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters (signed in 2008); 
iv) Cooperation in Police Matters; 
v) SAARC Terrorist Offences Monitoring Desk (STOMD). 

58 
 
3.13 The 31st Session of the Council of Ministers (Colombo, 27-28 February 2009)  adopted a 
SAARC Ministerial Declaration on Cooperation in Combating Terrorism. SAARC Terrorist 
Offences Monitoring Desk (STOMD) was established in 1995 in Colombo. The main objectives 
of STOMD are to collate, analyze, dissemination and sharing of information on crimes related to 
terrorism and exchange of expertise, experience, methodology and strategies to combat terrorism 
and other related organized crimes.   
3.14  Matters related to security are reviewed under the mechanism of the meetings of the 
Interior/Home Ministers and Secretaries. The above mechanism exists but it is difficult to 
ascertain how far these are being utilized. 
C. ASEAN Regional Forum 
 
3.15 Established in 1994, the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) is an important platform for 
security dialogue in the Indo-Pacific. It provides a setting in which members can discuss current 
security issues and develop cooperative measures to enhance peace and security in the region. 
The ARF is composed of 27 members: the 10 ASEAN member states (Brunei, Cambodia, 
Indonesia, Laos, Malaysia, Myanmar, Philippines, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam); 10 
ASEAN Dialogue Partners (Australia, Canada, China, the European Union (EU), India, Japan, 
New Zealand, the Republic of Korea (ROK), Russia and the United States); Bangladesh, the 
Democratic People's Republic of Korea, Mongolia, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Papua New Guinea, and 
Timor-Leste. The ARF has five work streams: Counter-Terrorism and Transnational Crime 
(CTTC); Information and Communications Technology (ICT) Security; Disaster Relief; 
Maritime Security; and Non-Proliferation and Disarmament. 
 
3.16 During Inter-sessional year 2021-22, the following ARF meetings and activities were 
conducted under CTTC pillar : 
 
a) ARF Seminar on the Role of Youth in Building Digital Resilience to Prevent and 
Counter Terrorism and Violent Extremism Conducive to Terrorism (VECT), 
videoconference, 15 March 2022; 
b) 18th ARF ISM on Counter-Terrorism and Transnational Crime, video conference, 
12 May 2022; 
 
3.17  Under ARF Hanoi Action Plan of Action II (2020-2025) adopted in 2020, ARF countries 
agreed to support the work of the ARF Inter Sessional Meeting on Counter-Terrorism and 
Transnational Crime (CTTC) as a framework to address regional terrorism, transnational crime 
including new and emerging forms of transnational crime and to enhance cooperation and 
exchange of best practices in the field of law enforcement, and strengthen cooperation, including 
in the area of border management and illicit drug trafficking, while ensuring respect for 
international law.   
https://aseanregionalforum.asean.org/wp-content/uploads/2020/09/ARF-Ha-Noi-Plan-of-Action-II-2020-
2025.pdf  

59 
 
3.18 The 18th ASEAN Regional Forum Inter-Sessional Meeting on Counter-Terrorism and 
Transnational Crime (ARF ISM on CTTC) was held virtually on 12 May 2022. India participated 
in the meeting. The meeting discussed the Priority Areas identified in the ARF Work Plan for 
CTTC, as follows : (i) illicit drugs; ii)chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear (CBRN) 
matters; (iii) preventing and countering violent extremism; and (iv) trafficking in persons. In the 
meeting no new activities in support of the ARF Work Plan for CTTC for 2022-2023. have been 
decided. The 19th ARF ISM on CTTC is scheduled to be held in hybrid mode on 24 May 2023.  
3.19 The 29th ARF under the Chair ship of Cambodia was held on 5 August 2022 in  Phnom 
Penh. The statement issued informed that ‘the Meeting stressed the importance of enhancing the 
ARF’s relevance and effectiveness in addressing the increasingly complex challenges amidst the 
continuously evolving regional landscape. In this connection, the Meeting noted that the ARF 
has been successful in the promotion of peace and stability in the region through enhanced 
cooperation in the areas of disaster relief, counter-terrorism and transnational crime, maritime 
security, non-proliferation and disarmament, peacekeeping operations, defence cooperation, and 
security of and in the use of information and communication technologies (ICTs).  
D. RATS-SCO 
3.20 India is a Member of Shanghai Cooperation Organization since 2017 by virtue of which it 
is also Member of the Regional Anti-Terrorist Organization of SCO (RATS-SCO), which is 
Permanent body of the SCO dealing with counter-terrorism, with its headquarters at Tashkent, 
Uzbekistan.  NSCS is ‘the Competent Authority’ for representing India at RATS-SCO. The List 
of major decisions of Council of Regional Anti-Terrorist Structure of Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (RATS SCO) to counter terrorism & status on their implementation is as under: 
 
 
S. 
No. 
Decision of Council 
of RATS SCO 
Status of implementation 
1. India hosted Joint 
Anti-Terrorist 
Exercise (JATE) 
“Manesar Anti-Terror-
2022” in 2022 
India’s National Security Guard (NSG) was nominated the lead 
agency to conduct JATE-2022. 
 
i) Stage-I of JATE “Manesar Anti-Terror-2022” SCO was held 
from 27 July 2022 to 1 August 2022 in the territories of respective 
SCO member countries. 
ii) Stage-II of JATE-2022 was held from 08-13 October 2022 at 
NSG Campus Manesar, Haryana, India. Closing ceremony (13 
October 2022) of JATE witnessed demonstration by NSG to 
counter attempts of terrorists for hostage situation in a school. 
Representatives from Russia, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Tajikistan 

60 
 
and Kyrgyz Republic participated by sending their CT experts. 
China and Pakistan participated as Observers.  Other international 
organizations CSTO, CIS-ATC, UNOCT, UNODC, etc. also 
participated as “Observers”.  
2. Conducting of Joint 
Border Operation 
(JBO)  
i) JBO “Border of 
Friendship – 2022” 
ii) JBO “Solidarity-
2023.” 
i) India’s Border Security Force (BSF) conducted JBO-2022 on 
India-Bangladesh Border and its Outcome Report was submitted to 
Executive Committee (EC) of RATS SCO. 
ii) Action Plan on conduct of JBO-2023 is still under consideration. 
3. Joint Measures by 
SCO member States 
for countering threats 
of terrorism from 
Afghanistan 
The joint measures as proposed by EC RATS SCO for creating a 
borders security mechanism around Afghanistan are violative of 
Article 2 of the SCO Charter and India has opposed the proposal on 
the grounds that it affects India’s sovereignty and territorial 
integrity. 
4. Kyrgyz Republic to 
host Joint Anti-
Terrorist Exercise 
(JATE) “Eurasia Anti-
Terror” in 2023 
Action Plan on conduct of JATE-2023 is still under consideration. 
India has not yet decided for the participation in the JATE-2023. 
5. Conduct of Joint 
Information 
Operations (JIO) to 
prevent the misuse of 
internet by Terrorists, 
Separatists and 
Extremists (TSEs) 
The Regulations for conduct of Joint Information Operations (JIO) 
has been finalized in the meeting of Council of RATS SCO on 7 
April 2023. The Action Plan on conduct of JIO in 2023 is yet to be 
finalized. 
6. Updation of “RATS 
SCO Unified Search 
Register (USR) of 
wanted TSEs” 
India has already shared with RATS SCO a list of 38 terrorists 
(declared by GoI till 31 December 2022) for adding into their 
Unified Search Register on ‘wanted’ terrorists. This List includes 
10 names which India has proposed for designations under UNSCR 
1267. In addition, India has also shared with RATS SCO Lists of 
42 ‘Terror Organizations’ and 13 ‘Unlawful Associations’ 
(declared by GoI till 31 December 2022) for addition to RATS 

61 
 
SCO List of Terrorist, Extremist and Separatist Organizations. 
 
E.  BRICS 
3.21 The subject matter of Counter-Terrorism is discussed at the level of Leaders, Foreign 
Ministers, as well as National Security Advisors. CT Division leads on this subject matter in 
MEA and coordinates with relevant line agencies.  
3.22 The BRICS Counter-Terrorism Working Group reports to the BRICS National Security 
Advisors. The BRICS Counter-Terrorism Working Group held its 1st meeting in 2016 under 
India’s BRICS Chairship. Five BRICS Counter-Terrorism Sub-Groups were established in 2019 
under Brazil’s BRICS Chairship. Each Sub-Group is led by a BRICS country as follows: (i) 
Capacity Building (Lead country – Brazil), (ii) Countering Foreign Terrorist Fighters (Lead 
country – Russia), (iii) Preventing the Misuse of Internet for Terrorist Purposes (Lead country – 
India), (iv) De-radicalization (Lead country – China), and (v) Countering Terrorist Financing 
(Lead country – South Africa).  
3.23 The latest meetings of the five BRICS CT Sub-Groups took place on 19-20 April 2022 in 
virtual format under China’s BRICS Chairship. The 7th meeting of the BRICS Counter-Terrorism 
Working Group took place on 21 April 2022 in virtual format under China’s BRICS Chairship. 
3.24 Hon’ble Prime Minister Shri Narendra Modi speaking during the BRICS Summit 2017 
had noted that “BRICS Countries should come together to fight against terrorism. We need to 
adopt a BRICS Counter-Terrorism Strategy for joint action.” The BRICS Counter-Terrorism 
Strategy was adopted in 2020 under Russia’s BRICS Chairship. Thereafter, the BRICS Counter-
Terrorism Action Plan was adopted in 2021 under India’s BRICS Chairship. 
3.25 The Ministry has also stated in its written reply that the main outcome of the 6th 
BRICS Counter Terrorism Working Group (CTWG) meeting was the finalisation of the BRICS 
Counter Terrorism Action Plan containing specific measures to implement the BRICS Counter 
Terrorism Strategy adopted by BRICS Leaders in 2020. The BRICS Counter Terrorism Action 
Plan was endorsed at the 13th BRICS Summit held virtually on 9th September 2021. The BRICS 
CT sub-groups will propose activities under the Action Plan for implementation.  
F. QUAD 
 
3.26 In its Background note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has stated that during 
the Quad Foreign Ministers Meeting held in March 2023, Foreign Ministers in their Joint 
Statement announced formation of Quad Working Group on Counter Terrorism.  
 
3.27 When further enquired regarding the achievements so far under the Quad in countering 
terrorism and the status of formation of Quad Working Group on Counter terrorism, the Ministry 
has stated that India hosted QUAD Table Top Exercise (TTx) twice in 2019 and 2021.Australia 
hosted third TTX  in 2022 to explore further cooperation. USA will be hosting fourth round of 

62 
 
Quad TTX in December 2023. Quad Consequence Management Workshop was hosted by USA 
in June 2023. Table Top Exercise and Consequence Management Workshop helped Quad 
partners to understand each other response in case of terrorist incident and learn from each other 
best practices. Quad Working Group on Counter terrorism was announced during the QUAD 
Foreign Ministers Meeting hosted by India in 2023.  
         
G. CICA   
3.28 India is a member of the Confidence on Interaction and Confidence Building Measures in 
Asia (CICA). At the 6th CICA Summit held on 13 October 2022, the leaders adopted the ‘CICA 
Plan of Action on the Implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy’. 
As Coordinator in CICA in the priority area of ‘Combating Terrorism’ under the ‘New challenges 
and threats’ dimension of the CICA Catalogue of Confidence Building Measures, India hosted 
virtual workshops titled ‘Counter Radicalization’ and ‘Misuse of Internet’ on 2-3 February and 
25-26 May 2023 respectively.  
 
3.29 The virtual workshops were coordinated by Ministry of External Affairs and hosted by 
Bureau of Police Research & Development (BPR&D) of Ministry of Home Affairs jointly with 
its outlying training unit Central Detective Training Institute (CDTI). Representatives from 
several CICA Member States participated in the virtual workshops. During the ‘Counter 
Radicalization’ workshop, speakers shared their expertise on various topics including 
radicalization and extremism; rise of fundamentalism and its global impact; misuse of social 
media as a tool for radicalization; models of de-radicalization; and radicalization & international 
terrorism. During the ‘Misuse of Internet’ workshop, speakers shared their expertise on various 
topics including the Misuse of Internet in Organised Crime; Use of Malware and Ransomware as 
a tool for Financial Crime; Prevention of Information and Communication Technology Crime 
against Women and Children; Use of Dark Web and Cryptocurrency in Illegal Trade and Terror; 
and Futuristic Information and Communication Technology Crime and Internet of Things Hacks. 
         
3.30 The Committee note that India leads the security pillar in regional cooperation 
under BIMSTEC of which Counter Terrorism and Transnational Crime (CTTC) is a sub-
sector. The CTTC has  six sub-groups focusing on intelligence sharing, legal and law 
enforcement issues, anti- money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism, 
narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and precursor chemicals, human trafficking and 
illegal migration and cooperation on countering radicalization and terrorism. The 
principal dialogue mechanism for the CTTC sub-sector of cooperation under the Security 
pillar is the Joint Working Group (JWG) on CTTC. The Committee understand that 
BIMSTEC regional organization cooperation in counter terrorism is an area of high 
priority in the BIMSTEC framework and cooperation in Counter-Terrorism within the 

63 
 
BIMSTEC framework is a work in progress and desire that the JWG on CTTC should be 
strengthened to ensure deeper cooperation amongst the member countries and to activate 
and re-energize all the sub-groups to function as effective instruments for countering 
terrorism and transnational crime. Acknowledging the important role of BIMSTEC in 
fostering regional cooperation in counter terrorism, the Committee recommend that 
concerted efforts should be to made to make this organization more responsive to cross 
border terrorism faced by India and other emerging forms of transnational crime. Formal 
and informal interaction amongst intelligence agencies of India and BIMSTEC countries 
should also be enhanced so that inputs on terrorist threats and imminent terrorist attacks 
are shared on real time and responded to promptly. In addition to security dialogues, the 
Committee also recommend that the Government should take initiatives for organizing 
more capacity building programmes on CTTC for security personnel and law enforcement 
officers under the BIMSTEC framework.   
         (Recommendation No. 29)  
3.31  The Committee note that SAARC mechanisms viz, SAARC Regional Convention on 
Suppression of Terrorism, High Level Group of Eminent Experts, SAARC Convention 
on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters, Cooperation in Police Matters and SAARC 
Terrorist Offences Monitoring Desk have been created towards collective action in 
fighting the menace of terrorism. The Committee further note that matters related to 
security are reviewed under the mechanism of the meetings of the Interior/Home 
Ministers and Secretaries. However, though the above mechanism exists, it is difficult to 
ascertain how far these are being utilized. The Committee are of the view that regional 
cooperation is vital for countering terrorism and renewed coordinated efforts should be 
made by SAARC to combat the menace of terrorism for peace, stability and development 
in the region. As a founding member of SAARC, the Committee desire that India should 
play a more pro-active role in this Regional Body and spearhead fresh initiatives for 
effective functioning and optimum utilization of the SAARC’s mechanisms for 
countering terrorism. The Committee underline the need for constant review of security 
matters at the Highest level and urge the Government to actively coordinate with 
member countries in this regard. The Committee also urge the Ministry to strive for 

64 
 
outcome oriented, measurable and quantifiable goals in the fight against global 
terrorism.    
          (Recommendation No. 30) 
3.32 The Committee note that the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) provides a setting in 
which members can discuss current security issues and develop cooperative measures to 
enhance peace and security in the Indo-Pacific region. The Committee further note that in 
the 18th ASEAN Regional Forum Inter-Sessional Meeting on Counter-Terrorism and 
Transnational Crime held virtually in 2022, the Priority Areas identified in the ARF Work 
Plan for CTTC viz,  illicit drugs; chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear matters; 
preventing and countering violent extremism and trafficking in persons were discussed. 
However, no new activities in support of the ARF Work Plan for CTTC for 2022-2023 have 
been decided. In view of the ASEAN Regional Forum (ARF) being an important platform 
for security dialogue in the Indo-Pacific, the Committee desire that the Government  
should continue to actively participate in the various work streams of the ARF and its 
meetings and expand its diplomatic outreach amongst the members of  the Forum so that 
the issue of cross border terrorism, infiltration and illegal migration resorted to by 
terrorists against India find mention in the priority areas of the ARF Work Plan. The 
Committee also urge the Government to contribute towards enhancing the ARF’s 
relevance and effectiveness in addressing the increasingly complex challenges amidst the 
continuously evolving regional landscape.   
         (Recommendation No. 31) 
 
3.33 The Committee note that as a member of the Shanghai Cooperation Organization, 
India is also a member of the Regional Anti-Terrorist Organization of the Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization (RATS-SCO), a Permanent body of the SCO dealing with 
counter-terrorism. The Committee further note that the Council of RATS SCO has taken 
various decisions to counter terrorism such as Joint Anti-Terrorist Exercise (JATE),  Joint 
Border Operation (JBO), Joint Information Operations (JIO), Updation of RATS SCO 
Unified Search Register of  wanted Terrorists, Separatists and Extremists, etc. The 
Committee understand that Action Plans on conduct of JBO-2023, JATE-2023 and JIO-

65 
 
2023 are still under consideration. The Committee are of the view that members of RATS 
SCO would be better equipped in countering terrorism through the said Joint 
Exercise/Operations and desire that Action Plans for conducting the Joint 
Exercise/Operations should be finalized without further delay. The Committee, therefore 
urge the Government to take up the matter with the RATS SCO and extend all assistance 
for expeditious conduct of the same.  
          (Recommendation No. 32) 
3.34 The Committee note that the BRICS Counter Terrorism Action Plan containing 
specific measures to implement the BRICS Counter Terrorism Strategy adopted by BRICS 
Leaders in 2020 was finalized at the 6th BRICS Counter Terrorism Working Group 
(CTWG) meeting and  subsequently endorsed at the 13th BRICS Summit held virtually on 
9th September 2021.  The Committee further note that the BRICS CT sub-groups will 
propose activities under the Action Plan for implementation. The Committee recommend 
that the Government should identify the activities needed to be incorporated in the said 
Action Plan in the context of India and make efforts to include these activities for 
implementation by BRICS. The Committee also recommend that the Government should 
evolve a mechanism for monitoring the status of implementation of the Action Plan in 
letter and spirit and propose the same to the BRICS CT sub-groups. 
          (Recommendation No. 33) 
3.35 The Committee note that the QUAD Working Group on Counter Terrorism was 
announced during the QUAD Foreign Ministers Meeting hosted by India in 2023. The 
Committee hope that formation of this working group would go a long way in furthering 
cooperation and coordinated response among the QUAD nations and sharing of 
experiences and best practices in countering terrorism and urge the Government to make 
all out efforts for the effective functioning of the QUAD Working Group on Counter 
Terrorism.  
          (Recommendation No. 34)  
3.36 The Committee note that as Coordinator in the Confidence on Interaction and 
Confidence Building Measures in Asia (CICA) in the priority area of ‘Combating 

66 
 
Terrorism’ under the ‘New challenges and threats’ dimension of the CICA Catalogue of 
Confidence Building Measures, India has hosted virtual workshops titled ‘Counter 
Radicalization’ and ‘Misuse of Internet’ in February and May 2023 respectively The 
Committee are pleased that India is playing an active role in CICA and urge the 
Government to forge strong bonds with CICA member States for coordinated response to 
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations as well as sharing of intelligence, expertise and 
best practices in this field. More workshops on counter terrorism measures on all aspects of 
new and emerging technologies adopted by terrorist groups may also be organized and all 
the CICA member States may be encouraged to participate. As the CICA Plan of Action on 
the Implementation of the United Nations Global Counter-Terrorism Strategy has also 
been adopted, the Committee recommend that the Government should take the initiative to 
evolve an effective mechanism to monitor the implementation of the United Nations Global 
Counter-Terrorism Strategy by CICA member States.  
          (Recommendation No. 35)  
 
 
 
 
 
      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

67 
 
     CHAPTER IV 
 
 COUNTERING GLOBAL TERRORISM AT INTERNATIONAL LEVEL 
 
 
A. India and the United Nations  
4.1 India has been supportive of all efforts, particularly in the UN, to combat terrorism and 
has played a leading role in shaping international opinion and urging the international 
community to prioritize the fight against terror. In terms of multilateral arrangements and 
agreements, India is party to all the 13 UN Sectoral conventions relating to terrorism. It has 
supported UNSC Resolution 1269 and 1368 which clearly identify terrorism as a threat to 
international peace and security. In addition, India has supported and fully implemented 
resolutions 1267, 1333 and 1363 relating to terrorism by Taliban regime in Afghanistan. Besides, 
the Terror related domestic laws (UAPA) has been amended in order to ensure action against UN 
designated individuals and entities. 
4.2 As a victim of terrorism for more than 3 decades, India has strongly advocated for 
strengthening multilateral efforts to fight terrorism, strengthening the UN Counter Terrorism 
architecture led by United Nations Office of Counter Terrorism (UNOCT), by providing it 
adequate financial resources and support.   
4.3 India fully leveraged its current non permanent membership of the Security Council, by 
sensitizing the Council on the issue of terrorism, encouraging it to send strong message to those 
supporting terrorism.   
4.4 India organized a special meeting of United Nations Counter Terrorism Committee 
(UNCTC) in India on 28-29 October 2022. The Special Meeting of the UNCTC discussed a 
wide-range of counter terrorism related issued under the following themes:  
i. Countering terrorist exploitation of Information and Communication Technologies 
(ICTs).  
ii. Countering terrorism financing – threats and opportunities related to new payment 
technologies and fund raising methods  
iii. Threats poses by terrorist use of unmanned aerial systems (UAS)  
iv. As an out come of the Special UNCTC Meeting, a document titled ‘Delhi declaration’ 
was adopted.  
v. As a result of India's persistent efforts, there is enhanced concern in the international 
community at terrorism emanating from Pakistan including the continuing activities 
of internationally designated terrorist entities such as Jamaat-ud Dawa (JuD), 
Lashkar-e-Taiba (LeT), Jaish-e-Mohammad (JeM), Hizbul Mujahideen, etc. 
 
         

68 
 
(i) UN Counter Terrorism Architecture   
 
4.5 The initiatives taken so far by India for strengthening the UN Counter Terrorism 
architecture including the UN Office of Counter Terrorism (UNOCT) are as under. 
 
(1) As a victim of terrorism for more than 3 decades, India has strongly advocated for 
strengthening multilateral efforts to fight terrorism, strengthening the UN Counter 
Terrorism architecture led by United Nations Office of Counter Terrorism (UNOCT), by 
providing it adequate financial resources and support. 
 
(2) India fully leveraged its non-permanent membership of the Security Council in 2021-22, 
by sensitizing the Council, and through this platform the international community on the 
issue of terrorism, encouraging the Council to send a strong message to those supporting 
terrorism. 
 
(3) During its tenure in the UNSC in 2021-22, India submitted names of five known 
terrorists [Abdul Rehman Makki, Abdul Rauf Asghar, Sajid Mir, Shahid Mehmood and 
Hafiz Talha Saeed] for listing under the UNSC 1267 [Al-Qaeda and ISIL] Sanctions 
regime. Out of these, the Sanctions Committee accepted to list Abdul Rehman Makki in 
the sanctions list on 16 January, 2023. 
 
(4) Our priorities and concerns on counter-terrorism were enunciated by the External Affairs 
Minister at the very beginning of India’s term in the Security Council. On 12 January 
2021, speaking in the Security Council at an open debate on counter-terrorism, India’s 
External Affair Minister, S. Jaishankar called for greater commitment of international 
community towards zero tolerance for terrorism, effective action by member states and 
proposed an eight-point action plan to counter the menace of terrorism, which include, i) 
summon the political will – no justification or glorification of terrorism, ii) no double 
standards - terrorists are terrorists, distinctions are made only at our own peril, iii) no 
political instrumentalization of UN Sanctions regimes – no blocking or holding on listing 
requests without any reason, iv) objective enlisting and delisting of terrorists, terrorist 
entities in UN sanctions regimes – not to be dome on political or religious considerations, 
v) discourage exclusivist thinking and be on guard against new terminologies and false 
priorities, vi) recognize the linkage to organized crime, vii) support and strengthen the 
international counter-finance standards such as those propagated by FATF, and viii) 
strengthen multilateral counter terrorism architecture under purview of UN office for 
counter terrorism by providing greater funding and resources to it. 
 
(5) India is a member of Advisory Board to the UN Counter Terrorism Center (UNCCT), 
which has recently been renewed for another 3 years. Since 2018, India contributed more 
than $1 million to support various UNOCT programs in this regard. India is also member 
of Group of Friends of Victims of Terrorism, which was launched in June 2019.  India 

69 
 
also co-sponsored the General Assembly resolution 73/305 on “Enhancement of 
International Cooperation to Assist Victims of Terrorism.” 
 
(6) During India’s Presidency of the Security Council for the month of August 2021, the 
Security Council adopted four Press statements strongly condemning activities of terrorist 
groups, including the attacks in Afghanistan. In its Presidential Statement adopted by 
consensus, the Security Council deplored the terrorist threat to maritime security.  On 
August 19, India organized a Ministerial level briefing on the threat posed by the ISIL or 
Da’esh, highlighting the rise of ISIL’s regional affiliates in several countries of Africa as 
well as in Afghanistan. 
 
(7) During its term in the Security Council, India also Chaired the important Counter 
Terrorism Committee (CTC) of the Security Council (also known by the UNSC 
Resolution as the 1373 Committee) in 2022. The committee plays a very important role 
in UN led efforts to strengthen the collective international efforts to prevent and counter 
terrorism by fortifying the institutional, legislative and policy framework of member 
states, keeping in mind the national perspective to effectively prevent and counter 
terrorism in all its forms and manifestations. 
 
(8) As a Chair of the CTC, India hosted a Special Meeting of the UNSC’s CTC in Mumbai 
and Delhi on 28 and 29 October 2022, which adopted a “Delhi Declaration” on 
“Countering the use of new and emerging technologies for terrorist purposes”.  This was 
the first time ever that the UN Security Council held a meeting in India in any format. 
This was also the first time that the entire UN Security Council of 15 Member States 
jointly paid tributes to victims of 26/11 Mumbai terror attacks at the memorial wall in Taj 
Mahal Palace Hotel in Mumbai.  
 
(9) On 29 October 2022, addressing the Security Council’s CTC Special Meeting in New 
Delhi, External Affairs Minister announced India's contribution of US$ 500,000/- to the 
United Nations Trust Fund for Counter-terrorism for year 2022-23. The contribution has 
ensured India's continued support to the United Nations Office of Counter-Terrorism 
(UNOCT)'s Global Programmes capacity building programmes for UN Member-States 
and has taken India’s cumulative contribution to CT Trust Fund since 2018 to US$ 2.1 
million. 
 
(10) India has also been undertaking multiple efforts to ensure accountability and fight the 
impunity of terror, and in this regard extended financial support to the UN Investigative 
Team to Promote Accountability for Crimes Committed by Da'esh/ISIL or UNITAD to 
investigate the crimes committed by ISIL/Da'esh against the people of Iraq and the citizens 
of other countries, including 39 Indians. 
  

70 
 
(11) Besides this, India participated in high-level counter terrorism meetings organized in 
General Assembly and Security Council. Shri V. Muraleedharan, Minister of State for 
External Affairs participated in the Security Council Debate on “Peace and Security in 
Africa:  Strengthening the fight against the financing of armed groups and terrorists through 
the illicit trafficking of natural resources” on 6 October 2022, organized by Gabon. During 
the high-level week, Shri Sanjay Verma, Secretary (West) participated in ministerial level 
meetings – the Global Counter Terrorism Forum (GCTF) on 21 September 2022 as well as 
the Ministerial meeting of the Group of Friends of Victims of Terrorism (GOFVOT) on 22 
September 2022.  
 
(12) Global Congress of the Victims of Terrorism: The first Global Congress of the 
Victims of Terrorism held in United Nations headquarters on 8-9 September 2022. From 
India, Mr Karambir Kang, a victim of 26/11 Mumbai attacks and Ms Nidhi Chaphekar, a 
victim of 2016 Brussels airport bombings participated in the victim’s segments.  
 
(13) India actively participated in the meetings and deliberations of 1267/1989/2253 
Al-Qaida and ISIL/Da’esh Sanctions Committee. We strived of updating the working 
methods of the Committee aimed at enhancing transparency and objectivity in the 
working of the Committee. We continue to engage the Analytical Support and Sanctions 
Monitoring Team (MT) on the issue of improving the effectiveness of reporting Asset-
Freeze and exemption measures. 
  
(14) As a part of India’s high level signature events during its Presidency of the UN 
Security Council in December 2022, EAM Dr. S Jaishankar chaired a UN Security 
Council briefing on “Global Counter Terrorism Approach: Challenges and Way 
Forward” on 15 December in New York. The meeting was also attended by Foreign 
Ministers of Ireland, UAE, UK, USA, Kenya and Ghana and high-level representatives 
from other UNSC Member States. Ambassador Vladimir Voronkov, the Under-Secretary 
General for Counter Terrorism and Acting Executive Director Weixiong Chen briefed the 
Security Council. In his remarks at the briefing, EAM emphasized that the international 
community cannot let another "9/11 of New York” or "26/11 of Mumbai” happen again.  
 
(15) A number of countries have commended India for its focus on the important issue 
of counter-terrorism throughout its UN Security Council, and also for successful hosting 
of the Special Meeting of the Security Council’s Counter Terrorism Committee in 
Mumbai and Delhi on 28-29 October 2022.  
         
4.6 On being asked the response of the international community regarding strengthening of 
the UN Counter terrorism architecture led by the United Nations Office of Counter Terrorism 
(UNOCT) by providing it adequate financial resources and support, advocated by India and the 
efforts made to convince the UN member States, the Ministry has stated that international 
community has been very appreciative and supportive of India’s role and stance on CT related 

71 
 
matters at UN.  India will be making a voluntary contribution of half a million dollars in the UN 
Trust Fund for Counter Terrorism this year, to augment the efforts of UNOCT in providing 
capacity building support to Member States in preventing and countering the threat of terrorism 
(ii) Global Counter Terrorism Strategy  
4.7 The salient features of the Global Counter Terrorism Strategy (GCTS) of the UN, India’s 
role, contributions and the implementation aspect of the GCTS is enumerated below: 
4.8 The UN GCTS is unique global instrument to enhance national, regional and 
international efforts to counter terrorism. It was adopted by consensus in 2006. It composed of 4 
Pillars: 
a) Addressing the conditions conducive to the spread of terrorism.  
b) Measures to prevent and combat terrorism.  
c) Measures to build states capacity to prevent and combat terrorism and to strengthen the role of 
the UN system in this regard.  
d) Measures to ensure respect for human rights for all and the rule of law as the fundamental 
basis for the fight against terrorism. 
4.9 India constructively contributed during the negotiations of the recently concluded 7th 
review of the Global Counter Terrorism Strategy (GCTS) accentuating discussion on 
strengthening member states’ obligations towards countering financing of terrorism, addressing 
use of new technologies by terrorist groups for organizing funding, recruiting cadre and 
spreading propaganda and false narratives, and upholding the rights of victims of terrorism. India 
also raised its voice against any attempts to divide and dilute the global efforts to fight terrorism 
by focusing on few manifestations of terrorism while ignoring the rest, and was successful in 
deterring such efforts. India’s efforts and contributions were duly noted and appreciated by 
several member states.  
4.10 The Ministry has also stated that as a founding member of Global Counter Terrorism 
Forum (GCTF) since its launch in 2011, India regularly participates at senior official level in its 
meetings. With the establishment of the UN Global Counter Terrorism Coordination Compact in 
2019, a close and mutually reinforcing relationship between GCTF and UN has evolved.   
 
4.11 Formation of UN Global CT Compact (Global Compact) comprising 42 entities, 
including INTERPOL, Inter Parliamentary Union and World Customs Organisation, streamlined 
and strengthened the UN system-wide prioritization and implementation of CT and Preventing 
Violent Extremism (PVE) measures. Today, UNOCT, in partnership with various 
counterterrorism global compact entities, international and regional organizations as well as 

72 
 
member States, runs more than 20 global capacity building programs to assist member States to 
prevent and counter the threat of terrorism. 
 
(iii)  UN Security Council Committees 
 
4.12 There are three main subsidiary bodies established by the UN Security Council that deal 
with terrorism related issues. 
 
(i) The 1267/1989 Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee [Security Council Committee 
pursuant to resolution 1267 (1999) and 1989 (2011) concerning Al-Qaida and associated 
individuals and entities]  - The Al Qaida sanctions regime was first established by UNSC 
Resolution 1267 (adopted on 15 October 1999) and has been modified and strengthened 
by subsequent resolutions. All these resolutions were adopted under Chapter VII of the 
UN Charter and require all States to take measures in connection with any individual or 
entity associated with Al-Qaida, as designated by the Committee:  Measures include: 
 
 freezing without delay the funds and other financial assets or economic resources of 
designated individuals and entities [assets freeze]; 
 
 preventing the entry into or transit through their territories by designated individuals 
[travel ban]; and 
 
 preventing the direct or indirect supply, sale and transfer from their territories or by their 
nationals or using their flag vessels or aircraft, of arms and related materiel to designated 
individuals and entities [arms embargo]. 
 
4.13 The sanctioned list under this currently has 255 individuals and 88 entities on it. Any 
State may request the Committee to add/delete names to either of the Sanctions Lists.  
 
4.14 The States are expected to inform the Committee on the actions they have taken to 
implement the sanctions regime against the individuals and entities placed on the Al-Qaida 
Sanctions List. 
 
4.15 The States are expected to inform the Committee on the actions they have taken to 
implement the sanctions regime against the individuals and entities placed on the Al-Qaida 
Sanctions List.  
 
(ii) The Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) [1373 Committee; responsible for 
monitoring the implementation of UNSC Resolution 1373, which requested countries to 
implement a number of measures intended to enhance their legal and institutional ability to 
counter terrorist activities]; and 
 
(iii) The 1540 Committee [which deals with preventing non-State actors from acquiring 
weapons of mass destruction]. 
 

73 
 
4.16 All these Committees comprise the members of the UN Security Council. By its 
resolution 2610 (2021), adopted on 17 December 2021, the Security Council extended the 
mandates of the Analytical Support and Sanctions Monitoring Team pursuant to resolutions 1526 
(2004) and 2253 (2015) concerning ISIL (Da’esh), Al Qaida and the Taliban and associated 
individuals and entities and of the Office of the Ombuds person until 17 June 2024.  
 
4.17 In 2004, CTC established the Counter-Terrorism Committee Executive Directorate 
(CTED) as a special political mission and charged it with assisting the Committee in its work. 
The mandate of CTED was renewed for another 4 years up to 31 December 2025, through the 
Security Council resolution 2617 adopted on 30 December 2021.  
 
4.18 India believes that the Security Council’s Sanctions regimes, particularly the ISIL/Al-
Qaida sanctions committee (also known as 1267/1989/2253 Sanctions Committee) can be an 
effective tool in countering the activities of terrorists and terrorist groups by restricting their 
travel and suppress their funding avenues. However, it also seek de-politicization of sanctions 
regime, evidence-based, listing and de-listing by the Committee, and need for a greater 
transparency in its working methods. Besides, India also submitted listing proposals of terrorists 
who were involved in cross-border terrorist attacks on India. On 16 January 2023, India’s efforts 
bore fruits when the ISIL/Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee designated Lashkar-E-Tayyiba terrorist 
Abdul Rehman Makki to the sanctions list. Makki was involved in several terrorist attacks on 
Indian soil, including the 26/11 Mumbai terrorist attack. This was the first listing of a Pakistani 
terrorist by India, as a designating state to the listing proposal. 
 
 
4.19 India has been continuously supporting the UN efforts, including through providing 
financial support for various UN counter terrorism related capacity building programmes. In 
recent years, India has contributed more than US$ 2 million to the UN Office of Counter 
Terrorism in support of its global programmes to counter financing of terrorism as well as 
stemming terrorists’ travels. 
 
    
4.20 The Committee observed that during its chairmanship of the Counter Terrorism 
Committee (1373 Committee) of the UN in 2022, India has prioritized the issues of terrorism in 
South Asia, expansion of terrorism in Africa, use of Internet and ICT for terrorist narratives, 
maritime security and use of new and emerging technologies for terrorist purposes. When further 
asked   to state the initiatives spearheaded by India to counter terrorism in South Asia and to 
meet the challenges on account of expansion of terrorism in Africa along with the tangible 
outcome in this regard, the Ministry has informed that during its tenure in the UNSC in 2021-22, 
India submitted the names of five known terrorists [Abdul Rehman Makki, Abdul Rauf Asghar, 
Sajid Mir, Shahid Mehmood and Hafiz Talha Saeed] for listing under the UNSC 1267 [Al-Qaeda 
and ISIL] Sanctions regime. Out of these, the Sanctions Committee accepted to list Abdul 
Rehman Makki in the sanctions list on 16 January, 2023.  
4.21 It may be noted that the Sanctions Committees of the UNSC work on the basis of 
consensus by the membership of the UNSC and even one member state placing a “hold” delays 

74 
 
the decision of the Committee, until the member state lifts the “hold” or “objects” to the 
proposal.  
4.22 Regarding the manner in which the Internet and ICT as well as new and emerging 
technologies have been used for terrorist narratives/purposes and the counter measure adopted by 
the Counter Terrorism Committee during India’s chairmanship, the Ministry has stated that 
during its term in the Security Council, India chaired the important Counter Terrorism 
Committee (1373 Committee) during the year 2022. The Committee plays a very important role 
in UN led efforts to strengthen the collective international efforts to prevent and counter 
terrorism by fortifying the institutional, legislative and policy framework of member states, 
keeping in mind the national perspective to effectively prevent and counter terrorism in all its 
forms and manifestations. 
4.23 As a Chair of the CTC, India also hosted a Special Meeting of the CTC in Mumbai and 
Delhi on 28 and 29 October 2022, which adopted a “Delhi Declaration” on “Countering the use 
of new and emerging technologies for terrorist purposes”.   
4.24 The Internet and ICT as well as new and emerging technologies have been used for 
terrorist narratives/purposes in the following manners:- 
(i) As Facilitator: The Internet is actively exploited by terrorists to carry on terrorist acts, 
incitement to commit acts of terrorism, radicalization and recruitment of terrorists, dissemination 
of illegal content, facilitating communication between terrorist actors and the training of 
potential recruits. 
(ii) As Propaganda mechanism: The posting of journalist beheadings online and the arrests of 
numerous nationals attempting to join terrorist organizations are examples to suggest that 
terrorists are increasingly using social media to spread their ideology and false narrative to attract 
and recruit members. 
(iii) As Proxy: Further, "About 90% of organized terrorism on the Internet is being carried out 
through social media." Al-Qaeda, ISIS and other prohibited terrorist organizations have moved 
their online presence to You Tube, Twitter, Facebook, Instagram, and other social media outlets. 
(iv) Use of Virtual Private Network (VPN) / Virtual Private Service (VPS) to bypass geo-fencing 
feature and target Government Infrastructure. 
4.25 When asked to furnish the details of measures taken, viz, assets freeze, travel ban, arms 
embargo, etc. by the 1267/1989 Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee in respect of India and other 
member countries during the last three years, the Ministry responded that the UNSC 1267 [Al-
Qaida and ISIL] Sanctions Committee has taken various action on amending the list of the 
Sanctioned individuals and entities, including through listing and delisting of some of those. The 
action taken by the Committee in the last three years are available on : 

75 
 
https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/sanctions/1267/press-releases and the consolidated list is 
available at : https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/content/un-sc-consolidated-list  
 
4.26 In India, adequate measures have been taken in the form of legislation and institutional 
framework for implementation of sanctions for assets freeze, travel ban and arms embargo.  The 
Unlawful Activity (Prevention) Act, 1967 is the principal legal regime for the purpose of 
freezing of assets. As per MHA’s order dated 02.02.2021, the procedure has been enumerated. 
However, no assets have been attached and no account has been frozen under Section 51A of the 
Unlawful Activity (Prevention) Act, 1967 in respect of UNSCR 1267/1989 Al-Qaida Sanction 
List as no match was found. 
4.27 The consolidated list of individuals and entities placed on the Al-Qaida Sanctions List, 
country-wise is available at: https://www.un.org/securitycouncil/content/un-sc-consolidated-list.  
 
4.28 On the action taken against those States who have not taken any action to implement 
the sanctions regime against the individuals and entities placed on the Al-Qaida Sanctions List, 
the Committee have been informed that the determination of violation of sanctions and action 
against such countries under Chapter VII of the UN Charter are to be taken by the UN Security 
Council, including those provided under Article 41 of the Charter (The Security Council may 
decide what measures not involving the use of armed force are to be employed to give effect to 
its decisions, and it may call upon the Members of the United Nations to apply such measures. 
These may include complete or partial interruption of economic relations and of rail, sea, air, 
postal, telegraphic, radio, and other means of communication, and the severance of diplomatic 
relations.”) 
 
4.29 From India, only one person namely Dawood Ibrahim Kaskar has been placed under 
listing criteria (QDi 135) by the UNSC 1267 Sanctions Committee. 
 
4.30 When enquired whether India has sent any request for addition of names in the Al-Qaida 
Sanctions List and the outcome of the same, the Ministry has stated that during its tenure in the 
UNSC in 2021-22, India submitted names of five known terrorists [Abdul Rehman Makki, 
Abdul Rauf Asghar, Sajid Mir, Shahid Mehmood and Hafiz Talha Saeed] for listing under the 
UNSC 1267 [Al-Qaeda and ISIL] Sanctions regime. Out of these, the Sanctions Committee 
accepted to list Abdul Rehman Makki in the sanctions list on 16 January, 2023.  
4.31 On being asked about the efforts being made by India for de-politicization of sanctions 
regime, evidence-based, listing and de-listing by the Al-Qaida Sanctions Committee,  need for a 
greater transparency in its working methods and the response received in this regard, the 
Ministry has informed that as member of the UNSC during 2021-22, India participated in the 
review process of the Guidelines for operation of the UNSC 1267 [Al Qaida and ISIL] Sanctions 

76 
 
Committee at the UN Security Council and persistently put forth its suggestions on amending the 
guidelines, focusing on depoliticization of the functioning of the Committee and making its 
decisions on listing and delisting evidence-based and transparent. The review is ongoing and will 
be carried out by the current membership of the UNSC.  
 
4.32 Further, during its tenure in the UNSC in 2021-22, India strongly took up the case for 
depoliticization of the Committee, along with making its decisions on listing and delisting 
evidence based and transparent, with various members of the UNSC. The same case was also 
made in the statements delivered in the UNSC, including by our External Affairs Minister.  
         
4.33 The Committee also observed that the Counter-Terrorism Committee (CTC) is 
responsible for monitoring the implementation of UNSC Resolution 1373, which requested 
countries to implement a number of measures intended to enhance their legal and institutional 
ability to counter terrorist activities. On further asked whether the CTC has asked India to 
implement any measure intended to enhance its their legal and institutional ability to counter 
terrorist activities, the Ministry has informed that UNSCR 1373 is a Resolution by the UNSC, 
which calls on all member states to implement the measures intended to curb terrorism and as 
such India also takes measures in the same spirit.  
 
4.34 The Ministry of Home Affairs, Government of India designates/lists individual terrorist 
or organization under Section 35 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 on its own 
motion or pursuant to requests received from other countries through the MEA, under the 
UNSCR 1373 (2001). 
4.35 Measures have been taken in the form of legislation and institutional framework for 
implementation of sanctions for assets freeze, travel ban and arms embargo.  The Unlawful 
Activity (Prevention) Act, 1967 is the principal legal regime.  
4.36 The Government of India issued revised procedure on 2nd February, 2021 for expeditious 
and effective implementation of Section 51A of Unlawful Activity (Prevention) Act, 1967 and  
subsequent modification dated 15th March, 2023, making the provision applicable to the 
individual terrorist/terrorist organizations designated domestically, and providing for basic 
expenses and unfreezing of funds, financial assets or economic resources.  
4.37 Further, India is fully complying with the UN sanction regime against individuals and 
entities vide UNSCR 1267, 1373 and subsequent resolutions. Till now, the Government has 
declared 44 entities as terrorist organizations and has designated 56 individuals as terrorists. 
        

77 
 
4.38 The Committee observed that India organized a Ministerial level briefing on the threat 
posed by the ISIL or Da’esh, highlighting the rise of ISIL’s regional affiliates in several 
countries of Africa as well as in Afghanistan and enquired about the global response to counter 
the rise of ISIL’s regional affiliates in several countries of Africa as well as in Afghanistan. The 
Ministry has informed that as a result of India's efforts, there is enhanced concern and awareness 
in the international community regarding rise of ISIL’s regional affiliates in several countries of 
Africa and Afghanistan and challenges arising out of it. On 29th August 2021, the Security 
Council adopted a resolution demanding, inter alia, that Afghan territory is not used to threaten 
or attack any country or to shelter or train terrorists or to plan or finance terrorist attacks against 
any country. The Resolution also refers to individuals and entities designated under the 1267 Al-
Qaeda Sanctions Committee [which includes Laskar-e-Tayyiba (LeT) and Jaish-e-Mohammad 
(JEM)]. 
4.39 The Ministry has also stated that a special meeting of the Counter Terrorism Committee 
was held in Mumbai and New Delhi on 28 and 29 October, 2002. At the end of the special 
meeting, the Delhi Declaration on countering the use of new and emerging technologies was 
issued. On being asked about the countries which participated in the said meeting, the Ministry 
has stated that as the Committee comprises of members of the UNSC, the meeting saw participation 
from all members of the UNSC viz. India, US, UK, China, Russia, France, Brazil, UAE, Kenya, 
Gabon, Ghana, Albania, Ireland, Mexico and Norway. Further, the representatives from 
incoming member states of the UNSC also participated viz. Malta, Switzerland, Mozambique, 
Japan and Ecuador.  
 
4.40 On the strategies proposed to be adopted and the outcome of the Delhi Declaration so far, 
the Committee have been informed that the Delhi Declaration calls on member states to take 
measures to counter the terrorists’ use of new and emerging technologies and mainly sets the 
tasks for the Counter Terrorism Committee (CTC) such as : 
 
(a)  The CTC to work on recommendations on the three themes of the CTC meeting namely 
“Countering Terrorist Exploitation of ICT and Emerging Technologies”, “Threats and 
opportunities related to new payment technologies and fund raising methods” and “Threats posed 
by misuse of unmanned aerial systems (UAS) by terrorists” after the conclusion of the Special 
Meeting.   
 
(b)  The CTC to continue to assist Member States, with the support of CTC Executive 
Directorate (CTED), to achieve full implementation of all relevant Security Council resolutions 
that pertain to countering the use of new and emerging technologies for terrorist purposes, and 
 
(c) The CTC may develop, with the support of CTED, set of non-binding guiding principles, 
taking into consideration the above, with a view to assisting Member States to counter the threat 
posed by the use of new and emerging technologies for terrorist purposes, including by 
compiling good practices on the opportunities offered by the same set of technologies to counter 
the threat, consistent with international human rights and international humanitarian law. 

78 
 
 
4.41 As such, it is for the CTC and CTED to take forward the outcome of the Delhi 
Declaration.  
 
4.42 On being asked whether there is any mechanism to review the status of implementation 
of the Delhi Declaration, the Ministry has informed that the “Delhi Declaration” does not 
provide for any mechanism to review the status of implementation of the Declaration. It is 
incumbent on the UN Member States to strive to implement the Declaration.   
 
4.43 Regarding the initiatives taken so far for countering exploitation of information and 
communication technologies by terrorists, the Committee have been informed that to counter 
such acts Government has intensified Cyber Patrolling for identifying terror networks and along 
with Counter Terrorism (CT) hotspots, surveillance over the encrypted devices as well dark web 
besides initiating capacity building programmes for Law Enforcement Agencies (LEAs). 
4.44 NIA is empowered to probe cases of cyber terrorism under the NIA (Amendment) Act, 
2019. A dedicated division namely, “Anti-Cyber Terrorism Division” has been created in the 
NIA for focused investigation of offences relating to cyber terrorism, including exploitation of 
information and communication technologies by terrorists. 
4.45 Besides, India hosted special session of United Nations Security Council Counter-
Terrorism Committee (UNCTC) (October 28-29, 2022) wherein the overarching theme was 
countering the use of Internet and drones by terrorist groups. In another meeting, ‘No Money For 
Terror’ (NMFT) (November 18-19, 2022), the issues of emerging technologies in the field of terror 
financing were discussed.  
4.46 When enquired about the initiatives taken and achievements so far to ensure maritime 
security, especially in the Indo-pacific region, the Ministry has stated that during India’s 
Presidency of the UNSC in August 2021, India hosted a High-Level Open Debate on 'Enhancing 
Maritime Security - A Case for International Cooperation' on 9 August 2021. In more ways than 
one, this was a historic first. It was Chaired by the Hon’ble PM and it was the first case when an 
Indian PM Chaired and addressed a UNSC meeting. The event saw high level participation from 
UNSC members. Russia, Kenya and Vietnam participated at the level of Head of State/Head of 
Government, and seven other Foreign and other Ministers also participated. 
4.47 It was also the first time that maritime security was discussed under the agenda item of 
international peace and security. While the council has in the past discussed issues related to 
piracy and armed robbery at sea, this was the first such holistic discussion. 
4.48 The outcome document of this meeting was a Presidential Statement (PRST) on Maritime 
Security piloted by India. It was first such UNSC product adopted by the unanimous consent of 
all 15 (fifteen) member states with a holistic view of maritime security including UNCLOS, 
terrorism, freedom of navigation, piracy, trans-national crimes and other illicit activities, 

79 
 
trafficking in arms, humans and others, strengthening international and regional cooperation, 
including capacity building. It was well received by the UNSC Members and India’s stewardship 
of anchoring this important issue in the UNSC for the first time, with a holistic view was widely 
appreciated by the larger UN audience. India’s success in steering the council to discuss an issue 
that had remained outside its consideration represented a remarkable breakthrough. 
4.49 Domestically, in its winter session of 2022, Parliament passed the Maritime Anti-Piracy 
Bill (MAPB) 2022 moved by External Affairs Minister (EAM) Dr. S. Jaishankar. MAPB 2022 
will provide the necessary enabling domestic legal framework to try piracy related offences in 
India. The provisions of MAPB 2022 are applicable to the high seas, where the offense of piracy 
is committed. The Bill defines ‘piracy’ as a criminal offence and provides sound legal basis, 
certainty and clarity for speedy trial of piracy related offences in India. It will act as a deterrent 
against pirates and promote safety of India’s maritime trade, including the safety of our vessels 
and crew members. The legislation will also be a step forward towards further cooperation with 
the signatories of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS), 1982 – which India 
ratified in 1995. 
B. INDIA  and FATF 
4.50 The FATF is an inter-governmental body established in 1989. Its Secretariat is housed at 
the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) headquarters in Paris.  Its 
objective is to set standards and promote effective implementation of legal, regulatory and 
operational measures for combating money laundering, terrorist financing and other related 
threats to the integrity of the international financial system.  The FATF is therefore a “policy-
making body” which works to generate the necessary political will to bring about national 
legislative and regulatory reforms in these areas. The FATF has expanded its work to include 
Proliferation Financing and Virtual Assets in  its Agenda. 
 
4.51 It has 40 members - 38 countries and 2 regional bodies (i.e. the European Commission 
and the Gulf Cooperation Council).  All P-S countries and most of the EU countries are members 
of the FATF.  In addition, major economies like India, Brazil, Argentina, Mexico, Canada, 
Malaysia, Singapore are also members. The decisions in the FATF are based on consensus. 
 
4.52 The FATF works through its Plenary meeting, which takes place three times per year.  
The report of the FATF Plenary meeting is submitted to G-20 Finance Ministers through an 
elected President from among its member states. The term of the President is for 2 years. Mr. T. 
Raja Kumar of Singapore is the current President of the FATF. 
 
4.53 So far, the FATF has issued 40 Recommendations. It monitors progress in  implementing 
these Recommendations through "peer reviews" (Mutual Evaluations).  Evaluation is carried out 
on (a) technical compliance i.e. existence of legislative measures  and (b) effectiveness of 
legislative measures to curb money laundering and terror financing risks. In case a country is 
found significantly deficient on these aspects, a high level political commitment is sought from 
the country concerned and an Action Plan with definite timelines is framed and the country is put 
in the FATF list of countries under increased monitoring, i.e. ‘Grey List’.  In case, a country is 

80 
 
unable to complete a large part of the Action Plan within the stipulated time, it runs the risks of 
being included in the ‘Black List’.  Inclusion in the ‘Grey List’ entails enhanced caution and 
scrutiny with respect to  financial transactions of the country concerned whereas inclusion in the 
‘Black List’ may entail initiation of counter measures against the non-compliant country in order 
to safeguard the international financial system from money laundering and terror financing risks 
emanating from such country.  At present, North Korea, Iran and Myanmar are the countries in 
the Black List while 23 countries are in Grey List. 
 
4.54  In a written reply furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has informed that India has 
been a member of FATF since 2010. It has actively participated in the discussions in FATF 
revolving around AML/CFT/CPF efforts undertaken by different jurisdictions. In particular, 
India, along with other FATF members has time and again highlighted the risk posed by 
Pakistan to the global financial system through its ML and TF activities.  
4.55 India has actively participated in FATF as well as in FATF Style Regional Bodies 
(FSRB). It participates in periodic sharing of intelligence updates on financing of Al Qaeda, 
ISIL, and their affiliates. 
 
4.56 India also actively participated in development of a guidance by FATF titled ‘Terrorist 
Financing Risk Assessment Guidance’ in 2019. This report helps jurisdictions assess the terrorist 
financing threat posed by global and regional terrorist groups, their systemic vulnerabilities, risk 
posed by the threats and vulnerabilities. The report presents rational methodologies that can be 
used for national risk assessment of terrorism financing. India also participated in formulation of 
revised guidance on Beneficial Ownership  as part of FATF work project. It is also participant of 
many other live projects of FATF.  
 
4.57 India as a FATF member works together with other members in the form of a task force 
toward the common objectives of the FATF Ministerial Mandate to tackle money laundering, 
terrorist and proliferation financing. 
 
4.58  India participates in the discussions and decision-making of the task force, including 
through:  
 
- Assumption of leadership / advisory positions (FATF President and Vice President, 
Steering Group members, working group co-chairs, other sub-group co-chairs and project leads). 
The Head of the India delegation to FATF, Mr. Vivek Aggarwal, Additional Secretary (Revenue) 
is a part of the Steering group.  
 
- Making proposals to the Plenary and working groups on policy issues and seeing them 
discussed.  
 
- Having access to all of the confidential and non-confidential documents, including but 
not restricted to Plenary, working group or other subgroup, conference, training, or consultation 
documents, within enough time prior to meetings or events to allow appropriate consideration 
of and internal co-ordination on the subjects considered by the FATF or its subgroups.  
 

81 
 
- Providing input – in writing or orally – to the discussions and decision-making processes 
of the FATF, its working groups and other subgroups.  
 
- Having a voice in the selection of the FATF President, Vice-President, members of the 
Steering Group and working group co-chairs, as well as the strategic planning and resource 
allocation for the FATF and its various subgroups in accordance with its Ministerial Mandate.  
 
- Having adequate representation (at least one seat) in any FATF, working group or 
subgroup meeting. India fulfils its obligations relating to financial, technical and human 
resource contributions, as well as other aspects of the work of the FATF.  
 
- Provides adequate financial support through Annual contribution as agreed by the Plenary 
to ensure the good functioning of the task force. 
 
- Providing experts for other task force initiatives (country reviews, policy discussions, 
conducting research, drafting documents, etc.). India is a part of the contact group for reviewing 
membership of Indonesia in FATF. 
 
- Designating representatives (Heads of Delegation) who serve as the main point of contact 
and participate in FATF meetings or other activities. 
 
- Contributing to FATF outreach to the private sector, including through active 
participation in FATF initiatives with the private Sector. India has nominated private sector 
representatives to the Private Sector consultative Forum, 2023. 
 
- Directly participates in FATF mutual evaluations (assessors and reviewers).India had 
given assessors for the mutual evaluation of New Zealand, Qatar  and MER review for Iraq, 
British Virgin islands. Reviewers for grey and black listed countries like Myanmar, south Africa, 
Nigeria, Tanzania, Vietnam, Philippines. 
 
4.59 FATF Cell, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance acts as the national focal point 
for effective liaison with the FATF and other FATF styled Regional Bodies. FATF Cell looks 
after the coordination of work related to FATF/APG/EAG Secretariats. FATF Cell regularly 
coordinates with agencies of India’s anti ML/CFT infrastructure namely ED, FIU-IND, RBI, 
SEBI, IRDAI, MHA, NIA, MEA etc. 
 
4.60 The names of countries included in the ‘Grey List’ and ‘Black List’ of the FATF List 
are as under:- 
 
FATF Black List  (As on 28 April 2023) 
 
1. North Korea/Democratic People’s Republic of Korea (DPRK) 
2. Iran 
3. Myanmar 
 
FATF Grey List (As on 28 April 2023) 

82 
 
 
1. Albania 
2. Barbados 
3. Burkina Faso 
4. Cayman Islands 
5. Democratic Republic of Congo 
6. Gibraltar 
7. Haiti 
8. Jamaica 
9. Jordan 
10. Mali 
11. Mozambique 
12. Nigeria 
13. Panama 
14. Philippines 
15. Senegal 
16. South Africa 
17. South Sudan 
18. Syria 
19. Tanzania 
20. Turkiye 
21. Uganda 
22. United Arab Emirates 
23. Yemen 
 
 
4.61 During the course of evidence on 29 March 2023, the Committee sought to know whether 
Artificial Intelligence is installed with respect to detecting the transfer of virtual assets to which 
the representative of the Department of Revenue responded as under:   
 “….so far as the suspicious transactions and Virtual Asset Service Providers’ red flags 
 are concerned, they are through the FIU Artificial Intelligence System where the STRs 
 are being reported and they will get monitored under the AI module of FINNet that we 
 have built in FIU”.  
      
4.62 On the global response regarding terror financing activity through virtual assets, the 
representative of the Department of Revenue during the course of evidence, stated: 
 “So far as the global response is concerned, FATF has revised its standards and under the 
 revised standards, terror financing activity through new technology, that is, virtual assets, 
 is to be monitored.  The travel rule is now compulsory to be implemented by all the 
 countries.  There is a different level of implementation by different jurisdictions.  Europe 
 has implemented the complete regulations on virtual assets and the movement of money 
 on new technology.  US has done part of it but much of the developing world has not 
 done much on this particular activity including our neighbours which are our major 

83 
 
 concern.  Getting the information from the areas of concern is still a challenge for us 
 including the flow of money from our neighbouring countries.  We have four major terror 
 theatres that is, our western borders which is J&K and Punjab, our North-eastern borders 
 where there is an issue of insurgency, the left-wing extremism and radicalization theatres. 
 All these theatres are now being very closely monitored by all the intelligence agencies.  
 We have regular meetings.  We have our daily information sharing protocol and wherever 
 there is a red-flag indication from the information that is coming in from any of these 
 agencies in the MAC platform, there is an operational analysis and that is shared with law 
 enforcement agencies.  There is a robust mechanism that India has developed.  Of course, 
 the challenges are there but as the challenges are coming, we are meeting them, by 
 bringing in the proper regulatory framework as well as the actionable implementation 
 framework”. 
4.63 Responding to the query of the Committee regarding protocol for information sharing on 
virtual assets, the representative of the Department of Revenue stated as under: 
 “….there is a protocol for information sharing for virtual assets in the entire world but the 
 problem is that only in those countries credible information is coming where they have 
 the travel rule applicable in their own law. 
 Like in USA, it is there now. In Europe it is there. But suppose you take information from 
 United Arab Emirates or Pakistan or some of the countries which are areas of concern for 
 us, even African countries, this protocol is not fully applicable, those jurisdictions are 
 being now persuaded by FATF as a global network to implement it. Once the FATF 
 standard is implemented all over the world, then this information flow will come. But 
 presently, it is a challenge. The full information flow is not there. But so far as Indian 
 Virtual Asset Service Providers are concerned, now the law has been made clear that all 
 Indian exchanges which are dealing with virtual assets, will have to maintain the 
 information of the sender, if the sender is from any other country, then that information 
 also will have to be maintained. But that is only for transactions that will be through 
 organised exchanges. But if the transaction is not through the virtual asset service 
 provider of Indian origin, then it is a challenge for us to get the information even now”. 
4.64 When asked whether there is any regular mechanism to monitor Terrorist Financing 
and Terrorist Financing risk on an ongoing basis, the Ministry has stated that the Directorate of 
Enforcement has strong internal mechanism to monitor Terror Financing Risk. At the 
headquarters level a Special Task Force unit has been established which specifically look after 
the Drug related and Terror Financing ML offenses. Information related to the relevant 
scheduled offence is sought from NIA & state Police authorities at regular intervals through 
correspondence as well as multi- agency meetings to initiate action under provisions of PMLA. 
Further, inputs are also received from intelligence agencies. 
 
        
 

84 
 
4.65 On the challenges being faced in countering terrorist financing and assessing 
Terrorist Financing risk in the country as well as the counter terrorist financing strategies of 
the Government, the Ministry has stated that the main challenge in Terror Financing (TF) cases 
is identifying trail of money as generally the proceeds of crime are transferred through hawala 
channels or in form of religious donations of small amounts. Further, unlike in money 
laundering cases, in TF cases no rotation of funds is observed. 
4.66 The Government of India is committed to tackle the menace of Terrorist Financing 
in the country and prepare strategies accordingly. Further, the Government of India keeps on 
evolving its strategies to be on par with the terrorists’ organisations. As stated in above reply, it 
is again submitted that in terror financing cases, ED has a very important role both in tracing 
the proceeds of crime and its laundering by the terrorists. ED not only attaches the Proceeds of 
Crime and takes possession of the same, thus, deprives the accused of enjoying fruits of crime. 
Further, Prosecution Complaints is also filed against the terror accused under the PMLA for 
confiscation of proceeds of crime and conviction of accused. The Directorate of Enforcement 
tal‹es action both under the provisions of PMLA and the Foreign Exchange Management Act, 
1999 (FEMA) to disrupt the TF activities in India. 
 
C. NMFT Ministerial Conference 
 
4.67 The Committee observed that No Money for Terror’ (NMFT) Ministerial Conference 
on Countering Terror Financing was held on 18 & 19 November 2022 in New Delhi and 
enquired about the issues discussed, consensus arrived at and outcome of the Conference. In a 
written reply, the Ministry has stated that Illicit Flow of Funds (IFFs) is one of constantly 
growing major issues that has captured the attention of the international community in recent 
years, due to its high incidence. In this connection, the 3rd No Money for Terror (NMFT) 
Conference on Counter Terrorism Financing was held on 18-19 November, 2022 in 
continuation to first two conferences, held in France and Melbourne in 2018 and 2019, 
respectively. 
4.68 The conference discussed on technical, legal, regulating and co-operational aspects of 
terrorist financing. During the conference, deliberations were focused on: - 
 Global trends in terrorism & terrorism financing. 
 Use of formal and informal channels of funds for terrorism. 
 Emerging technologies & terror financing 
 International cooperation to address challenges in combating financing terrorism. 
 
4.69  The conference was attended by 77 Countries and 16 Multi lateral organizations. This was proved a unique forum for participating countries and organizations to discuss the effectiveness of the current international regime of combating the Financing of Terror, and to discuss solutions to emerging challenges. On November 19, 2022, 

85 
 
during the concluding session, Union Home Minister offered to establish a Permanent NMFT Ministerial Conference (NMC) Secretariat in India, in order to sustain the continued global focus on countering the financing of terrorism. 
D. Counter Terrorism under India’s G-20 Presidency 
4.70 The Committee observed that India has prioritized counter terrorism under its 
Presidency of G-20 and enquired about the means and mechanism in this regard. The Ministry 
has informed that India’s G20 priorities include international peace and harmony, of which 
cooperation in the field of Counter Terrorism is an important element. The Chair’s Summary 
and Outcome Document of the G20 Foreign Ministers Meeting (FMM) in New Delhi on 1-2 
March 2023, stated as follows: 
 “Recalling the Leaders' Declaration in Antalya (2015), Hamburg (2017) and Osaka 
 (2019), we condemn terrorism in all its forms and manifestations, including those on the 
 basis of xenophobia, racism and other forms of intolerance, or in the name of religion or 
 belief, recognizing the commitment of all religions to peace. It constitutes one of the most 
 serious threats to international peace and security. We strongly condemn all terrorist acts 
 against critical infrastructure, including critical energy facilities, and against other 
 vulnerable targets. All acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their 
 motivation, wherever, whenever and by whomsoever committed. Effective counter-
 terrorism measures, support for the victims of terrorism and the protection of human 
 rights are not conflicting goals, but complementary and mutually reinforcing. A holistic 
 approach on the basis of international law can effectively counter terrorism.  
 The nature and scope of linkages between terrorism and organized crime, including 
 trafficking in arms and drugs, corruption, money laundering and other crimes which may 
 support terrorism, vary by context, and require effective criminal justice responses. 
 Efforts to increase the effectiveness of international cooperation should be strengthened 
 to deny terrorist groups safe haven, freedom of operations, movement and recruitment, as 
 well as financial, material or political support. The international community should step 
 up efforts to effectively combat these growing threats including through enhancing 
 collective measures to counter money laundering and terrorism financing. We will also 
 step up our fight against corruption.  
 We express concern about illicit trafficking and diversion of small arms and light 
 weapons. International cooperation among States is critical to combat these phenomena, 
 including export, import controls, and tracing.” 
 Cooperation in the field of Counter Terrorism is pursued through relevant bilateral, 
 regional and multilateral frameworks.” 
 

86 
 
4.71 When enquired about the issues discussed and declarations adopted for countering global 
terrorism including de-radicalization strategies during the G20 Summit held recently and India’s 
role and contributions in this regard, the Ministry has stated that during India’s G20 Presidency 
high priority has been accorded to the subject of counter-terrorism; and serious efforts have been 
made to achieve consensus on effective global counter terrorism measures. In February, 2023, 
during the first G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors Meeting, the G20 members 
recognized “the urgent need to establish effective anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism 
financing regulations and oversight of virtual assets, especially to prevent their use in money 
laundering and terrorism financing, in line with FATF Standards”. In March, 2023 during the 
G20 Foreign Ministers’ Meeting (FMM), India was successful in including a separate section on 
counter-terrorism in the FMM Outcome Document wherein all Foreign “condemned terrorism in 
all its forms and manifestations, including those on the basis of xenophobia, racism and other 
forms of intolerance, or in the name of religion or belief”. Since February, India has positively 
worked towards prioritizing discussion on counter-terrorism in various G20 fora in order to 
enhance global counter-terrorism efforts and to build consensus on the subject. In July, India 
hosted the G20 Conference on “Crime and Security in the Age of NFTs, AI and Metaverse” 
where traditional, non-traditional and new and emerging challenges, including terrorism and its 
financing, money laundering, misinformation and disinformation were discussed in detail by 
subject experts and practitioners from the G20 and guest countries. Such strong language on 
counter terrorism in the G20 New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration is a significant improvement from 
past G20 Presidencies. 
4.72 The G20 Leaders in the G20 New Delhi Leaders’ Declaration recognized terrorism as 
“one of the most serious threats to international peace and security” and “condemn(ed) terrorism 
in all its forms and manifestations, including those on the basis of xenophobia, racism and other 
forms of intolerance, or in the name of religion or belief, recognizing the commitment of all 
religions to peace.” They “strongly condemn(ed) all terrorist acts against critical infrastructure, 
including critical energy facilities, and against other vulnerable targets while acknowledging that 
all acts of terrorism are criminal and unjustifiable, regardless of their motivation, wherever, 
whenever and by whomsoever committed.” They emphasized that “efforts to increase the 
effectiveness of international cooperation should be strengthened to deny terrorist groups safe 
haven, freedom of operations, movement and recruitment, as well as financial, material or 
political support.”  
 
4.73 On being asked whether there is any mechanism for the implementation aspect of such 
declarations, the Ministry informed that G20 Declarations and commitments resonate across the 
world and are carried forward by concerned international organizations and sovereign 
governments, through specific actions and concrete steps. G20 is a premier agenda setting body 
of the World. In the field of counter-terrorism, the commitment of the G20 Leaders is expected 

87 
 
to be further amplified by international fora such as the UN System, including its Counter-
terrorism Committee, and FATF, including for framing the global policy approach in this area.  
                                                                                              
4.74 The Committee note that India is party to all the 13 UN Sectoral conventions 
relating to terrorism and has supported UNSC Resolution 1269 and 1368 which clearly 
identify terrorism as a threat to international peace and security. Further India has fully 
implemented resolutions 1267, 1333 and 1363 relating to terrorism by Taliban regime in 
Afghanistan. India has also taken several initiatives for strengthening the UN Counter 
Terrorism architecture led by United Nations Office of Counter Terrorism (UNOCT) and 
regularly contributed towards various UNOCT programmes and the UN Trust Fund for 
Counter Terrorism. The Committee further note that India has also successfully hosted the 
Special Meeting of the UN Security Council’s Counter Terrorism Committee (UNCTC) in 
Mumbai and Delhi on 28-29 October 2022. Besides, the Terror related domestic laws  have 
been amended in order to ensure action against UN designated individuals and entities. 
The Committee acknowledge the Government’s commitment to countering terrorism and 
desire that it should continue to prioritize the fight against global terrorism by fortifying its 
institutional, legislative and policy framework domestically and at the same time strongly 
advocating the need for UN member States to do so. The Committee also desire that India 
should persistently advocate the need for actively supporting the efforts of the UN and its 
bodies including its global capacity building programmes, regular and substantial 
contribution to the UN Trust Fund for Counter Terrorism, effective implementation of all 
the resolutions of the UN General Assembly and Security Council in letter and spirit etc. by 
member States. The Committee further urge the Government to play a pro-active role in 
strengthening the collective international efforts to prevent and counter terrorism through 
the United Nations Office of Counter Terrorism. 
          (Recommendation No. 36)  
4.75 The Committee note that during its tenure in the UNSC in 2021-22, India has 
submitted the names of five known terrorists for listing under the UNSC 1267 [Al-Qaeda 
and ISIL] Sanctions regime. Out of these, Abdul Rehman Makki has been accepted for 
listing by the Sanctions Committee on 16 January, 2023. The Committee desire that India 

88 
 
should continue to pursue the matter of listing the remaining four terrorists under the 
sanctions regime to thwart/curb the nefarious activities of these terrorists against the 
country. 
          (Recommendation No. 37)  
4.76 The Committee note that the Global Counter Terrorism Strategy (GCTS) of the 
United Nations which was adopted by consensus in 2006 is a unique global instrument to 
enhance national, regional and international efforts to counter terrorism. The Committee 
understand that during the negotiations of the 7th review of the GCTS, India has succeeded 
in deterring efforts against any attempts to divide and dilute the global efforts to fight 
terrorism by focusing on few manifestations of terrorism while ignoring the rest. The 
Committee desire that the Government should continue to constructively engage in the 
negotiations during upcoming reviews of GCTS after taking stock of the progress in 
implementation of the Strategy, identification of the priority areas for focus and coming up 
with constructive suggestions for future implementation by the UN system.  The Committee 
also stress the need for member States to develop strong political will to root out terrorism, 
strengthening member States’ capacity to counter terrorist threats and ensuring better 
coordination with the UN Counter Terrorism Architecture and programmes and urge the 
Government to take further initiatives in this regard.  
          (Recommendation No. 38)  
4.77 The Committee note that the UN Global Counter Terrorism Coordination Compact 
was established in 2019 and has a close and mutually reinforcing relationship with the 
Global Counter Terrorism Forum (GCTF).   The formation of the UN Global CT Compact 
comprising of 42 entities including INTERPOL, Inter Parliamentary Union and World 
Customs Organisation has streamlined and strengthened the UN system-wide prioritization 
and implementation of CT and Preventing Violent Extremism (PVE) measures. The 
Committee further note that presently, UNOCT in partnership with various 
counterterrorism global compact entities, international and regional organizations as well 
as member States, runs more than 20 global capacity building programmes to assist 
member States to prevent and counter the threat of terrorism. The Committee understand 
that effective utilization of the UN Global CT Compact platform and active participation in 

89 
 
the global capacity building programmes of the UNOCT would enhance collaboration, 
joint mobilization of resources and implementation of joint programmes and projects on 
counter terrorism and prevention of violent extremism and hence urge the Government to 
maintain close cooperation and coordination with all the entities. 
          (Recommendation No. 39)  
4.78 The Committee note that the three main subsidiary bodies established by the UN 
Security Council that deal with terrorism related issues are the 1267/1989 Al-Qaida 
Sanctions Committee, the Counter Terrorism Committee or 1373 Committee and the 1540 
Committee dealing with preventing non-State actors from acquiring weapons of mass 
destruction. The Committee understand that effective implementation of the UN Security 
Council’s Sanctions regime can be an effective tool in countering the activities of terrorists 
and terrorist groups by restricting their travel and suppressing their funding avenues and 
urge the Government to support the UN efforts wholeheartedly and collaborate actively 
with member States in this regard. On the need for de-politicization of the sanctions regime, 
evidence-based listing and de-listing with greater transparency by the Sanctions Committee, 
the Committee urge the Government to make persistent efforts at the UNSC to achieve the 
same. 
          (Recommendation No. 40)  
4.79 The Committee note that at a Special Meeting of the UNSC’s Counter Terrorism 
Committee hosted by India in Mumbai and Delhi on 28 and 29 October 2022, a strong 
Delhi Declaration on countering the use of new and emerging technologies for terrorist 
purposes was adopted.  The Declaration focused on the threat from unmanned aerial 
systems including drones, online radicalization and recruitment as well as terrorist 
financing through crypto currencies and other virtual means. The Committee stress the 
need for effective implementation of the Delhi Declaration by member States in the global 
fight against terrorism and urge the Government to take up the issue of conducting 
periodic review of its implementation in the Counter Terrorism Committee of the UNSC.   
 
          (Recommendation No. 41) 
 

90 
 
4.80 The Committee note that during India’s Presidency of the UNSC in August 2021, a 
High-Level Open Debate on 'Enhancing Maritime Security-A Case for International 
Cooperation' was held on 9 August 2021. The outcome document of this meeting was a 
Presidential Statement on Maritime Security piloted by India, the first such UNSC product 
adopted by the unanimous consent of all 15 member States with a holistic view of maritime 
security. The Committee hope that India will continue to take further initiatives to ensure 
maritime security, especially in the Indo-Pacific region. The Committee also urge the 
Government to work towards furthering cooperation with member States for effective 
implementation of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, freedom of navigation, 
enhancing capacities and capabilities on maritime security, etc. and strengthening the 
collective efforts and regional and international cooperation in combating piracy, trans-
national crimes, human trafficking, trafficking in arms and other illicit activities through 
the maritime route.   
          (Recommendation No. 42) 
 
4.81 The Committee note that the Financial Action Task Force (FATF) is an inter-
governmental body established in 1989 with the objective of setting standards and 
promoting effective implementation of legal, regulatory and operational measures for 
combating money laundering, terrorist financing and other related threats to the integrity 
of the international financial system.  It has 40 members - 38 countries and 2 regional 
bodies (i.e. the European Commission and the Gulf Cooperation Council). The Committee 
further note that the FATF has expanded its work to include Proliferation Financing and 
Virtual Assets in its Agenda. The Committee are aware of the new mode of terror financing 
adopted by terrorists/terrorist groups including virtual assets and stress the need for 
monitoring this new terror financing mode closely. The Committee desire that the 
Government should work in close coordination with the FATF and implement all the 
standards set by the body to curb the use of virtual assets by the terrorist groups and 
constantly monitor the progress in this regard. The need for implementation of the 
complete regulations on virtual assets by all the countries, particularly our neighbours 
must be voiced at various regional and multilateral fora. The Committee also desire that 
the Government should evolve an effective actionable implementation framework and 

91 
 
constantly review the working of the regulatory framework on virtual assets as well as the 
actionable implementation framework to meet any challenges emanating from use of new 
technology for terrorist financing in the country.       
              
          (Recommendation No. 43)  
 
4.82 The Committee note that India has actively participated in FATF as well as in FATF 
Style Regional Bodies (FSRB). It participates in periodic sharing of intelligence updates on 
financing of Al Qaeda, ISIL, and their affiliates. India also actively participated in 
development of a guidance by FATF titled ‘Terrorist Financing Risk Assessment Guidance’ 
in 2019, formulation of revised guidance on Beneficial Ownership as part of FATF work 
project and other live projects of FATF. India as a FATF member works together with other 
members in the form of a task force towards the common objectives of the FATF 
Ministerial Mandate to tackle money laundering, terrorist and proliferation financing. The 
Committee are of the view that focus should be given to pre-empt and prevent terrorist 
financing through new technology and virtual assets through optimum use of Artificial 
Intelligence and sharing of real time inputs. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
India and the FATF should work towards up-gradation of periodic sharing of intelligence 
updates on financing of Al Qaeda, ISIL, and their affiliates to real time sharing of 
intelligence updates to achieve the said goal. The Committee also desire that the 
Government should play a more pro-active role in FATF and improve its coordination with 
members of the task force to achieve the common objectives of tackling money laundering, 
terrorist and proliferation financing.  
          (Recommendation No. 44)  
4.83 The Committee note that the FATF Cell in the Department of Revenue, Ministry of 
Finance acts as the national focal point for effective liaison with the FATF and other FATF 
styled Regional Bodies. FATF Cell looks after the coordination of work related to 
FATF/APG/EAG Secretariats. FATF Cell regularly coordinates with agencies of India’s 
anti ML/CFT infrastructure namely ED, FIU-IND, RBI, SEBI, IRDAI, MHA, NIA, MEA 
etc. The Committee desire that the Government should work towards strengthening the 

92 
 
FATF Cell and expand its diplomatic outreach with FATF Cells of other countries to 
ensure closer cooperation and coordination.   
          (Recommendation No. 45) 
4.84 The Committee note that for monitoring of Terrorist Financing Risk, the 
Directorate of Enforcement has strong internal mechanism with a Special Task Force 
unit established at the headquarters level.  The Committee also note that in Terror 
Financing cases, the main challenge is identifying the trail of money as generally the 
proceeds of crime are transferred through hawala channels or in the form of religious 
donations of small amount. The Committee stress the need for overcoming the challenge 
in identifying the trail of money in Terror Financing cases and urge the MEA to extend 
all cooperation to the Directorate of Enforcement in this regard through diplomatic 
outreach and coordination with international agencies and organizations.  
        
          (Recommendation No. 46)  
4.85  The Committee note that the 3rd No Money for Terror (NMFT) Ministerial 
Conference on Countering Terror Financing was held on 18 & 19 November 2022 in New 
Delhi in which 77 countries and 16 multi lateral organizations participated. The Committee further note that at the concluding session, Union Home Minister h a s  offered to establish a Permanent NMFT Ministerial Conference (NMC) Secretariat in India, in order to sustain the continued global focus on countering the financing of 
terrorism. The Committee are of the view that establishment of a permanent NMC Secretariat would enhance cooperation and collaboration amongst the international community in suppressing the sources of terror funding and curbing the growth and expansion of terrorist activities globally. As a victim of terrorism for more than three decades, India would also benefit from the focused attention to countering the financing of terrorism. The Committee, therefore, urge the Government to pursue the matter for early finalization of all the modalities so that a permanent NMC Secretariat is established in India. 
          (Recommendation No. 47) 

93 
 
4.86 The Committee note that during India’s G20 Presidency, high priority has been 
accorded to the subject of counter-terrorism and serious efforts have been made to achieve 
consensus on effective global counter terrorism measures. The G20 Leaders in the G20 New 
Delhi Leaders’ Declaration recognized terrorism as one of the most serious threats to 
international peace and security and condemned terrorism and all terrorist acts. The 
Committee also note that the G20 Leaders emphasized that efforts to increase the 
effectiveness of international cooperation should be strengthened to deny terrorist groups 
safe haven, freedom of operations, movement and recruitment, as well as financial, 
material or political support. The Committee hope that India would play a pivotal role in 
strengthening international cooperation and ensuring effective coordinated response to 
root out safe havens of terrorist groups and curbing their freedom of operations, movement, 
recruitment and financial, material or political support. The Committee also desire that the 
Government should advocate the need to take specific actions and concrete steps by all the 
member States to combat all forms of terrorism and terrorist acts through the G20 forum 
and other international fora like the UN system and the FATF. 
          (Recommendation No. 48)  
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                                    P.P. CHAUDHARY,                                                      
31  January, 2024             Chairperson,                                
11 Magha, 1945 (Saka)                                       Committee on External Affairs 
 
  

94 
 
          ANNEXURE- I 
 
MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2021-22) HELD ON 22 JUNE, 2022 
 
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1625 hrs. in Main Committee Room, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary   –  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt. Preneet Kaur   
3. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi  
4. Shri  P.C. Mohan 
5. Smt. Queen Oja 
6. Dr. K.C. Patel 
7. Shri N.K. Premchandran 
8. Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
9 Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri K. J. Alphons 
11. Shri Brijlal  
12. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
 

95 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Saurabh Kumar  Secretary (East) 
2. Shri Rudrendra Tandon AS (BIMSTEC & SAARC) 
3. Shri Mahaveer Singhvi JS (CT) 
4. Ms. Yojna Patel JS (SCO) 
5. Shri Anil Kumar Rai JS (Parliament & Coordination) 
 
6. Shri J.P. Singh JS (PAI) 
7. Shri Devesh Uttam JS (CPV) 
8. Shri Raghuram S. Director (UNP) 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Praveen Vashista AS (CTCR), MHA 
2. Maj. General Manish Erry IG (Ops), NSG 
3. Shri Ashish Batra IG, NIA 
4. Ms. Chanchal Yadav Director (CT) 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    - Joint Secretary 
2. Ms. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director 
2. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
  

96 
 
  At the outset, Hon’ble Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and 
the representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs and Home Affairs to the sitting of the 
Committee convened to have briefing in connection with detailed examination of the subject 
‘Countering Global Terrorism at Regional and International Level’. He then drew the 
attention of all the witnesses to Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha 
pertaining to maintaining the confidentiality of the Proceedings and Direction 58 of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. Outlining the issues to be discussed, he requested the 
witnesses to introduce themselves before making submissions before the Committee.   
2. The Secretary (East) in the Ministry of External Affairs highlighted the initiatives 
taken by India in the global efforts to counter terrorism which inter alia included initiative to 
pilot the draft comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism; raising the issue of 
Pakistan’s continued support to cross border terrorism at bilateral, regional and international 
fora; advocating the need for strengthening of multilateral efforts to fight terrorism and 
strengthening the UN counter terrorism architecture led by UNOCT; focusing on new 
financial instruments and digital technology being used by terrorists; supporting the UN’s 
efforts to strengthen the capacity of member States through financial contribution and close 
engagement with the UNCTC; spearheading several initiatives on counter terrorism including 
maritime security during its Presidency of the UN Security Council; eight point action plan to 
counter terrorism; organizing special Ministerial meeting on the threat posed by ISIL or 
Da’esh; active participation in the FATF; active involvement in the meetings of BRICS and 
BIMSTEC Joint Working group on Counter terrorism and their sub-groups as well as other 
regional organizations; establishment of JWGs on counter terrorism, signing of agreements 
on Mutual Legal Assistance in Criminal Matters, Extradition treaties  etc.  
3. The representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs briefed the Committee on the 
initiatives taken by the Government in the recent past to counter terrorism including 
amendments in the Unlawful Activities Prevention Act and the National Investigation 
Agency Act; joint training, counter terrorism related training and capacity building courses 
conducted by NSG;  strengthening of the mechanism for exchange of information on real-
time basis; exchange of information with the Enforcement Directorate on terror financing; 

97 
 
capacity building of NIA in terms of manpower and equipment; plans for organizing 
Ministerial Conference on Counter Terrorism etc. 
 4.  Thereafter, the Members raised various issues which inter alia included definition of 
terrorism; terrorist activities and radicalization; activities of  PFI and STPI; role of NIA in 
dealing with terrorists and issue of terrorism; role of UN in countering terrorism; action 
against Indian Mujahideen; State sponsored terrorism and fake Indian currency; massacre 
inside place of worship; need for sincere efforts to combat terrorism at the global level; need 
to check foreign funding of terrorism; effectiveness of NSG and its resources and manpower; 
cyber attacks and coordination between Ministries/Departments/Agencies on cyber security; 
media coverage of terrorist activities etc.   
 5.  The representatives of the Ministries responded to the queries of the Members. 
Before the Sitting concluded, the Chairperson directed the witnesses to furnish written replies 
on the points raised by the Members to the Secretariat of the Committee at the earliest. 
The witnesses then withdrew 
The Committee then adjourned 
A verbatim record of the Proceedings has been kept. 
  

98 
 
ANNEXURE- II 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2022-23) HELD ON 10 NOVEMBER, 2022 
 
The Committee sat from 1000 hrs. to 1130 hrs. in Committee Room ‘D’, Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
Present 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary   –  Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi  
3. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
4. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
5. Dr. K.C. Patel 
6. Shri N.K. Premchandran 
7.  Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
8. Shri Rebati Tripura 
9. Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
10. Shri Anil Desai 
11. Shri Prakash Javadekar 
 
 

99 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Saurabh Kumar  Secretary (East) 
[Leader of Delegation] 
2. Shri Mahaveer Singhvi JS(CT) 
3. Smt Yojna Patel JS (SCO) 
4. Shri Anil Kumar Rai JS (Parl. & Coord.) 
5. Shri Prakash Gupta  JS (UNP) 
6. Shri J.P. Singh JS(PAI) 
7. Shri Raghuram S. Director (UNP) 
 
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS 
 
S.No. Name Designation 
1. Shri Praveen Vashista Additional Secretary, MHA 
 
2. Shri Nitish Kumar 
 
IG, NIA 
3. Brigadier KTG Krishnan DIG, NSG 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai    - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt.  Reena Gopalakrishnan  - Director 
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Ms. Maya Menon    - Under Secretary  
  

100 
 
  At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members of the Committee and the 
representatives of the Ministries of External Affairs and Home Affairs to the Sitting of the 
Committee convened to have evidence in connection with detailed examination of the subject 
‘Countering Global Terrorism at Regional and International Level’. Highlighting the issues 
to be discussed, Chairperson drew the attention of all the witnesses to Direction 55 (1) of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha pertaining to maintaining the confidentiality of the 
Proceedings and Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. He then 
requested the witnesses to introduce themselves before making submissions before the 
Committee.   
2. The Secretary (East) in the Ministry of External Affairs presented an overview of the 
international dimension regarding the developments on countering global terrorism in the 
past and recently during 2022 which inter alia included raising the issue of Pakistan’s 
continued support to cross-border terrorism at bilateral, regional and multilateral fora; need 
for concerted action against all terrorist groups; extradition and mutual legal assistance 
agreements in criminal matters; MoUs on security cooperation; coordination amongst 
Financial Intelligence Units; counter terrorism measures under the UN including meeting of 
CTC in New Delhi recently and need for strengthening the counter terrorism architecture of 
the UN; misuse of internet, ICT, new and emerging technologies for terrorist activities; 
initiatives taken under FATF; India’s engagement with RATS of SCO; initiatives under 
BIMSTEC and QUAD; JWGs on counter terrorism; definition on CCIT; efforts to be made 
on countering terrorism during India’s Presidency of G20, etc.    
3. The representative of the Ministry of Home Affairs made a submission before the 
Committee on various aspects of terrorism such as, proliferation of global terrorism through 
radicalization, recruitment and lone wolf attacks; terror financing through crypto currencies 
and virtual assets; international cooperation amongst various agencies on counter terror 
capacity enhancement; joint training and capacity building courses organized by NSG; 
modernization of police forces and weaponry; check on the smuggling of fake currencies; 
hosting of Conference on Counter Terrorism Financing; cyber security etc. 
 4.  Thereafter, the Chairperson and the Members raised various issues which inter alia 
included roadmap for countering terrorism relating to cyber space and biological weapons; 

101 
 
extradition of fugitives in countries with which India does not have extradition treaty or 
agreement; efforts for extradition treaty at UN level; steps to counter the use of crypto and 
virtual currencies by terrorists;  cyber security; need for automated intelligence; need for 
Sanction Committee for a bigger policy in UN; need to develop network with other countries 
to stop the activities of terrorists etc.  
  5. The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs and the Ministry of Home 
Affairs responded to the queries of the Members. The Chairperson then thanked the 
representatives of the Ministries for valuable and insightful inputs on the subject and also 
directed them to furnish written replies on the points raised during the discussion, to the 
Secretariat of the Committee at the earliest. 
The witnesses then withdrew 
The Committee then adjourned 
A verbatim record of the Proceedings has been kept. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

102 
 
ANNEXURE- III 
 
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2022-23) HELD ON 29 MARCH, 2023 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, the 29th March 2023 from 1525 hrs. to 1645 hrs. in 
Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
                  
                    Shri P.P. Chaudhary      –       Chairperson  
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
 
 2. Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
 3. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
 4. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
 5. Smt. Queen Oja 
 6. Dr. K C Patel 
 7. Shri N. K. Premchandran 
 8.  Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
 9. Shri Rebati Tripura 
 10. Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
 11. Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
 
RAJYA SABHA 
 
 
 12. Shri Anil Desai 
 13. Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi  
 14. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

103 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF ELECTRONICS AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY  
S. No Name Designation 
1. Shri Sanjay Verma 
 
Secretary (West)  
[Leader of Delegation] 
2. Smt. Vani Rao AS(AMS) 
3. Shri Sandeep Chakravorty JS(EW) 
4. Shri Anil K. Rai JS(Parl & Coord) 
5. Shri Prakash Gupta JS(UNP) 
6. Shri J.P. Singh JS(PAI) 
7. Shri Devesh Uttam JS(CPV) 
8. Shri K.D. Dewal JS(CT) 
9. Shri M. Keivom Dir (CT) 
S. No Name Designation 
1. Shri Alkesh Kumar Sharma Secretary 
2. Shri Amit Agrawal Additional Secretary 
3. Dr. Sanjay Bahl DG CERT-In 

104 
 
 
 
 
DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE 
 
SR No. Name Designation 
1. Sh. Vivek Aggarwal 
 
AS(Revenue) 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
 
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai   - Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan  - Director  
3. Ms. K Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
  
 2. XXXX  XXXX XXXX XXXX    
 3. XXXX  XXXX XXXX XXXX  
 4. XXXX  XXXX XXXX XXXX  
 5. XXXX  XXXX XXXX XXXX 
 6. Thereafter, Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of External 
Affairs, the Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology and  the Department of 
Revenue to the Sitting of the Committee convened to have evidence in connection with 
detailed examination of the subject ‘Countering Global Terrorism at Regional and 
International Levels’. Highlighting the issues to be discussed, Chairperson drew the attention 
of all the witnesses to Direction 55 (1) of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha 
4. Dr. Sandip Chatterjee Scientist G and Group Coordinator - 
Cyber Law 
5. Dr. S. Sathyanarayanan Scientist E 
 

105 
 
pertaining to maintaining the confidentiality of the Proceedings and Direction 58 of the 
Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha. He then requested the witnesses to introduce 
themselves before making submissions before the Committee.   
7. The Secretary (West), Ministry of External Affairs elaborated on the Government’s 
efforts at countering terrorism post November 2022 which inter alia included the status of 
the Comprehensive Convention on International Terrorism; cross-border terrorism emanating 
from Pakistan; extradition arrangements and agreements on mutual legal assistance in 
criminal matters with other countries; bilateral agreements and MoUs on security 
cooperation; debate on Global Counter-Terrorism Approach: Challenges and Way Forward; 
Delhi Declaration on countering terrorism; India’s ranking in the Global Terrorism Index; 
designation of LeT terrorist in the  UN Sanctions List; initiatives taken under FATF; 9th 
INTERPOL General Assembly in Delhi; No Money for Terror Conference; initiatives under 
G20 Framework; de-radicalization strategies under SCO and CICA; meeting of BIMSTEC 
Joint Working Group on Counter Terrorism; formation of QUAD Working Group on counter 
terrorism; international cooperation in intelligence sharing and capacity building, etc.  
8. The representative of the Ministry of MeitY highlighted the initiatives taken for cyber 
security in view of the emergence of new technology and rise in the use of internet; role of 
CERT-In and NCIIPC; coordination with MHA and other intelligence agencies to contain 
cyber threats and cyber attacks on India; mechanism to detect malware attacks and its 
containment; strengthening of ISP gateways; specific directions issued on crypto assets and 
virtual assets service providers, etc. The DG, CERT-In also briefed the Committee about the 
legal provisions in the IT Act,  2000  for deterring cyber terrorism including use of malware, 
worms, ransomware, etc. and negotiations with ICANN for root servers  based in India. 
9. On the issue of terror financing, the representative of the Department of Revenue 
briefed the Committee regarding coordination and mechanisms for intelligence sharing 
through the Multi Agency Coordination network; role of FIU; increased use of virtual 
currencies like bit coin; reporting of suspicious transaction through virtual assets; regulatory 
and actionable implementation frameworks on terror financing; revision of FATF standards 
on terror financing; challenges of detecting virtual assets transaction through the service 
providers/exchange outside of India, etc.   

106 
 
 10.  Thereafter, the Chairperson and the Members raised various issues which inter alia 
included use of technology to cripple the economy; preparedness of India to deal with cyber 
attacks and the proactive steps taken in this regard; international cooperation on prevention 
of cyber attacks; membership of ICANN and setting up of internet root servers in India; 
artificial intelligence for thwarting cyber attacks; role of CERT-In; budgetary allocation for 
cyber protection; cyber protection policy for Government and private sectors; mechanisms 
for detecting, monitoring and countering  terror financing including transaction through 
virtual assets and bit coins; regulation/law on virtual assets; artificial intelligence system for 
detecting suspicious virtual assets transactions; coordination between various investigating 
agencies and FIU; etc.  
 11. The representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs, the Ministry of MeitY and   
the Department of Revenue responded to the queries of the Members. The Chairperson then 
thanked the representatives of the Ministries/Department for valuable and insightful inputs 
on the subject and also directed them to furnish written replies on the points raised during the 
discussion, to the Secretariat of the Committee at the earliest. 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
The Committee then adjourned 
A verbatim record of the Proceedings has been kept. 
 
  

107 
 
ANNEXURE –IV 
 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2023-24) HELD ON 31 JANUARY, 2024 
  
The Committee sat from 1730 hrs. to 1930 hrs. in Main Committee Room Parliament 
House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 Present 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary     –     Chairperson 
MEMBERS 
LOK SABHA 
2. Shri P. C. Mohan 
3. Smt. Queen Oja 
4. Dr. K. C. Patel 
5. Shri N. K. Premachandran 
6. Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
7. Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
8. Shri  E.T. Mohammad Basheer 
9. Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
RAJYA SABHA 
  10. Shri Anil Desai  
 11. Shri Abdul Wahab 
12.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
  
 
 
 
 

108 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1.      Shri Anjani Kumar                               -          Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan              -          Director             
3.      Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut                  -          Deputy Secretary 
4.      Ms. Maya Menon                                -          Under Secretary 
           
2.        At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  
3.     The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the subject 
“Countering Global Terrorism at Regional and International Levels’. 
4.        The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the 
draft Report without any modifications. 
5.        The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the Report to 
Parliament.  
6.        xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx  
7.        xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx  
8. xxxx   xxxx   xxxx   xxxx  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
 
XXXX                                                 (Matters not pertaining to the Report) 
 