 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the 
Twenty Fourth Report of the Committee on India’s Policy Planning And Role Of Think 
Tanks With Special Reference To ICWA and RIS] 
 
 
TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2024 / Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2023-24) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
29 
 

 
 
 
TWENTY NINTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2023-24) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
 [Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations contained 
in the Twenty Fourth Report of the Committee on India’s Policy Planning And Role Of 
Think Tanks With Special Reference To ICWA and RIS] 
 
 
  
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 7February, 2024 
            Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 7 February, 2024 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
FEBRUARY, 2024 / Magha, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO.       
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2024 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  

 
 
 
 
CONTENTS 
               PAGE 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2023-24)……............................................................  (ii)                                        
  
INTRODUCTION……………………………………………………………………………… (iii)      
 
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………………………………… 1 
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been accepted by the                            
  Government………………………………........................................................ 18 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
  pursue in view of the Government’s Replies...………………………………… 42  
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Replies of the  
  Government have not been accepted by the Committee  
  and require reiteration…………………………..……..………………………..  43 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of which Final 
  Replies of the Government are still awaited…………………………………… ..44 
  
       
APPENDICES 
 
I. Minutes of the ______Sitting of the Committee held on -- Feb, 2024…….............   66                                                  
II. Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the Observations /  
Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the Committee  
on External Affairs  (17th Lok Sabha)……………………………………..………....    68 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2023-24) 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary - Chairperson 
 
    Lok Sabha  
 
2.    Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 3.    Shri Abhishek Banerjee 4.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.    Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
6.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait 7.    Smt. Preneet Kaur 
8.    Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
9.    Smt. Poonam Pramod Mahajan 10.  Shri Srinivas Reddy Manne 
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan 
12.  Smt. Queen Oja 13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey 
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel 
15.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 16.  Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
17.  Shri Soyam Bapu Rao 
18.  Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 19.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
20.  Dr. Harsh Vardhan 21.  Vacant 
    Rajya Sabha  
 22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan 23.  Smt. Misha Bharti 
24.  Shri Anil Desai 
25.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 26.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
27.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
28.  Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 29.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
30.  Shri Kapil Sibal 31.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
Secretariat  
1.      Shri Anjani Kumar    –   Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   –   Director  
3. Ms. Maya Menon   -  Under Secretary 
4. Shri Anurag Sandil   -   Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 
  
 

 
   
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2023-24) having been authorized by 
the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Twenty-Ninth Report (17th 
Lok Sabha) on action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Fourth Report of the  Committee on the subject ‘India’s Policy 
Planning and Role of Think Tanks with Special Reference to ICWA and RIS’. 
2. The Twenty-Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 7 August, 2023 and laid on 
the Table of Rajya Sabha on 8 August, 2023. The Action Taken Replies of the Government on 
all the Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 10 October, 
2023 (English Version) and 27 October, 2023 (Hindi Version). 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their Sitting held 
on    5 February, 2024. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee has been given at 
Appendix-I to the Report. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Twenty-Fourth Report of the Committee on 
External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                       P.P. CHAUDHARY,                      
5  February, 2024                                                                                           Chairperson,                                 
16 Magha, 1945 (Saka)                                              Committee on External Affairs 
 
(iii) 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
  
        This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Twenty Fourth Report of the 
Committee on the subject ‘India’s Policy Planning and Role of Think Tanks with Special Reference 
to ICWA and RIS’. The Twenty Fourth Report was presented to Lok Sabha on 7 August, 2023 and 
laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 8 August, 2023. 
 
2.    The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs on all the 38 
observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized as follows: - 
 
  (i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: - 
  
Recommendation Nos. 5, 9, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29,  32, 
35 and 36. 
Total-18  
Chapter-II 
 (ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
Nil                                 
        Total- Nil 
Chapter-III 
  
 (iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration: - 
  Nil                                                                          
Total-Nil   
Chapter-IV 
  

2 
 
 (iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited: - 
 Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17 21, 23, 30, 31, 33, 34, 
37 and 38 
Total-20  
Chapter-V 
  
3.    The Committee desire that the final replies to the comments and 
observations/recommendations contained in Chapter-I of this Report and recommendations 
included in Chapter V may be furnished to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of this Report.  
  
4.    The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
observations/recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
 
POSITIONING INDIA BEFORE THE INTERNATIONAL COMMUNITY THROUGH MULTIPLE 
STRUCTURAL PLATFORMS 
 (Recommendation No. 2) 
 
5. The Committee in their 24th Report had observed/recommended as under: 
  
 ‘The Committee note that ever since the thrust of PP&R Division was centered towards 
creating Indian global flagship platforms which would allow India to articulate its foreign 
policy directions to a global audience, they have been reaching out to the strategic and 
foreign policy community by supporting several collaborative activities. As a result, several 
flagship Indian platforms evolved at the global level, namely, the Raisina Dialogue, the 
Indian Ocean Conference, the Global Technology Summit, the Asia Economic Dialogue, 
etc. Among these platforms, the ‘Raisina Dialogue’ by the Observer Research Foundation 
has become the global benchmark to reflect Indian thinking and over a period of time, it has 
evolved as a platform which rivals any other international conference. At the same time, the 
Committee take note of the popularity of certain other platforms like Shangri-La Dialogue, 

3 
 
the Munich Security Conference, etc. In a global scenario where it is extremely important 
for the world outside to know not only what you think but to appreciate and accept the same 
also, the Committee desire that the PP&R Division of MEA position India before the 
international community through multiple structural platforms and strive to make each one 
of them, a platform that the entire world aspire to be a part of.’ 
 
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 “The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is noted for compliance.” 
  
 
7. With a view to providing impetus to creating Indian global flagship platforms to allow 
India to articulate its foreign policy directions to a global audience, the Committee had 
desired that the PP&R Division of MEA position India before the international community 
through multiple structural platforms and strive to make each one of them a platform that 
the entire world aspire to be a part of. The Committee note that in its Action Taken Reply, 
the MEA has chosen to give the usual common reply “the recommendation of the esteemed 
committee is noted for the compliance” and has remained silent on the recommendation of 
the Committee with regard to assessing viable means and ways to position India before the 
international community through multiple structural platforms. The Committee are aware 
that their recommendation involves significant institutional changes which may take time, 
however, the Committee are of the considered view that Ministry could have mentioned 
some initial steps or blueprints of action initiated or proposed in this regard in the reply 
furnished. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the 
Ministry to take some fruitful steps and apprise the Committee at the earliest. 
  

4 
 
UTILIZATION OF INDIAN MISSIONS AND POSTS ABROAD FOR A DEEPER AND REGULAR 
EXCHANGE OF IDEAS   
(Recommendation No. 8) 
  
8. The Committee in their Report had observed/recommended as under: 
  
‘The Committee are given to understand that Indian Missions/posts abroad not only act as 
the representative of India but also play a key role in gathering information on the 
diplomatic frontline, disseminating information to the overseas public and promoting of 
diplomatic relations. As a part of these activities, the Missions and Posts abroad maintain 
active engagements with prominent think tanks, research scholars and experts in the 
countries of their jurisdiction and the feedback is periodically shared with the Ministry in the 
form of political reporting and assessments by Missions. Taking note of this, the Committee 
feel that Indian Missions can play a more proactive role towards greater engagement with 
such experts and hence, urge the Ministry to utilize Indian Missions and posts abroad for a 
deeper and regular exchange of ideas and for channelizing the intellectual inputs/ subject 
expertise from abroad into the formulation of India’s short, medium as well as long-term 
foreign policy objectives and goals.’ 
 
9. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply have stated as under: 
 
  “The recommendation of the esteemed committee is noted for compliance.” 
 
  
10.  Feeling that Indian Missions can play a more proactive role towards greater 
engagement with prominent think tanks, research scholars and experts in the countries of 
their jurisdiction, the Committee had urged the Ministry to utilize Indian Missions and posts 
abroad for deeper and regular exchange of ideas and for channelizing the intellectual 
inputs/subject expertise from abroad into the formulation of India’s short, medium as well 
as long-term foreign policy objectives and goals. In its Action Taken Note, furnished to the 
Committee, the Ministry has submitted a stereotyped reply stating that the suggestion of the 
Committee have been noted for compliance. Considering that Indian Missions/posts abroad 

5 
 
are already playing a key role in gathering information on the diplomatic frontline, 
disseminating information to the overseas public and promoting  diplomatic relations, the 
Committee again urge the Ministry to  escalate their efforts in utilizing  the services of these 
missions and posts towards deeper and regular exchange of ideas and channelizing the 
intellectual inputs/subject expertise from abroad into the formulation of India’s foreign 
policy objectives and goals. Progress and outcome achieved in this regard may be 
intimated to the Committee.  
  
DEVELOPING RESEARCH CULTURE IN THE COUNTRY 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
  
11.  The Committee in their 24th Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee understand that India has a rich legacy of think tank ecosystem. The 
Committee note that the oldest think tank, United Service Institution (USI), was setup as far 
back as in 1870. The Committee also note that prior to the economic reforms of the 1990s, 
think tanks in India were largely funded by government or semi-government bodies. 
However, since the 1990s, private sector think tanks have come up steadily and their 
numbers are growing now at a healthy rate. According to a study, India now houses the 
third largest think-tank ecosystem in the World, after USA and China. The Committee are of 
the view that growing complexity of global challenges has made the role of think tanks very 
significant in recent years. Think tanks serve to provide well researched data and 
information for helping policy makers to make informed choices. They assist in breaking 
down the complex problems into simpler understandings and help in formulating solutions 
that cover all the relevant dimensions. The Committee are given to understand that think 
tanks play a substantive role in dialogue and collaborative work through research, 
seminars, track 1.5/track 2 events with other foreign think tanks and research 
organizations, thereby further engaging and familiarizing the global strategic and think tank 
community with Indian developments and policy orientations. The Committee are also 
given to understand that many foreign policy concepts/initiatives move from Track 2 

6 
 
dialogues to Track 1.5 dialogues and eventually become Government policy. Keeping in 
view the same, the Committee desire MEA to take the lead in developing research culture 
through its PP&R Division, create or support more think tanks and directly interact with 
universities in the country. Further, taking note of the fact that globally think tanks are 
projected to assume an even greater role in the implementation and evaluation of public 
policies and that this trend is likely to be followed in India as well, the Committee also 
exhort the Government to scale up its current collaboration with think tanks and universities 
with proper assessment of their funding requirements.’ 
 
12.  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under:  
 
 “The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted for compliance.” 
  
 
13. Taking cognizance of the substantive role played by Indian thethink tanks with other 
foreign think tanks and research organizations and the fact that many foreign policy 
concepts/initiatives move from Track 2 dialogues to Track 1.5 dialogues and eventually 
become Government policy, the Committee had desired that MEA take the lead in 
developing research culture through its PP&R Division, create or support more think tanks 
and directly interact with universities in the country. The Committee had further enjoined 
upon the Government to scale up its current collaboration with think tanks and universities 
with proper assessment of their funding requirements. The Committee feel constrained to 
note that the Ministry in response have given a very standardized reply and have failed to 
apprise the Committee of any concrete steps taken or being taken in this regard. It appears 
that no steps have been taken to even assess the funding requirement in this regard.The 
Committee are not satisfied with the reply furnished by the Ministry and while reiterating 
their earlier recommendation urge the Ministry to take proactive steps towards developing 
research culture through its PP&R Division, creating or supporting more think tanks and 
also scaling up its current collaboration with think tanks and universities. The Committee 
further would like to be kept apprised of the steps taken and the probable funding 
requirements in the matter.  

7 
 
 
EXPLORING NEW TERRITORIES FOR TRACK 1 & TRACK1.5 DIALOGUES. 
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
14. The Committee in their 24th Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee note that one of the primary functions of the Policy Planning Division is to 
conduct bilateral and multilateral policy planning dialogues, especially Track 1, Track 1.5 
dialogues. The Committee note that the various track dialogues are mostly Europe and 
East Asia centric and do not include any dialogue with African countries, or with our own 
neighbouring countries, or the North American and South American countries, except USA 
and Brazil. The Committee are given to understand that many of these countries do not 
have an established Policy Planning Division and for a Track 1 dialogue to materialise, a 
Policy Planning Division is needed on the other side also. Despite such constraints the 
Committee desire the Ministry to proactively map out each of the neighbourhood as well as 
the African countries and explore the possibility of initiating policy planning dialogue with 
them, especially in view of India’s raising interest in African countries and thrust on 
Neighbourhood First Policy.’ 
 
15. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 “The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted for compliance.” 
  
 
16. Having felt that the various track dialogues conducted by the Policy Planning 
Division are mostly Europe and East Asia centric and that many other important regions are 
untouched, the Committee had desired that the Ministry proactively map out each of the 
neighbourhood as well as the African countries and explore the possibility of initiating 
policy planning dialogue with them, especially in view of India’s raising interest in African 
countries and thrust on Neighbourhood First Policy. The Committee note that in its Action 

8 
 
Taken Note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry has submitted a stereotyped reply 
stating that the suggestion of the Committee has been noted down. In the considered 
opinion of the Committee, with India taking a lead, during its G 20 Presidency, towards 
inclusion of African Union, it is the need of the hour that we are also seen as a leader in 
fostering a more comprehensive and meaningful dialogues with the African countries.The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry to take 
immediate steps to proactively map out each of the neighbourhood as well as the African 
countries for the purpose without further delay. The Committee may be kept apprised of 
progress achieved in this regard   
 
STRENGTHENING COORDINATION BETWEEN MEA & ICWA 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
17. The Committee in their 16th Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee note that the Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA) work in close 
coordination with MEA to address issues that are at the top of the foreign policy agenda. As 
a statutory body, the mandate of ICWA, inter alia, is to promote the study of Indian foreign 
policy and international affairs so as to develop a body of informed opinion; to promote 
India’s relations with other countries through discourse and exchange of ideas as well as to 
serve as a clearing house of information and knowledge regarding world affairs. Since the 
role and mandate of ICWA are quite comprehensive and broad in scope, the Committee 
desire ICWA to continue focused research on areas of Government’s priority and play a 
more effective role in policy formulations of the Government. In order to contribute to the 
shaping of an India narrative on foreign policy and advance India’s priorities effectively, 
ICWA should also strengthen its coordination with MEA and work in a proactive than 
reactive mode.’ 
 

9 
 
18. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 “The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. ICWA will make 
efforts to strengthen its coordination with MEA and work proactively to advance 
India’s priorities effectively through research and intellectual activities.” 
 
  
19. With a view to bestowing ICWA a more effective and meaningful role in foreign policy 
formulations of the Government, the Committee had desired that ICWA continue to focus its 
research on areas of Government’s priority as also strengthen its coordination with MEA 
and work in a proactive mode than reactive mode.  The Committee note that the reply 
furnished by the Ministry is yet again a standardized version which does not indicate any 
tangible step being taken by the Ministry in this regard. The Committee are keen to know 
about the tangible action, if any, taken in regard to the Committee’s recommendation and , 
therefore, urge the Ministry to proactively implement the directions of the Committee and 
keep the Committee apprised of the progress in this regard. 
 
 
PARTICIPATION OF PARLIAMENTARIANS IN SEMINARS AND ACTIVITIES OF ICWA 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 
20. The Committee in their 24th Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee note that in pursuance of its mandate, ICWA undertakes numerous 
intellectual activities to promote India’s relations with other countries and discuss India’s 
policy towards international affairs. These activities include bilateral dialogues, international 
conferences, seminars, lectures and discussions. The Committee also note that since April 
2021, ICWA has organized 126 events which were mix of lectures, talks, bilateral 
dialogues, international and national seminars, book launches, panel and roundtable 
discussions. The Committee have been informed that these events were organized in 
physical and hybrid mode. The Committee appreciate the initiative of ICWA in organizing 

10 
 
the events through the digital hybrid mode too as it would have enabled easier participation 
of scholars/experts from abroad and in turn would have had a positive impact on making 
the conversations more engaging and productive. The Committee have been given to 
understand that a number of Council’s activities are organized in coordination with and 
support of the MEA and its representatives have been regularly participating in a range of 
activities organized by ICWA. The Committee note that events such as the celebration of 
the 50th anniversary of India-Vietnam Diplomatic Relations, ‘MaitriDiwas’ the India-UK 
Strategic Futures Forum dialogue or the international conference on Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization Reconnect ~ Rejuvenate under India’s Presidency have been conducted by 
ICWA with the support MEA. The Committee further note that a number of Council’s 
activities such as Sapru House Lectures delivered by visiting foreign dignitaries are also 
organized in support and coordination with the Ministry of External Affairs. The Committee 
appreciate that some of the conferences and dialogues have the participation of External 
Affairs Minister, Minister of State, Foreign Secretary and Secretaries from the Ministry of 
External Affairs. The Committee have also been informed that the ICWA conducts studies 
at Ministry’s request, for instance on Nepal, Afghanistan, Pakistan and Africa and have 
submitted the reports. They have also contributed to discussion/research papers on IORA 
and UNSC and even carried out the publication of the book ‘Covid and Diplomacy’. The 
Committee have been informed that these ICWA publications are regularly shared with 
concerned policy makers in MEA but without sharing with Parliamentarians. The Committee 
while recognizing the contribution of ICWA to India’s foreign policy making process urge 
ICWA to make added efforts to increase the frequency of its intellectual activities such as 
seminars, conferences, roundtables, and other discussions, both in physical and hybrid 
mode and also ensure the participation of Parliamentarians to achieve its mandate.’ 
 
21. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 “The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. ICWA is making 
consistent endeavor to enhance its programmatic activities and to diversify the 
participation in its programs and will strive to also include Parliamentarians 
wherever feasible.” 
  

11 
 
22. The Committee had urged upon ICWA to make added efforts to increase the 
frequency of its intellectual activities and also ensure the participation of Parliamentarians 
in its programs to achieve its mandate.’ The Committee are pleased to note the Ministry’s 
assurance that ICWA is making consistent endeavor to enhance its programmatic activities 
and  diversify the participation in its programmes. The Committee also welcome the 
Ministry’s assurance that ICWA would strive to include participation of Parliamentarians in 
its programmes. The Committee are hopeful that ICWA would actively persevere on its 
commitment in the coming years.   
 ’ 
GENERATING INCREASED INTEREST AND PARTICIPATION IN THE IBSA VISITING 
FELLOWSHIP PROGRAMME 
(Recommendation No. 33) 
  
23. The Committee in their 24th Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee note that as part of its wider dissemination programme, RIS has been 
conducting a number of capacity building programmes which include Indian Technical and 
Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programmes and the IBSA Visiting Fellowship Programme 
with the Ministry of External Affairs the Summer School on Trade with EXIM Bank of India 
and Internship Programme for university students. In addition, RIS also conducted capacity 
building programmes on Agricultural Trade Policy Analysis with the support of its partner 
institutions. As regards the IBSA Visiting Fellowship Program instituted at RIS to promote 
academic exchange of young scholars in the field of economics and social sciences for 
strengthening research collaboration among India, Brazil and South Africa in the spirit of 
South-South Cooperation, the Committee find that only three candidates have joined the 
programme in 2023. In view of the focus of this Fellowship programme on multilateral 
institutional frameworks and the diverse range of important issues that concerns IBSA, the 
Committee urge RIS and the MEA to ensure that all the available slots are filled so that 

12 
 
every opportunity to do in-depth joint research and exchange of information in the fields of 
macro-economy, trade and development among India, Brazil and South Africa is fully 
utilized.’ 
 
24. In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under: 
 
 “The esteemed committee’s recommendation has been duly noted.”  
  
25.   Having noted that only three candidates have joined the IBSA Visiting Fellowship 
Program instituted at RIS with the aim to promoting academic exchange of young scholars 
in the field of economics and social sciences for strengthening research collaboration 
among India, Brazil and South Africa, the Committee had urged that RIS and the MEA 
ensure that all the available slots of the Fellowship Program are filled in. The Committee, 
however, note that the Ministry’s reply is silent on the action taken/proposed to be taken in 
this regard. As the Ministry are well aware, this fellowship programme aims to give 
opportunities to young scholars to do in-depth joint research and exchange of information 
in the fields of macro-economy, trade and development among India, Brazil and South 
Africa. The Committee, feel that the Ministry needs to be more proactive in its approach to 
encourage academic exchange of young scholars in the Fellowship programme. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and strongly urge the Ministry 
to review the   fellowship programme at the earliest with a view to increasing interest and 
participation therein. The Committee wish to be kept apprised of the action taken in the 
matter.  

13 
 
 
OPENING UP OF RIS INTERNSHIP PROGRAM  
(Recommendation No. 34) 
 
26. The Committee in their 24th Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee note that RIS offers internship to post-graduate students in economics 
from reputed institutes/universities for a period of two to three months mostly during the 
summer and winter breaks of the academic semesters. The Committee have been informed 
that 14 students from different universities of India completed their internship at RIS during 
the last one year. The Committee feel that to inculcate interest in policy research on 
international affairs, training to budding scholars needs to be encouraged from a very 
young age. As such Committee are of the view that being a premier think-tank in  India on 
global and regional economic policy, having accumulated unique expertise and knowledge 
base in the field of international trade, regional economic integration, new technologies and 
industrialization, regional connectivity and infrastructure development, blue economy, 
development finance and related areas, RIS should actively consider opening its internship 
programme in these specialized areas for students at graduate levels too. The Committee, 
hence, urge upon RIS to evaluate their internship programme and offer more opportunities 
to students and apprise the Committee about the same.’ 
 
27.    In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under: 
 
“The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. RIS would review its 
existing Internship Programme and make a vigorous effort to extend this facility to a larger 
number of interested candidates, including students at Graduate level also.” 
 
28.  The Committee, had urged upon RIS to evaluate their internship programme and 
offer more opportunities to students. The Committee had also felt that RIS should actively 
consider opening its internship programme to inculcate interest in policy research on 
specialized areas for students at graduate levels too. The Committee welcome the Ministry’s 

14 
 
assurance that RIS would be reviewing its existing internship Programme and make efforts 
to extend its internship programme to a larger number of interested candidates, including 
students at Graduate level also. The Committee are hopeful that RIS would take proactive 
steps to expedite the process of review. The Committee also urge the Ministry to keep track 
of the review with a view to expediting the outcome and also desire to be kept apprised of 
the progress in this regard. 
CREATION OF ADDITIONAL FACULTY POSTS IN RIS 
(Recommendation No. 36) 
  
29.   The Committee in their 24th Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee note that RIS has been having only a tiny regular faculty ranging between 
5 to 8 scholars at a given point of time since 2006 in addition to contractual faculty hovering 
between eight to 36. The Committee further note that the sanctioned strength is three 
Professors, three Associate Professors and just one or two Assistant Professors. It is learnt 
that despite strong recommendations by its Governing Council, expansion of regular faculty 
could not be done due to restrictions imposed by the Government on creation of new posts. 
As such, RIS has to substantially rely on its contractual faculty who due to lack of job 
security exits suddenly as the contractual appointments can be approved by RIS for not 
more than one year. At times, it becomes even difficult to get well qualified scholars as 
Professors or Associate Professors. The Committee feel that as a credible research 
institution, RIS needs to have a far stronger regular faculty base given the wide spectrum of 
its work programme requiring engagement of a large number of scholars with deeper 
domain knowledge and experience to conduct meaningful studies. The Committee are of 
the considered view that RIS needs to have a larger number of young and promising 
scholars at the level of Associate Professor, Assistant Professor, apart from Research 
Assistants to ensure organic growth of RIS Faculty and give its junior and middle level 
members a sense of security and career advancement. Hence, the Committee urge RIS 

15 
 
and the Ministry to take up the matter of creation of additional posts with the appropriate 
authority for appointment of regular faculty and intimate the Committee about the progress 
in this direction.’ 
 
30.   In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under: 
 
 “As advised by the esteemed Committee, the Ministry would positively examine any 
proposal of RIS and take up with other relevant ministries, including the Ministry of 
Finance, for the creation of additional permanent Faculty posts at RIS to effectively 
and efficiently carry out its enhanced role and responsibilities as an institution of 
excellence to meet the emerging requirements for research.” 
 
 31.   With a view to ensuring organic growth of RIS Faculty and giving its junior and 
middle level members a sense of security and career advancement,the Committee had 
recommended that RIS and the Ministry may take up the matter of creation of additional 
posts of regular faculty with the appropriate authority  and intimate the Committee about the 
progress in this direction. The Committee are pleased to note the Ministry’s assurance that 
it would positively examine any proposal of RIS and take up with other relevant ministries, 
including the Ministry of Finance, for the creation of additional permanent Faculty posts at 
RIS.  The Committee hope that RIS and the Ministry would take up the matter on a war 
footing and keep the Committee apprised of the developments in this regard.  
 
ADEQUATE INFRASTRUCTURE FACILITIES TO RIS 
(Recommendation No. 37) 
  
32.   The Committee in their 24th Report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
‘The Committee note that RIS functions from the India Habitat Centre (IHC) premises in 
Delhi covering an initially acquired built up area of 1000 sq. mt. in September 1988 and an 
additional built-up space of 381.46 metres acquired by it from IHC later. The Committee 
have been told that RIS does not have any facility to house visiting scholars, including the 
six IBSA Fellowship holders or around 30 ITEC course participants coming from Global 
South to take part in its five specialized courses annually. Due to lack of required 

16 
 
conference facilities within its limited space, RIS has to frequently look for appropriate 
venues outside for holding its key meetings or conferences in which a large number of 
scholars from the country and abroad participate. Looking into the situation, the Committee 
feel that the built-up space available with RIS is insufficient to meet its present and 
emerging requirements. The existing space provides no scope for expansion of RIS’s 
Faculty, which is absolutely essential for its organic growth to carry forward its mission of 
conducting evidence based specialized studies on trade and economic issues to give a 
boost to Government’s efforts towards Atmanirbharta. The Committee are of the 
considered view that RIS needs to have its campus, hostel and allied facilities as an 
institution of excellence in the country which is mandated to conduct a large number of 
policy research studies for its in-house platforms such as the Global Development Centre, 
ASEAN India Centre, Centre for Maritime Economy and Connectivity (CMEC), etc. apart 
from the wide range of other studies commissioned by its partners. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry may seriously take up the issue of providing 
adequate infrastructure facilities to RIS and apprise the Committee about the specific steps 
taken in this regard. RIS may also, in consultation with Ministry of External Affairs, create a 
futuristic work plan and seek necessary budgetary allocation from the Ministry of Finance.’ 
 
33.   In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs submitted as under: 
 
 “The esteemed Committee's recommendation is noted for compliance.” 
 
 34.  The Committee had observed that RIS does not have any facility to house visiting 
scholars, and due to lack of required conference facilities within its limited space, RIS has 
to frequently look for appropriate venues outside for holding its key meetings or 
conferences. The Committee had also felt that with the insufficient built-up space available, 
RIS is unable to meet its present and emerging requirements. The Committee, therefore, had 
recommended that the Ministry might seriously take up the issue of providing adequate 
infrastructure facilities to RIS and apprise the Committee about the specific steps taken in 
this regard. The Committee are disheartened to note the casual reply furnished by the 

17 
 
Ministry. Time and again the Committee have impressed upon the Ministry that action taken 
notes furnished by the Ministry should be reflective of the actual action taken, either interim 
or final by the Ministry and not inconclusive, vague or couched in general terms such as 
‘noted or accepted’. The Committee are of the  view that considering the unique place that 
RIS holds as a research institute in global sphere as well as its level of participation in 
conferences and seminars both at domestic and international level, the Ministry should 
have taken the matter of space crunch being faced by RIS much more  earnestly. Although 
the Committee are aware that the given time is not sufficient for the complete execution of 
the recommendation but an initial proposal or some blueprint is least expected. The 
Committee, therefore, reiterate, its earlier recommendation and desire that the matter may 
be taken up more expeditiously.  
 
 

18 
 
CHAPTER II 
 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
The Committee note that the Ministry has taken positive steps towards 
initiating direct interface with the student’s fraternity through their 
universities. The Committee have been informed that the Ministry is currently 
in the process of shaping an engagement with 75 identified universities all over 
India for the purposes of generating research content, using the interface with 
the universities to build a narrative, encouraging greater interest on topics of 
foreign policy particularly those topics which have a huge domestic resonance. 
The Committee appreciate the initiative taken by the Ministry to catch the 
next generation of potential policy makers and start interacting and 
interfacing with them very early on. The Committee are hopeful that the 
Ministry would continue its efforts to create more opportunities for the 
student fraternity to be actively part of foreign policy making and directly 
sponsor research studies of relevance in select universities and apprise the 
Committee about the outcomes in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry is making several efforts to reach out to the student fraternity. The 
Ministry takes university students on regular basis for the Ministry of External 
Affairs Internships Program. In addition, the Ministry also organizes distinguished 

19 
 
lectures in which prominent speakers share their views/opinions on contemporary 
foreign policy themes in top universities and academic institutions in India.   
 
Further, both Research and Information Systems (RIS) for developing countries, 
and the Indian Council for World Affairs (ICW A) have dynamic programs to 
connect with young scholars through internships, participation in seminars, etc. 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is duly noted for further 
compliance.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
 
The Committee have been informed that the MEA has a robust internship 
programme wherein opportunity is given to youths of the country to interface 
with the daily routine process of the foreign policy making and learn that how 
does the different wings of Ministry of External Affairs come together to 
shape a view on a foreign policy issue. It has been further given to understand 
that there is a high demand for internship in MEA and that the selection 
process to the programme is fairly rigorous. The Committee have been 
informed that the candidates who apply and are selected are placed across the 
Ministry of External Affairs including with the Policy Planning and Research 
Division whereby they get an opportunity to associate and to see very closely 
the functioning of the Ministry of External Affairs. The Committee note that 
the programme is open to graduates and undergraduates from universities 
across the country. The Committee feel that internship programme of MEA is 
an excellent opportunity for budding scholars of our country to familiarize 

20 
 
themselves with the process of formulation of foreign policy and its 
implementation. The Committee are hopeful that the Ministry would continue 
in its efforts through its internship programme to bring foreign policy closer 
to the people of the country. The Committee further desire that the Ministry 
strive to ensure that there is sufficient diversity amongst the group of interns 
selected with respect to gender, underprivileged sections, geographical 
domicile and balanced representation from both urban and rural areas so that 
students from across the country are able to associate themselves with MEA. 
The Ministry should also create some job opportunities for utilization of 
services of talented young interns interested in making career in this field. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. The MEA 
Internship Policy of the Ministry of External Affairs is aimed at taking Foreign 
Policy closer to the people of the country; to bring in more focus on MEA; to 
provide value to the interns; to ensure better gender inclusivity and to increase 
diversity in terms of qualifications, domicile and socio-economic status amongst 
the cohort of interns engaged by the Ministry. All efforts are being made to ensure 
increased diversity amongst the group of interns in each term with respect to 
gender, underprivileged sections, geographical domicile and representation from 
both urban and rural areas. Candidates from districts under the ‘Transformation of 
Aspirational Districts Programme’ (TADP) and those belonging to 
SC/ST/OBC/EWS categories are given priority at different stages in the selection 
process. To ensure gender representation, a minimum of 30% of interns in each 
term are filled by women candidates. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 

21 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
 
The Committee finds that to fulfill its mandated objectives, ICW A has been 
undertaking a range of activities, of which research and disseminations form a 
core activity. This includes mainly the research works done by in- house 
faculty in the form of Issue Briefs, View Points and Special Reports- on topical 
issues having a bearing on Indian foreign policy interests. The Committee note 
that since April 2021 alone, ICWA has published 167 Issue Briefs, 136 View 
points, and 5 Special reports in addition to 25 Sapru House papers which are 
comprehensive future- oriented policy research papers on selected topics 
related to foreign policy. In addition, guest articles and research papers by 
outside experts, research projects with MoU partners, special research 
projects at the request of Ministry of External Affairs and research projects 
with Ministry of Defence are undertaken by ICW A. The Committee find that 
over a period of time, ICWA has diversified its research both in terms of 
geography as well as thematic issues, keeping in view their relevance to India’s 
foreign and security policies. The areas and thematic studies that have 
received added thrust include maritime studies, Indo-Pacific, Ukraine, 
Afghanistan, and multilateral institutions like SCO, G-20, IORA and the UN. 
Since the research output is regularly shared with the Ministry and other 
stakeholders with an aim to influence policymakers and the public, the 
Committee recommend that ICW A should give added thrust to focused and 
indepth Research on emerging trends in international relations. At the same 
time, the thrust should be on quality output than quantity. 
 

22 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. ICW A will 
continue to lay emphasis on focused and in-depth research on emerging trends in 
international relations, and will keep striving towards bringing out high quality and 
effective research outputs through rigorous peer-review mechanism and greater 
discussion with relevant stakeholders. 
  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
 
The Committee further note that the sanctioned strength of the Research 
Faculty in ICW A is 30 of which 01 post has been kept for Director (Research), 
05 posts for Senior Research Fellows, 12 posts for Research Fellows, 01 post 
for Research Associate and 05 posts for Research Interns. The Committee 
have been informed that one of the challenges being faced by ICWA in its 
working is getting quality researchers, especially when ICWA selection 
criteria focuses more on the expertise, knowledge and presentation skills in 
addition to academic qualifications like Ph.D, Masters, etc. In order to rope in 
Research Faculty with domain expertise and in-depth understanding of broad 
global themes/trends, proper incentive structure including provisions for 
annual increment and granting allowances is a pre-requisite. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the ICW A may come up with such proposals at the 
earliest and implement the same after the approval of the Governing Body 
and Governing Council. The Ministry should also enhance the allocation 
accordingly. The Committee also desire that to give a younger profile to the 
Research Faculty, additional hiring of Research Associates may also be 

23 
 
considered on a need basis. The Committee may be apprised of the progress in 
the matter. 
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In order to get quality researchers and retain good scholars, the Council will submit 
a proposal regarding some revision of the emolument structure of the Research 
Faculty to its Governing Body/Council. 
 
ICW A has recently commenced hiring of Research Associates to give a younger 
profile to the Research Faculty. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
 
The Committee note that ICWA brings out quite a wide range of publications 
which include Sapru House Papers, Special Publications, ICWA Guest 
Columns, Viewpoint, Issue Briefs, Special Reports, Oral history Project, etc. 
The Council also publishes books covering a wide spectrum of subjects which 
include single authored books, edited books and conference proceedings. Since 
April 2021 alone, ICWA has published 32 books which include 18 single 
authored and edited books and 14 conference proceeding books. The 
Committee find that the Council has brought out translations of some of its 
books/ publications into Hindi and regional languages. ICWA has also 
submitted that all Viewpoints, Issue Briefs, Sapru House Papers, Special 
Reports have been put on the ICWA website both in English and the Hindi 

24 
 
version. The Committee really appreciate the initiative taken by ICW A 
towards getting its various publications translated into Hindi. At the same 
time, the Committee though understand that it is a challenge to get quality 
translators who have knowledge of international affairs to understand the 
tone, tenor and the nuances of terminologies, however, MEA may also 
persuage the ICWA to look into the possibilities of getting its publications 
translated into vernacular languages as well so that their work can reach to 
maximum number of citizens. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Council will make efforts to get its research products translated into vernacular 
languages as feasible and wherever the subject is found to be relevant to the target 
audience. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
 
 The Committee have been informed that as part of its national outreach 
activities, ICWA has been sponsoring seminars/conferences across India on 
foreign policy and international relations. The Committee have further been 
informed that these outreach conferences are organised in collaboration with 
several Indian universities and think tanks including Council’s MoU partners 
across the country. The Committee, however, note that since April 2021, only 
14 outreach conferences in Universities have been supported by ICWA. In this 
respect, ICW A has submitted that due to pandemic, joint activities conducted 

25 
 
in collaboration with Universities had reduced as most of the Universities 
were badly disrupted by COVID 19 Pandemic. It has been further submitted 
that with the opening up of Universities, ICWA has been receiving a number 
of good proposals. The Committee are hopeful that ICWA is able to organize 
more conferences in the coming months and urge them to extend support for 
national/international conferences by recognised universities and UGC centres 
on themes of mutual interest in international relations and foreign policy. The 
Committee also desire that ICW A put in serious efforts to have more 
collaborations with other like-minded institutions, national and foreign think 
tanks and universities to build complementarities and explore synergies. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
ICW A has been making constant endeavour to enter into collaborative 
arrangements with institutions and universities dealing with foreign policy and 
international relations at national and international level. Recently, it has entered 
into MoUs with, MNIT, Jaipur, IIT, Guwahati, Punjab University as well as BISR, 
Belarus, ISIS, Malaysia, and Diplomatic Academy of Vietnam. ICWA ’s outreach 
activities continue to be a key area of its work with the objective of promoting 
foreign policy discourse in India and mutual understanding on foreign policy and 
international affairs with foreign interlocutors. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 

26 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
 
The Committee understand that ICW A is the country’s oldest foreign policy 
think tank which began seriously the study of international affairs and debate 
on foreign policy in a consciously non-partisan manner. The Committee also 
note that over the years ICWA has constantly reinvented itself with the 
changing times. The Committee are, however, of the view that despite setting 
new benchmark in terms of its institutional strength to influence the policy 
formulations through research and publications, policy debates and 
discussions, outreach to other institutions, including through translation of 
publications, the general public is not aware of the activities of ICWA. The 
Committee are of the opinion that lack of public awareness about the activities 
of ICWA will in the long run hinder its growth and development. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that ICW A should come up with more people 
centric programmes and activities which invite participation from the general 
public, especially, the student fraternity. 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Council’s programmatic activities have been witnessing diverse participation 
from academic, strategic and student community, diplomatic corps, media and 
business. Social media promotion of Council’s events has led to greater public 
outreach and participation including students. ICW A will continue to enhance its 
public outreach through its social media platforms. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 

27 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20) 
 
The Committee note that one of the mandates of ICWA is to generate interest 
amongst the younger generation on international relations and to provide a 
platform for them to come to ICW A. The Committee understand that the 
ICWA has an internship programme through which young researchers are 
invited to get trained in conducting research on foreign policy and 
international affairs. These Y oung researchers can pursue research internship 
at ICW A for a period of 6 months, extendable to 1 year. The Internship 
Programme is advertised on the Council’s website. The Council receives 
applications throughout the year and Interns are selected and taken. The 
Committee also note that the Council has entered into MoUs with 27 
universities for collaboration, including provision for students pursuing 
graduation and post-graduation in International Relations to intern with 
ICWA. The Committee have further been informed that to train young 
scholars interested in policy research on international affairs, ICWA has 
promoted and expanded its internship programme to include not only paid 
interns who have completed their MA, but also nonpaid interns, who are 
pursuing graduation and post- graduation. It has also been submitted that 
during outreach programmes at universities and academic institutions, 
representatives from ICWA inform students about the internship 
opportunities which generally acquaints the student fraternity about ICWA 
and also generates interest in their internship program. The Committee have 
been told that the interns who join are given opportunities to be involved in 
diverse activities of the ICW A. They participate in conferences, go to seminars 
and are also encouraged to write at least one paper. Upon completion of 
internship a recommendation letter is also given to them. While the 

28 
 
Committee appreciate the steps being taken by ICW A to promote its 
internship program, they are disappointed to note that the results do not 
commensurate the efforts as only 15 interns are seen currently engaged in the 
Council. The Committee, therefore, urge upon ICW A to evaluate their 
internship program, make more concerted efforts to reach out to the student’s 
community and take steps to put in place an eco-system wherein more and 
more students are encouraged to join the internship programme of ICWA and 
contribute in its mission. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. The Council will 
enhance its intake of paid and non-paid interns. While continuing with the regular 
6 month internship programme, the Council will try to accommodate interns for 
shorter duration to allow greater flexibility to students to take up internship at the 
Council, especially during the vacation period of colleges and universities, to 
increase the intake of interns. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22) 
The Committee note that the Centre for Migration, Mobility and Diaspora 
Studies (CMMDS) at the Indian Council of World Affairs (ICWA) has come 
into effect on 1 August 2022 pursuant to decision of the Government of India 
to merge the erstwhile India Centre for Migration under the Ministry of 
External Affairs with the ICW A. CMMDS functions as the research unit on 
matters relating to international migration, mobility, and diaspora studies. It 

29 
 
is given to understand that CMMDS seeks to promote safe and orderly 
mobility of Indian nationals for employment abroad through research on 
mobility patterns, labour market assessments, procedural and data 
management issues, pre-departure orientation guidance, etc. and undertakes 
empirical, analytical and policy related research on international migration 
and labour mobility as also pilot projects to document good practices. The 
Committee find that various categories of agreements like Labour Manpower 
Agreements (LMA), Migration and Mobility Partnership Agreements 
(MMPA) are being signed by India on migration and mobility with several 
countries. While expressing their appreciation about such agreements which 
facilitate safe, orderly and legal migration for our workfoce, the Committee 
recommend that a robust mechanism for periodic assessment of such 
agreements may be devised and awareness about the opportunities that arise 
from the agreement may be spread among the public. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
As part of its work related to migration and mobility, ICWA will seek to write 
commentaries on such Agreements concluded by India with other countries, as 
well as papers on migration trends. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24) 
 
The Committee note that the ICW A Library (popularly known as Sapru 
House Library) has been a premier resource centre for both Indian and 

30 
 
foreign scholars for the past seven decades. The Library houses a rich 
collection on international relations, international law, international economy, 
foreign policy, political history and social sciences. The Committee also note 
that the Sapru House Library has various user friendly facilities such as 
Bibliographic service, the Digitized Institutional Repository Service, Various 
online databases, Reference service etc. for use of public, academicians and 
research scholars. It is seen that the Library is open for students, 
parliamentarians, legislators, academics, diplomats, historians, civil servants, 
journalists, students, subject experts, etc. The Committee have also been told 
that the recent renovation and upgradation have made it more user-friendly 
with a better reading environment and a modern digital section. While the 
Committee are happy to note the various steps are being taken by ICW A for 
making Sapru House Library more accessible to a wider community of 
individuals, experts and scholars such as remote access, Wi-Fi Facility, reader 
friendly environment, etc., the Committee urge upon ICWA to give wider 
publicity of the facilities available in the Sapru House so that the Library is 
used to its full capacity. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
ICW A will continue to make efforts to give wider publicity to Sapru House 
Library, which since its renovation is seeing almost full capacity in its Reading 
Hall. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 

31 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 25) 
 
The Committee note that the Council makes use of its websites in English and 
Hindi as well as social media platforms to publicize, project and share its 
research products and its intellectual activities. The Committee have also been 
informed that the Council is active on Facebook, Twitter, YouTube and 
LinkedIn and that there has been 23 per cent of increase followers on Twitter. 
Since social visibility is a necessity for any organization to grow and social 
media platforms are an important tool to achieve the same,the Committee 
encourage ICWA to continue dissemination of its publications on Council’s 
website, and social media platforms such as Facebook, Twitter, Y ouTube, 
LinkedIn and fortnightly electronic notifications. The Committee also urge 
ICWA to take serious steps to spread their presence in other social media 
platforms such as Instagram, Snapchat as well to provide greater visibility to 
activities of ICW A. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Council has been increasing its viewership on social media in the last few 
years. It will make efforts to further diversify its social media platforms.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 26) 
 
The Committee note that Research and Information System for Developing 
Countries (RIS ) is an autonomous policy research think tank that specialises 
in issues related to international economic development, trade, investment and 

32 
 
technology. RIS advises the Government on all matters pertaining to 
multilateral and regional economic issues referred to it from time to time 
including collaborative arrangements with other developing countries. 
Pursuant to the mandate, RIS coordinates with the Policy Planning and 
Research Division and other Divisions in the MEA and provides its inputs and 
programmatic/ research support to MEA. Since RIS provides wide range of 
divergent views on issues of significant importance to the country which 
assists the government to have a multidimensional view on key issues, the 
Committee desire that the specialized research programme of RIS should be 
strengthened further and integrated within the Government system. 
Moreover, the Committee also desire RIS to widen its outreach to vigorously 
promote India’s narrative on areas of critical importance in the evolving 
world where counter narratives need to be handled effectively through 
evidence-based research. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The esteemed committee’s recommendation has been noted for compliance. On the 
advice of MEA, RIS has taken several significant initiatives to widen its outreach 
within the country and abroad for vigorously promoting India’s evidence-based 
perspective on foreign policy issues.  
 
RIS is working very closely with the MEA and the engagement has been broad-
based across various divisions. The scope for systemic integration of RIS is 
envisaged in the very structure of the Governing Council which has representations 
from MEA, through the Foreign Secretary and Secretary (Economic Relations). 
The Governing Council also has Secretaries from the Ministry of Finance, 
Department of Economic Affairs; Ministry of Commerce and Industry, and 

33 
 
Ministry of Science and Technology. In addition, RIS is also having several studies 
and projects with other government agencies such as Ministry of AYUSH, Ministry 
of Ports, Shipping, and Waterways; Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers’ Welfare; 
and the NITI Aayog, among others.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 27) 
 
 
The Committee understand that RIS brings out evidence-based policy 
research studies, policy briefs and research papers on emerging issues and 
organizes a wide range of events within the country and abroad under the 
overall guidance and support of the Ministry of External Affairs. The 
Committee note that the RIS gets Grant in Aid from MEA as well as other 
agencies. In 2021-22 , the grant was Rs. 22.19 crore including a special grant 
of Rs. 10.22 crore for acquiring an additional built up areas from India 
Habitat Center to overcome space crunch and in the FY 2022-23, the outlay 
was Rs. 14.19 crore. The Committee have been further informed that under 
BE 2023- 24 the allocation is Rs. 16.64 crore which is a substantial increase of 
14.05% from last year’s budget. The Committee have been told that these 
funds are used for the day-to-day functioning of the institution in terms of pay 
and allowances to its employees and for holding national and international 
meetings/ seminars/ conferences with the participation of national, regional 
and global scholars. Taking into account the impeccable track record of RIS 
in utilization of funds over the years and the growing spectrum of its work 
programme including the special policy research studies on G20 issues and the 
specific requirements of being MEA’s Knowledge Partner for Think (T20) 

34 
 
during India’s Presidency of G 20, the Committee urge the Ministry to keep 
monitoring the budgetary requirements of RIS and make appropriate 
additional allocation at RE stage, if required. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. Ministry accords 
positive consideration to the financial requirements of RIS at the RE and BE stage 
every year while approving its annual grant. Over and above the annual grant, 
Ministry also favourably considers additional funding requirements of RIS for the 
assigned tasks for specific research studies or events from time to time through 
special sanctions.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 28) 
 
The Committee note that RIS is envisioned as a forum for fostering effective 
policy dialogue and capacity-building among developing countries on global 
and regional economic issues. Since its inception, the focus of the work 
programme of RIS has been the promotion of South-South Cooperation and 
collaboration with developing countries in multilateral negotiations in various 
forums. The Committee have been told that RIS works  as a bridge to bring 
both Global South and Global North together to identify best possible 
solutions for accelerated growth of Global South. It has also been submitted 
that RIS has entered into research partnership agreements with the financial 
support of Northern partners to promote some of the best global practices for 

35 
 
the economic development of Global South. The establishment of Global 
Development Centre at RIS clearly shows that RIS is moving towards the 
engagement of its Northern partners for accelerated economic development of 
Global South. In the emerging global scenario of interdependence amongst the 
nations, the Committee feel that forging working partnerships for attainment 
of Sustainable Development Goals (SDDGs), financial inclusion, gender 
equality, reformed multilateralism, etc. need to be upheld and India with her 
rising stature in the world economy and politics, should support every effort 
towards that end. The Committee, therefore, desire that MEA should 
encourage and support RIS to continue to act as a bridge and be the voice of 
the country in its attempts to bring about convergence of Global South with 
the Global North in areas of collective interest, at the same time guiding the 
Global South to defend and promote its core trade and economic interests at 
bilateral, regional and global levels during intergovernmental negotiations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
RIS has so far made major efforts to create its global footprint and has been 
engaged in major international meetings and negotiations including at the WTO 
and the UN entities. RIS has also in the recent past made efforts to work closely 
with regional bodies like the BIMSTEC, ASEAN, IORA and AU. The Ministry 
shall, in consultation with RIS, continue to facilitate its engagement in major 
global forums.  MEA has also supported the RIS Flagship Annual Conference the 
Delhi Process on South-South and Triangular Cooperation. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 

36 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 29) 
 
The Committee understand that RIS has expertise in theoretical exposition 
and empirical assessment of regional connectivity initiatives to assess long 
term gains and related issues. The Committee note that India does not have a 
dedicated think-tank to address regional connectivity issues which is of critical 
importance in contemporary times. The Committee have been assured that 
RIS has supported Government of India’s track 1.5 initiatives by providing 
robust inputs in these areas and that its inputs have provided valuable 
support to Government’s decision making in terms of regional cooperation. 
The Committee understand that physical connectivity not only improves 
mobility between growth centers and hinterland but also promotes cross-
border trade, foster people-to-people movement, and enhance cultural connect 
with the neighbouring countries. Closely linked with connectivity is trade 
facilitation. With a robust network of physical and digital connectivity, trade 
facilitation reforms and border infrastructure in place, trade costs gets 
reduced, value chains gets strengthened contributing to industrialization 
along the economic corridors. Taking into account the increasing role of India 
in the region as connectivity provider and infrastructure facilitator, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to utilize the expertise of RIS and encourage 
them to augment their expertise in the areas of trade facilitation and regional 
connectivity through new research, knowledge creation and data collection on 
neighbouring countries and specific sectors to provide valuable inputs to the 
Government in formulating India’s connectivity strategy. 
 

37 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 
To strengthen India’s Neighbourhood First policy and Act East Policy, MEA has 
advised RIS to work closely with Ministry of Ports Shipping and Waterways to 
strengthen the connectivity pillar at RIS and accordingly a new Centre for 
Maritime Economy and Connectivity (CMEC) has been launched. MEA has 
nominated JS Indo-Pacific as a member of the Advisory Board of this centre. In 
addition, to strengthen collaboration on regional issues, RIS is already working 
with the Indo-Pacific Division to manage and lead with ASEAN-India Centre 
(AIC) at RIS on issues related to multi-modal connectivity. MEA has also 
nominated RIS as member of the BIMSTEC Network of Policy Think Tanks 
(BNPTT) and the West Europe Division of MEA has also engaged RIS for leading 
to India-EU Connectivity Partnership launched by Hon’ble Prime Minister of 
India and EU President. On trade facilitation measures, RIS has also come up with 
a dedicated research programme.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 32) 
 
The Committee note that under its University Connect Programme, RIS 
organizes a wide range of national seminars in collaboration with universities 
and academia across the country to generate greater awareness on foreign 
policy issues. Under the Programme it invites young scholars and 
academicians to take part in its major conferences such as Annual 
International Conference on South-South Cooperation. The Committee are 
aware that as a part of the ‘Jan Bhagidari’ initiative of the G20 Indian 

38 
 
Presidency, RIS has been organizing G20 Lecture Series in 75 universities 
across the country with the aim to reaching out to the youth and student 
fraternity of our country. The Committee view University Connect as an 
important means to connect with the youth of the country and generate 
awareness about the importance of India’s G20 Presidency. It is also an 
opportunity for young Indians to bring new ideas and perspectives to G-20-
related topics. The Committee hope that MEA will facilitate the RIS to 
successfully cover all the 75 Universities under the Jan Bhagedari Programme 
and rope in the youth of the country as cultural ambassadors who can help 
build long-lasting relationships with G-20 fraternity. Moreover, MEA 
alongwith RIS should also look into the possibility of continuing to bring in 
more and more Universities under the umbrella of University Connect 
Programme even after the end of India’s G20 Presidency on 30 November 
2023 and chalk out a mechanism to use the networks created during this 
period to build long-lasting relationships with the Universities in the country. 
(Recommendation No. 32) 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. The University 
Connect Programme has emerged as a grand success under the Jan Bhagidari 
initiative of India’s G20 Presidency. RIS would make efforts to continue effective 
partnership under this platform and work towards greater participation and 
engagement of Indian universities in priority areas like LiFE and similar themes 
where wider adoption is critical.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 

39 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 35) 
 
The Committee note that RIS disseminates its research output through a wide 
range of its publications like Policy Briefs, Reports, Discussion Papers, etc. 
The Committee also note RIS has brought out several publications on various 
themes including India-EU Connectivity: Partnership for Development, 
Demand and Democracy; Ayush Sector in India: Prospects and Challenges; 
Deepening Cooperation in IBSA Perspectives From Key Sectors; ASEAN-
India Development Cooperation Report-2021; E-Commerce Issues at the 
WTO Discussions and in India; ASEAN and India Partners of Integration in 
Asia, etc. The Committee concur with submission of RIS that these research 
publications provide vital information to policy makers and shapers and are 
valuable reference points to the research community on issues related to trade, 
investment, finance, technology, health, development partnership, etc. The 
Committee, however, feel that there is a need for wider publicity for the 
research output of RIS and hence, urge RIS to take steps to ensure wider 
dissemination and easy availability of its publications for research scholars 
and academicians. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The esteemed committee’s recommendation is duly noted. RIS website has been 
revamped and has been made more interactive. RIS has also started the practice of 
translating its research and knowledge outputs in Indian and foreign languages. 
This has been widely implemented for the G20 related publications. RIS has been 
further encouraged to make effective use of social media as well as mainstream 
media and widen its reach through the University Connect platform. RIS has also 

40 
 
been advised to make optimum use of digital media for live dissemination of its 
events, programmes, dialogues and conferences as part of its outreach programme.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 36) 
 
The Committee note that RIS has been having only a tiny regular faculty 
ranging between 5 to 8 scholars at a given point of time since 2006 in addition 
to contractual faculty hovering between eight to 36. The Committee further 
note that the sanctioned strength is three Professors, three Associate 
Professors and just one or two Assistant Professors. It is learnt that despite 
strong recommendations by its Governing Council, expansion of regular 
faculty could not be done due to restrictions imposed by the Government on 
creation of new posts. As such, RIS has to substantially rely on its contractual 
faculty who due to lack of job security exits suddenly as the contractual 
appointments can be approved by RIS for not more than one year. At times, it 
becomes even difficult to get well qualified scholars as Professors or Associate 
Professors. The Committee feel that as a credible research institution, RIS 
needs to have a far stronger regular faculty base given the wide spectrum of 
its work programme requiring engagement of a large number of scholars with 
deeper domain knowledge and experience to conduct meaningful studies. The 
Committee are of the considered view that RIS needs to have a larger number 
of young and promising scholars at the level of Associate Professor, Assistant 
Professor, apart from Research Assistants to ensure organic growth of RIS 
Faculty and give its junior and middle level members a sense of security and 
career advancement. Hence, the Committee urge RIS and the Ministry to take 
up the matter of creation of additional posts with the appropriate authority 

41 
 
for appointment of regular faculty and intimate the Committee about the 
progress in this direction. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As advised by the esteemed Committee, the Ministry would positively examine 
any proposal of RIS and take up with other relevant ministries, including the 
Ministry of Finance, for the creation of additional permanent Faculty posts at RIS 
to effectively and efficiently carry out its enhanced role and responsibilities as an 
institution of excellence to meet the emerging requirements for research.    
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 

42 
 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE 
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT  
 
 
-NIL-

43 
 
 
CHAPTER- IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY 
THE COMMITTEE AND REQUIRE REITERATION 
 
 
 
-NIL- 

44 
 
 
CHAPTER V 
 
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH 
FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL A WAITED 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 
The Committee note that the Policy Planning & Research Division was 
established in the Ministry of External Affairs in 1966. In 1984, the mandate 
of the division was enhanced to assist in foreign policy formulation, 
preparation of position papers, analysis of international affairs, assessment of 
critical situations, preparation of drafts for speeches of President/ PM/ EAM, 
conduct of seminars and studies, etc. The Committee also note that the 
division’s mandate was extended further in 2015 with an aim to providing 
greater visibility to Indian foreign policy, articulate the Indian view on major 
emerging global developments, receive and deliberate on new ideas, attract 
high-level international participation in flagship events, provide useful 
exposure to the Indian think-tank institutions and help advance India’s 
leadership projection in the world. The Committee are pleased to note that the 
PP&R Division of the Ministry has in the years since supported several 
collaborative activities with think tanks through conferences, 
seminars/webinars, Track 1.5/2 dialogues, and research projects to advance 
the extended mandate assigned to them. However, in Committee’s view the 
division needs to be strengthened and well equipped to conduct or collaborate 
in more and more established conferences/dialogues to upscale the targets and 
outcomes while simultaneously enlarging the scope of engagement with more 

45 
 
think-tanks and regions across the country and the world and they may be 
apprised accordingly. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is noted for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023]] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
The Committee note that ever since the thrust of PP&R Division was centered 
towards creating Indian global flagship platforms which would allow India to 
articulate its foreign policy directions to a global audience, they have been 
reaching out to the strategic and foreign policy community by supporting 
several collaborative activities. As a result, several flagship Indian platforms 
evolved at the global level, namely, the Raisina Dialogue, the Indian Ocean 
Conference, the Global Technology Summit, the Asia Economic Dialogue, etc. 
Among these platforms, the ‘Raisina Dialogue’ by the Observer Research 
Foundation has become the global benchmark to reflect Indian thinking and 
over a period of time, it has evolved as a platform which rivals any other 
international conference. At the same time, the Committee take note of the 
popularity of certain other platforms like Shangri-La Dialogue, the Munich 
Security Conference, etc. In a global scenario where it is extremely important 
for the world outside to know not only what you think but to appreciate and 
accept the same also, the Committee desire that the PP&R Division of MEA 
position India before the international community through multiple structural 
platforms and strive to make each one of them, a platform that the entire 
world aspire to be a part of. 

46 
 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is noted for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 7 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
The Committee understand that the Policy Planning Division of the Ministry 
is a true junction box of all thinking where all ideas, information and inputs 
land from different sources from within the Ministry and outside, including 
from Policy Planning Dialogues. It is their job to assimilate, analyze and filter 
through all of it to generate meaningful research output that builds the 
knowledge base of the Ministry and our Missions abroad. The Committee also 
note that the policy planning is not just limited to what the Government 
thinks but also to respond to what is happening outside the Government 
including the thoughts of international think tanks, thoughts of civil society 
about India’s position and they way the academia look at different 
relationships that India have. Hence, the Committee desire that the division 
maintain robust interfaces with all elements which are external to the 
Government including the business and the corporate community. Since the 
policy planning work needs whole of Government approach and the work is 
very crucial, the Committee further desire that the division keeps itself up to 
date with the latest thinking, with the best of the personnel who could create 
anchored policy framework for building a strong India narrative abroad. 

47 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is noted for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
The Committee note that the Policy Planning Division prepares research 
papers, policy briefs and situation reports pertaining to global developments/ 
international affairs in general and India’s foreign policy in particular. The 
publications of Policy Planning Division are non-classified and shared mostly 
within the government apparatus, and also to heads of leading think tanks. 
The Annual Report of the Ministry which is a compilation of its activities is a 
public document. The speeches of the External Affairs Minister, spokesperson 
and the contents of conferences are all put together into an India Narrative, 
which is also out in the market. Further, the website of the Ministry also 
provides for information on bilateral relations of India with various countries. 
The Committee, however, feel that there is lack of awareness amongst the 
general public regarding the activities of the Ministry and access to most of 
the pertinent information compiled by Ministry is restricted to limited 
fraternity. The Committee desire that the Ministry may take steps towards 
wider dissemination of its publications, including Reports, Briefs and 
compendia as well as that of its network of think tanks and autonomous 
bodies. The Committee also desire that the Ministry actively work on a 
mechanism to proactively converse with the people of India in layman 

48 
 
language, as well as in Rajbhasha and major regional languages on the issues 
related to external affairs and India’s foreign policy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed Committee to engage in layman language & 
Rajbhasha is duly noted for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
The Committee are given to understand that as part of India’s G 20 residency 
the Ministry are organizing G-20 university connect wherein about 200 
meetings of G-20 are being organized spread over each and every State and 
Union Territory of India. The Committee have also been given to understand 
that directions have been given to organizers of these G-20 meetings to 
mandatorily connect with the local universities and the think tank ecosystem 
available there in respective State and Union territory and to engage them 
through a side event of the G-20 meeting. While the Committee appreciate the 
initiative taken by the Ministry to utilise the G20 Summit as an opportunity to 
connect with the various Think Tanks and Universities in the country, the 
Committee are of the considered view that the Ministry should utilize this 
opportunity and those of similar events in future too to strengthen its network 
of interaction with the think tanks and extend it further to go regional and 
sub-regional levels. The Committee are also hopeful that the Ministry would 
continue in its endevours to connect to local Universities and think tanks of 
the country and utilize the interface for the purposes of generating research 

49 
 
content as well as encouraging greater interest amongst the student 
community on topics of foreign policy particularly topics which have a huge 
domestic resonance and apprise the Committee about the achievements made 
through such initiatives. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is noted for compliance.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 
 The Committee understand that outreach to the strategic and foreign policy 
community is one of the core verticals of PP&R Division. The Committee are 
given to understand that the Division supports four annual flagship 
conferences organized in partnership with prominent Indian think-tanks - 
Raisina Dialogue (in partnership with Observer Research foundation), Asia 
Economic Dialogue (in partnership with Pune International Centre), Global 
Technology Summit (in partnership with Carnegie India) and Indian Ocean 
Conference (in partnership with India Foundation), which are broadly 
themed under geopolitics, geoeconomics, geotechnology and geostrategy, 
respectively. The Committee note that these Conferences have been organized 
across various cities in India and abroad, for instance the Global Technology 
Summit was held in Bengaluru, Indian Ocean Conference was held in various 
countries in the Indian Ocean Region and the Asia Economic Dialogue was 
held in Pune. The Committee have also been informed that besides these 
conferences there are various national level seminars being held from time to 

50 
 
time in collaboration with think tanks, universities and academic institutions 
in different locations across the country to generate greater awareness on 
foreign policy issues such as the NADI Dialogue (Guwahati), Maha Rana 
Pratap Annual Geopolitics Dialogue (Udaipur), Policy Dialogue “Act East to 
Indo-Pacific: Role of North-east Indian states in ‘Connecting the 
Connectivities’” (Imphal), Third India-Japan Intellectual Conclave 
(Agartala), etc. The Committee are happy to note that the policy discourse is 
not restricted to Delhi and urge the Policy Planning Division to take it to 
regional locations more often and ensure involvement of more think tanks and 
organizations across India in such endeavours. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed committee is noted for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.8) 
 
The Committee are given to understand that Indian Missions/posts abroad not 
only act as the representative of India but also play a key role in gathering 
information on the diplomatic frontline, disseminating information to the 
overseas public and promoting of diplomatic relations. As a part of these 
activities, the Missions and Posts abroad maintain active engagements with 
prominent think tanks, research scholars and experts in the countries of their 
jurisdiction and the feedback is periodically shared with the Ministry in the 
form of political reporting and assessments by Missions. Taking note of this, 
the Committee feel that Indian Missions can play a more proactive role 

51 
 
towards greater engagement with such experts and hence, urge the Ministry 
to utilize Indian Missions and posts abroad for a deeper and regular exchange 
of ideas and for channelizing the intellectual inputs/ subject expertise from 
abroad into the formulation of India’s short, medium as well as long-term 
foreign policy objectives and goals. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed committee is noted for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 10 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 
1.47 The Committee note that Policy Planning Division interfaces with all 
three Track Dialogues in the country. For Track 1, it is directly responsible, 
for Track 1.5, it is semiresponsible and for Track 2 its responsibility is only to 
present Government of India’s viewpoint. The Committee are aware that 
these interfaces generate ideas, which translates to initiatives which then 
translate into processes, conferences or conference themes. While appreciating 
the fact that the Division is expanding the number of conferences that it 
supports to encourage dialogue on foreign policy and international affairs 
across the country, the Committee find that Track Dialogues in our country 
are dealt by domain experts. The Committee feel that in an increasingly 
complex global environment, where peace builders and diplomats looking to 
address difficult policy challenges are increasingly incorporating track 1.5 and 

52 
 
track 2 dialogues in their strategies, the Ministry should seek guidance from 
Parliamentary Standing Committee on External Affairs on topical issues. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No.11) 
 
The Committee understand that India has a rich legacy of think tank 
ecosystem. The Committee note that the oldest think tank, United Service 
Institution (USI), was setup as far back as in 1870. The Committee also note 
that prior to the economic reforms of the 1990s, think tanks in India were 
largely funded by government or semi-government bodies. However, since the 
1990s, private sector think tanks have come up steadily and their numbers are 
growing now at a healthy rate. According to a study, India now houses the 
third largest think-tank ecosystem in the World, after USA and China. The 
Committee are of the view that growing complexity of global challenges has 
made the role of think tanks very significant in recent years. Think tanks 
serve to provide well researched data and information for helping policy 
makers to make informed choices. They assist in breaking down the complex 
problems into simpler understandings and help in formulating solutions that 
cover all the relevant dimensions. The Committee are given to understand that 
think tanks play a substantive role in dialogue and collaborative work 
through research, seminars, track 1.5/track 2 events with other foreign think 
tanks and research organizations, thereby further engaging and familiarizing 

53 
 
the global strategic and think tank community with Indian developments and 
policy orientations. The Committee are also given to understand that many 
foreign policy concepts/initiatives move from Track 2 dialogues to Track 1.5 
dialogues and eventually become Government policy. Keeping in view the 
same, the Committee desire MEA to take the lead in developing research 
culture through its PP&R Division, create or support more think tanks and 
directly interact with universities in the country. Further, taking note of the 
fact that globally think tanks are projected to assume an even greater role in 
the implementation and evaluation of public policies and that this trend is 
likely to be followed in India as well, the Committee also exhort the 
Government to scale up its current collaboration with think tanks and 
universities with proper assessment of their funding requirements. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 13 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
 
 The Committee note that one of the primary functions of the Policy Planning 
Division is to conduct bilateral and multilateral policy planning dialogues, 
especially Track 1, Track 1.5 dialogues. The Committee note that the various 
track dialogues are mostly Europe and East Asia centric and do not include 
any dialogue with African countries, or with our own neighbouring countries, 

54 
 
or the North American and South American countries, except USA and Brazil. 
The Committee are given to understand that many of these countries do not 
have an established Policy Planning Division and for a Track 1 dialogue to 
materialise, a Policy Planning Division is needed on the other side also. 
Despite such constraints the Committee desire the Ministry to proactively 
map out each of the neighbourhood as well as the African countries and 
explore the possibility of initiating policy planning dialogue with them, 
especially in view of India’s raising interest in African countries and thrust on 
Neighbourhood First Policy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No.16 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
 
The Committee note that the Indian Council of World Affairs (ICW A) work in 
close coordination with MEA to address issues that are at the top of the 
foreign policy agenda. As a statutory body, the mandate of ICWA, inter alia, is 
to promote the study of Indian foreign policy and international affairs so as to 
develop a body of informed opinion; to promote India’s relations with other 
countries through discourse and exchange of ideas as well as to serve as a 
clearing house of information and knowledge regarding world affairs. Since 
the role and mandate of ICWA are quite comprehensive and broad in scope, 

55 
 
the Committee desire ICW A to continue focused research on areas of 
Government’s priority and play a more effective role in policy formulations of 
the Government. In order to contribute to the shaping of an India narrative 
on foreign policy and advance India’s priorities effectively, ICW A should also 
strengthen its coordination with MEA and work in a proactive than reactive 
mode. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. ICW A will make 
efforts to strengthen its coordination with MEA and work proactively to advance 
India’s priorities effectively through research and intellectual activities. 
  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 19 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
The Committee note that in pursuance of its mandate, ICW A undertakes 
numerous intellectual activities to promote India’s relations with other 
countries and discuss India’s policy towards international affairs. These 
activities include bilateral dialogues, international conferences, seminars, 
lectures and discussions. The Committee also note that since April 2021, 
ICWA has organized 126 events which were mix of lectures, talks, bilateral 
dialogues, international and national seminars, book launches, panel and 
roundtable discussions. The Committee have been informed that these events 
were organized in physical and hybrid mode. The Committee appreciate the 
initiative of ICWA in organizing the events through the digital hybrid mode 
too as it would have enabled easier participation of scholars/experts from 

56 
 
abroad and in turn would have had a positive impact on making the 
conversations more engaging and productive. The Committee have been given 
to understand that a number of Council’s activities are organized in 
coordination with and support of the MEA and its representatives have been 
regularly participating in a range of activities organized by ICW A. The 
Committee note that events such as the celebration of the 50th anniversary of 
India-Vietnam Diplomatic Relations, ‘Maitri Diwas’ the India-UK Strategic 
Futures Forum dialogue or the international conference on Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization Reconnect ~ Rejuvenate under India’s Presidency 
have been conducted by ICWA with the support MEA. The Committee 
further note that a number of Council’s activities such as Sapru House 
Lectures delivered by visiting foreign dignitaries are also organized in support 
and coordination with the Ministry of External Affairs. The Committee 
appreciate that some of the conferences and dialogues have the participation 
of External Affairs Minister, Minister of State, Foreign Secretary and 
Secretaries from the Ministry of External Affairs. The Committee have also 
been informed that the ICWA conducts studies at Ministry’s request, for 
instance on Nepal, Afghanistan, Pakistan and Africa and have submitted the 
reports. They have also contributed to discussion/research papers on IORA 
and UNSC and even carried out the publication of the book ‘Covid and 
Diplomacy’. The Committee have been informed that these ICWA 
publications are regularly shared with concerned policy makers in MEA but 
without sharing with Parliamentarians. The Committee while recognizing the 
contribution of ICWA to India’s foreign policy making process urge ICWA to 
make added efforts to increase the frequency of its intellectual activities such 
as seminars, conferences, roundtables, and other discussions, both in physical 
and hybrid mode and also ensure the participation of Parliamentarians to 
achieve its mandate. 

57 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. ICW A is making 
consistent endeavor to enhance its programmatic activities and to diversify the 
participation in its programs and will strive to also include Parliamentarians 
wherever feasible. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 19 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21) 
 
The Committee note that since its inception the thrust areas of work of ICWA 
has evolved over the years. From an initial focus on Asian Relations, Afro-
Asian Solidarity and related area studies it has now evolved to cover area 
studies across the globe and thematic issues such as maritime studies, Indo-
Pacific, Ukraine, Afghanistan, and multilateral institutions like SCO, G-20, 
IORA and the UN, Digital diplomacy, Gender issues in international affairs 
and SDG issues, etc. The Committee have been informed that as part of its 
expansion programme ICWA has setup three Special Centers namely Centre 
for Shanghai Cooperation Organization (SCO), Centre on Migration Mobility 
and Diaspora Studies (CMMDS) and Centre for Council for Security 
Cooperation in the Asia Pacific (CSCAP) to undertake focused research and 
dialogues in specific areas in order to contribute to emerging discourse on 
these areas. The Committee have been told that the Shanghai Cooperation 
Organization (SCO) Study Centre is a lead think tank engaged in SCO-related 
activities. The Council for Security Cooperation in the Asia Pacific (CSCAP) 

58 
 
is a Track 2 network of member institutions which serves as an important 
mechanism to build closer interaction with various countries in the ASEAN 
and the wider Indo-Pacific region. The Committee are also given to 
understand that these centres publish their own research papers on themes 
relevant to the organization which have been acknowledged by policy makers 
and foreign and Indian scholars to be very useful. The Committee appreciate 
the proactive steps being taken by ICW A to have focused research and 
dialogues in specific areas. The Committee urge ICW A to further strengthen 
and widen its endevours in area specific research through its special centres 
and support the MEA to address issues that are at the top of the foreign policy 
agenda more effectively. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23) 
 
The Committee note that Think Tank 20 or T20 is one of the eleven 
Engagement Groups within G20. The Committee have been informed that 
DG, ICW A is the Chair of Task Force 7 (TF7) on ‘Towards Reformed 
Multilateralism: Transforming Global Institutions and Frameworks’. In this 
capacity, ICW A has been participating in the T20 meetings to advance the 
agenda of reformed multilateralism. It has also been submitted that a curtain 
raiser talk on “G20 @ 2023 - The Road Map to Indian Presidency” was held 
on 08 August 2022. It is further seen that ICWA has published a book 
‘G20@2023: The Roadmap to Indian Presidency’ and brought out papers by 

59 
 
in-house faculty and external experts on themes related to G-20. The 
Committee also hope that India’s core interests are upheld during its G20 
Presidency by ICW A and that it utilizes this opportunity to ensure that the 
priorities set by India during its G20 Presidency are carried forward beyond 
the Indian Presidency. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
ICW A has noted the recommendation of the esteemed committee. It will strive to 
promote a discourse on India’s G20 Presidency priorities as relevant to its mandate. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 30) 
 
The Committee are given to understand that fostering policy dialogue on 
trade, investment and economic cooperation forms an integral part of the RIS 
work programme. The Committee note that in the recent past RIS has 
organized a number of dialogues, meetings and discussions encompassing 
various themes of national interest such as Energy Efficiency in Effective 
Energy Transition; Future Digital Currencies and CryptoCurrencies; 
Revisiting Economic Cooperation in BIMSTEC in Post-COVID-19; Need for 
Setting Up of a New Development Bank, etc. The Committee feel that such 
policy dialogues are of profound importance for our country since these 
enable academicians, policy makers, practitioners and other stakeholders to 
carry out extensive deliberations on various economic issues confronting the 
Global South at national, regional, sub-regional and  multilateral level and 
share their insights towards evolving possible solutions. The Committee, hope 

60 
 
that RIS would plan to organize similar in-depth discussions on regular basis 
in coordination with its wide range of national and international partner 
institutions on key issues and strengthen its connect to the Ministries of 
Commerce and Industry (MoCI), Ministry of Finance (MoF) and Ministry of 
Science and Technology (MoST) to bring to table holistic understanding of 
issues on trade, investment and economic cooperation assimilated from 
subject scholars from across the globe with different affiliations and MEA 
should appropriately utilize the value of such discussions for betterment of 
foreign policy. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 31) 
 
The Committee note that RIS has been engaged in G20 work for Indian 
Presidency at multiple levels in the ‘Working Group’ as well as the 
‘Engagement Group’ tracks. The Committee have been told that RIS is a 
knowledge partner for the Agriculture Working Group (AWG) and the 
Development Working Group (DWG) wherein it has been providing inputs 
and comments on various thematic issues concerned to each group. The 
Committee note that in addition to the above, RIS is also actively working 
with five engagement groups viz. Think 20 (T20), Science 20 (S20), Youth 20 
(Y20) and Civil 20 (C20) as one of the lead coordination institutions for 
organizing events/conferences/seminars as also providing valued inputs to 

61 
 
various activities being organized by these groups. In view of the diversity of 
issues and complex challenges the world is grappling with, the Committee are 
aware that the expectations from India’s Presidency of G20 has really 
multiplied. While applauding the humongous role RIS is playing in shaping 
concerns of Think 20, Science 20, Youth 20 and Civil 20, the Committee urge 
RIS to infuse fresh ideas on G20 by carefully assessing its implications for 
global economy. The Committee also desire RIS to compare, contrast and 
create new knowledge that matter for the people in the G20 countries and in 
rest of the world, including the developing countries, LDCs, SIDS, etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The esteemed committee’s recommendation is duly noted. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 33) 
 
The Committee note that as part of its wider dissemination programme, RIS 
has been conducting a number of capacity building programmes which 
include Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programmes and 
the IBSA Visiting Fellowship Programme with the Ministry of External 
Affairs the Summer School on Trade with EXIM Bank of India and 
Internship Programme for university students. In addition, RIS also 
conducted capacity building programmes on Agricultural Trade Policy 
Analysis with the support of its partner institutions. As regards the IBSA 
Visiting Fellowship Program instituted at RIS to promote academic exchange 
of young scholars in the field of economics and social sciences for 

62 
 
strengthening research collaboration among India, Brazil and South Africa in 
the spirit of South-South Cooperation, the Committee find that only three 
candidates have joined the programme in 2023. In view of the focus of this 
Fellowship programme on multilateral institutional frameworks and the 
diverse range of important issues that concerns IBSA, the Committee urge 
RIS and the MEA to ensure that all the available slots are filled so that every 
opportunity to do in-depth joint research and exchange of information in the 
fields of macro-economy, trade and development among India, Brazil and 
South Africa is fully utilized. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The esteemed committee’s recommendation has been duly noted. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No.25 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 34) 
 
The Committee note that RIS offers internship to post-graduate students in 
economics from reputed institutes/universities for a period of two to three 
months mostly during the summer and winter breaks of the academic 
semesters. The Committee have been informed that 14 students from different 
universities of India completed their internship at RIS during the last one 
year. The Committee feel that to inculcate interest in policy research on 
international affairs, training to budding scholars needs to be encouraged 
from a very young age. As such Committee are of the view that being a 

63 
 
premier think-tank in  India on global and regional economic policy, having 
accumulated unique expertise and knowledge base in the field of international 
trade, regional economic integration, new technologies and industrialization, 
regional connectivity and infrastructure development, blue economy, 
development finance and related areas, RIS should actively consider opening 
its internship programme in these specialized areas for students at graduate 
levels too. The Committee, hence, urge upon RIS to evaluate their internship 
programme and offer more opportunities to students and apprise the 
Committee about the same. 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed committee is duly noted. RIS would review 
its existing Internship Programme and make a vigorous effort to extend this facility 
to a larger number of interested candidates, including students at Graduate level 
also.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 28 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 37) 
 
The Committee note that RIS functions from the India Habitat Centre (IHC) 
premises in Delhi covering an initially acquired built up area of 1000 sq. mt. in 
September 1988 and an additional built-up space of 381.46 metres acquired by 
it from IHC later. The Committee have been told that RIS does not have any 
facility to house visiting scholars, including the six IBSA Fellowship holders or 
around 30 ITEC course participants coming from Global South to take part in 

64 
 
its five specialized courses annually. Due to lack of required conference 
facilities within its limited space, RIS has to frequently look for appropriate 
venues outside for holding its key meetings or conferences in which a large 
number of scholars from the country and abroad participate. Looking into the 
situation, the Committee feel that the built-up space available with RIS is 
insufficient to meet its present and emerging requirements. The existing space 
provides no scope for expansion of RIS’s Faculty, which is absolutely essential 
for its organic growth to carry forward its mission of conducting evidence 
based specialized studies on trade and economic issues to give a boost to 
Government’s efforts towards Atmanirbharta. The Committee are of the 
considered view that RIS needs to have its campus, hostel and allied facilities 
as an institution of excellence in the country which is mandated to conduct a 
large number of policy research studies for its in-house platforms such as the 
Global Development Centre, ASEAN India Centre, Centre for Maritime 
Economy and Connectivity (CMEC), etc. apart from the wide range of other 
studies commissioned by its partners. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that the Ministry may seriously take up the issue of providing adequate 
infrastructure facilities to RIS and apprise the Committee about the specific 
steps taken in this regard. RIS may also, in consultation with Ministry of 
External Affairs, create a futuristic work plan and seek necessary budgetary 
allocation from the Ministry of Finance. 
Reply of the Government 
The esteemed Committee's recommendation is dated for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No.34 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 

65 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 38) 
 
The Committee desire that the Ministry of External Affairs may closely 
monitor the recommendation of the Committee with ICWA and RIS and 
submit the outcome to the Committee. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendation of the esteemed Committee is noted for compliance. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/76/2023 dated 10/10/2023] 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                            P.P. CHAUDHARY,                  
5 February, 2024                                                                                                    Chairperson,                                 
16 Magha, 1945 (Saka)                                                 Committee on External Affairs 

66 
 
APPENDIX-I 
  
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2023-24) HELD ON 5 FEBRUARY, 2024 
  
The Committee sat on Monday, 5 February, 2024 from 1500 hrs. to 1520 hrs. in 
Main Committee Room, Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi. 
PRESENT 
1.        Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
  
Lok Sabha 
  
2.      Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3. Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
4. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
5.      Shri P. C. Mohan 
6.     Smt. Queen Oja 
7.      Dr. K. C. Patel 
8. Shri N.K. Premachandran 
9.      Shri Soyam Babu Rao 
10. Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
11. Shri E.T. Mohammed Basheer 
   
Rajya Sabha 
  
  
12.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan   
13.  Shri Anil Desai 
14.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
  
  

67 
 
Secretariat 
             
           1.        Shri Anjani Kumar                           -          Joint Secretary  
2.        Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan              -          Director 
3.        Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut               -          Deputy Secretary 
4.        Smt. Maya Menon                             -          Under Secretary 
  
2.        At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the 
Committee.  
3.        Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the 
Action Taken by the Government on the Observations/ Recommendations 
contained in the Twenty-Fourth Report of the Committee on External Affairs on 
the subject ‘India’s Policy Planning and Role of Think Tanks with Special 
Reference to ICWA and RIS’. 
4.        The Chairperson invited the members to offer their suggestions, if any, for 
incorporation in the draft Report after some deliberations. The Committee adopted 
the draft report without any modification. 
5.        The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Action 
Taken Report and present the same to Parliament. 
6.         XXXX. 
7.        XXXX 
8.        XXXX 
 The Committee then adjourned. 

68 
 
Appendix-II 
 (Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
  
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE TWENTY FOURTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (17TH LOK SABHA) 
                                           
(i)  Total Number of Recommendations       38  
 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government. 
  
Recommendation Nos. 5, 9, 14, 15, 16, 18, 19, 20, 22, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 32, 35 
and 36. 
                                                                  Total-18 
Percentage:  47.4% 
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue in 
view of the Government's replies. 
       
NIL  
                                                      Total- Nil 
 Percentage: 0 % 
  
 (iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the Government 
have not been accepted by the Committee and require   reiteration. 
  
NIL  
                                                      Total- Nil 
 Percentage: 0 % 
  
(v)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited. 
  
Recommendation Nos.  1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 17, 21, 23, 30, 31, 33, 34, 
37 and 38  
                                                                                        Total- 20 
Percentage:  52.6% 
  
 