 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Indian Diaspora Overseas including NRIs, PIOs, OCIs and Migrant Workers: 
All Aspects of their Conditions and Welfare, including the Status of the 
Emigration Bill 
 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
  APRIL, 2025/ Chaitra, 1947 (Saka)  
 
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2024-25) 
 
                          EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
06 
 

 
 
SIXTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
Indian Diaspora Overseas including NRIs, PIOs, OCIs and Migrant Workers: All 
Aspects of their Conditions and Welfare, including the Status of the Emigration Bill 
 
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 01 April, 2025 
          Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 01 April, 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
         APRIL, 2025/ Chaitra, 1947 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
COEA NO. - 175      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha (____________ 
Edition) and printed by  
  

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25)…………………………..(ii) 
INTRODUCTION………………………………………………………………………………………………..(iii)  
PART I - REPORT 
 
CHAPTER 1 INDIAN DIASPORA OVERSEAS- NRIS, PIOS /OCIS 1-25 
CHAPTER 2 EMIGRATION POLICY & WELFARE SCHEMES  26-56 
CHAPTER 3 ENGAGEMENT WITH THE DIASPORA 57-79 
CHAPTER 4 PORTALS FOR ENGAGEMENT WITH DIASPORA 80-92 
 PART II - RECOMMENDATIONS 
 
93-142 
 APPENDICES  
Appendix I Minutes of the Fourth Sitting of the Committee held on 27 November 2024 143-145 
Appendix II Minutes of the Ninth Sitting of the Committee held on 21 January 2025 146-148 
Appendix III Minutes of the Tenth Sitting of the Committee held on 04 February 2025 149-151 
Appendix IV Minutes of the Eighteenth Sitting of the Committee held on 26 March 2025 152-153 
 ANNEXURES  
Annexure - A Data on Indian Diaspora Abroad 154-168 
Annexure - B Guidelines on Indian Community Welfare Fund Established in Indian 
Missions/Posts Abroad 
169-186 
Annexure -C  Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awardees 187-199 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i)  

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25) 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3. Shri Vijay Baghel 
4. Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5. Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
6. Shri Arun Govil 
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
8. Shri Navaskani K. 
9. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
12. Shri Sanatan Pandey 
13. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
14. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
15. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
16. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
17. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
18. Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
19. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
20. Shri Akshay Yadav 
21. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. John Brittas 
23. Smt. Kiran Choudhry 
24. Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
25. Dr. K. Laxman 
26. Ms. Kavita Patidar 
27. Shri A. D. Singh 
28. Kunwar Ratanjeet Pratap Narayan Singh 
29. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
30. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
31. Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
Secretariat  
1. Shri Anjani Kumar   –  Joint Secretary 
2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   –  Director  
3. Ms. Maya Menon              _ Under Secretary 
 
(ii) 
 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
  
            I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2024-25) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Sixth Report (18th Lok Sabha) on the 
subject ‘Indian Diaspora Overseas, including NRIs, PIOs, OCIs and Migrant Workers: All Aspects of 
their Conditions and Welfare, including the Status of the Emigration Bill.’ 
 
2.        The Committee selected the subject ‘Indian Diaspora Overseas, including NRIs, PIOs, OCIs 
and Migrant Workers: All Aspects of their Conditions and Welfare, including the Status of the 
Emigration Bill’ for detailed examination during 2024-25. The Committee was briefed by the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs on the subject on 27 November 2024. Thereafter, 
the Committee heard the views of the representatives of NORKA Roots (Kerala), Department of NRI 
Affairs (Punjab), People of Indian Origin Chamber of Commerce and Industry (PIOCCI) and Centre 
for Diaspora Studies (Gujarat University) on 21 January 2025. The Committee took evidence of the 
representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs on 04 February 2025. 
 
3.        The Report was considered and adopted by the Committee at their Sitting held on 26 March 
2025. The Minutes of the Sittings of the Committee are appended to the Report. 
 
4.         The Committee wish to express their gratitude to the Ministry of External Affairs and the 
Diaspora Organisations for placing material information as well as tendering evidence and views 
before the Committee. 
 
5.        For facility of reference, the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee have been 
printed in bold letters in the Report. 
  
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                 Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                    
26  March, 2025                                                                                        Chairperson,                                
05  Chaitra, 1946 (Saka)                                           Committee on External Affairs 
       
(iii) 

1 
PART I – REPORT 
 
CHAPTER I 
 
INDIAN DIASPORA OVERSEAS- NRIs, PIOs /OCIs 
 
 ‘Indian Diaspora’ refers to those people of Indian origin who had migrated to foreign lands 
from India either several generations ago or in the recent past on long term Visas issued by other 
countries and have since settled abroad. The Indian Diaspora includes Overseas Citizens of India 
(OCIs)/Persons of Indian Origin (PIOs) and Non-Resident Indians (NRIs).  
 
1.2 The Indian Diaspora is one of the largest and most diverse global communities with an 
estimated population of over 35 million spread across the globe. As of January 2024, the population 
of Indian Diaspora was about 35.42 million, comprising of 15.85 million NRIs and 19.57 million PIOs 
and OCIs.  Major countries with significant Indian populations include the United States, the United 
Kingdom, Canada, the Gulf countries, Australia, South East Asia, and the Caribbean. Indian Diaspora 
has made a unique identity by excelling and making significant contributions across various fields like 
politics, business, science, technology, music, and literature. 
 
A. DEFINING OCI/PIO/NRI 
 
1.3 A Person of Indian Origin (PIO) means a foreign citizen (except a national of Pakistan, 
Afghanistan Bangladesh, China, Iran, Bhutan, Sri Lanka and Nepal)  
(i) who at any time held an Indian passport or  
(ii) who or either of their parents/ grandparents/ great grandparents was born and 
permanently resident in India as defined in Government of India Act, 1935 and other 
territories that became part of India thereafter provided neither was at any time a citizen of 
any of the aforesaid countries (as referred above) or  
(iii) Who is a spouse of a citizen of India or a PIO 
 
1.4 An Overseas Citizen of India is a foreign national, -  
(i) who was a citizen of India at the time of, or at any time after 26th January, 1950; or 
(ii) who was eligible to become a citizen of India on 26th January, 1950; or 
(iii) who belonged to a territory that became part of India after 15th August, 1947; or 

2 
(iv) who is a child or a grandchild or a great grandchild of such a citizen; or 
(v) who is a minor child of such persons mentioned above; or 
(vi) who is a minor child and whose both parents are citizens of India or one of the parents is 
a citizen of India - is eligible for registration as OCI cardholder.  
 
1.5 Besides, spouse of foreign origin of a citizen of India or spouse of foreign origin of an 
Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder and whose marriage has been registered and subsisted for a 
continuous period of not less than two years immediately preceding the presentation of the application 
is also eligible for registration as OCI cardholder.  
 
1.6 However, no person, who or either of whose parents or grandparents or great grandparents is 
or had been a citizen of Pakistan, Bangladesh or such other country as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, specify, shall be eligible for registration as an Overseas Citizen 
of India Cardholder. 
 
1.7 A Non Resident Indian(NRI) is an Indian citizen who has traveled with an Indian Passport from 
India to another country to ordinarily reside there for any purpose, except for tourism purposesMEA 
adheres to the broadest definitions of these terms, in order to ensure the most inclusive welfare of 
Indian Diaspora. 
 
1.8 A detailed comparative chart of the three categories is as under: 
 
 NRI Persons of Indian 
Origin 
OCI Cardholder 
1. Who? An Indian 
citizen who is 
ordinarily 
residing 
outside India 
and holds an 
Indian 
Passport 
A person who or whose 
any of ancestors was an 
Indian national and who 
is presently holding 
another country’s 
citizenship/ nationality 
i.e. he/she is holding 
foreign passport 
A person registered as Overseas Citizen 
of India (OCI) Cardholder under section 
7A of The Citizenship Act, 1955 

3 
 
2. Who is 
eligible? 
- - Following categories of foreign nationals 
are eligible for registration as Overseas 
Citizen of India (OCI) Cardholder:- 
(1) Who was a citizen of India at the time 
of, or at any time after the 
commencement of the Constitution i.e. 
26.01.1950; or  
(2) who was eligible to become a citizen 
of India on 26.01.1950; or  
(3) who belonged to a territory that 
became part of India after 15.08.1947; or 
(4) who is a child or a grandchild or a 
great grandchild of such a citizen 
(mentioned in (1) to (3) above) ; or  
(5) who is a minor child of such persons 
mentioned above; or  
(6) who is a minor child and whose both 
parents are citizens of India or one of the 
parents is a citizen of India; or  
(7) spouse of foreign origin of a citizen of 
India or spouse of foreign origin of an 
Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder 
registered under section 7A of The 
Citizenship Act, 1955 and whose marriage 
has been registered and subsisted for a 
continuous period of not less than two 
years immediately preceding the 
presentation of the application.  
Such spouse shall be subjected to prior 
security clearance by a competent 
authority in India.  
 
Note : No person, who or either of whose 
parents or grandparents or great 
grandparents is or had been a citizen of 
Pakistan, Bangladesh or such other 
country as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify, shall be eligible for registration as 
an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder. 
3. How can 
one get? 
- - Eligible persons to apply online. For this 
purpose, please log on to 
https://ociservices.aov.in . 

4 
 
4. Where to 
apply? 
- - The applicants have to submit the 
application form online and upload all the 
requisite documents (self attested), 
photograph and signature (in the case of 
minors who cannot sign, left hand thumb 
impression) along with the application. 
After submission of the complete 
application online including documents, 
photograph and signature, the original of 
the supporting documents have to be 
submitted to the Indian Mission/ Post/ 
FRRO concerned for prior verification. 
They are not required to bring hard 
copies/ printouts of the application or the 
photocopies of the uploaded documents. 
         Details of offices where the 
applicants have to submit the original 
supporting documents for prior verification 
are as follows:- 
 
Applicants outside India 
(1) The Indian Mission /Post having 
jurisdiction over the country of which 
applicant is a citizen; or  
(2) If he/she is not living in the country of 
his/her citizenship, to the Indian Mission 
/Post having jurisdiction over the country 
of which the applicant is ordinarily 
resident. 
 
Applicants in India 
 
If the applicant is residing in India, to the 
Foreigners Regional Registration Offices 
(FRROs) according to their jurisdictional 
control. To know the jurisdiction of 
FRROs, please see “Addresses of offices 
to submit OCI applications” in the website 
of the Ministry of Home Affairs - 
www.mha.aov.in.  
 
Note: For the above purpose, ‘ordinarily 
resident’ will mean a person staying in a 
particular country or in India for a 
continuous period of 6 months. 

5 
 
5. Fees? - - (a) in ca se of application submitted in 
Indian Mission/ Post abroad - US $ 275 or 
equivalent in local currency.  
(b) in case of application submitted in 
India Rs. 15,000/-. 
6. Which 
nationals are 
ineligible? 
- - No person, who or either of whose 
parents or grandparents or great 
grandparents is or had been a citizen of 
Pakistan, Bangladesh or such other 
country as the Central Government may, 
by notification in the Official Gazette, 
specify, shall be eligible for registration as 
an Overseas Citizen of India Cardholder. 
7. What 
benefits one is 
entitled to? 
All benefits as 
available to 
Indian citizens 
subject to 
notifications 
issued by the 
Government 
from time to 
time 
No specific benefits 1) multiple entry lifelong visa for visiting 
India for any purpose: 
 
Provided that for undertaking the following 
activities, the OCI Cardholder shall be 
required to obtain a special permission or 
a Special Permit, as the case may be, 
from the competent authority or the 
Foreigners Regional Registration Officer 
or the Indian Mission concerned, namely:- 
(i) to undertake research;  
(ii) to undertake any Missionary or Tabligh 
or Mountaineering or Journalistic 
activities;  
(iii) to undertake internship in any foreign 
Diplomatic Missions or foreign 
Government organisations in India or to 
take up employment in any foreign 
Diplomatic Missions in India;  
(iv) to visit any place which falls within the 
Protected or Restricted or prohibited 
areas as notified by the Central 
Government or competent authority; Note: 
For requisite special permission, OCI 
Cardholder may visit: https: 
//ociservices.gov.in . 
 
(2) exemption from registration with the 
Foreigners Regional Registration Officer 
or Foreigners Registration Officer for any 
length of stay in India: 

6 
Provided that the OCI Cardholders who 
are normally resident in India shall 
intimate the jurisdictional Foreigners 
Regional Registration Officer or the 
Foreigners Registration Officer by email 
whenever there is a change in permanent 
residential address and in their 
occupation;  
 
(3) parity with Indian nationals in the 
matter of,- (i) tariffs in air fares in domestic 
sectors in India; and (ii) entry fees to be 
charged for visiting national parks, wildlife 
sanctuaries, the national monuments, 
historical sites and museums in India; 
 
(4) parity with Non-Resident Indians in the 
matter of,- 
(i) inter-country adoption of Indian children 
subject to the compliance of the 
procedure as laid down by the competent 
authority for such adoption  
(ii) appearing for the all India entrance 
tests such as National Eligibility cum 
Entrance Test, Joint Entrance 
Examination (Mains), Joint Entrance 
Examination (Advanced) or such other 
tests to make them eligible for admission 
only against any Non Resident Indian seat 
or any supernumerary seat:  
Provided that the OCI Cardholder shall 
not be eligible for admission against any 
seat reserved exclusively for Indian 
citizens;  
(iii) purchase or sale of immovable 
properties other than agricultural land or 
farm house or plantation property; and  
(iv) pursuing the following professions in 
India as per the provisions contained in 
the applicable relevant statutes or Acts as 
the case may be, namely:- 
(a) doctors, dentists, nurses and 
pharmacists;  
(b) advocates;  
(c) architects;  
(d) chartered accountants;  
 

7 
(5) in respect of all other economic, 
financial and educational fields not 
specified in this notification or the rights 
and privileges not covered by the 
notifications made by the Reserve Bank of 
India under the Foreign Exchange 
Management Act, 1999 (42 of 1999), the 
OCI Cardholder shall have the same 
rights and privileges as a foreigner.  
 
(6) Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) 
cardholders are eligible for appointment 
as teaching faculty in NTs, NITs, IIMs, 
IISERs, NSc, Central Universities and in 
the new AIIMS set up under Pradhan 
MantriSwasthya Suraksha Yojana 
(PMSSY). Explanation — 
 
(1) The OCI Cardholder (including a PIO 
Cardholder) is a foreign national holding 
passport of a foreign country and is not a 
citizen of India.  
(2) “Non-Resident Indian” shall have the 
same meaning as assigned to it in the 
Foreign Exchange Management 
(Acquisition and Transfer of Immovable 
Property in India) Regulations, 2018 made 
by the Reserve Bank of India under the 
Foreign Exchange Management Act, 1999 
(42 of 1999) and who fulfils the “Non-
Resident Indian” status as per the Income 
Tax Act, 1961 (43 of 1961). Any other 
benefits to an OCI Cardholder may be 
notified by the Central Government under 
section 7B(1) of The Citizenship Act, 
1955.  
Note: - (1) State Governments should 
ensure that the OCI Cardholder 
registration booklets of OCI Cardholders 
are treated as their identification for any 
services rendered to them. 8. Does No 
he/she require visa for visiting India.  
 
(2) A person registered as an OCI 
Cardholder is eligible to apply for grant of 
Indian citizenship under section 5(1) (g) of 
The Citizenship Act, 1955 if he/she has 

8 
attained full age (18 year) and if he/she is 
registered as OCI Cardholder for five 
years and is ordinarily resident in India for 
twelve months before making an 
application for registration. Central 
Government, if it is satisfied that special 
circumstances exist, may after recording 
the circumstances in writing, relax the 
period of twelve months, up to a 
maximum of thirty days which may be in 
different breaks. 
8. Does he/she 
require visa for 
visiting India. 
No Yes OCI Card is itself a multiple entry lifelong 
visa for visiting India for any purpose. 
However, for undertaking certain 
activities, OCI Cardholders will require 
prior permission as mentioned against SI. 
No. 7 above. 
9. Is he/she 
required to 
register with 
the local police 
authorities in 
India? 
No Yes if the period of stay 
is for more than 180 
days 
No 
10. What 
activities can 
be undertaken 
in India? 
All activities Activity as per the type 
of visa obtained 
All activities except certain activities for 
which prior permission/spucial permit is 
required as mentioned against Si. No.7 
above. 
11. How can 
one acquire 
Indian 
citizenship? 
He/she is an 
Indian citizen 
As per section 5(1 )(a) & 
5(1)(c) of The 
Citizenship Act, 1955, 
he/she has to be 
ordinarily resident in 
India for a period of 7 
years before making an 
application for 
registration. 
As per section 5(1 )(g) of The Citizenship 
Act, 1955, a person registered as an OCI 
Cardholder for 5 years and who is 
ordinarily resident in India for twelve 
months before making an application for 
registration is eligible for grant of Indian 
citizenship.  
 
Central Government, if it is satisfied that 
special circumstances exist, may after 
recording the circumstances in writing, 
relax the period of twelve months, up to a 
maximum of thirty days which may be in 
different breaks. 
 

9 
 
i) OCIs and PIO Card Holders 
1.9 On being asked about the differences and similarities between the OCIs and PIO card holders 
and the benefits accorded to each, MEA stated as under:  
“The benefits to an OCI cardholder are the following: 
(i) Multiple entry, multi-purpose lifelong visa to visit India; 
(ii) Exemption from reporting to Police authorities for any length of stay in India; and 
(iii) Parity with NRIs in financial, economic and educational fields except in the 
acquisition of agricultural or plantation properties. 
 
1.10 The Scheme of PIO cards has been discontinued since 2015. Indian Immigration will accept 
all Person of Indian Origin (PIO) cards (including handwritten ones) along with valid foreign passport, 
as valid travel document till December 31, 2025, instead of earlier deadline of December 31, 2024. 
Indian Immigration Check Post(s) will continue to consider all PIO cards (which were valid as on 
January 9, 2015) valid for exit from/entry into India till December 31, 2025. This extension of timeline 
is subject to the condition that if in the meantime, any deadline is notified by the International Civil 
Aviation Organization (ICAO) thereby making handwritten PIO cards invalid, then PIO cardholders 
may have to obtain appropriate visa from Indian Missions/Posts. All PIO cardholders (handwritten and 
machine-readable) have been advised to convert their PIO card to OCI card before this deadline”  
 
1.11 Talking about OCIs and PIOs, the Secretary, continued during oral evidence as under:  
 “We almost treat PIOs and OCIs same because the Government has told every PIO card 
holder to convert themselves and get an OCI. Not everybody has still done it and I know the 
numbers could be varying anywhere between a lakh and a half who are still PIO card holders. 
The Government has been continuously extending the date for converting their PIO cards into 
OCI cards. I think, the latest date perhaps has now been extended to 31st December, 2025. 
They have this opportunity to get it converted. The PIO card holder does not face any difficulty 
in entering India. We are okay with it as long as they show the PIO card. So, that is the 
definition that we have.”  
 
1.12 The Ministry, in a written reply, have informed that the following steps have been taken to 
further liberalize the OCI Scheme: 
i. The requirement to re-issue an OCI card each time a new passport is issued to a 
foreigner up to 20 years of age and once after completing 50 years of age is dispensed 
with. Now, an OCI cardholder shall have to get the OCI card re-issued once a new 
passport is issued after completing 20 years of age so as to capture his/ her facial 
features on attaining adulthood. 
ii. Missions/Posts have been asked to not seek renunciation certificate from those applicants 
who have already acquired foreign nationality. 

10 
iii. Extension of the OCI facility upto 6th generation of PIOs residing in 
a. Suriname 
b. Reunion Island 
c. Guyana 
d. French territories of Gaudeloupe and Martinique 
iv.  Extension of the OCI facility upto 7th generation of PIOs residing in Mauritius 
1.13 As per data available on MHA's OCI portal, till date 51,58,262 OCI cards have been issued. 
Year wise details since 2005 as under: 
OCI Cards Issued (All Missions Abroad & All FRROs) 
S.No. Year Total Cases 
1.  2005 289 
2.  2006 86321 
3.  2007 112401 
4.  2008 158805 
5.  2009 169794 
6.  2010 214414 
7.  2011 262646 
8.  2012 234826 
9.  2013 253345 
10.  2014 220406 
11.  2015 316330 
12.  2016 403898 
13.  2017 405518 
14.  2018 339510 
15.  2019 329340 
16.  2020 191592 
17.  2021 328799 
18.  2022 403676 
19.  2023 349382 
20.  2024 341315 
21.  2025 35655 
Total 5158262 
 
 
1.14 During the course of evidence, concerns were raised by various members relating to 
complaints being received regarding dishonouring of OCI Cards or their revocation. On being asked 
about the same, the Committee have been informed that the Ministry of Home Affairs is the competent 
authority to decide on revocation of OCI cards and records on OCI cards revoked or OCI cardholders 
denied permission to travel are available with MHA. 

11 
 
1.15 On a specific query about the reasons for denial of OCI cards to Indians abroad despite 
possessing genuine credentials and identity papers, the Ministry, in their written reply, have submitted 
that the OCI applications abroad are accepted by Missions/ Posts abroad and approved by Ministry of 
Home Affairs. Reasons for denial of OCI cards are also available with MHA.  
 
ii) Non Resident Indians (NRIs) 
1.16 On being pointed out that a common definition for the term ‘Non Resident Indians' is lacking, 
the Secretary during the sitting held on 04.02.2025 submitted as under: 
 “xxx I agree with you that the definition of NRI varies from Act to Act. xxxxx FEMA has a 
different definition of NRI. The Income Tax Act has a different definition of NRI. As far as we 
are concerned, we treat a person as NRI as long as that person is abroad and holds an Indian 
passport. That is how we differentiate. A PIO or an OCI card holder is not an NRI because he 
or she does not hold an Indian passport. So, for us, that is the definition of NRI. We are not 
looking at the Income Tax Act – xxxx. We are not looking at FEMA or any other Act. So, our 
definition, therefore, is that those who are holding a blue passport, we treat them as NRIs and 
as long as they are abroad.” 
 
1.17. The Committee felt that multiplicity of definitions have a potential to lead multiple 
interpretations which in turn impacts the decision making process and accessibility of services. On 
being asked about the same, MEA has replied as under:  
 “This Ministry considers that Non-Resident Indians are those people who hold an Indian 
passport and who have travelled abroad for any reason other than that of tourism. This is the 
definition that is used by this Ministry for devising its Diaspora Engagement policies. This is 
the most expansive definition of Non-Resident Indians and Ministry adopts it to extend for 
maximum mutual benefit.” 
 
iii) Issuance of Aadhaar Cards to Overseas Indians  
1.18 Apprising the Committee of the difficulty being faced by the Overseas Indians in procuring 
Aadhaar Cards, a representative from Diaspora Organisation during the sitting of the Committee on 
21.01.2025 submitted as under: 
 “Another issue of interest or concern to us is that there was a time when we could obtain the 
Aadhaar Card and now it has become difficult for OCIs and PIOs to get an Aadhaar Card. But 
Aadhaar Card in India is the basis for everything. If you need an investment or need to open 
an office or a bank account or deal with parents, you need an Aadhaar Card. Even to get a 
SIM Card, you need Aadhaar Card.” 
  

12 
 
1.19 When asked about the facilities available for Aadhaar Card enrolment for OCI card holders 
from abroad, the Ministry in their written reply have informed that Aadhaar Card enrolment is handled 
by UIDAI which has not made any arrangements for setting up Aadhaar facilitation centers outside 
India.  
 
iv) Voting Rights to NRI’s 
1.20 During the course of the sitting with the State representatives and the Diaspora organizations 
one of the proposals brought forth was related to extension of voting rights to NRI’s and enabling them 
to exercise their franchise from abroad. When asked about the same, Secretary (CPV & OCI) during 
the sitting held on 04.02.2025 submitted as under: 
 “The electoral politics part, xxx  as to whether NRIs can have voting opportunities. xxx, I 
remember earlier, five, six years back, this was talked about. If a decision is taken to have 
voting rights for NRIs, we in the MEA, the Missions post abroad, I am sure would become the 
polling centres. We would be very happy to facilitate in whatever way we can. I think we had 
discussions with the Election Commission also. We said that we would be happy to help in 
every way possible for enabling NRIs to vote while they are abroad. But the Election 
Commission has to work around that. 
 
1.21 Asked about the status of this demand of the NRI’s, the Ministry in their written reply have 
submitted as under: 
 “During a meeting with the Election Commission of India, ECI informed the Ministry that the 
matter is currently pending with the Ministry of Law and Justice (MoLJ) as the subject matter 
“Voting Rights to NRIs” pertains to legislative department of MoLJ. It will also need 
amendments in the Act of 1950 and 1951, which provides registration and enrollment of the 
overseas electors in the electoral rolls.  
  ECI also mentioned that even after necessary amendments are made, the 
implementation of NRIs voting abroad will take some time because ECI will have to engage 
with national political parties before implementation of the voting rights and expressed 
apprehensions that voting rights to NRIs may lead to a discriminatory system in non-
democratic countries.”  
 
B. GEOGRAPHICAL DISTRIBUTION & DATA ON INDIAN DIASPORA  
 
1.22 Based on inputs received from Missions/ Posts abroad, the Ministry of External Affairs is 
maintaining a database of physical distribution of Indian Diaspora members across the world, 
Country- wise (Annexure-’A’) 

13 
 
1.23 It is seen from the data that as of January 2024, the population of Indian Diaspora was 
35421987, comprising of 15850612 NRIs and 19571375 PIOs and OCIs. However, as per the UN 
Population Division’s estimate there were around 178.6 lakh Indian migrants in 2020 implying that the 
number of migrants would have undoubtedly increased significantly than the figures reflected by the 
Ministry.  
 
1.24 When pointed out the probable discrepancy between the Ministry’s records and the UN 
Population Division’s estimate, Secretary (CPV & OIA) during the sitting held on 04.02.2025 submitted 
as under: 
 “xxxx one of the biggest problems, xxxx, is the availability of data. The data that we have 
provided to you is based on the inputs that we receive from Missions/Posts. I would say that 
the data is a kind of rough data. It is not a perfect immigration data -- that means 
immigration of that country concerned where they can say that ‘x’ number of Indians 
entered. So, on the basis of data, we try to get estimates from the Missions/Posts as on 31st 
December of a particular year or 1st of January. xxx the biggest challenge is to really get the 
data particularly of not only NRIs, PIOs, but also, the students. xxxx the difference that you 
are mentioning about the UN data and our data is something that if we can get a little bit of 
more details, if we get it country-wise, then, we can circulate it to our Missions and Posts, 
and tell them that this is what we have from the UN and you need to look at it a little more 
closely, and perhaps, reconcile. xxxx Getting data is a big challenge.  
 
1.25 Asked about the best possible way out to have a near correct figure on our Diaspora abroad, 
the Secretary submitted as under: 
 “We need to devise mechanisms actually between the Bureau of Immigration and the 
Ministry of External Affairs to put the data together particularly of how many people have 
actually gone abroad; their final destination; where they have settled; and where they are 
working. And if they have come back, then it is a different thing.” 
 
1.26 During the sitting of the Committee on 21.01.2025, representatives from Diaspora 
Organisations put across their concerns regarding lack of data availability and data sharing by the 
Centre with the State Governments. 
 
1.27 In a written response regarding the above concerns regarding more reliable data on our 
Diaspora, the MEA submitted as under:  
 “Accurately tracking the large Indian Diaspora spread across the globe and generations is a 
challenging task, which requires enhanced data collection methods through regular surveys, 

14 
census data, and collaboration with host countries for securing immigration records. 
Countries differ in their methods of collecting immigration details and the extent to which it is 
made available in the public domain. Ministry is making all efforts to motivate the Indian 
Diaspora to register themselves with Indian Embassies and Consulates abroad or on digital 
platforms of the Ministry.  
  United Nations Department of Economic and Social Affairs of the UN Population 
Division released the International Migration Report 2020, in the wake of the disruptions 
caused by the Covid pandemic to the migration flows across the world. The report identified 
India as the country with the largest Diaspora population in the world, accounting for 17.86 
million migrants out of the 281 million estimated migrants in the world. The report defines 
migrants as persons living outside of their country of origin. It arrived at these figures after 
analyzing the data collected jointly with the International Organization for Migration (IOM) 
and the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD).  
  While the methodology and accuracy of the United Nations’ data remains outside the 
purview of this Ministry, Ministry makes wholehearted efforts to encourage the Indian 
Diaspora to register with its Missions/Posts abroad to have the most authentic and accurate 
data on them. Such data has proved extremely useful particularly while managing crisis 
situations in foreign lands, particularly those relating to evacuation of Indian nationals from 
abroad during distress”. 
  Ministry, based on the official records and inputs received from Missions and Posts, 
estimates that Indian Diaspora comprise of 15.85 million NRIs and 19.57 million PIOs and 
OCIs, adding to the total of 35.42 million Indian Diaspora in January 2024.  
 
C. REMITTANCES RECEIVED FROM INDIAN DIASPORA 
 
1.28 It was submitted before the Committee that the data of inward remittances received from 
abroad is being maintained by the Department of Economic Affairs (DEA). The data comprises of 
current transfers in cash or in kind received by resident households from non-residents mainly for the 
purpose of family maintenance. As per inputs from DEA and RBI, the year-wise data, representing 
private transfer receipts as available in India’s Balance of Payments (BoP) statement II, is given 
below: 
India's Inward Remittances (In USD Billion)* 
Year Inward Remittance 
2021-22 89.1 
2022-23 112.5 
2023-24 118.7 
2024-25 (Quarter 1) 29.5 
2024-25 (Quarter 2) 31.9 
 

15 
 
D. ADMINISTRATIVE & POLICY FRAMEWORK FOR DIASPORA 
i) Divisions in MEA Handling Matters Relating to Diaspora 
1.29 Consequent upon the merger of the erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) with 
the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA),  the Ministry was directed to elaborate upon the institutional, 
administrative and policy framework that has been set up since the merger. Various Divisions have 
been set up under the MEA, which provides the requisite institutional and administrative support for 
wider engagement with Diaspora and formulates policies for the same. 
 
1.30 Divisions in the Ministry of External Affairs handling matters relating to Diaspora, their welfare 
and matters pertaining to migration along with their mandate are given below: 
 
(i) Diaspora Engagement (DE) Division: This Division deals with matters relating to 
students and NRI marital disputes issues along with programmes related with 
engagement of Diaspora which includes Know India Programme (KIP), Scholarship 
Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC), Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora 
(PCTD), celebration of Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) etc. 
(ii) Emigration Policy & Welfare (EP & W) Division: This Division deals with matters 
relating to Migration and Mobility including MMPAs & LMAs, Emigration Bill, India-EU 
CAMM, Global Compact on Migration, ADD, IMRF and other Regional Processes 
along with welfare initiatives for Indian workers abroad like PDOT, PBBY, ICWF & 
PKVY. 
(iii) Overseas Employment & Protector General of Emigrants (OE & PGE) Division: This 
Division deals with matters related to overseas employment of Indian workers, 
appointment of overseas recruitment agents, providing assistance through Pravasi 
Bharatiya Sahatya Kendra (PBSK), working of E-Migrate Portal, Welfare measures to 
protect the interests of Emigrants working abroad etc. 
(iv) Passport Seva Programme (PSP) Division: The PSP Division of the Ministry provides 
passport services through the Central Passport Organization (CPO) and its network of 
Passport Offices, Passport Seva Kendras (PSKs); and Post Office Passport Seva 
Kendras (POPSKs). Consular, Passport and Visa services to overseas Indians/Foreign 

16 
nationals are provided by the PSP Division through the Indian Missions and Posts 
abroad. 
(v) Consular, Passport & Visa (CPV) Division: It handles all policy matters related to 
Consular Grievance, Legalisation/Attestation of documents, Extradition Matters, 
Issuance of Indian Visas at our Missions abroad for foreign nationals, Registration of 
births and deaths abroad and Issuance of OCI Card by our Missions/Posts abroad  
 
1.31 Following the merger of the two Ministries, India’s Diaspora policy has emerged as one of the 
key components of India’s soft power projection in the world. The Ministry of External Affairs 
acknowledges the strategic significance of soft power projection through public and cultural diplomacy 
and accords it high priority while formulating and implementing India’s foreign policy.  
 
ii) India’s Diaspora Policy 
 
1.32 Asked about the availability of a comprehensive policy document on the Indian Diaspora as 
a  guiding document in engaging meaningfully and productively with the Diaspora community, the 
Secretary (CPV & OIA), during the sitting held on 27.11.2024, stated as under: 
 “……recognizing the importance of the Indian Diaspora, the Ministry of External Affairs has 
developed a comprehensive Diaspora policy framework centered around the four C’s and 
we call them as Care, Connect, Celebrate, and Contribute.  
  The objective of this policy is to recognize and appreciate the immense and 
invaluable contribution of the Indian Diaspora to India’s development, acknowledge their 
growing influence and high standing in the overseas community, uphold the welfare and 
protection of our Diaspora, connect them to their roots, and celebrate their achievements..” 
 
1.33. Giving details about the comprehensive Diaspora policy framework centred around the 
"4Cs"—Care, Connect, Celebrate, and Contribute, the Ministry have submitted as under:  
 “The Indian Diaspora is incredibly diverse, spanning across various countries, cultures, and 
socioeconomic backgrounds. Such diversity does not therefore permit formulation of a 
single, tight and unique policy for the Indian Diaspora all across the globe since it would then 
fail to address the unique needs and aspirations of all Diaspora members. The Ministry have 
further submitted that the policies pertaining to the Indian Diaspora has evolved with time, 
on the basis of feedback received from the Diaspora as well as from Indian Missions/ Posts 
abroad from time to time. The Ministry connects to the Indian Diaspora abroad through 
thematic events and conferences aimed at promotion of sectoral expertise on various 
subjects including Economy, Energy, Science & Technology, Culture, Trade & Tourism, 
Health, Social and other contemporary issues, and through various welfare schemes and 
programmes aimed at promotion of ties with the Indian Diaspora. India’s engagement with its 
Diaspora has moved from ‘All of Ministry approach’ towards an ‘All-of-Government 

17 
approach’ in which other wings of the Government, other Ministries and Departments as well 
as the State Governments are involved in all aspects of Diaspora affairs”.  
 
1.34 On a specific query as to when the shift in Diaspora policy framework centering around the 
fours ‘C’s’ namely Care, Connect, Celebrate and Contribute was framed, the Ministry in their written 
reply have, inter-alia, stated the shift in the Diaspora policy to a more comprehensive, holistic and 
effective framework to engage with the Indian Diaspora was brought in at the time when Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs was merged into the Ministry of External Affairs in January 2016. Since 
then, this Ministry has been following a Diaspora policy centered around the 4Cs. Such a holistic 
approach towards engagement with the Indian Diaspora ensures that the latter remains connected 
as an integral part of India’s growth story and its global identity. 
 
1.35 While informing about the Diaspora Policy Framework and its working, the Ministry have 
submitted thata Working Group to analyze the objectives, working and challenges of various 
schemes/programmes/initiatives for the welfare of the Indian Diaspora has also been constituted.  
 
1.36 Replying to an additional query on the details of constituting this Working Group, its meetings 
and the tangible outcomes/suggestions that have emerged from its meetings the Ministry in their 
written reply have submitted as under:   
 
 “Following the Standing Committee on External Affairs recommendations in the 8th& 11th 
Reports of 17thLok Sabha, a Working Group was constituted to make a comparative analysis 
of the objectives, working and challenges of various programmes/ initiatives/ schemes for 
welfare of Indian Diaspora. It was constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary 
(CPV&OIA) and Heads of Divisions of OIA-I, OIA-II, CPV, PSP and OE & PGE Divisions as 
members of the Working Group. The group met for the first time on 22 December, 2021. The 
Working Group examined the efficacy of the various ongoing Diaspora Engagement and 
Welfare Schemes of the Ministry besides revisiting those which had closed subsequent to 
Overseas Indian Affairs coming under the jurisdiction of MEA from the erstwhile Ministry of 
Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA). The Working Group proposed: 
(i) To include medical courses in the list of courses under SPDC. 
(ii)  To provide 50% reservation of seats for women under the SPDC Scheme as per the 
recommendation of the Standing Committee to adopt gender inclusive measures by 
the Ministry. 
 The recommendations of the Working Group have since been implemented. It has not met 
thereafter”. 
 

18 
1.37 Asked to clarify  how other Ministries/ Departments and State Governments are involved in 
aspects of Diaspora affairs and how the change in approach has resulted in addressing the 
concerns of our Diaspora abroad more effectively, the Ministry in their written reply have submitted 
as under: 
 “The collaborative model of ‘All-of-Government approach’ ensures that the diverse and 
evolving needs of the Diaspora are met more effectively by drawing on the expertise and 
resources of multiple government stakeholders. In 2021, Ministry of Women and Child 
Development and Ministry of External Affairs decided to set up ‘One Stop Centres’ to ensure 
safety, security and well-being of Indian women abroad. It was also proposed for 
augmenting the facilities for assisting women in Missions where such centres already 
existed. The Ministry also collaborates with National Commission for Women for providing 
guidance and counselling to distressed Indian women married to NRI spouse. Additionally, 
the ministry also participates in consultations organized by NCW on the subject of issues 
faced by Indian women abroad.  
  The Ministry works closely with the Ministry of Labour& Employment, Ministry of Health 
& Family Welfare, Ministry of Law and Justice and Ministry of Skills Development and 
Entrepreneurship regarding Overseas Employment, Migration, Mobility and training matters. 
There is regular interaction with the Ministry of Home Affairs and Bureau of Immigration 
regarding issue of passports to Indian citizens abroad and OCI cards to persons of Indian 
origin. There is collaboration with the Ministry of Education on student matters. 
  Ministry also organizes VideshSampark Program whereby the States are being 
apprised regarding the information about Diaspora Engagement initiatives of the Ministry 
including various schemes, consular and Visa matter for helping the Indian Diaspora and 
NRIs from these states. The involvement of multiple ministries allows for more holistic 
policies that address the wide-ranging needs of Diaspora, from economic issues to social 
and legal matters. With more stakeholders involved, concerns raised by the Diaspora 
community are met with quicker responses and more tailored solutions. 
 
iii)  Role of Missions/Embassies Abroad 
 
1.38 The Committee enquired about the functioning of Indian Embassies for the welfare of NRI 
workers abroad. The Ministry in their written reply have submitted as under: 
 “The Government has established various mechanisms to enable Indian workers abroad to 
reach out to Missions/Posts abroad in case they need any assistance. The workers can 
contact the Missions/Posts through various channels like walk-in, email, multilingual 24x7 
emergency numbers, grievance redressal portal like MADAD, CPGRAMS, and e-Migrate, and 
social media etc.  
  Pravasi Bharatiya Sahayata Kendras (PBSK) have been set up in New Delhi and at 
Dubai (UAE), Riyadh & Jeddah (Kingdom of Saudi Arabia) and Kuala Lumpur (Malaysia) to 
provide assistance, guidance and counselling to Indian workers in distress. 
  Indian Missions/Posts abroad have also established 24X7 Helplines including Toll Free 
Helplines, Whatsapp numbers and have launched mobile Apps to enable Indian nationals 
contact respective Indian Missions/Posts when in distress or in emergency situation. 

19 
  Missions/Posts in Gulf Countries also have dedicated Labour wings which ensure 
redressal of labour grievances. Shelter homes for distressed Indian nationals have been set 
up in countries having sizeable presence of Indians such as Bahrain, Kuwait, Malaysia, Qatar, 
Saudi Arabia and UAE. These shelter homes provide free boarding and lodging to Indian 
nationals in distress pending their repatriation back to India. 
  On receiving complaint from migrant workers against the Foreign Employers (FE), the 
concerned Indian Mission/Post takes up the matter with the employer/local authorities. On 
finding any FE at fault, they are placed under Prior Approval Category (PAC) in the e-Migrate 
portal and further employment of Indian workers through that particular FE is allowed only 
after due consultation with the concerned Indian Mission/Post. Issues relating to FEs are also 
raised in the periodic meetings of the Joint Working Group held under the aegis of 
Memorandum of Understandings signed with various countries. 
  Indian Missions/Posts also regularly organize Open House and Consular camps in 
remote areas to interact and get feedback from the Indian workers abroad and address their 
grievances. 
  Regular sensitization of Mission officials on the needs of the Diaspora is an ongoing 
process undertaken by our Mission/Post.” 
 
1.39 During interaction with the representatives from the State Diaspora Organisations, one of the 
representatives stated as under: 
 “… a lot of the illiterate people who go abroad, xxxxx, what we observed is that people who go 
off Punjab are generally in certain States, maybe Canada, New Zealand, Australia, a few 
European countries and for Kerala it is the Arab countries, and what we feel is that in the 
Embassy, someone from the State who understand the State nuances should be posted. Most 
of the time these people cannot communicate in English. They only communicate in the local 
language. So, this has been a long-pending demand for us because someone in the Embassy 
who does not understand Punjab and someone from Punjab comes up to him, he would not 
understand the nuances or his problem or his issues. Most of the time there is a language 
barrier also. 
 
1.40 When asked how the Ministry proposes to address this issue, the Ministry in their written reply 
have submitted as under: 
 “The officers / officials in the Ministry of External Affairs come from different States of India 
with diverse social background. In addition to English and Hindi, they can speak in their 
regional languages. When posted in Embassies and Consulates abroad, they have the ability 
to directly interact with the migrant labourers in their native language to address their issues.  
  Additionally, in countries with large Indian emigrant population, especially in the Gulf 
countries, the locally recruited staff in our Embassies/Consulates are predominantly from large 
migrant source states (Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, UP, etc.) who can 
converse with the Indian migrant labourers in their native language. Communication so far has 
not been a hindrance in addressing labour issues.  
  Indian Missions/Posts also regularly organize Open House and Consular camps in 
remote areas in order to render consular services, interact with community, including migrant 
labourers, get their feedback and address grievances, if any. The revamped e-Migrate portal 

20 
V2.0 launched by Hon’ble EAM on 14 October 2024, has been integrated with BHASHINI to 
enable access to information in 12 regional languages.” 
 
1.41 When questioned about the complaints received by Diaspora members in respect of 
accessibility of Indian mission abroad to NRI workers and students abroad, Secretary (CPV & OIA) 
during the sitting held on 04.02.2025 submitted as under: 
 “I am very disturbed to hear that the experience of dealing with Mission posts has not been 
very good. Almost all our Mission/Posts have got every mechanism possible to help and 
facilitate our Diaspora.” 
 
1.42 The Committee also enquired about the frequency of holding of Open houses by the Missions 
abroad. The Ministry in their reply have submitted as under: 
 “All Indian Missions/Posts are mandated to organize Open Houses at least once in every 
quarter. Based on the high priority accorded to the holding of Open Houses by Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad, it has also been incorporated in the Performance Evaluation 
Monitoring System (PEMS) of this Ministry. Indian Missions/Posts abroad receive grades for 
holding such Open Houses. Details of the number of Open Houses held and grievances 
received during the last three years are being compiled from Indian Missions/Posts abroad 
and will be furnished shortly.” 
 
iv) Indians in Prisons Abroad 
 
1.43 As per information available with the Ministry, at present 10,152 Indian prisoners including 
under-trials are lodged in foreign prisons. Country-wise list is as under: 
 
Sr. No. Country 
Total number of Indians 
incarcerated in Foreign 
Jails 
1 Afghanistan 8 
2 Angola 2 
3 Argentina 1 
4 Armenia 39 
5 Australia 27 
6 Azerbaijan 10 
7 Bahrain 181 
8 Bangladesh 4 
9 Belarus 9 
10 Belgium 1 
11 Bhutan 69 
12 Brunei Darussalam 6 

21 
13 Cambodia 22 
14 Canada 23 
15 Chile 1 
16 China 173 
17 Congo 5 
18 Cote d’ Ivoire 14 
19 Croatia 3 
20 Cuba 2 
21 Cyprus 21 
22 Denmark 1 
23 Egypt 1 
24 Ethiopia 4 
25 France 45 
26 Georgia 45 
27 Germany 25 
28 Guatemala 2 
29 Guinea 2 
30 Indonesia 21 
31 Iran 18 
32 Iraq 1 
33 Ireland 5 
34 Israel 4 
35 Italy 168 
36 Jamaica 1 
37 Japan 6 
38 Jordan 28 
39 Kazakhstan 3 
40 Kenya 4 
41 Kuwait 387 
42 Kyrgyzstan 4 
43 Laos 6 
44 Lenbanon 2 
45 Lithuania 1 
46 Madagascar 1 
47 Malawi 1 
48 Malaysia 338 
49 Maldives 10 
50 Mali 1 

22 
51 Malta 5 
52 Mauritius 10 
53 Mexico 1 
54 Morocco 2 
55 Mozambique 5 
56 Myanmar 27 
57 Nepal 1317 
58 Nigeria 3 
59 North Macedonia 5 
60 Oman 148 
61 Pakistan 266 
62 Philippines 44 
63 Poland 7 
64 Qatar 611 
65 Republic of Korea 4 
66 Russia 27 
67 Rwanda 3 
68 Saudi Arabia 2633 
69 Senegal 5 
70 Serbia 4 
71 Singapore 92 
72 South Africa 8 
73 Spain 34 
74 Sri Lanka 98 
75 Switzerland 1 
76 Tajikistan 1 
77 Thailand 37 
78 Trinidad and Tobago 1 
79 Turkiye 3 
80 UAE 2518 
81 Uganda 11 
82 United Kingdom 288 
83 USA 169 
84 Uzbekistan 3 
85 Vietnam 4 
86 Zimbabwe 1 
  10152 
 
 

23 
1.44 The Ministry have also furnished the details of Indian/ Foreign prisoners transferred under 
TSP Agreements during the last two years (2023 & 2024) and current year (As on 13.02.2025). The 
same are as under:  
 
 Indian prisoners transferred from foreign countries to India 
 
Year Number of 
prisoners 
Country-wise 
2023 05 Iran- 03 Cambodia- 01 
United Kingdom- 01 
2024 02 United Kingdom - 02 
2025 
(As on 13.02.2025) 
01 Russia -01 
Total 08  
 
  Foreign prisoners transferred from India to their native countries 
 
Year Number of 
prisoners 
Country-wise 
2023 03 Iran- 02 Brazil- 01 
2024 Nil -- 
2025 
(As on 13.02.2025) 
Nil -- 
Total 03  
 
1.45 The Committee enquired as to the steps being taken by the Government for the release of 
these prisoners. The Ministry in their written reply have submitted as under: 
 
 “The Government attaches high priority to the safety, security and well-being of Indians in 
foreign countries, including those in the foreign jails. Indian Missions/Posts abroad remain 
vigilant and closely monitor the cases of Indian nationals being put in jail in foreign countries 
for violation/ alleged violation of local laws. 
  As soon as the information about the detention/arrest of an Indian national is received 
by an Indian Mission/Post, it immediately gets in touch with the local Foreign Office and other 
concerned local authorities to get consular access to the detained/arrested Indian national to 
ascertain the facts of the case, confirm his or her Indian nationality and ensure his or her 
welfare. Missions/Posts remain vigilant to ensure that rights of the Indian prisoners in foreign 
jails are protected. 
  Apart from extending all possible consular assistance to Indians imprisoned abroad, 
Indian Missions and Posts also assist in providing legal aid wherever needed. Missions and 
Posts also maintain a local panel of lawyers where Indian community is in sizeable numbers. 

24 
No fee is charged from any Indian prisoner for extending facilities by the Indian Embassy 
concerned. The Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) is set up in Indian Missions & Posts 
abroad for assisting overseas Indian nationals in distress situations on a means tested basis in 
deserving cases. The support extended under ICWF includes financial assistance to Indian 
prisoners for legal aid as well as travel documents / air tickets during repatriation. 
  The issue of release and repatriation of Indian nationals in foreign prisons is regularly 
pursued by Indian Missions and Posts abroad with the local authorities concerned. 
Missions/Posts abroad also approach the law enforcement agencies to complete the 
investigation and judicial proceedings at the earliest possible. The Government also follows up 
this issue during consular and other consultations with other countries. In addition, the 
Government, through its Missions/Posts abroad and during high level visits, also takes up and 
pursues grant of amnesty/commutation of sentences of Indian prisoners in foreign countries. 
India has also entered into prisoner transfer treaties with many nations that allow a person 
convicted of a crime to be transferred to his or her home country to serve the prison sentence. 
 
1.46 Asked whether some of these Indians are in jails in countries with which India has Transfer of 
Sentenced Persons Agreements and yet have not been repatriated, the Ministry in their written reply 
have submitted as under: 
 “India has  
on Transfer of Sentenced Persons by virtue of which Indian prisoners lodged in foreign countries can 
be transferred to India to serve the remainder of their sentence and vice-versa. These are 
Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bosnia & Herzegovina, Brazil, Bulgaria, Cambodia, Egypt, 
Estonia, France, Hong Kong, Iran, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, Republic of Korea, Kuwait, 
Maldives, Mauritius, Mongolia, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, 
Thailand, Turkiye, United Arab Emirates (UAE), United Kingdom and Vietnam. 
  India has also signed two multilateral conventions on Transfer of Sentenced Persons, 
namely Inter-American Convention on Serving Criminal Sentences Abroad and Council of 
Europe Convention on Transfer of Sentenced Persons, by virtue of which sentenced persons 
of member States and other countries which have acceded to these conventions can seek 
transfer to their native countries to serve the remainder of their sentence. 
  Consent of the prisoner, host country and transferring country are required for transfer 
under Transfer of Sentenced Persons (TSP) agreement. MHA is the nodal authority 
overseeing transfer of prisoners under TSP agreement and is currently processing a number 
of cases. TSP cases involve several stages of processing, namely obtaining consent of the 
transferring country, availability of complete documentation necessary for processing the 
request, obtaining comments of the State Government concerned and identification of the 
specific prison where the prisoner is to be lodged, making escort arrangements by the State 
Government concerned for transfer from foreign country to India, clearance from various 
agencies etc. All these factors have to be attended to while processing request transfer. 
Therefore, no rigid timeline can be fixed for completion of such requests as the fulfillment of 
requirement depends on receiving complete documentation and clearance from foreign 
Governments, State Governments and other relevant agencies etc.” 
 
1.47 As per information available with the Ministry, there are 12 countries where Indians are 
imprisoned in large numbers (more than 100). These are Bahrain (272), China (185), Italy (164), 

25 
Kuwait (387), Malaysia (371), Nepal (1187), Oman (117), Qatar (740), Saudi Arabia (2647), Sri Lanka 
(143), United Arab Emirates (2479) and United Kingdom (288). Nine of these countries are covered 
under existing agreements on Transfer of Sentenced Persons. 
 
1.48 Asked whether the Government has taken up the matter regarding the release of these 
prisoners with the nine countries with which India has agreements on Transfer of Sentenced Persons, 
the Ministry has in their written reply submitted as under: 
 “The matters relating of Indians nationals in prisons in foreign countries and of the foreigners 
of that country in Indian prisons is routinely discussed at various fora. Missions/ Posts abroad 
take up welfare of Indian citizens in prisons, among other matters, as a part of their meeting 
with the Foreign Ministries, as do the Foreign Missions in India. The matter is also covered 
during Foreign Office consultations and Consular Dialogues. As far as transfer of sentenced 
persons from countries with whom we have bilateral agreements, Government has been 
working on the matter. Our Embassies have been in regular contact with their host 
government and Ministry of Home Affairs to transfer the sentenced Indians. It may be noted 
that Ministry of Home Affairs is the nodal Ministry for negotiating and implementing the 
agreements on transfer of sentenced persons.” 
 
1.49 Asked about the status of agreements with the other 3 countries, namely Nepal, Malaysia and 
Oman, the Ministry have stated that regarding the signing of agreements with more countries, MHA is 
working on negotiating for signing such agreements with various countries.   
 
1.50 On being asked whether the Ministry intends to have bilateral agreements with these 3 
countries, the Ministry have informed that consultation on bilateral agreements is taken up based on 
mutual interest and the nature of bilateral relations. 
 
1.51 Regarding the steps being taken by the Ministry to conclude Transfer of Sentenced Persons 
with countries wherein large number of Indians are imprisoned, the Ministry in their written reply have 
submitted as under: 
 “With India signing the two multilateral conventions on Transfer of Sentenced Persons, namely 
Inter-American Convention on Serving Criminal Sentences Abroad and Council of Europe 
Convention on Transfer of Sentenced Persons, most of the countries in Europe, North 
America and South America are covered for the purpose. This leaves countries in Asia, Africa 
and few countries in Eastern Europe which needs to be covered by bilateral agreements. So 
far 31 bilateral agreements on Transfer of Sentenced Persons have been signed. Ministry of 
Home Affairs, which is the nodal Ministry for this subject, processes and signs the agreement 
as and when the foreign country is willing to do the same. 
 
 

26 
CHAPTER II 
 
EMIGRATION POLICY & WELFARE SCHEMES  
 
A. EMIGRATION POLICY 
 In recent times, international migration has assumed a pivotal role, shaped by demographic 
shifts and technological progress, significantly impacting labour markets worldwide. India is a leading 
country in the international migration dynamics and is advantageously poised due to its demographic 
potential. By 2030, India’s working-age population is set to peak at 68.9%, reaching 1.04 billion 
persons. India’s Diaspora is over 35 million strong and it is the top remittance receiving country in the 
world with inward flow of remittance to the tune of USD 118.7 billion in the year 2023-24 . The 
Government of India recognises this potential of its citizens and its objective to promote safe and legal 
migration to provide employment opportunities abroad for both workers and professionals. 
 
2.2  It is the Emigration Policy and Welfare Division in the Ministry of External Affairs that works 
towards establishing institutional mechanisms to foster the global mobility of Indian workers, students, 
academicians, researchers, business persons and so on. The Ministry has been proactively furthering 
the mobility for the Indian workforce through diverse Memorandum of Understanding (MoUs) and 
agreements such as Migration and Mobility Partnerships and Labour Mobility and Labour Welfare 
Agreements with destination countries, which establish a robust framework for legal migration. These 
agreements/MoUs seek to achieve fostering people-to-people ties, streamlining visa procedures. 
  
i) Migration and Mobility Partnership Agreements 
2.3  Migration and Mobility Partnerships aimed at harnessing India’s demographic dividend and 
fostering mobility for our students, academics, business people, and professionals have already been 
signed with France (2018), the UK (2021), Germany (2022), Australia (2023), Austria (2023), Italy 
(2024) and Denmark (2024).  
 
2.4  The Labor and Manpower Cooperation MOUs/Agreements that provide the overarching 
framework for cooperation on labour and manpower related issues are in place with the Gulf 
Cooperation Council countries, Japan (2021), Portugal (2021), Mauritius (2023), Israel (2023), Taiwan 
(2024) and Malaysia (2024). 

27 
 
2.5  These MOUs and Agreements have provision of implementation through Joint Working 
Groups, and all prevailing labour and manpower-related issues are discussed during these JWG 
meetings. Further, to safeguard the specific interest of domestic workers in GCC Countries, 
agreements on Labor Cooperation for Domestic Sector have been signed with Saudi Arabia, UAE and 
Kuwait.  
 
2.6  When the Committee desired to know whether India has agreements like MMPAs and LMAs 
with all countries where Indian Diaspora is in large numbers, Ministry on External Affairs stated, inter-
alia, as under:  
 “ India has signed Migration and Mobility Partnership Agreements/ MoUs (MMPAs) or Labour 
Mobility Agreements/ MoUs (LMAs) with several countries where the Indian Diaspora is 
present. Additionally, the government is actively engaging to conclude more such agreements 
with destination countries. We have prioritized countries with significant potential that offer 
benefits and opportunities for Indian nationals including skilled workers, professionals and 
students. 
  
The government is actively engaged in ongoing discussions with various countries to finalize 
MMPAs and LMAs, particularly with countries in Europe and the Far East”.  
 
ii) Collaboration with International/ Multilateral Organisations 
2.7   Apart from bilateral arrangements on migration and mobility and labour migration, the Division 
is also deeply engaged with international and multilateral organisations for enhancing the horizon of 
India’s initiatives in fostering safe, orderly, and regular migration pathways. 
 
iii) International Organisation for Migration  
2.8 Secretary (CPV and OIA) participated at the 114th Session of International Organisation for 
Migration (IOM) at Geneva, Switzerland. Engagement at senior official level will aid in strengthening 
the existing cooperation with IOM and help identify further initiatives with IOM. 
 
iv) India Centre for Migration (ICM) 
2.9 The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) set up the India Centre for Migration (ICM) formerly 
known as Indian Council for Overseas Employment, as a ‘not for profit’ society under the Societies 
Registration Act 1860, in July 2008. The India Centre of Migration (ICM) serves as a research think-

28 
tank to Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) on all matters relating to international migration and mobility. 
The Centre undertakes empirical, analytical and policy related research, and undertakes pilot projects 
to document good practices. Over the years, ICM has expanded its scope of work, by following a 
multi-pronged approach by actively organizing workshops, research studies and seminars in 
collaboration with academic institutions, state governments and international bodies. 
 
2.10 On being asked about the reasons for not being a party to any international instrument for 
protection of Diaspora, it was submitted as below:  
 “  India values the international instruments for the protection of the Diaspora and appreciates 
the efforts made in this regard. While India has chosen not to become a party to certain 
specific instruments, this decision is informed by a variety of factors including the implications 
of any international convention/ instrument on its national policies and priorities. 
  India has a robust framework for engaging with and supporting its Diaspora, which 
includes a wide range of bilateral agreements/MoUs and welfare measures. These policy 
measures and initiatives have proven effective in addressing the diverse needs and 
challenges faced by the Indian Diaspora worldwide. 
  Our approach has been multifaceted allowing for flexibility and context-specific 
solutions that are responsive to the unique circumstances in different countries and the 
evolving dynamics in the domain of international migration and mobility. We have been 
actively exploring ways to strengthen cooperation and collaboration on Diaspora-related 
matters at international, bilateral as well as multilateral levels. India has proactively 
participated in international forums and discussions related to migration and Diaspora issues 
and has remained committed towards its international obligations” . 
 
v) Global Compact for Migration 
2.11 The Global Compact for Safe, Orderly and Regular Migration (GCM) is a non-binding 
agreement that aims to improve the management of migration. The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) 
of India has taken steps to facilitate safe and regular migration, in line with the GCM's 
objectives. Giving details MEA submitted as under: 
 “India had endorsed the Global Compact for Safe, Orderly, and Regular Migration (GCM) in 
December 2018 at the Intergovernmental Conference in Marrakech, Morocco. The GCM is the 
first-ever inter-governmentally negotiated UN agreement on a common approach to managing 
international migration. While not legally binding, the GCM’s guiding principles, objectives and 
actions find their roots in established obligations and principles, underpinned by the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights, the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development, and 
international law. 
  The Compact outlines 23 objectives aimed at facilitating safe, orderly, and regular 
migration while addressing challenges related to irregular migration, as follows: 
(i) Collect and utilize accurate and disaggregated data as a basis for evidence-based 
policies 

29 
(ii) Minimize the adverse drivers and structural factors that compel people to leave their 
country of origin 
(iii) Provide accurate and timely information at all stages of migration 
(iv) Ensure that all migrants have proof of legal identity and adequate documentation 
(v) Enhance availability and flexibility of pathways for regular migration 
(vi) Facilitate fair and ethical recruitment and safeguard conditions that ensure decent 
work 
(vii) Address and reduce vulnerabilities in migration 
(viii) Save lives and establish coordinated international efforts on missing migrants 
(ix) Strengthen the transnational response to smuggling of migrants 
(x) Prevent, combat and eradicate trafficking in persons in the context of international 
migration 
(xi) Manage borders in an integrated, secure and coordinated manner 
(xii) Strengthen certainty and predictability in migration procedures for appropriate 
screening, assessment and referral 
(xiii) Use migration detention only as a measure of last resort and work towards 
alternatives 
(xiv) Enhance consular protection, assistance and cooperation throughout the 
migration cycle 
(xv) Provide access to basic services for migrants 
(xvi) Empower migrants and societies to realize full inclusion and social cohesion 
(xvii) Eliminate all forms of discrimination and promote evidence-based public 
discourse to shape perceptions of migration 
(xviii) Invest in skills development and facilitate mutual recognition of skills, 
qualifications and competences 
(xix) Create conditions for migrants and Diasporas to fully contribute to sustainable 
development in all countries 
(xx) Promote faster, safer and cheaper transfer of remittances and foster financial 
inclusion of migrants 
(xxi) Cooperate in facilitating safe and dignified return and readmission, as well as 
sustainable reintegration 
(xxii) Establish mechanisms for the portability of social security entitlements and 
earned benefits 
(xxiii) Strengthen international cooperation and global partnerships for safe, orderly 
and regular migration 
  Many of the policies and initiatives of the Government of India are in consonance with 
the objectives and guiding principles laid out in the GCM. India’s emigration framework aims at 
strengthening regular pathways and improving recruitment and decent work in line with 
objective 5 and 6 of the GCM respectively. India has entered into several bilateral 
agreements/MoUs/MoCs with destination countries showcasing India’s commitment towards 
fostering regular pathways for migration and mobility.  
  Additionally, the government has put a major focus on skills development and 
recognition, migrant and Diaspora contributions and international cooperation aligning with 
objective 18, 19 and 23.The same is being achieved through coordination between different 
ministries such as the Ministry of External Affairs, Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship, Ministry of Labour and Employment, other line ministries and in 
collaboration with State and private agencies, international organizations and civil societies.  

30 
  Furthermore, the Government of India has been taking steps to improve data and 
information on international migration which align with objective 1 and 3 of the GCM.2 For 
instance, the newly revamped e-Migrate 2.0 portal, launched to regulate the safe and ethical 
recruitment of Indian workers abroad, embodies GCM objectives by ensuring ethical 
recruitment practices and providing transparency in the migration process. 
  Welfare policies like Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) and Pravasi Bharatiya 
Bima Yojana (PBBY, translated as Overseas Indian Insurance Programme) assist Indian 
migrant workers working abroad. An online consular grievance monitoring system is being 
administered, namely MADAD Portal (loosely translated as 'Help Portal'), for Indian citizens 
living abroad. Moreover, during the unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic, Vande Bharat 
Mission (loosely translated as 'Salute India Mission') served as the largest repatriation 
operation to bring back overseas migrant workers to country of origin (India, in this case). Pre-
departure Orientation Training (PDOT) is one of the initiatives to ensure a safe, orderly, legal 
and humane migration process with the motto- ‘Surakshit Jayein, Prashikshit Jayein” 
(translated as 'go safe, go informed').  
  India plays a key role in regional consultative processes such as the Colombo Process 
(CP), Abu Dhabi Dialogue (ADD) and international/multilateral migration forums such as the 
Global Forum on Migration and Development (GFMD) and the International Dialogue on 
Migration (IDM). At present, India holds the chair of the Colombo Process for a two-year term 
(2024-2026). Towards this end, the Government of India is actively implementing measures to 
ensure safe and regular migration and in enhancing international cooperation.” 
 
B. OVERSEAS EMPLOYMENT & PROTECTION OF EMIGRANTS 
 
2.12 A large number of Indians go abroad for employment. The process of emigration of Indian 
workers, with Emigration Clearance Required (ECR) category passports, is regulated under the 
Emigration Act, 1983, which is administered by the Ministry of External Affairs (MEA).  
 
2.13 With the help of 16 offices of the Protector of Emigrants (POEs) located at Mumbai, Chennai, 
Delhi, Kolkata, Chandigarh, Hyderabad, Cochin, Thiruvananthapuram, Jaipur, Raebareli, Patna, 
Bengaluru, Guwahati, Ranchi, Bhubaneswar and Agartala across the country, the Protector General 
of Emigrants (PGE) enforces the Emigration Act, 1983.   
 
i) Protector General of Emigrants 
2.14 PGE under Ministry of External Affairs is the authority responsible for protecting the interest of 
Indian workers going abroad. PGE is also the registering authority to issue Registration Certificate to 
the Recruiting Agents for overseas manpower exporting.  

31 
 
 
ii) Protector of Emigrants 
2.15 The Protectors of Emigrants are responsible for granting emigration clearance to the intending 
emigrants as per the procedure prescribed under the Emigration Act, 1983. The Protectors of 
Emigrants shall perform the functions assigned to them by this Act under the general superintendence 
and control of the Protector General of Emigrants.  
 
2.16   The mandate and core responsibilities of the Protector of Emigrants are defined under the 
Emigration Act, 1983. These duties of PoEs have been elaborated under Section 4 of the ibid act, 
as "General duties of Protectors of Emigrants—Subject to the other provisions of this Act, every 
Protector of Emigrants shall, in addition to the special duties assigned to him by or under this Act—  
(a) protect and aid with his advice all intending emigrants and emigrants;  
(b) cause, so far as he can, all the provisions of this Act and of the rules made       
thereunder to be complied with;  
(c) inspect, to such extent and in such manner as may be prescribed –  
  (i) any emigrant conveyance, or 
 (ii) any other conveyance if he has reason to believe that any intending emigrants 
or 
 (iii) emigrants are proceeding from, or returning to, India to or from a place outside          
India by such other conveyance; 
(d) inquire into the treatment received by emigrants during their voyage or journey to, and 
during the period of their residence in the country to which they emigrated and also 
during the return voyage or journey to India and report thereon to the Protector 
General of Emigrants or such other authority as may be prescribed; 
 (e)  aid and advise, so far as he reasonably can, emigrants who have returned to India. 
 
2.17 Apart from above duties following responsibilities have been entrusted to the Protector of 
Emigrants: 
a.  Emigration Clearance: Granting Emigration Clearance (EC) to individuals intending to 
go abroad for employment to notified ECR countries, ensuring that applications are 
thoroughly verified and meet all legal requirements. 

32 
b.  Guidance and Protection: Providing comprehensive protection and guidance to 
prospective emigrants and those already deployed abroad. This includes rendering 
timely and effective advice and assistance throughout their journey and employment 
abroad. 
c.    Regulatory Compliance: Ensuring all stakeholders, including Recruiting Agents (RAs), 
comply with the Emigration Act, 1983, and relevant regulations, thereby maintaining 
the integrity of the emigration system. 
d.  Grievance Redressal: Addressing grievances from emigrants regarding repatriation,   
employment disputes, and related issues, ensuring quick resolution and support. 
  e.  Coordination with Authorities: Engaging with the Bureau of Immigration, State Police, 
Indian Embassies, and Consulates, as well as other relevant government agencies, to 
protect emigrant welfare and enforce compliance. 
f. Monitoring and Investigation: Conducting thorough investigations into the treatment of 
emigrants, both during transit and their stay abroad, and taking corrective actions if 
required. 
g. Educational and Outreach Programs: Organizing educational initiatives and outreach   
programs to inform and educate emigrants and stakeholders about safe and legal 
migration practices. Pre-departure Orientation Training for emigrants is an important 
initiative in this direction.  
h. Policy Implementation and Feedback: Implementing policy changes and providing 
feedback to the PGE Division and Ministry of External Affairs to continuously enhance 
emigration processes and safeguard emigrant interests. 
 
iii) Emigration of ECR Category Passport Holders 
2.18   Emigration of ECR category passport holders is regulated by way of grant of Emigration 
Clearance by any of the 16 POEs. This is for employment in any of the 18 notified ECR countries, 
namely, Afghanistan, Bahrain, Indonesia, Iraq, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Libya, Malaysia, Oman, 
Qatar, Saudi Arabia, South Sudan, Sudan, Syria, Thailand, United Arab Emirates and Yemen. 
Presently, granting of Emigration Clearance has been suspended for Iraq, Libya, Syria and Yemen 
due to prevailing conditions there. 

33 
 
iv) Safeguards for Emigrants 
2.19    Various safeguards are in place within PoE offices to ensure that the clearance process is not 
misused or circumvented by illegal recruitment agencies or unauthorized intermediaries.  
a.  Digital verification: All the Emigration Clearances (ECs) are applied and processed 
through the e-Migrate portal only, ensuring that only authorized agents registered with the 
Ministry can apply for EC. The Bureau of Immigration (BOI) will not allow a passenger to 
board a flight/vessel if EC clearance is not granted via the e-Migrate system, preventing 
unauthorized emigration.  
b.  Regular audits: Periodic audits of clearance processes and decisions help identify and 
address any discrepancies or irregularities. 
c.  Strict recruiting agent (RA) registration: A rigorous vetting process (compulsory police and 
degree verification) is in place for registering and renewing Recruiting Agent licenses. 
d. Initiating actions: Show cause notices are issued to registered RAs involved in illegal 
activities. Those violating provisions of the Emigration Act 1983 are suspended as 
necessary. Additionally, actions are taken against illegal/unregistered RAs in coordination 
with local police under various provisions of the Emigration Act. 
e. Surprise inspections: Unannounced checks on RAs deter illegal activities and ensure 
compliance. 
f. Coordination with law enforcement: Working closely with police and cybercrime units to 
tackle fraudulent practices reinforces the integrity of the emigration process. Similarly 
regular coordination is maintained with BOI officials to discuss patterns/trends in 
emigration and sharing details of violations with each other. 
 
2.20 PoE offices play a vital role in assisting emigrants who face exploitation, abuse or other forms 
of distress once they are abroad. The PoE offices issue show cause notices to registered RAs as and 
when grievances against them are registered. The registration certificate (RC) of those violating 
provisions of the Emigration Act 1983 are suspended as deemed necessary. Additionally, actions are 
taken against illegal/unregistered RAs in coordination with local police under various provisions of the 
Emigration Act. The PoE offices work closely with state police and cybercrime units to tackle 
fraudulent practices and to reinforce the integrity of the emigration process. Similarly regular 
coordination is kept with BOI officials to discuss patterns in emigration and sharing details of violations 

34 
with each other. Various activities undertaken by the PoE offices to assist the emigrants are listed 
below: 
a.  Helplines operated by PBSK: The helplines are managed by the Pravasi Bharatiya 
Sahayata Kendra (PBSK), which registers grievances from emigrants and forwards them 
to the concerned Protector of Emigrants for further action. 
b.    Coordination with Indian Missions and RAs: Upon receiving grievances, the PoE ensures 
that Recruiting Agents (RAs) assist emigrants by fulfilling their contractual obligations. 
Simultaneously, PoE recommends that Indian Missions ensure Foreign Employers (FEs) 
adhere to their commitments. 
c.    Facilitating communication: PoE facilitates communication between emigrants and their 
families, keeping them informed about the situation and actions taken. 
d.   Legal assistance: PoE provides support in legal matters, including addressing contract 
violations and ensuring fair treatment of emigrants in coordination with the concerned 
Indian Mission.  
e.    Resolution through RAs: PoE works with RAs to resolve issues faced by emigrants and 
ensure compliance with contracts and regulations. 
f.   Continuous engagement: The PoE maintains direct contact with individual emigrants 
raising grievances and remains engaged until the issue is satisfactorily resolved. 
g.   Maintaining distress databases: PoE maintains a comprehensive database of distress 
cases, enabling informed follow-up and policy improvement. 
h. Action against erring parties: PoE initiates action through issuing Show Cause Notices 
(SCNs) or suspending the licenses of employers or agents involved in exploitation, abuse, 
or other illegal practices. 
i. Recovery of dues: PoE assists in recovering overdue payments and compensation for 
emigrants facing financial exploitation. 
j. Registration and categorization: Upon receiving a complaint, PoE registers and 
categorizes the case, coordinating with relevant stakeholders (Embassy, RA, employer) 
for resolution. 
k. Follow-up and closure: PoE provides regular updates to the family of emigrant and 
ensures proper documentation of the resolution and closure of the case. 
 
 

35 
v) Co-ordination between PoE and Indian Missions 
2.21 The PoE office directly coordinates with the Consular and Labour Wings of Indian Missions to 
ensure the welfare of emigrants. PoE office serves as the nodal field office of MEA for matters related 
to emigration and associated grievances and is well-positioned to engage with state police and local 
administration, acting as a vital link between Indian Missions, the emigrant’s family, and local 
authorities. The PoE regularly coordinates with Indian Embassies and Consulates abroad on following 
issues: 
a. Regular information exchange: PoE offices maintain regular communication with Indian 
embassies and consulates to stay updated on local labour laws and working conditions. 
b.   Sharing of emigrant data: Emigrant data is shared with Embassies and Consulates to 
facilitate easy tracking and assistance when needed. 
c. Joint monitoring: Collaboration with our Embassies and Consulates abroad for monitoring 
employers and workplace conditions helps ensure emigrant welfare. 
d. Collaborative grievance handling: PoE offices and Embassies/Consulates work together 
to address grievances and resolve issues faced by emigrants. 
e. Recruiting Agents (RA) and Foreign Employer (FE) compliance: Upon receiving 
grievances, PoE ensures that RAs assist emigrants by fulfilling contractual obligations. 
Similarly, in cases where required, PoE suggests Indian Missions to ensure FEs meet 
their commitments. 
f. Crisis liaison: PoE offices act as a liaison between families in India and emigrants abroad 
during crises situation, facilitating communication and support. 
g. Repatriation coordination: In crisis situations, PoE offices coordinate with the Embassies 
and Consulates for the safe repatriation of emigrants. 
h. Crisis communication: PoE offices help disseminate crisis-related information and updates 
to families and stakeholders. 
i. Handling death cases: In case of death, PoE works closely with Indian Missions for the 
timely dispatch of mortal remains. It acts as the first point of contact between the 
emigrant's family and agencies abroad. POEs further work in assisting the family in 
obtaining insurance claims by coordinating with Missions to gather necessary legal and 
medical documents. 

36 
 
vi) Regulation of  Recruitment to Overseas Jobs 
2.22. Since Recruiting Agents (RA) are required to obtain Registration Certificate (RC) from the 
PGE before they can engage in recruitment of Indian workers for overseas employment, the 
Committee desired to know in details as to how the procedure works. In response, it was conveyed 
that the Ministry takes appropriate measures and issues guidelines from time to time to regulate the 
registered Recruiting Agents (RAs) in the country. As per Section 10 of the Emigration Act, 1983, no 
person/agency can function as Recruiting Agent (RA) without a valid Registration Certificate (RC) 
issued by the Registering Authority i.e. Protector General of Emigrants (PGE).  
2.23. The process of registration of RA is done through a web-based application i.e. e-Migrate portal 
which brings all the stakeholders, including the RAs, Foreign Employers (FEs) and the prospective 
emigrants on a common platform. As per the Emigration Rules 1983 (as amended from time to time), 
no RA shall collect from the prospective emigrant the service charges more than the prescribed 
amount, in respect of services rendered by it to that emigrant and the RA shall issue a receipt to the 
emigrant for the amount collected by it in this regard. Whenever, any complaint against a registered 
RA is received, a Show Cause Notice (SCN) is issued to the concerned RA, under Section 14 of the 
Emigration Act, 1983, directing them to resolve the complaint. In case, the RA fails to respond to the 
SCN or reply is not found to be satisfactory, their RC can be cancelled or suspended for 30 days as 
per Section 14 (2) of the Emigration Act, 1983. The order of suspension can be revoked by the 
Competent Authority only after consultation with all the stakeholders and after ensuring that the 
complaint has been fully resolved to the satisfaction of the complainant. 
 
2.24. Ministry also publishes a list of unregistered RAs on the e-Migrate portal. Advisories/alerts on 
fraudulent/illegal recruiting agents are also hosted on this portal. Ministry also takes action against 
illegal migration through unregistered/illegal RAs with the support of concerned State Governments. 
 
2.25  Certain Emigration Check Required (ECR) countries such as Saudi Arabia, Qatar, Oman, 
Malaysia, United Arab Emirates, Kuwait, Jordan, Bahrain, Lebanon, and Indonesia issue guidelines 
and relevant information in accordance with their local labour laws to cover visa sponsorship, medical 
insurance, flight tickets and similar other benefits by the employer of these countries to the foreign 
employees. This is ordinarily governed by the contract between the employer and the employee. To 

37 
prevent exploitation of Indian workers by Foreign Employers (FEs), the Government has fixed the 
Minimum Referral Wages (MRW) to regulate the wages of Indian migrant workers seeking 
employment in the ECR countries. Ministry enforces the MRW through the offices of Protector of 
Emigrants (POEs). POEs while granting the mandatory Emigration Clearance (EC), in accordance 
with Section 22 of the Emigration Act 1983, read with Rule 15 of Emigration Rules, checks wage 
offered by the Foreign Employers (FEs) and deny the EC if the wage so offered is below the fixed 
wage. 
 
2.26   In reply to a question in Lok Sabha on 20 December 2024 on the fake job offers from various 
countries and the exploitation of young job aspirants by scamsters, it was given as below: 
 “As and when complaints against the illegal agents/dubious firms luring Indian youth in false 
recruitment offers through various channels are received, such matters are referred to the 
State police for investigation and prosecution under the relevant legal provisions of the 
Bharatiya Nyaya Sanhita (BNS) and other legislation in place including the ones enacted by 
the some State Governments. In the cyber domain, action is also taken against illegal 
recruiting agents in association with Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre (I4C), MHA and 
State Police authorities. Requests to take down social media posts of illegal Recruiting Agents 
from all over India have been regularly shared with I4C. 
  Ministry also issues advisories through e-Migrate portal, social media handles and 
other modes of publicity about the perils of fake job rackets and ways to prevent the same. Till 
October 2024, a total of 3,094 unregistered agents in country have been notified on the 
eMigrate portal. 
  The awareness campaign on safe and legal migration through e-Migrate portal is 
carried out by the Ministry across the country from time to time by conducting workshops, 
trainings, information sessions, digital campaigns for media groups, police officials and law 
enforcement agencies, local administration, aspiring recruiting agents, entrepreneurs and 
general public. During these sessions awareness on emigration regulations, schemes 
beneficial for emigrants like Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY), Pre-Departure Orientation 
Training (PDOT), e-Migrate portal and various advisories issued by Indian Embassies are 
brought to the notice of all stakeholders including job seekers, and advise them to verify all 
antecedents of Recruiting Agents before accepting any kind of employment offer and not be 
enticed and entrapped in the fraudulent job offers”. 
 
(vii) Illegal Migration 
2.27   On being asked about the steps being taken by the Ministry to streamline the recruitment 
processes of workers and promote legal migration, it was replied in a written submission as below:  
 “With the rise of fraudulent and illegal migration, Ministry of External Affairs has been making 
concerted efforts to educate prospective emigrants about the perils of illegal migration. 
Protector General of Emigrants office in the Ministry has been working on varied activities 
aligning e-Migrate portal with other Ministries and with similar Governments portals of the host 

38 
countries for skilling and mapping overseas opportunities and promoting the legal migration in 
order to boost sustainable employment eco-system and entrepreneurship opportunities for 
Indian workforce.  
  The portal has been a success since its launch in 2015 by facilitating around 42 lakh 
migrant workers employed abroad, registering more than two lakhs Foreign Employers and 
2,000 plus registered recruiting agents within India. In order to facilitate prospective emigrants 
especially those from rural areas, a new scheme was launched in December 2017 to 
encourage registration of recruiting agents (RA) from small cities, towns, and distant villages. 
Earlier, recruiting agents/agencies were mainly concentrated in large cities, which caused a 
significant inconvenience and challenge to prospective emigrants in addition to exposing them 
to the dangers of illegal channels of migration.  
  This Ministry through various Missions and Posts abroad always encourage migrant 
workers to register their complaints/grievances related to employment, overcharge by 
recruitment agents, tortures and harassment, non-payment of salaries, etc. on MADAD and e-
Migrate portals to facilitate redressal by taking them up with concerned authorities. Ministry 
has been making efforts to educate migrant youths about the perils of illegal channels.  
  A campaign titled 'Surakshit Jayen Prashikshit Jayen' (Go Safe, Go Trained) was 
launched in 2018 to raise awareness and facilitate safe and legal migration. The goal is that 
well-informed migrant youths will be able to seamlessly integrate and have a safe and 
productive stay abroad. During the 17thPravasiBhartiya Divas (PBD) Conference held in 
Indore, Madhya Pradesh in January 2023, PM Modi launched a postal stamp with the motto 
‘Surakshit Jayen Prashikshit Jayen’ to spread awareness about safe and legal migration. 
  To promote legal migration, Ministry has also taken several initiatives such as Pravasi 
Bhartiya Bima Yojna (PBBY), and revising the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) 
guidelines etc. to ensure safety and welfare of migrant workers. PBBY was launched in 2017 
to provide an insurance cover of Rs. 10 Lakhs in case of accidental death or permanent 
disability and other benefits at a nominal insurance premium of Rs 275 (for two years) and Rs 
375 (for 3 years).  
  Separately, the Ministry has been working with several state governments and 
stakeholders to disseminate information on the Indian Diaspora and foreign jobs and to spread 
awareness about safe and illegal migration through MEA’s state outreach programs from time 
to time. Such outreach programs were organized in Tamil Nadu, Telangana, Andhra Pradesh, 
Assam and West Bengal in 2021; in Tamil Nadu, Kerala and Telangana in 2022; Bihar and 
Uttarakhand in 2024. They were also requested to pro-actively check the growth of illegal 
agents and to take strict actions against them including launching awareness campaigns in 
vernacular medium for wider coverage and adaptation. 
 
2.28   Regarding the recruitment of female domestic workers, the representative of the Ministry 
submitted as under during the briefing of the Committee:  
 “At this moment, the recruitment of female domestic workers is only through the 12 State-run 
recruitment agents. We have not yet allowed the private recruitment agents to come into this 
process. Since 2016, it has been kept like this so that they are not exploited. Basically, the 
domestic social workers going to the ECR countries have to only go through the State-run 
RAs. 
 

39 
 
2.29 The 13 state-run recruiting agencies are : 
(a) NORKA Roots;  
(b)  Overseas Development and Employment Promotion Consultants (ODEPC) of Kerala;  
(c)  Overseas Manpower Corporation Ltd.  of Tamil Nadu;  
(d) Uttar Pradesh Financial Corporation(UPFC) of Uttar Pradesh; 
(e)  Overseas Manpower Company Andhra Pradesh Limited (OMCAP) of Andhra Pradesh;  
(f)  Telangana Overseas Manpower Company Limited (TOMCOM),  of Telangana;  
(g)  Rajasthan Skill & Livelihoods Development Corporation (RSLDC),  of Rajasthan; 
(h)  Karnataka State Unorganised Workers Society Security Board (KUWSSB) of Karnataka 
(i) Karnataka Vocational Training & Skill Devlopment Corporation (KVTSDC) of Karnataka;  
(j) M/s Pan IIT alumni Reach for Jharkhand Foundation of Jharkhand and Bihar State  
(k) Overseas Placement Bureau of Bihar  
(l) World Skill Centre,  
(m) Punjab Ghar Ghar Rozgar & Karobar Mission 
 
2.30   Women who are ECR (Emigration Clearance Required) passport holders can travel abroad to 
ECR countries for employment only if they are 30 years and above through 13 State Government 
recruitment agencies.   
 
2.31   Adding further on the steps to curb illegal migration, the representative of the Ministry deposed 
as below during the briefing : 
 “Our emigration team here are regularly sensitizing the State police authorities and the State 
Government authorities because the moment the Mission is able to inform us or we are able to 
track down which is the illegal agent that has taken these people away, we immediately send it 
to the State Government because it has to be ultimately handled by the State Government. 
We also try to have a regular mechanism of having some dialogue with the concerned State 
Governments from where we get the maximum number of problems of illegal migration 
happening. Finally, it has to be a State Subject because the State has to look at it. We tell the 
State that this particular agent has been found. Our website also has the list of illegal agents 
that we have identified and put out. Of course, the regular agents are also mentioned there” . 
 
 
(viii) Deportation of illegal immigrants from United States 
 2.32 In the wake of deportations of illegal migrants back to the country from the United States and 
probable mass deportations in the future, the Committee had desired to know whether the 

40 
Government of India has any provisions for addressing the humanitarian concerns arising out of this 
exigency. In was responded to by the Ministry in a written reply as under: 
 “The Government of India is against illegal immigration, especially because it is linked to 
several forms of organized crime. For Indian nationals, not just in the United States of 
America, but in any part of the world, if they have illegally entered a country, or have legally 
entered but are overstaying the period of their visa validity, or have entered and living in a 
country without proper documentation, India will take them back, provided necessary 
documents or information is made available by the authorities of that country which would 
enable MEA along with order GOI agencies to verify the individuals nationality. Once it is 
verified that an individual is an Indian national, then the Government will facilitate their return 
to India.   
 The responsibility of reintegration of returned Indian deportees rests with the respective State 
governments from where the emigrants belong. Various State Governments have developed 
ways and means to reintegrate workers returning from abroad.  
 
2.33 Regarding SoPs in place internationally or with other countries about the deportation of illegal 
migrants, it was informed that most countries have necessary SOPs in place to handle deportation-
related matters. To handle deportations to India, an SOP has been put in place whereby MEA in 
coordination with other agencies in India undertakes nationality and security verification process. This 
process takes anywhere between 1-4 weeks depending on the kind of documentation provided by a 
foreign country. Following verification of the deportees, India sends a clearance to the country 
concerned as well as to the Indian Embassy / Consulate concerned to issue an Emergency 
Certificate, if required. If the number of deportees is large, as in the case of US, permissions are given 
to allow for deportation by chartered flights. Prior to receiving such flights, the sending side shares a 
passenger manifest, which is again scrutinized from the security and nationalist angle and then 
necessary clearances are issued. 
 
2.34 In this back drop, the Committee specifically desired to know whether SoPs have been 
followed in the recent deportation from the U.S and if not, the action taken by the Government. The 
ministry of External Affairs in a written response stated as below: 
 “All deportation operations carried out by the United States via chartered / commercial flights 
are based on the SOPs as enumerated in the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement 
(ICE) Air Operations Handbook. The handbook lays down the rules for pre-boarding, 
embarking and disembarking of detainees / deportees on all chartered and commercial flights 
and the protocol for all required documentation.  There has been no change from past 
procedure and the SOPs have been structurally followed for the flights undertaken by the US 
to date. 
  In accordance with the Use of Restraints Policy (No. 11155.1, Section 5.10, effective 
November 19, 2012), detainees transported by ICE Air aircraft will be fully restrained by the 

41 
use of handcuffs, waist chains, and leg irons during flights. Flight security personnel will 
restrain any individual aboard an ICE Air flight who poses a threat to the safety of the mission. 
Restraints will not be removed for any reason unless approved by the flight security. 
  The MEA is in constant touch with the US side and has repeatedly insisted on the 
deportees not to be shackled, particularly women and children. The US ICE has taken on 
board this request and for the second deportation flight undertaken on 15 February, 2025, 
women and children were not shackled”. 
 
ix) Professionals Trapped in Job Rackets in Southeast Asia 
 
2.35 On a specific query on the increasing cases of exploitation of Indian labour in Southeast Asia, 
particularly in fraudulent scam operations, the Ministry replied as below:  
 “It has come to the notice of the Government instances of dubious firms involved in fake 
recruitment job offers having lured Indian nationals mostly through social media channels to 
South-East Asian countries including Cambodia, Myanmar, Lao PDR and made them to carry 
out cybercrime and other fraudulent activities from scam centers operating in these countries. 
The exact number of Indian nationals stuck in these countries is not known as Indian nationals 
reach these scam centers on their own volition through fraudulent/unscrupulous recruitment 
agents/agencies and through illegal channels. 
  Government accords utmost priority to the safety, security and well-being of Indian 
nationals abroad. Government of India has raised this issue at political level with the host 
Government from time to time. Missions/Posts take up the issue of rescue and repatriation of 
Indian nationals actively with the local Ministry of Foreign Affairs and other concerned 
Government agencies of the host country like Immigration, Labour Department, Home Affairs, 
Defence and Border Affairs and law enforcement agencies. With the concerted efforts of our 
Embassies in the Cambodia, Lao PDR and Myanmar, the number of Indian nationals including 
software engineers rescued till date is mentioned in the table below: 
  The Government has established various channels to enable Indian nationals abroad 
to reach out to the Mission/Post concerned in case they need any assistance. They can 
contact the Missions/Posts through walk-in interview, email, multilingual 24x7 emergency 
numbers, grievance redressal portal like MADAD, CPGAMS, and e-Migrate, and social media 
etc. The Ministry of Home Affairs has set up the ‘Indian Cybercrime Coordination Centre’ (I4C) 
as an attached office to deal with all types of cybercrimes in a coordinated and comprehensive 
manner. 
  Ministry issues advisories and social media posts about the fake job rackets from time 
to time. Similar communications are also issued by the respective Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad through their official websites, social media handles and print media. Our Missions in 
South-East Asian countries issued various detailed advisories, upon receiving such 
information on Indian nationals being lured by fake job rackets in South-East countries, to job 
seekers, and advise them to verify all antecedents of recruiting agents and companies before 
accepting any kind of employment offer and not be enticed and entrapped in the fraudulent job 
offers in these countries. 
  Ministry, in coordination with the Indian Missions/Posts abroad and offices of 
Protectors of Emigrants in India, take quick and decisive action whenever instances of 
exploitation of job seekers by illegal agents come to notice. A list of 3,111 unregistered agents 
(till November 2024) has been notified on e-Migrate portal. This information is regularly 

42 
updated based on the complaints filed by the aggrieved individuals and based on the inputs 
received from our Missions/Posts abroad. The complaint against the illegal agents and the 
dubious firms luring Indian youth in false recruitment offers through various channels are 
regularly shared with the respective State Governments and other agencies such as I4C, MHA 
for suitable action. To spread awareness on cybercrime, the Central Government has taken 
steps which inter-alia include, dissemination of relevant information through SMS, I4C social 
media account, radio campaigns, engaged MyGov for publicity in multiple channels, 
organizing cyber safety and security awareness weeks in association with States/UTs, 
newspaper advertisement on digital arrest scams, announcements in Delhi Metros on digital 
arrest, and other modus operandi of cybercrimes. 
 
Country No. of Indian National rescued 
Cambodia 1091 
Lao PDR 770 
Myanmar 497 
 
x) Rehabilitation of Returned Workers: 
  
2.36 On being asked about the provisions for rehabilitation of returned migrants, Secretary (CPV & 
OIA) submitted as under: 
 “……rehabilitation of returned workers is left to the State Governments concerned at this 
moment. At the Central Government level, I do not think there is any plan or any budget. I 
mean even during the Covid times also, the same policy was followed.” 
 
2.37 The Ministry have further furnished that following data on Indian emigrant workers who have 
returned to India: 
Year EC approved but not 
travelled 
EC Approved and Emigrant 
has Departed from India EC approved, Emigrant 
Traveled and Returned 
back to India 
2019 49257 125724 192567 
2020 20904 30815 42295 
2021 11805 52378 68335 
2022 24768 196088 152071 
2023 24164 268638 105366 
2024 53546 267838 34467 
TOTAL 184444 941481 595101 
 
2.38 When the Committee sought to know about the steps being taken by the Government to 
facilitate their return and rehabilitation, the Ministry in their written response have submitted as under: 
 “Rehabilitation and return and employment of emigrants is a wide and cross-cutting area 
between various authorities. Ministry of Skill Development and Enterprise (MSDE) is providing 

43 
up-skilling and re-skilling opportunities to the youth, including returned emigrants, through 
various skilling initiatives such as Pradhan Mantri Kaudhal Vikas Yojana (PMKVY), Jan 
Shikshan Sansthan, National Apprenticeship Promotion Scheme (NAPS), and Industrial 
Training Institutes (ITIs).”  
 
2.39 Noting the lack of reintegration programmes for returning migrants at national level, the 
Committee sought to know about the reasons for the lack of such programmes at the national level. 
The Ministry in their written reply have submitted that the responsibility of reintegration of returned 
Indian migrants rests with the State governments, from where the emigrants belong and various State 
Governments have developed ways and means to reintegrate workers returning from abroad.   
 
2.40 Asked about how the economic reintegration of returning migrants can be facilitated, the 
Ministry have informed that during the pandemic, under the Vande Bharat Mission, Ministry of Skill 
Development and Entrepreneurship, Ministry of Civil Aviation, and Ministry of External Affairs jointly 
launched ‘SWADES – Skilled Worker Arrival Database for Employment Support’. The initiative aims at 
empowering the returning citizens with relevant employment opportunities by creating a database of 
qualified citizens based on their skill sets and experience to tap into and fulfill demand of Indian and 
foreign countries. The returning citizens are required to fill up an online SWADES Skills Card. The 
database thus generated has been integrated with India’s ASEEM portal. The portal provides 
employee connect for prospective employers. 
 
2.41 The Committee, during examination of the subject has come to know that the State of Kerala 
took a proactive step in addressing emigrant issues by establishing specialized agencies for 
governance. Leading this effort, the Non-Resident Keralites Affairs (NORKA) department was created 
in 1996 to formulate welfare schemes for emigrants and address their problems.  
 
2.42 This department is the only entity among Indian states with comprehensive economic 
reintegration programs tailored specifically for returning migrants. As the first and largest Non-
Resident Indian (NRI) affairs department in India, NORKA sets the standard for other states to follow 
in migration welfare and governance. NORKA's welfare and reintegration programs for Non-Resident 
Keralites (NRKs) are frequently compared to those of migration policy leaders such as the Philippines 
and Sri Lanka. 
 

44 
2.43 One of NORKA's flagship initiatives is the Norka Department Project for Return Emigrants 
(NDPREM), launched in 2013 to assist returning migrants in establishing self-employment ventures. 
Through collaboration with 19 financial institutions, this program has benefited 8,945 returnees by 
providing the financial support necessary for their economic reintegration. 
 
2.44 Another significant initiative is the Pravasi Bhadratha Scheme, introduced after the COVID-19 
pandemic to support returnees affected by the global crisis. Since 2021, this scheme has benefited 
14,166 individuals by offering livelihood opportunities through various loan programs. 
 
2.45 To further support returning migrants, NORKA has established the Norka Business Facilitation 
Centre, providing expert guidance and assistance to Non- Resident Keralites looking to start or 
expand businesses in Kerala. This initiative has led to the creation of 474 new enterprises by 
returnees, fostering local economic development. 
 
2.46 Additionally, NORKA introduced an Employment Incentive Scheme and a job-matching 
platform to connect returning migrants with potential employers. This platform helps integrate 
returnees into the labor market and facilitates their smoother transition back into Kerala's workforce. 
 
2.47 Through these initiatives, NORKA ensures that the economic reintegration of returning 
migrants is not only supported but actively encouraged, allowing them to contribute meaningfully to 
Kerala's economy. 
 
C. E- MIGRATE PROJECT 
 
2.48 E-Migrate is a comprehensive e-Governance portal developed to facilitate safe and legal 
migration of Indian workers abroad. This initiative was taken to make the emigration process fast and 
transparent and to address various complaints  
 
2.49 The e-Migrate project, launched in 2015, is designed to facilitate emigration of ECR category 
workers emigrating to notified countries for employment purposes. eMigrate (Version 2.0) was 
launched on 14 October, 2024and has also been integrated with the Passport Seva Project (PSP) of 
MEA for validation of Passport details of migrant workers registering on this portal.  It is also 

45 
integrated with the Bureau of Immigration (BoI) of the Ministry of Home Affairs for online validation of 
EC granted by POEs. The new portal has also been integrated with UMANG, Bhashini, Digilocker, 
SPV- CSC (Meity) DG Shipping systems and SBI e-payment gateway.  The Portal provides for a 
contactless and paperless process for FEs (Foreign Employers) and Recruiting Agents (RAs) as a 
fully digitized B-2-B platform to conduct recruitment process. The portal also provides a 
comprehensive and online database of emigrants to Missions, RAs, FEs and insurance agencies to 
make the whole emigration cycle faster, transparent and allows authentication/ verification of 
credentials of all the stakeholders. 
 
D. EMIGRATION BILL 2024 
 
2.50 The proposed legislation on Emigration [Overseas Mobility (Facilitation and Welfare) Bill, 
2024] seeks to replace the Emigration Act, 1983 which presents a long overdue opportunity to reform 
the recruitment process for seeking overseas employment. It aims to establish a hassle-free, robust, 
transparent and comprehensive emigration management framework that facilitates safe and orderly 
migration for Overseas Employment aspirants. 
 
2.51 In this regard , it was submitted that the proposed draft is under internal consultation. After 
internal consultations, the draft will be put up for public consultation which will be followed up by Inter-
Ministerial consultations along with the Draft Cabinet Note. Thereafter, the revised draft will be shared 
with the Ministry of Law & Justice (MoLJ).   
 
2.52   Once the concurrence of MoLJ is obtained, the final draft will be sent for the approval of the 
Union Cabinet. Once the bill is finalized after internal and inter-ministerial consultations, the draft will 
be put up for 30 days public consultations. 
 
2.53 During the briefing held on 27.11.24, the representative of the Ministry of External Affairs 
stated:  
 “With the objective to reform the recruitment process for seeking overseas employment, the 
Ministry of External Affairs is working on an Emigration Bill to replace the existing Emigration 
Act of 1983. This Bill aims to establish a robust, transparent and comprehensive emigration 
management framework to facilitate safe and orderly migration for overseas employment. It is 
still under discussion in the Ministry for the finalisation of a text. Thereafter, it will be put out for 

46 
public consultation, followed by inter-Ministerial consultations and thereafter submitted to the 
Cabinet for its approval”.  
 
 
F. WELFARE SCHEMES FOR OVERSEAS INDIANS 
 
2.54. The government accords high priority to safety and welfare of Indian citizens living abroad. 
Welfare schemes like Indian Community Welfare Fund, Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana, Pre-
Departure Orientation Training, and so on and so forth are critical tools towards this objective.   
  
i) Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY) 
2.55 The Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY), is a mandatory insurance scheme for Emigration 
Check Required (ECR) category workers going to ECR countries for overseas employment. PBBY 
provides an insurance cover of 10 lakhs in case of accidental death or permanent disability and some 
other benefits at a nominal insurance premium of Rs. 275/ Rs. 375 for a period of two/three years.  
 
2.56  The Scheme initially launched in 2003, has been amended in 2006, 2008 and was 
comprehensively revamped to become effective from August 1, 2017. The scheme now provides for 
global coverage irrespective of employer and location and has facility for online renewal. The revised 
scheme is simpler and more beneficial for emigrant workers and is aimed at ensuring an expeditious 
settlement of claims.  
 
2.57 Furnishing the details of the benefits offered under the scheme, the Ministry of External Affairs 
in a written reply stated as under:  
 “Under the revised PBBY scheme, the insurance coverage is Rs.10 lakh in case of accidental 
death or permanent disability.  
  Other benefits of PBBY are:  reimbursement of medical expenses upto Rs.1 lakh on 
hospitalization in emergencies, accidental injuries, sickness etc.; reimbursement of cost of 
transportation of mortal remains in accidental death along with cost of return airfare of one 
attendant; if the insured person falls sick or is declared medically unfit to continue or resume 
work and the service contract is terminated by the foreign employer within the first twelve 
months of taking the insurance cover, then the actual one way Economy class airfare to India 
shall be reimbursed by the Insurance company; one way return ticket to India in case of 
premature termination of contract by the employer for no fault of the employee; maternity 
benefit to a woman emigrant of a cover of Rs.35,000 to Rs.50,000, restricted to actual cost, 
and subject to certification by the Indian mission abroad; insurance coverage of maximum of 
Rs. 50,000/- in case of hospitalization of family during the period of policy, in case of death or 

47 
permanent disability of the insured worker; insurance coverage of a sum of Rs. 45,000/- in 
case of legal expenses incurred by the insurer on litigation relating to employment subject to 
certification by concerned Indian mission about the necessity of filing the case. The e-migrate 
portal facilitates on-line renewal of PBBY policy within 30 days of its expiry”. 
 
2.58  Regarding on-line renewal of PBBY policy after the expiry of the stipulated 30 days period, it 
has been informed that  the beneficiary can contact his Registered Agent to renew his policy or buy a 
new policy. The premiums for both buying a new policy and renewing the policy are same. 
 
2.59 The Committee have been informed further that since its inception, 80,37,200 policies have 
been issued and 2197 claims were settled till November, 2024.  
 
2.60 The number of insurance claims received, settled and pending for the last 5 years under the 
Scheme are as under:  
Financial Years Claim Received Claim Settled* 
2020-2021 72 38 
2021-2022 89 54 
2022-2023 107 26 
2023-2024 73 22 
Total 418 156 
* Settlement of PBBY claims is an on-going process.  As such, number of unsettled claims at the end 
of a particular year may change, if they are settled during the following year. Secondly, the unsettled 
claims may also include claims not accepted/rejected by the insurance companies. 
 
2.61  According to the insurance companies, generally the claims are processed within 15 days of 
the receipt of the claim.  
 
2.62 However, while observing that the number claims made since 2020 under the Scheme is very 
low and only 2197 claims have been settled out of 80,37,200 policies issued since its inception, the 
Committee desired to know the reasons for the same.  It was then informed that the Number of claims 
under PravasiBhartiyaBimaYojana (PBBY) is perhaps on the lower side as the Scheme covers 
accidental death or permanent disability.  Natural deaths are not covered under the Scheme. Cases of 
accidental death and permanent disability is not high and hence, the number of claims under PBBY is 
low. 
 
 

48 
2.63 It has been added further in this regard as under:  
 “Failure to comply with the conditions set in the insurance policy, including submission of 
claims in stipulated time frame, deficiency in  submission of required documents, as indicated 
in the Policy , including any certificate, that may be required to be obtained from the foreign 
employer/Missions/Posts abroad etc. are stated to be the reasons for pendency of claims.  As 
and when representations from the insured or nominee are received for delay or non-
settlement of claims, they are taken up with the insurance companies for taking appropriate 
actions to redress the grievances and settle the claims expeditiously” . 
 
ii) Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF). 
 
2.64   The Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) has been set up in all Indian Missions and Posts 
abroad to meet the contingency expenditure incurred by them for carrying our various on-site welfare 
activities for Overseas Indian citizens on a means-tested basis. The ICWF guidelines today have 
considerably expanded the scope of on-site welfare activities for the benefit of distressed Indian 
nationals that could be extended through the Fund.  
2.65 The guidelines cover three key areas namely Assisting Overseas Indian nationals in distress 
situations (Boarding and Lodging, Air passage, Legal Assistance, Emergency Medical Care, 
Transportation of Mortal Remains), Community Welfare activities and Improvement in Consular 
services. They now also include provisions for setting of legal panels in countries with sizeable Indian 
Diaspora, payment of fines/penalty for petty crimes for release of prisoners and assistance to 
distressed Indian women abroad.  
 
2.66 Since the year 2012 till  June 2024, legal assistance by Indian Missions/Posts abroad has 
been extended to 4213 Indian nationals, Boarding & Lodging assistance has been provided to 
1,76,557 Indian nationals, Emergency medical care provided to 10611 distressed Indian nationals, air 
passage to 38,463  stranded Indians, and 3808 mortal remains of Indian nationals were airlifted. 
 
2.67 Year-wise data of collection and utilisation of the Indian Community Welfare for last 5 years is 
as under: 
Year 
Funds Utilized                                        
(INR) 
Fund Collection 
(INR) 
2019 709,866,1731 1,652,652,533 

49 
2020 1,372,505,009 555,045,764 
2021 370,756,312 670,826,058 
2022 692,010,026 1,095,611,203 
2023 612,838,403 1,230,491,767 
 
2.68 Here under is the data on funds spent since 2012 till June 2024 by Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad in extending legal assistance to 4213 Indian nationals, Boarding & Lodging assistance to 
1,76,557 Indians, Emergency medical care to 10611 distressed Indian nationals, air passage to 
38,463 stranded Indians, and airlifting 3808 mortal remains of Indian nationals. Details are as under: 
Year-wise details of funds spent during 2014-2024 on ICWF assistance 
YEARS 2014 2015 
Sl.No. HEADINGS No. of Beneficiaries Expenditure in INR No. of Beneficiaries Expenditure in INR 
1 Boarding &Lodging 5918 25,917,910 4014 29,147,175 
2 Emergency Medical Care, 444 4,837,363 200 5,297,275 
 
3 
Air Passage to Stranded Overseas Indians 
8665 332,753,313 8530 72,990,093 
4 Legal Assistance 319 4,219,172 188 5,794,390 
5 Airlifting of Mortal Remains 243 19,010,575 279 45,593,038 
 
YEARS 2016 2017 2018 
Sl.No. HEADINGS No. of Beneficiaries Expenditure in 
INR 
No. of Beneficiaries Expenditure in 
INR 
No. of Beneficiaries 
Expenditure 
in INR 
1 Boarding &Lodging 5892 41,517,882 7984 57,375,310 10939 89,085,116 
2 Emergency Medical Care, 
704 11,221,607 350 7,295,852 550 8,791,148 
 
3 
Air Passage to Stranded Overseas Indians 
2253 122,659,828 2516 51,925,986 3735 66,568,191 
4 Legal Assistance 184 4,406,254 734 9,258,433 478 7,115,756 
5 Airlifting of Mortal Remains 302 35,243,060 326 50,846,614 409 57,119,091 
 

50 
YEARS 2019 2020 2021 
Sl. No. HEADINGS No. of Beneficiaries Expenditure 
in INR 
No. of Beneficiaries 
Expenditure in 
INR 
No. of Beneficiaries Expenditure in 
INR 
1 Boarding &Lodging 10685 81,287,454 71879 144,261,549 20553 23,503,822 
2 Emergency Medical Care, 
949 8,714,188 4804 11,455,230 1117 17,289,515 
 
3 
Air Passage to Stranded Overseas Indians 
2759 62,524,228 3146 115,464,434 2489 106,712,301 
4 Legal 
Assistance 
374 8,282,911 85 3,855,195 161 4,299,285 
5 Airlifting of Mortal Remains 353 62,160,936 297 59,487,371 422 57,095,553 
 
YEARS 2022 2023 2024 (upto June 2024 
Sl. No. HEADINGS No. of Beneficiaries Expenditure in 
INR 
No. of Beneficiaries Expenditure in 
INR 
No. of Beneficiaries 
Expenditur
e in INR 
1 Boarding &Lodging 20184 53,551,115 15286 46,206,535 4227 25,991,599 
2 Emergency Medical Care, 
1165 11,146,036 280 16,721,039 52 3,535,265 
 
3 
Air Passage to Stranded Overseas Indians 
2145 65,700,824 1607 48,253,639 621 16,469,553 
4 Legal 
Assistance 
387 6,735,508 602 119,688,527 655 3,807,737 
5 Airlifting of Mortal Remains 
507 86,544,256 433 88,721,880 239 64,393,773 
*The break-up of expenditure for 2012 and 2013 is not available on record 
 
2.69 ICWF is a self sustained fund.  No budgetary support is provided by Ministry.  The sources of 
the ICWF are (i) service charges on issuance of Visa/OCI/PIO card; Passport services and attestation 
of documents; (ii) Voluntary contribution by Indian community; and (iii) Income from interests accrued 
through investments and deposits.  Additional requirement of funds by Missions/Posts, if any, are 
transferred from other Missions/Funds having sufficient funds, with the approval of the Competent 
Authority in the Ministry.   
 

51 
2.70   The existing ICWF Guidelines have considerable provisions for assistance of distressed 
overseas Indians and for community welfare.  However,  Ministry is  working on to find out if the scope 
of the existing ICWF scheme could be enhanced.  
2.71 In a written reply to a question on  benchmark/criteria for utilisation of ICWF, it was submitted 
as below:  
 “The criteria for utilization of funds has been indicated in Para 3 of ICWF Guidelines in detail 
(ICWF Guidelines of 2017 with amendments is attached as Annexure B. A committee of three 
officers consisting DCM/DCG and officers dealing with Labour, Consular, Community Welfare 
or Administration is constituted in Missions/Posts to review the operations of the fund every 
quarter. The accounts of ICWF maintained at I n d i a n  Missions/Posts abroad are subject to 
audit by the Internal Audit Wing of the Office of the Pr. CCA, MEA and subject to Statutory 
Audit” . 
 
2.72 In order to spread awareness regarding the ICW Fund and the assistance provided therein, 
Indian emigrant workers proceeding abroad are apprised during PDOT to get in touch with the nearest 
Indian Missions/ Post in case of emergencies, and the nature of assistance being provided by our 
Embassies and Consulates overseas. Missions/ Posts are also publicize assistance provided on their 
respective websites and social media handles, and the same is also done by the Ministry.     
 
iii) Transportation of mortal remains of Indian citizens from abroad 
 
2.73  The CPV Division in the Ministry of External Affairs is the nodal Division and has well-
established mechanism/SOPs to coordinate with all Missions / Posts abroad to provide help to Indian 
nationals abroad in distress including in cases of deaths, local cremation/burial or transportation of 
mortal remains to their hometowns in India and settlement of insurance / compensation claims. 
 
2.74  Transportation of mortal remains of Indians who die abroad, involves completion of certain 
formalities before the local authorities allow such body/bodies to be transported to India. In case the 
death is unnatural, police investigations are to be completed. There exists a singly window clearance 
in all Indian Missions/Posts for such cases.  
 
2.75 As soon as the information about the death of an Indian national comes to the knowledge of 
the concerned Indian Mission/Post abroad, they take proactive action by seeking a report from the 
local Foreign Office and other concerned authorities regarding the cause of the death of the Indian 
national. Our Missions/Posts abroad inform the next of kin of the deceased Indian national, and 

52 
facilitate the transportation to India or local burial of mortal remains in accordance with the wishes of 
the family of the deceased. 
 
2.76 Transportation of mortal remains of Indians involves the following steps: 
i) The family to nominate a person on their behalf to carry out all the formalities in foreign 
country, if they are unable to come to the foreign country to take over the mortal 
remain. 
ii) The Authorized person/ Employer/University Authority to inform the Insurance 
Company (if any). 
iii) The Authorized person/ Employer/University Authority to nominate a Transporter (in 
consultation with Insurance Company, if any). 
iv) To get the FIR copy from the Police authorities, if applicable 
v) Transporter to complete the formalities of Embalming, Encoffining& Quarantine of the 
mortal remains as soon as possible 
vi) The Authorized person/ Employer/University Authority/ Transporter to book an Air 
Ticket to India for transportation of mortal remains. 
vii) The authorized person needs to obtain the documents (FIR, if any, Medical Certificate/ 
Death Certificate, Original Passport, Embalming Certificate, Encoffining Certificate, 
Quarantine Certificate, Authority Letter by the family, List of belongings, Air Way Bill 
(copy or detail information) and provide to Embassy/ Consulate for Cancellation of 
passport of the deceased and issue of “Death Certificate and NOC”. 
viii) The family also needs to authorize a person to collect the mortal remains at the Indian 
Airport on their behalf, if required. 
ix) For transportation of mortal remains, Indian Missions/ Posts need liaising with different 
authorities in the foreign country, viz. 
 (a) Medical report / death certificate issued from the hospital concerned; 
 (b) Police report (with English translation, if report is in some other language), in 
case of accidental or unnatural death; 
 (c) Consent letter from next of kin of the deceased for transportation of mortal 
remains; 
 (d) Issuing of No Objection Certificate (NOC) by the Mission / Post for 
transportation  

53 
 (e) Clearance and arrangements for embalming of mortal remains from the 
authorities concerned in the foreign country; 
 (f) Clearance from local immigration/ customs department. 
 
2.77 These procedures differ from country to country depending on the regulations in the specific 
country. Therefore, there is no fixed time frame for eventual transportation. Generally, the 
transportation of mortal remains is quicker in cases of natural deaths in comparison to the cases of 
unnatural deaths. 
 
2.78 In normal circumstances, such cases are invariably processed between 3 to 14 days in cases 
of natural deaths. Generally, delays occur in cases of unnatural deaths where legal and police 
investigations have to be completed by local authorities. Delays also occur in cases where the 
nationality or identity of the deceased needs to be established. In some cases, DNA profiling has also 
been undertaken to confirm the identity of the deceased. In very few cases, the family of deceased is 
untraceable or unwilling to provide consent for transportation of mortal remains or local burial / 
cremation leading to delays. 
 
2.79  Indian Missions/Posts incur expenditure out of Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) for 
transportation of mortal remains of deceased Indian nationals to India, under the provisions of ICWF 
guidelines. The year wise expenditure for the last five years is as follows: 
Year Expenditure(in INR) 
2019 6,21,60,937/- 
2020 5,94,87,371/- 
2021 5,70,95,553/- 
2022 8,45,83,770/- 
2023 2,32,51,964/- 
 
iv) Pre-Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) 
 
2.80 Under the ‘Surakshit Jaayein Prashikshit Jaayein’ abhiyaan of the Government of India, the 
Pre-Departure Orientation Training Programme was launched by the Ministry of External Affairs in 
January, 2018 with an aim of enhancing soft skills of Indian emigrant workers, going abroad specially 
to Gulf and other ECR countries.  Under this programme, the emigrant workers are given one day free 

54 
of cost orientation training aiming to help them to understand local rules and regulations of the 
destination country and their culture, tradition, language etc. Since the inception of the PDOT 
programme in 2018, a total of 1,72,220 emigrant workers have been imparted orientation training till 
31st December 2024. 
 
2.81          Financial assistance is given by the Ministry for the PDOT programme every year. Funds 
from the allocated budget are disbursed to the State government run departments/agencies on 
demand basis, which operationalise the scheme. Details of Budget allocation under PDOT head 
during last three financial years are as follows: 
Financial Year Budget Grant (in INR) Funds released to State 
Agencies (in INR) 
2022-23 3 Crore (300 lakhs) 0 
2023-24 1.20 Crore (120 lakhs) 79.77 lakhs 
2024-25 1 Crore (100 lakhs) 16.08 lakhs (as on January 2025) 
 
 
2.82 Pre-Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) programmes are aimed at enhancing soft skills of 
Indian migrant workers largely going for work abroad especially to the Gulf region and Malaysia, in 
terms of culture, language, tradition and local rules and regulations of the destination country. One 
day long PDOT training also sensitizes migrant workers about pathways to safe and legal migration 
and various government programmes for their welfare and protection. The initiative has been a 
success and is being expanded further. The PDOT curriculum content has been standardized all over 
the country. Comprehensive PDO Manuals for Master Trainers have been developed in seven 
languages i.e. Hindi, English, Bangla, Malayalam, Punjabi, Tamil and Telugu.  The Ministry launched 
online PDOT in April 2021 to reach out to prospective emigrants who live far away from PDOT 
centres.  This initiative is helping us to deliver training for more number of migrants as classroom 
training almost stopped since onset of Covid-19 last year.   
 
2.83 The PDOT training is imparted under two models: 
i. PDOT Centres operated by National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) empanelled 
training partners under the Pravasi  Kaushal Vikas Yojna (PKKY), a joint collaboration 

55 
under an MoU between Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) and a grant of Rs. 10 crore was extended by MEA to MSDE.  
ii. PDOT Centres managed by State Government agencies. Ministry has been granting 
funds to State Governments to conduct PDOT Training to emigrant workers @ Rs. 500/- 
per candidate for in-person training and Rs. 100 for online training. 
 
2.84 Since its inception, the budget allocation for PDOT is as follows: 
 
S.No. Budget for PDOT INR (in crores) 
1. 2017-18 0.5 crores 
2. 2018-19 0.5 crores 
3. 2019-20 3.0 crores 
4. 2020-21 0.2 crores 
5. 2021-22 2.0 crores 
6. 2022-23 3.0 Crores 
7. 2023-24 3.0 Crores 
8. 2024-25 5 Crores 
    
2.85 There are 36 PDOT centers operational in 32 cities in UP, Rajasthan, Punjab, Maharashtra, 
West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Bihar, Odisha, Madhya Pradesh and 
Karnataka. Out of the 36 PDOT centers, opened by MEA in collaboration with MSDE and the State 
Governments, 14 centers are managed by NSDC and 22 by State Government Agencies. The list of 
PDOT centers under various jurisdictions of POEs is as follows: 
 S. No. Name of PoE PDOT Centre 
1. POE Rae Bareilly 
(Uttar Pradesh) 
Lucknow 
Gorakhpur 
2. POE Jaipur 
(Rajasthan) 
Jaipur 
Sikar 
Nagaur 
2. POE Chandigarh 
(Punjab) 
Mohali 
Jalandhar 
Amritsar 
4. POE Mumbai 
(Maharashtra) 
Mumbai 
(VideshBhawan) 
Mumbai (Andheri) 
Bhopal 

56 
5. POE Kolkata 
(West Bengal) 
Kolkata 
Bhubaneswar 
6. POE Hyderabad 
(Telangana) & 
Andhra Pradesh 
Hyderabad 
Karimnagar 
Nizamabad 
Vijaywada 
Kadapa 
Vizag 
Kakinada 
Visakhapatnam 
8. POE Chennai 
(Tamil Nadu) 
Chennai (NSDC) 
Chennai NRT 
8. POE, Thiruvananthapuram 
(Kerala) 
Trivandrum 
 
9. POE Cochin (Kerala) Kochi, Ernakulam 
11. POE Patna 
(Bihar) 
Darbhanga 
Gaya 
Muzaffarpur 
Patna 
12. POE Bengaluru 
(Karnataka) 
Bengaluru 
 
 
2.86 The Ministry is in the process of opening more PDOT centres in major cities witnessing high 
emigration rate in the country to take the total number from 35 to 100 to cover parts of the country not 
covered so far including the north-eastern region. For new centers, we also expanding our partners 
beyond NSDC to include industry bodies such as CII, FICCI, ASSOCHAM and Common Services 
Centre, e-Governance Service India Limited of Ministry of Electronics and Information Technology and 
work in close collaboration with states.  
 
2.87 The Ministry launched online PDOT in April 2021 to reach out to prospective emigrants who 
live far away from PDOT centres. We have seen very positive responses from participants, especially 
women participants. This initiative is helping us deliver training for more migrants. The Ministry 
proposes to continue online PDOT training post-Covid and provide both online and in-person training 
options to prospective emigrants. The Ministry has also mandated to make mandatory PDOT for 50% 
of Emigration Clearances issued by all PoE offices. 
 
 
 

57 
Chapter III 
 
Engagement with the Diaspora 
 
 Various policies and programmes are being undertaken by the Ministry of External Affairs for 
Engagement with Indian Diaspora.  The Diaspora Engagement Division implements several Diaspora 
engagement schemes, including Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention, Pravasi Bharatiya Divas 
Conferences, Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Award, Regional Pravasi Bharatiya Divas, Know India 
Programme, Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children, Bharat Ko Janiye Quiz, Pravasi Rishta 
Portal and Promotion of Cultural ties with Diaspora. The Division also deals with marital disputes and 
child custody cases involving Overseas Indians, issues related to Indian students abroad, and 
miscellaneous grievances received from Diaspora 
 
i) Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) Convention 
 
3.2 The Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) is one of the flagship events of the Government of India 
which has been celebrated since 2003 to recognize the contribution of Overseas Indian Community in 
the development of India and to celebrate Indian Diaspora’s connection with its roots. The format of 
the PBD Convention was revised in 2015 with the main PBD Convention being held every alternate 
year with the participation of overseas Diaspora experts, policy makers and stakeholders.  
 
3.3 The 18 th PBD Convention was held in Bhubaneswar in Odisha from 8-10 January, 2025. For 
the last few years, the Government of India has been organizing the PBD Convention in partnership 
with one of the State Governments. The PBD Convention hosted in Partner State provides the 
opportunity to showcase the State’s strengths to the Diaspora and helps in attracting investment and 
technology into that State. 
 
3.4 On being asked about the reasons for revision of the format of PBD Convention in 2015, the 
Ministry in their written reply have submitted that the decision was made to primarily enhance the 
impact of the event by organizing it every two years instead of on an annual basis. The intention was 
to create a more comprehensive and detailed program for enhancing the depth and reach of India’s 
engagement with its Diaspora and to effectively harness their potential to contribute towards India’s 
growth story. 

58 
3.5 Asked about the States with which the Government of India has been partnering for organizing 
the PBD Convention, the Ministry in their written reply have furnished the following details:  
 “Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention from its inception in 2003 has been held as follows:- 
 
Year Dates Venue 
2003 9-11 January, 2003 New Delhi 
2004 9-11 January, 2004 New Delhi 
2005 7-9 January, 2005 Mumbai (Maharashtra) 
2006 7-9 January, 2006 Hyderabad (erstwhile Andhra Pradesh) 
2007 7-9 January, 2007 New Delhi 
2008 7-9 January, 2008 New Delhi 
2009 7-9 January, 2009 Chennai (Tamil Nadu) 
2010 7-9 January, 2010 New Delhi 
2011 7-9 January, 2011 New Delhi 
2012 7-9 January, 2012 Jaipur (Rajasthan) 
2013 7-9 January, 2013 Kochi (Kerala) 
2014 7-9 January, 2014 New Delhi 
2015 7-9 January, 2015 Gandhinagar (Gujarat) 
2017 7-9 January, 2017 Bengaluru (Karnataka) 
2019 21-23 January, 2019 Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh) 
2021 8-9 January, 2021 Virtual 
2023 8-10 January, 2023 Indore (Madhya Pradesh) 
 
 
3.6 The Ministry have furnished details of amount allocated and utilized under the Budget Head 
‘Celebration of Pravasi Bharatiya Divas’ for the period 2019-20 – 2023-24. The same are under:- 
        (INR in Crores) 
FY Amount allocated Expenditure Incurred 
2019-20 9.12 9.15 
2020-21 22 17.82 
2021-22 5 0.45 
2022-23 30 30.96 
2023-24 15 14.39 
 
3.7 Asked about whether the Ministry have any data on the level of participation of Indian 
Diaspora in the Convention, the Ministry have submitted that the participation of the Indian Diaspora in 
the Convention has been satisfactory with over 3500 on an average per edition and that the 
Government has taken various steps to further widen its engagement with the Indian Diaspora.  
 

59 
3.8 The revision of the format of the PBD in 2015 has enhanced participation of the Diaspora 
besides having participation from HoGs/HoSs& Ministers of Indian origin from other countries, 
renowned businessmen, eminent members of the Diaspora abroad and experts from various fields. 
The Ministry has endeavored to get Diaspora participants from various sectors and disciplines, 
including but not limited to, trade, business, youth, sports, science & technology, academics, 
research, engineering and culture; as well as from various segments of society, including youth 
Diaspora, migrant workers and women.  
 
3.9 Asked about whether the Ministry has any data on the countries that ensured maximum 
participation in the PBDs, the Ministry have furnished the following participation data with respect to 
last two PBDs:  
Sl. No. Country 17 th PBD 
(Indore) 
18th PBD 
(Bhubaneswar) 
1. Mauritius 578 339 
2. Qatar 516 193 
3 UAE 472 224 
4 Oman 273 307 
5 Malaysia 63 542 
 
3.10 On a specific query to furnish data on number of Blue collar workers- Semi-skilled emigrant 
workers who participated in the last three PBDs, the Ministry in their written reply have submitted that 
they only have data in respect of number of participants from various countries.   
 
3.11 When asked about the proactive steps being taken to ensure wider participation of semi-
skilled or blue collared workers of the Indian Diaspora in the PBD, the Ministry in their written reply 
have submitted that Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Convention is a flagship Indian Diaspora engagement 
programme of the Ministry that is open to participation by all members of the Indian Diaspora, 
including the semi- skilled emigrant workers. The Ministry have assured that in all the previous PBD 
Conventions as well as in the 18th PBD Convention, dedicated segments have been incorporated in 
the programme that focus upon the importance of safe and legal migration and the challenges faced 
by emigrant workers abroad, and recourse initiatives undertaken by the Ministry towards the same.  
3.12 Enquired about the concrete projects/initiatives/achievements that have emerged from the 
deliberations at the annual Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) held over the last two decades, the Ministry 
in their written reply have submitted that the action points emanating from each PBD Convention and 

60 
Conference are discussed and shared with Ministries concerned for integration into the overall policy 
frameworks of the Government. Some of the suggestions made during deliberations at the PBD and 
indeed incorporated in several new initiatives of the Government. It has been submitted that the 
continuous revision of the Government’s migration policy, policy towards foreign nationals studying in 
India, changes in various Diaspora- related schemes, offering of scholarships to Diaspora children, 
cultural outreach programmes, implementation of VAJRA, PRABHASS, GIAN, SWADES, ASIM 
schemes are based on the suggestions made at the PBD Conventions of the past.    
 
3.13 Asked about whether the Ministry prepares any Outcome Report of Pravasi Bharatiya Day 
Convention the Ministry have informed that as per past practice no Outcome Report is being prepared 
by the Ministry of PBD Convention.  
 
ii ) Regional Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Conventions 
 
3.14 Noting that the last Regional Pravasi Bharatiya Divas was held in Singapore in 2018, the 
Committee during the course of the evidence sought to know whether the Ministry has abandoned the 
policy of holding Regional Pravasi Bharatiya Divas. The Ministry, in their written reply, submitted that 
they have not abandoned the policy of holding Regional PBD. They have further stated that the 
Ministry has so far successfully organized 10 regional PBDs, with the last one being held in Singapore 
in 2018.  Due to COVID pandemic, the Regional PBDs could not be held in 2020 and 2022. On being 
asked when the next Regional Pravasi Bharatiya Divas is proposed to take place, the Ministry have 
informed that the same is expected to be organized in 2026. 
 
3.15 During the course of interaction with the State Diaspora organizations, Secretary, NORKA 
explaining about the platform provided by the State Government of Kerala to the Non Resident 
Indians of the State submitted as under: 
 “We have an assembly or parliament of NRKs which we call as Lok Kerala Sabha. This started 
in the year 2017. In that, we have NRKs. They might be citizens all across the world but they 
are part of this parliament because they are NRKs for us. In that parliament, we also have 
NRKs from outside the State but within India. So, we have people from Uttar Pradesh, 
Uttarakhand etc.” 
 

61 
3.16 Explaining further about the functioning of the Lok Kerala Sabha, Secretary, NORKA 
submitted as under: 
 “xxx we want to constantly engage with our Diaspora. We don’t want them to leave their roots 
in Kerala. For example, even though they become citizens in Canada or America, they still 
become part of investment in Kerala, they do businesses in Kerala and they have land in 
Kerala. So, they will have issues with the State Government. So, we want them to have a 
formal platform where they can contribute as well as air their concerns with us. We can also in 
turn help the Diaspora there. We have some eminent NRKs. They also help the Malayali 
community in those areas. Though they become citizens in their respective countries, they still 
identify themselves with this culture and they help others in the community. So, we also look at 
them as part of social support across the world.”  
 
iii) Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Award (PBSA) 
 
3.17 Pravasi Bhartiya Samman Awards’ (PBSA) is the highest honour conferred on a Non-Resident 
Indian (NRI), Person of Indian Origin (PIO) or an organization or institution established and run by 
NRIs or PIOs. During the PBD Convention, the Hon’ble President of India honours around thirty (30) 
eminent Indian Diaspora members with this prestigious award. ‘PBSA recognizes and honours the 
significant contribution by NRIs and PIOs within India or abroad for reasons such as exceptional social 
and humanitarian work, for contributions made towards India’s development, for building bridges 
between India and their host country or for enhancing India’s prestige in their home country. Till the 
17th PBD Convention, 296 PBSA Awards had been conferred. List of the Awardees have been 
attached as Annexure – C. 
 
3.18 Asked whether the Ministry has fixed any criteria for award of these Awards, the Ministry in 
their written reply have submitted that PBSAs are conferred to those PIOs and NRIs who have made 
a significant contribution for their achievements abroad and in India as detailed below:- 
For Achievements Abroad: 
(a) Better understanding of India; 
(b)  Support to India’s causes and concerns in a tangible way; 
(c)  Building closer links between India, the overseas Indian community and their country 
of residence; 
(d)  Social and humanitarian causes in India or abroad; 
(e)  Welfare of the local Indian community; 

62 
(f)  Philanthropic and charitable work; 
(g)  Eminence in one’s field or outstanding work, which has enhanced India’s prestige in 
the country of residence; or 
(h)  Eminence in skills which has enhanced India’s prestige in that country (for non-
professional workers). 
 
For Achievements Within India 
(a) Philanthropic investments and charitable work in India; 
(b) For contributions made towards India’s Development. 
 
3.19 Asked about the nomination and selection process of Awardees, the Ministry have submitted 
that nominations for the Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Award can be made by the following persons or 
organizations: 
a)  Governors of States and Lt. Governors of Union Territories in India; 
b)  Heads of Indian Diplomatic Missions/Heads of Indian Diplomatic Posts abroad.  
c)  Chairman and Members of the Parliamentary Standing Committee dealing with the 
Ministry of External Affairs. 
d)  The Executive Head of Prominent Overseas Indian Associations with nation-wide 
character as may be decided by the Ministry of External Affairs. 
e)  Previous awardees of Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Award 
f)  Self Nomination 
  The Jury-Cum-Awards Committee can also make up to 6 suo-moto nominations. 
  Thereafter, a committee of officers, constituted by the Ministry of External Affairs, 
examine the nominations received with a view to ensure their completeness and draw up a 
short citation on each nominee to facilitate the work of the Jury-cum-Awards Committee. The 
Jury-Cum-Awards Committee is made of:  
a)  Vice President of India (Chairman) 
b)  Minister of External Affairs (Vice Chairman) 
c)  Principal Secretary to the Prime Minister 
d)  Home Secretary 
e) Foreign Secretary 
f)  Five members nominated by the Prime Minister 

63 
g)  Secretary or Additional Secretary dealing with Overseas Indian Affairs matters in the 
Ministry of External Affairs 
  The recommendation of the Jury-cum-Awards Committee is then submitted to the 
Prime Minister and President for approval, who are the final deciding authority in the matter. 
 
3.20 Asked whether alumni database of all PBSA awardees till date has been created, the Ministry 
have submitted that the same has been created by the Ministry along with their fields of specialization. 
 
iv) Scholarship Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC). 
 
 
3.21 SPDC was introduced in the academic Year 2006-07 for the children of PIOs and NRIs to 
enable them to pursue Undergraduate courses in Indian Universities/ Institutions and promote India as 
a centre of higher studies. The Ministry offers 150 scholarships every year under the scheme, out of 
which, 50 are reserved for Children of Indian workers in ECR countries. Under SPDC Scheme, 
financial assistance of up to US$ 4000 towards tuition fee, admission fee and post admission services 
is provided for Undergraduate courses in professional and non-professional courses.  
 
v) Know India Programme (KIP) 
 
3.22 Know India Programme is an initiative launched in December 2003 by the Ministry for the 
Indian Diaspora between the age group of 21-35 years. The purpose of the KIP is to familiarize the 
People of Indian Origin (PIO) youth with contemporary India, through a three week orientation 
programme and provide them an exposure to the country of their origin. It aims to promote awareness 
on different facets of life in India and the progress made by the country in various fields e.g. economic, 
industrial, education, science & technology, communication and information technology and culture. 
Till now,  81 editions of KIP have been oraganised by the Ministry with participation by about  2922 
members of youth PIOs from 54 countries.  
 
3.23 While Briefing the Committee, the Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs submitted on Know 
India Programme:  
 
 “The “Know India Programme” has been successful in connecting the young members of the 
Indian Diaspora basically between the age of 21 and 35 years with their heritage roots and is 
an opportunity for them to witness the development strides of modern India. 

64 
 Sir, …………..the 79 th batch of the Know India Programme is already in India and they 
comprise of 27 PIO journalists. This is for the first time we have got journalists who are 
Persons of Indian Origin, for them to see the modern India” . 
 
 
3.24 The year-wise expenditure on the programme during the period 2022 till Jan 2025 has been 
furnished by the Ministry. The same is as under: 
S. No. FY Final Estimate 
(in Cr.) 
Expenditure 
(In Cr.) 
1 2022-23 3.00 3.70 
2 2023-24 10.00  10.09 
3 2024-25 10.00  5.19 (Till Jan 2025) 
   
3.25 Asked about the participation level from Girmitiya Countries, the Ministry have furnished the 
following information: 
      
S. No. Country 2022-23 2023-24 2024-25 Total 
1 Fiji 33 83 49 165 
2 Reunion Island 
(France) 
3 2 0 5 
3 Guyana 31 35 16 82 
4 Jamaica 0 1 0 1 
5 Mauritius 51 89 51 191 
6 South Africa 17 21 20 58 
7 Suriname 30 28 19 77 
8 Trinidad and 
Tobago 
14 41 24 79 
Total 179 300 179 658 
 
 
3.26 Asked about whether the Ministry is concerned about the relatively low participation in the 
Know India Programme the Ministry have in their written reply submitted that prior to the merger of the 
erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) with MEA, the number of editions of KIP 
conducted was limited to two to four every financial year. As such, only 34 editions had been 
conducted in the first 13 years until FY 2015-16, attended to by about 1,053 participants. After the 
merger of the Ministries, the KIP guidelines were revised in 2016-17 to enhance participation of youth 

65 
Diaspora in KIP. Since then, the Ministry has started conducting six editions of KIP in every financial 
year. Subsequent to the 17thPravasiBharatiya Divas Convention in January 2023, the Programme was 
again revamped in FY 2023-24 with the approval of Hon’ble EAM. The coverage of the Programme 
was widened to increase the number of participants, and new elements were introduced and the 
scope of the programme was broadened to include showcase to the participants India’s 
developmental strides in various sectors besides presenting to them India’s industrial development 
and flagship initiatives of GOI. The Ministry is currently conducting eight to nine editions of KIP during 
each financial year since FY 2023-24. 
 
3.27 Asked about specific measures being taken to enhance awareness and increased 
participation in the programme, the Ministry have submitted that the Know India Programme is one of 
the earliest and most successful programmes of the Government that facilitates direct engagement of 
the Government with the youth Indian Diaspora, most of whom visit their mother land for the first time 
under this scheme. As such, they have adopted a multi-pronged approach to increase awareness and 
outreach of the Programme amongst the youth Diaspora by effective utilization of the social media 
and digital platforms. The Ministry has also worked towards creating engaging content for the youth 
members of the Diaspora, such as videos, infographics, and interactive quizzes, to capture attention 
and share information in a more dynamic way. Indian Missions/ Posts abroad are also reaching out to 
the Indian communities in their jurisdiction to showcase the unique opportunity offered by this 
Programme.  
 
3.28 The Ministry have further stated that the response of the youth Diaspora towards the 
Programme has been exceptionally positive. A KIP alumni database prepared by the Ministry has also 
been shared with Missions/ Posts abroad for continued engagement with these Diaspora members to 
ensure wider outreach of the Government of India overseas. 
 
3.29 On being asked about the perception that the program focuses too heavily on showcasing 
tourist attractions, potentially overlooking deeper cultural experiences and social realities in India, the 
Ministry have in their written reply submitted that while designing the programme for the KIP 
participants in each edition, Ministry takes utmost care in ensuring that the participants get a 
comprehensive and holistic exposure to contemporary India and its achievements. They are also 

66 
provided with an immersive and enriching experience to connect with India’s heritage and cultural 
wealth.  
 
3.30 Key elements of the Know India Programme include presentations on the country’s political 
process, economy, developments in various sectors like science & technology, pharmaceuticals, 
startup ecosystem, digital public infrastructure, JAM trinity, education, defence, agriculture & tourism, 
along with interactions with faculty and students at premier Universities/ Colleges/ educational 
institutions, and visits to industries and exposure to schemes like Skill India, Digital India, 
Aatmanirbhar Bharat, Make in India, etc.  They also get an exposure to Vedantic, spiritual, religious & 
medicinal traditions of India like Yoga, Ayurveda, etc. The participants visit places of historical 
importance/monuments where they learn about the rich cultural legacy and heritage of India. 
 
3.31 Adding to the above, the Secretary, Ministry of External Affairs deposed before the Committee 
during Oral Evidence on 04.02.25  as under:  
 “The 80 th and the 81st editions of the “Know India Programme” were also held in December 
and January. Seventy-seven participants from 12 countries in these two editions participated. 
We actually had 40 in the 80th session and 37 in the 81st session and 12 countries in each. 
They visited Jaipur, Hyderabad, Agra and Bhubaneshwar besides historical and culturally 
significant sites in India. Most importantly, they had an opportunity to participate in the 18th 
PBD.” 
 
vi) Bharat ko Janiye (BKJ) Quiz 
 
3.32 Bharat Ko Janiye (BKJ) Quiz is an initiative of the Government of India to engage with the 
young overseas Indians residing outside India. The quiz is conducted to motivate overseas Indian and 
foreign youth to enhance their knowledge about India. The initiative was started in 2015 under the 
directive of the Hon’ble Prime Minister. The winners of the BKJ Quiz are selected under three 
categories, viz. Persons of Indian Origin, Non Residence Indians and foreign nationals and are invited 
to India to participate in the Bharat Ko Janiye Yatra (BKJY). Top 15 winners in two categories (NRI 
and PIO) are invited to visit India on a two-week long BKJ Yatra, starting with their participation in the 
18th PBD Convention. 
 
3.33 During Oral Evidence on 04.02.25, the Secretary (CPV & OIA), Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted further as under:  

67 
 “The fifth Bharat Ko Janiye quiz was also held to strengthen the connection of the Diaspora 
with India, particularly the youth and foreigners who are interested in learning about India. A 
total of around 1,08,876 participants from 203 countries took part in the online quiz which was 
divided into two categories. One was for Non-Resident Indians and another was for Persons of 
Indian Origin and foreign nationals. Thirty winners, 15 in each category, were invited to visit 
India from 8th to 21st of January, including participation in the Pravasi Bharatiya Diwas, 
providing them an opportunity to experience India’s heritage, culture and contemporary 
developments” . 
 
3.34 As regards the level of participation under the Bharat koJaniye (BKJ) Quiz, the Ministry have 
given the following details: 
Quiz Year 
(Edition)s 
Registration Participation Participation in % Number of 
countries 
2021-22 (4th) 15,343 4,690 30.57% 179 
2024-25 (5th) 1,24,522 1,08,876 87.48% 203 
 
3.35 Giving details of the category wise participation, the Ministry have informed that the 5th BKJ 
quiz was conducted in two categories i.e. (i) NRIs and (ii) PIO/Foreigners, which is as under: 
S.No Category Registration Participation 
1 Non- Resident Indians (NRIs) 83,936 74,197 
2 PIO/Foreign Nationals 40,586 34,679 
 
3.36 Asked about the steps being taken by the Ministry to ensure wider participation of the young 
overseas Indians, the Ministry in their written reply have submitted that the following steps were taken 
to ensure wider participation in the quiz: 
1. Revamping of the Quiz: The BKJ Quiz was revamped in 2024 with an aim to increase 
the level of participation that had remained low since 2015. The following were the 
salient features of the revamped quiz:  
(i) The quiz was streamlined into a single round online quiz, replacing the 
previous multi-stage format (online and offline), making it more convenient and 
exciting for participants. 
(ii) To ensure wider participation of young overseas Indians, the age limit has 
been expanded to 14-50 years, from the previous range of 18-35 years. 

68 
(iii) The number of questions was reduced to 30, from 100 in previous editions, 
simplifying the quiz while maintaining its challenge. 
(iv) The quiz categories were simplified into two groups: (i) PIO/Foreign Nationals 
and (ii) Non-Resident Indians, for better categorization and clarity. 
(v) A flexible feature was added, allowing participants to skip or flip up to 3 
questions, enhancing the user experience and increasing engagement. 
(vi) To make the quiz more interactive and engaging, multi-media questions (33%), 
such as text, image, audio, and video, were introduced in the 5th edition.  
(vii) Keeping up with current trends, a user-friendly mobile application was 
developed this year for universal accessibility on smart phones. This 
technological expansion was aimed at providing seamless user experience for 
participants.  
2.  Publicity: In order to reach a broader audience and maximize participation, XPD 
Division undertook digital social media campaign through Missions/Posts abroad and 
the collective efforts ensured that quiz gained the visibility and momentum it needed to 
thrive. The notable elements of publicity were: 
(i) Missions were encouraged to reach out to schools and colleges, Diaspora 
organizations such as Indian associations, friendship groups, for enhanced 
participation by students, members of Diaspora and foreigners.  
(ii) A media agency was hired to boost publicity of the quiz, particularly in high 
Diaspora countries through campaigns on major social media platform to reach 
a broader audience and maximise participation in the quiz.  
(iii) A detailed digital media campaign was implemented. Digital creatives content 
such as short videos, reels, infographics, emailers, roll-ups, were provided to 
ensure aggressive social media campaign by Missions/Posts in their respective 
countries.  
3. Collaboration with Social Media Influencers: In an effort to target specific 
demographics, such as students, younger generation, professionals, etc and to 
enhance participation and outreach, XPD Division collaborated with more than 100 
social media influencers around the world to promote the quiz among their followers. 
4. Innovative steps: Innovative measures were introduced to increase participation in 
quiz, such as  

69 
(i) Digital Certificate to all participants regardless of their scores allowing them to 
display their achievements on social media and leave a lasting impression. 
(ii) A new “Challenge Friends!” feature was added to encourage friendly 
competition and make the quiz more enjoyable. Participants sharing the quiz 
with their friends creates a ripple effect, increasing reach and participation.” 
 
vii)   Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora (PCTD). 
 
3.37 PCTD was started in 2005 and under this initiative Ministry provides grants to Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad to support their initiatives aimed at strengthening ties with the Overseas Indian 
Community; to preserve, maintain and showcase their Indian heritage and culture. The scheme aims 
to nourish and strengthen the cultural bonds between India and its Diaspora and to reinforce the 
cultural identity of the persons of Indian origin. The Ministry has provided funds to 66 Missions/Posts 
across the globe under this scheme for CFY for engaging Diaspora to showcase the Indian culture, 
heritage and legacy. The Budget provided under PCTD in BE 2023-24 and 2024-25 was 6 crore and 
in BE 2025-26 it is enhanced to Rs. 6 crore. The funds released to Missions/Posts for financial year 
2023-24 & 2024-25 are .Rs. 3,48,38000 and Rs. 3,80,50000 respectively. 
 
3.38 The Committee enquired about the criteria for selecting PCTD events, and how the impact of 
these events is assessed. The Ministry in their written reply have submitted that they seek proposals 
from Indian Missions/Posts abroad for promoting cultural ties with Indian Diaspora at the start of each 
FY. The Missions/Posts abroad submit their proposals to support initiatives of the Overseas Indian 
community to foster their Indian connect through organization of various Indian festivals, cultural 
events such as food festivals, dance, music etc., Community get-togethers including with the youth 
members etc. The funds disbursed to the Indian Missions/Posts for supporting such activities create a 
positive impact on the Indian Community residing abroad and encourages them to stay connected 
with Indian culture and ethnicity. 
 
3.39 Asked whether there are any plans to increase funding for PCTD to support a wider range of 
Diaspora, the Ministry have submitted that they have projected an amount of Rs. 5 crore in RE for 
CFY under the budget head PCTD for enhancing its disbursement to its Missions and Posts and Rs. 
10 crores in BE 2025-26 for further enhancing support under PCTD to the Indian Diaspora.  
 

70 
3.40 Asked whether the projection of Rs. 10 crore for 66 Missions is sufficient according to the 
Ministry, the Ministry in their written reply have submitted that the Budgetary allocation under the 
Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora (PCTD) has increased by about 30% in FY 2024-25, 
compared to FY 2022-23, in response to the increasing requests from Missions/ Posts abroad to 
support their initiatives to strengthen ties with the Overseas Indian Community. The growing Indian 
community living abroad increasingly expect and await Indian cultural events organized by the Indian 
Embassies and Consulates in their countries, and the Indian Missions and Posts find it difficult to meet 
these expectations with the limited resources available to them.  Therefore, an RE proposal of Rs. 8 
Crores was submitted by the Ministry, but only an amount of Rs. 4 Crores was approved in Revised 
Estimates for current FY 2024-25. Considering the growing demand as well as the limited availability 
of resources, an estimated expenditure of Rs. 10 Crores has been projected under PCTD budget for 
FY 2025-26. 
 
viii) Videsh Sampark Programme- State Outreach  
 
3.41 The Videsh Sampark Programme was started in 2017 as an outreach initiative of the Ministry 
of External Affairs aimed at engaging with the relevant stakeholders within the State Governments. It 
is aimed at laying the platform for organizing brainstorming sessions with State Governments on 
various challenges faced by the Indian Diaspora overseas and to enhance engagement with the 
Indian States to address the same. Under this programme, conferences are held in the State capital 
where MEA officials brief senior State Government officials and other stakeholders in the State about 
the initiatives, programmes and schemes propagated and implemented by the Ministry. The Ministry 
so far has conducted three programmes in the CFY 2024-25 with the states of Bihar and Tripura in 
August, 2024 and with Uttarakhand in September 2024. 
 
3.42 The Committee sought to know how many Videsh Sampark Programmes have been 
conducted by the Ministry since its inception. The Ministry in their written reply have submitted so far 
Videsh Sampark Programmes have been conducted with State Government of Telengana in May, 
2017,  State Government of Maharashtra in August, 2017,  State Government of Kerala in September, 
2017,  State Government of Gujarat in August, 2018, Madhya Pradesh in September, 2018,  State 
Government of Karnataka in February, 2020,  State Government of Punjab and Haryana in June, 

71 
2023,  State Government of Bihar in July, 2024,  State Government of Tripura in July, 2024 and  State 
Government of Uttarakhand in September, 2024. 
 
3.43 Regarding the response from the State Governments to the Programme, the Ministry have 
submitted that these programme have been productive and  benefited the State Government 
Officials/Officers by increasing their understanding and awareness of the initiatives of MEA’s engage 
programmes with Indian Diaspora, challenges faced by overseas Indians, especially workers, women 
and children, and grievance redressal mechanisms, along with other issues concerning trade, 
investment and foreign policy. It has also facilitated better coordination between the Union and the 
State Governments to resolve outstanding issues pertaining to the Indian Diaspora. 
 
3.44 Asked about the challenges being faced by the Ministry in the conduct of the Programme, the 
Ministry have informed that there is no major challenge in conducting VSPs except to find mutually 
convenient dates to organise them in coordination with the State Governments.  
 
3.45 Enquired about how successful the programme has been in achieving its objectives and 
whether any assessment has  been done by the Ministry, the Ministry have stated that the utility of this 
Programme in sensitizing the State Governments on issues pertaining to the overseas Indians cannot 
be overstated.  Nevertheless, Ministry is making continuous efforts to further increase the annual 
number of this Programme in coordination with the State Governments. 
 
3.46 During interaction with the State Diaspora Organisations, the Principal Secretary, Department 
of NRIs’ Affairs, Government of Punjab, submitted as under: 
 “The other issue is that our interaction with MEA is very minimal. Like we had this Pravasi 
Bharat programme, but the State Governments are not associated with it. 
  xxxx 
  There is hardly any s ampark. So, I think there should be more association.  The CM 
was invited, but the State Governments were not invited, neither had we had any area where 
we could put our viewpoints or there was any consultation. So, we feel that there should be 
more interaction between the State Governments at least on the issues concerning the States 
which have large population of NRIs. 
 
3.47 Adding to the above sentiments, Secretary, NORKA submitted as under: 
 “…….., we, the State Governments, feel the pulse of these emigrants because their families 
are here, their contacts are in the State Government. So, we feel the pulse of these NRIs. But 
unfortunately, because emigration is in the Union List, the Government of India generally has 

72 
a very centralized approach to this immigration issues. xxx, … we would like more consultation 
and more contribution from the State Governments when it comes to emigration policies and 
schemes, especially those States which has a large number of emigrants. We feel that Centre 
and States should establish formal platforms and frameworks where we can work together in 
devising schemes as well as policies.” 
 
3.48 When asked about the concerns raised by these State representatives, the Ministry have 
reiterated thatthey have been engaging with the State Governments on various issues pertaining to 
the welfare of NRIs including our migrant workers abroad. and assured that such engagements with 
the State Governments would be continued in future. 
  
3.49 On a specific suggestion to have  regular interactions with State Governments on NRI issues, 
Secretary CPV & OIA informed that concerned Joint Secretary etc. are in touch whenever the State 
Governments have any issues.  
 
3.50 Asked about the concerns raised by the States regarding lack of response or 
acknowledgement from MEA regarding communications from State Governments related to 
international migration, the Ministry in their written reply have submitted thatthe Ministry have regularly 
and timely responded to the communications from various state authorities on the issue of emigration. 
The Overseas Employment Division is also working closely with the 13 state recruiting agencies (RAs) 
for facilitation of emigration through e-Migrate portal.  
 
3.51 They have further submitted that the Protector of Emigrants (PoE) offices located in various 
states communicates regularly with the state government officials on various issues related to 
emigration. PoE office serves as the nodal field office of MEA for matters related to emigration and 
associated grievances and is well-positioned to engage with state police and local administration, 
acting as a vital link between Indian Missions, the emigrant’s family, and local authorities. They work 
closely with the state law enforcement authorities and cybercrime units to tackle fraudulent practices, 
reinforcing the integrity of the emigration process. Currently there are 16 PoE offices in 15 states / 
UTs of India. For better coordination with state governments in the matters of emigration, Ministry has 
been exploring the possibility of opening of PoE offices in those states, where such offices currently 
do not exist. PoE Offices in Odisha, Jharkhand and Tripura have been opened recently.  
 

73 
 
 
ix) One Stop Centres 
3.52 In 2021, Ministry of Women & Child Development and MEA collectively decided to set up 
OSCs in Indian Missions abroad with the objective of providing services like medical assistance, 
police assistance, legal aid, counseling, etc. for the benefit of distressed women. One Stop Centre 
(OSC) Scheme is under Nirbhaya Fund for safety, security and well being of distressed Indian women 
in countries abroad. 
3.53 When asked about the reasons for delay in setting up of One Stop Centres, Secretary (CPV & 
OIA) during the sitting held on 27.11.2024 has submitted as under: 
 “The one stop centre was something which was being talked about for quite some time. Now, 
finally, the Ministry of Women and Child Development have approved and told us to set up 
one stop centres and this approval of their scheme only in October, 2024. So, we have 
immediately approached our concerned missions and asked them to come up with their 
proposals because only once we get the proposals from the missions post and share it with 
the Ministry of Women and Child Development. The funds would be allocated to operate.” 
 
3.54 The Ministry have informed the Committee that the anticipated budgetary requirements have 
already been received from Missions/ Posts abroad, and the proposal is currently under process in the 
Ministry, pending financial concurrence. 
 
3.55 Asked about the expected time line country-wise for setting up of One Stop Centres in Indian 
Missions abroad, the Ministry have informed that the nine Missions for which the One Stop Centres 
(OSC) have been approved to be set up have sent their updated financial proposals for setting up the 
OSCs in their respective countries from the next FY 2025-26. The Ministry expects to launch the 
scheme from the next Financial Year 2025-26. 
 
3.56 During the course of evidence the Committee sought to know the current status of the One 
Stop Centres being set up under Nirbhaya Fund. The Ministry in their written reply have submitted that 
the proposal for setting up seven One Stop Centres with provision of shelter homes in Bahrain, 
Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, UAE, Saudi Arabia (Jeddah and Riyadh) and two OSCs without shelter homes 
in Toronto and Singapore for distressed women were approved by the Empowered Committee under 
the chairmanship of Hon’ble Minister, Women and Child Development on 23.10.2024. The Ministry 
expects to launch the scheme from the next Financial Year 2025-26. 

74 
 
3.57 The Committee sought to know about the stop gap set ups available for distressed Indian 
women in countries abroad. The Ministry in their reply have submitted that Indian Missions and Posts 
abroad are helping distressed Indian women overseas by providing them Boarding and Lodging, 
return air passages, legal assistance, emergency medical care, etc. on means-tested basis through 
the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF).  
 
3.58 Asked what platforms are currently available for distressed Indian women to reach out to the 
Consulate or the Ministry for assistance, it has been submitted that various platforms like e-mail, 
CPGRAMS, MADAD, 24*7 helplines, Open Houses etc that are available for the distressed Indian 
women to reach out to the Consulate/Mission or Ministry for assistance. 
 
3.59 The Committee also sought to know about the measures being taken to enhance awareness 
about these platforms among the Diaspora. The Ministry, in their written reply, have stated that 
theyalong with Missions/Posts abroad, are duly advertising these outreach mechanisms through 
websites, social media platforms etc so that distressed Indian women can reach out to them to seek 
assistance. 
 
x) Engagement with Students 
 
3.60 During the course of various sittings of the Committee, one of the major concerns which arose 
related to safety and security of Indian Students abroad. The Ministry have stated that providing safety 
and security to Indian students abroad is one of the top most priorities of the Government of India. 
Indian Missions/Posts abroad maintain regular contacts with Indian students enrolled in Universities 
abroad  Indian Missions/Posts abroad encourage Indian students to remain connected on a regular 
basis and make all possible efforts to respond to the outstanding issues faced by them on a priority 
basis. The grievances of the students are responded to almost on a real time basis through telephone 
calls, walk-ins, emails, social media, 24x7 emergency helplines, open houses and the MADAD Portal.  
Any complaint received from the Indian students abroad are taken up with the concerned 
University/Institution and the host Government, as the case may be for requisite action. 
 
3.61 The Ministry  collect the data on number of Indian Students studying abroad on yearly basis 

75 
from Missions and Posts abroad. As per data available with the Ministry as on 01.01.2024, there are 
17,79,097 Indian students studying in various Schools/Universities/Tertiary Institutions abroad.  
 
3.62 Asked whether any data is kept regarding the return/stay of students going abroad, the 
Ministry have stated that no such data is maintained by them. 
  
3.63 Indian Missions/Posts cannot keep track of the whereabouts of all Indian students studying 
abroad on a continuous basis. However, Indian Missions/Posts abroad do maintain regular contacts 
with Indian students enrolled in Universities abroad. 
 
3.64 The Committee asked about the details of students from India who have been apprehended 
and lodged in foreign prisons and the steps taken to get their release. The Ministry have submitted 
that Government maintains data of all Indian nationals who get arrested or imprisoned in foreign 
countries. However, separate data for students is not being maintained.  
 
3.65 Regarding students outreach, during the course of evidence on 04.02.2025, Secretary (CPV & 
OIA) apprised the Committee as under: 
 “Most of our embassies have been told that they must conduct programs in the beginning of 
the year so that they go to the various universities, colleges, wherever possible, and meet the 
incoming new students, talk to them, familiarize them with the local laws and requirements. 
So, the process of orientation programs for the students who have joined, by the Mission is an 
ongoing exercise which our Mission/Posts have regularly been doing, and they have been 
told, and often what happens, they conduct these programs and they put it out on the social 
media so that other colleagues who have not been able to join are familiar of what has been 
happening.  
 
3.66 The Ministry further informed that theIndian Missions/Posts abroad invite students enrolled in 
various Universities under their jurisdiction for Welcome ceremonies organized almost as soon as 
they reach the foreign shores for pursuing higher studies. Heads of Indian Missions/Posts also 
organize Orientation Programmes for Indian students and brief them on challenges and threats, if any, 
that they may confront during their stay in the foreign lands and mechanisms to take counter active 
measures. Heads of Indian Missions/Posts and other senior Embassy officials also visit foreign 
Universities and Educational Institutions in their respective countries of accreditation to regularly 

76 
interact with Indian students and Indian Students’ Associations to address their safety and welfare 
related issues. 
 
3.67 Regarding SoPs  in place for student outreach by our missions abroad, the Ministry in their 
written reply have submitted that currently, there is no SOP regarding student outreach by our 
Missions, but Indian Missions and Posts are mandated to actively engage with Indian students 
abroad, as described in the following point. 
 
3.68 Concerned about safety of Indian students especially with the growing number of deaths 
reported especially in the US, the Committee enquired from the Ministry of the action being taken in 
the matter. The Ministry in their written reply have submitted as under: 
 “The safety and security of Indians abroad is one of the foremost priorities for the Ministry. Our 
Missions and Posts remain vigilant and closely monitor any such untoward incident. Such 
incidents are immediately taken up with the concerned authorities of the host country to 
ensure that the cases are properly investigated and the perpetrators are punished. These 
issues are also raised during meetings with Government officials of the countries concerned, 
including at the highest levels as appropriate. Any issue pertaining to Indians abroad is dealt 
by Missions/Posts on priority basis and distressed Indian nationals are provided all possible 
consular assistance, including emergency medical care and boarding/lodging, whenever 
required. The Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) is set up in Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad for assisting overseas Indian nationals in distress situations on a means tested basis in 
deserving cases. The support extended under ICWF also includes transportation of mortal 
remains of Indian nationals who passed away abroad”. 
 
3.69 As per the data received from Indian Missions/Posts abroad, during the last three years, 14 
Indian students died in foreign countries due to violence/attacks. 
 
xi) Knowledge Sharing Programmes 
 
3.70 The Government has launched various knowledge sharing programmes like VAJRA Faculty 
Scheme, PRABHASS and VAIBHAV to amplify India’s scientific and technical knowledge through the 
contributions of its Diaspora community overseas. 
 
VAJRA Faculty Scheme 
3.71 The Visiting Advanced Joint Research (VAJRA) Faculty Scheme taps the expertise of 
International Faculty/ scientists/ technologists including NRIs and PIOs/OCIs in the highly competitive 

77 
areas of research and development by offering them adjunct/ visiting faculty positions in Indian 
Institutions/Universities. 
 
Pravasi Bharatiya Academic and Scientific Sampark (PRABHASS) 
3.72 Pravasi Bharatiya Academic and Scientific Sampark (PRABHASS) is an initiative to develop a 
database and a virtual platform to bring on board the Global Indian S&T Community to address the 
domestic social challenges/problems.  
 
Vaishvik Bharatiya Vaigyanik (VAIBHAV) fellowship programme 
3.73 The Vaishvik Bharatiya Vaigyanik (VAIBHAV) fellowship programme aims to foster 
collaboration between Indian Diaspora scientists and Indian academic and research institutions. All 
such schemes promote India’s global positive image and influence by leveraging its Diaspora 
community. 
 
xii) Assessment/ Evaluation of Diaspora Engagement Programmes 
 
3.74 The Committee sought to know about the impact of the various policies and programs and the 
feedbacks received from the Diaspora on the same. The Ministry in their written reply have submitted 
that the Government is in regular touch with the Indian Diaspora across the globe. Indian Diaspora 
members as well as Missions/ Posts abroad from time to time provide feedback on various Diaspora 
engagement programmes. The general feedback from the Indian Diaspora on Ministry programmes of 
engagement with them has been positive, which is evident from various social media platforms. They 
have further informed that the feedback of the participants in each of the Diaspora Engagement 
Programmes are examined seriously and diligently to continuously improve such schemes. Such 
feedback also contributes to policy making at various levels.   
 
3.75 Elaborating on the impact of the Diaspora engagement programmes of the Ministry, Secretary 
(CPV & OIA) during the sitting held on 27.11.2024 submitted as under: 
 “…. the xxx initiatives have helped the Ministry to nurture the connection of the Indian 
Diaspora with their homeland and enabled them to act as cultural ambassadors fostering 
goodwill and strengthening India's global influence” 
 

78 
3.76 The Committee further enquired as to whether the Ministry has carried out any assessment or 
evaluation of these programs. The Ministry in their written reply have submitted thatan impact 
assessment study was conducted by the Indian Institute of Mass Communication on media 
awareness campaigns for safe and legal migration, run by the Government. Elaborating further they 
have stated that based on the observations and recommendations contained in the Impact 
Assessment Study of mass media campaign on safe and legal migration, Ministry has formulated a 
multi-pronged approach to improve upon this programme.   
 
3.77 Elaborating, the Secretary (CPV & OIA), during the sitting held on 27.11.2024 stated as under: 
 “As far as the evaluation of the programmes are concerned, we look at the success in terms of 
the participation. For example, in the scholarship programmes, the number of participants that 
have joined, the numbers are increasing. We feel that the programme for the Diaspora 
Children's Scholarship Programme is somewhat successful. As far as the “Know India 
Programme” is concerned, xxx, in three months, we had three batches coming and, in each 
batch, we had 40 participants. We get more applicants but we are not able to take more than 
40 because of administrative constraints. The kind of feedback we get from each one of them, 
they get so emotionally connected with the country, with the mother land of their forefathers. 
We feel that this is one of the most successful initiatives of the Ministry, and every year, we 
are trying to have at least 10 batches to cover 400 to 450.  
  xxx, the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas, xxx, is now a biennial event. We get 3000 to 4000 
participants who come for the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas almost every year. This year, the 
registrations have started and we are seeing registrations are taking place. So, it is one of the 
most famous and popular programmes that connect the Diaspora between themselves and 
get a huge participation. Independently, we have not undertaken any evaluation. xxxx. If I look 
at the utilisation of the budget and the participation that we see, xxx these two-three 
programmes, I would say that the programmes are successful.”  
 
3.78 Asked whether regular assessments or evaluation are being carried out by the Ministry in 
respect of other programmes and schemes such as Videsh Sampark Programme, Pravasi Bharatiya 
Bima Yojana, PDOT, Know India Programme etc., the Ministry have submitted as under: 
 “Know India Programme is one of the oldest and the most successful programmes of the 
Government that facilitates direct engagement of the Government with the young Indian 
Diaspora, most of whom visit their forefathers’ motherland for the first time under this scheme. 
The response of the young Diaspora towards the Programme has been exceptionally positive. 
Many of the KIP beneficiaries continue to remain connected even after the end of the 
programme and positively recommend KIP to their friends. A KIP alumni database prepared 
by the Ministry has also been shared with Missions/ Posts abroad for continued engagement 
with these Diaspora members to ensure wider outreach of the Government of India overseas. 

79 
 Through Videsh Sampark Programme, Ministry has been engaging with the State 
Governments on various issues pertaining to the welfare of NRIs including our migrant 
workers abroad. These programme, conducted with the State Governments, have been 
productive and benefited the State Government Officials/Officers by increasing their 
understanding and awareness of the initiatives of MEA’s engagement programmes with Indian 
Diaspora, challenges faced by overseas Indians, especially workers, women and children, and 
grievance redressal mechanisms, along with other issues concerning trade, investment and 
foreign policy. Ministry has observed that this Programme has facilitated better coordination 
between the Union and the State Governments to resolve outstanding issues pertaining to the 
Indian Diaspora. 
 
3.79 On being asked about the initiatives/steps being taken by the Ministry and the Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad to ensure wider dissemination of the various Schemes benefiting the Indian 
Diaspora, the Ministry in their written reply have submitted that Indian Missions/Posts abroad are 
making all out efforts to disseminate and popularize the programmes for the welfare of the Indian 
Diaspora through their websites, social media handles including Facebook and Twitter, community 
Whatsapp channels, virtual newsletters etc. Heads of Missions also hold meetings with the office 
bearers of the Indian Associations and prominent members of the Diaspora. Indian Associations have 
been requested to promote the RISHTA portal. Missions and Posts have also taken the initiative to 
explain the utility of the RISHTA portal to the India Diaspora during various community interaction 
such as during Hindi Divas, National Days, celebration of ICCR Foundation Day,  ITEC Day, various 
Indian festivals, etc. The Ministry have informed that the response to the Portal has been picking up 
steadily and overseas Indians have now started interacting with the Missions through the Portal. They 
have further submitted that the portal is sought to be further tweaked to improve its functionality based 
on the suggestions received from stakeholders. 

80 
CHAPTER-IV 
 
PORTALS FOR ENGAGEMENT WITH DIASPORA 
 
A. GLOBAL PRAVASI RISHTA PORTAL 
 
The Ministry of External Affairs launched the Global Pravasi Rishta Portal, a platform connecting 
Pravasis which include NRI, PIO & OCI card holders, with Government of India through the Missions 
and Posts abroad on 30 December 2020.  
 
4.2 It is a two-way communication channel between the Government of India and the Indian 
Diaspora abroad and can be used for dissemination of information and creation of database of 
Diaspora based on voluntary registration. Currently, the Global Pravasi Rishta Portal is not 
functioning, as it is being merged with the other portals of the Ministry. 
 
4.3 Regarding the non-functioning of the Global Pravasi Rishta Portal, the Ministry have submitted 
that the Global Pravasi Rishta Portal has been temporarily suspended due to malware attack 
susceptibility. The Ministry is working on the restoration of the Portal, or creation of an alternate 
application with similar scope at the earliest. One of the projected options for the same is merging the 
functions with other portals dealing with Diaspora engagement programmes of the Ministry. 
 
4.4 Elaborating on the issue, Secretary (CPV & OIA), during the sitting held on 27.11.2024 
submitted as under: 
“We have 3-4 portals related to the Pravasi Bharatiya. We are undergoing a tendering process 
through which we will identify one company that will bring all these portals under one umbrella. 
So, it is not that the portals are going. The portals will be back very soon. As you know, it is a 
tender process which one has to go through to get all the approvals and we award the 
contract. So, the whole thing is going to come under one umbrella, but the same portals will 
again remain. Therefore, I want to assure the Members that the portals remain and the portals 
are not going. It is just a kind of a technical arrangement that instead of being scattered we 
bring it under one umbrella.” 
 
4.5 Asked to provide the timeline for the completion of this merger and the expected re-launch, the 
Ministry in their written reply have submitted that the portal is expected to be re-launched within one 

81 
year. They have informed that Diaspora members abroad will however be able to register on the 
websites of Indian Missions/ Posts of their concerned jurisdiction. 
 
B. MADAD (Consular Services Management System) 
 
4.6 As part of the good governance initiative by the Government, an online comprehensive 
grievances redressal portal - MADAD - was launched in February 2015. It is accessible to all Indian 
nationals abroad in distress, including to those who have been stranded overseas due to various 
reasons. MADAD can be accessed through website (www.madad.gov.in) or through mobile app. All 
Indian Missions and Posts abroad and the MEA’s Branch Secretariats in Chennai, Guwahati, 
Hyderabad, Kolkata and Mumbai are linked to this portal for consular grievance tracking and follow-
up. Indian Missions/ Posts abroad take action on the complaints and update the status regularly. The 
MADAD Portal is regularly monitored at various levels. 
 
4.7 The grievances being handled in MADAD comprise of a range of consular issues 
including repatriation, transportation of mortal remain, death compensation, work related problems, 
imprisonment cases, marital disputes, whereabouts unknown cases, consular services, passport 
issues, court cases, students issues etc. Multilingual Call Centres (Under PBSK), Student 
Registration, Prisoners Module, Integration with the portal “eMigrate”, Integration with State 
Governments in India, Module for assistance through Indian Community Welfare Fund, etc. have been 
added to the scope of the portal. 
 
4.8 Asked in how many languages the MADAD portal can be accessed, the Ministry have 
informed that MADAD is available in bilingual form and can be accessed in Hindi and English 
languages. 
 
4.9 The Committee sought know how the MADAD portal help people in distress, especially 
students, if a student is unable to file a complaint in portal. The Ministry have submitted that all Indian 
nationals, whether in India or abroad, can register their grievances in MADAD Portal and . the 
relatives/ friends can file grievances on behalf of Indian national.  
 

82 
4.10 All grievances registered on the portal are automatically transferred to the concerned Mission/ 
Post who take up the matters with the concerned foreign government and its agencies for redressal of 
the matter.  
 
4.11 Regarding efforts being made for timely disposal of public grievances, the Ministry have 
submitted that special efforts are being made to resolve the issues pertaining to MADAD Grievances 
by regular follow ups through e-mails, telephones and reviews/reminders on MADAD Portal itself. 
Apart from this, coordination with concerned Missions/Posts abroad is also maintained for time bound 
disposal of different grievances. Further to it, direct registration of grievances on MADAD Portal, 
Mobile App for MADAD is also available on iOS, Android and Windows platforms. Twitter Sewa 
(@meaMADAD) was also launched in March 2017 to regularly manage and promptly respond to 
different issues pertaining to Indian Citizen. 
 
4.12 The Ministry have given the following details regarding the statistics of grievances handled on 
MADAD portal: 
 
Grievance 
Received 
Grievances 
Resolved 
Pending Disposal % 
92,874 88,887 3,987 95.70 
 
 
4.13 The Country wise redressal status of the grievances is as under: 
 
S. No. Country Grievances 
Received 
Grievances 
Resolved 
Pending 
1 Afghanistan 152 131 21 
2 Algeria 57 51 6 
3 Angola 95 92 3 
4 Argentina 12 12 0 
5 Armenia 165 150 15 
6 Australia 895 814 81 
7 Austria 50 45 5 
8 Azerbaijan 37 35 2 
9 Bahrain 1723 1688 35 
10 Bangladesh 215 210 5 

83 
11 Belarus 22 20 2 
12 Belgium 73 65 8 
13 Bhutan 35 33 2 
14 Botswana 17 17 0 
15 Brazil 35 34 1 
16 Brunei 67 63 4 
17 Bulgaria 6 4 2 
18 Burkina Faso 6 4 2 
19 Cabo Verde 1 1 0 
20 Cambodia 210 188 22 
21 Cameroon 19 16 3 
22 Canada 1401 1330 71 
23 Chad 0 0 0 
24 Chile 7 7 0 
25 China 531 513 18 
26 Colombia 21 19 2 
27 Cote Divoire 80 76 4 
28 Croatia 19 18 1 
29 Cuba 6 5 1 
30 Cyprus 52 50 2 
31 Czech Republic 39 39 0 
32 Dpr Korea 2 2 0 
33 Democratic 
Republic Of 
Congo 
134 115 19 
34 Denmark 44 40 4 
35 Djibouti 7 7 0 
36 Dominican 
Republic 
1 1 0 
37 Egypt 51 45 6 
38 Equatorial Guinea 16 15 1 
39 Eritrea 1 1 0 
40 Estonia 0 0 0 
41 Ethiopia 161 155 6 
42 Fiji 31 31 0 
43 Finland 37 35 2 
44 France 290 282 8 
45 Germany 589 563 26 
46 Ghana 122 117 5 
47 Greece 51 44 7 

84 
48 Guatemala 13 13 0 
49 Guinea 7 4 3 
50 Guyana 32 26 6 
51 Hungary 40 38 2 
52 Iceland 11 11 0 
53 Indonesia 238 232 6 
54 Iran 398 389 9 
55 Iraq 335 321 14 
56 Ireland 99 94 5 
57 Israel 86 84 2 
58 Italy 347 324 23 
59 Jamaica 44 41 3 
60 Japan 179 173 6 
61 Jordan 114 111 3 
62 Kazakhstan 52 43 9 
63 Kenya 154 150 4 
64 Kuwait 5905 5650 255 
65 Kyrgyzstan 118 116 2 
66 Lao PDR 11 10 1 
67 Lebanon 75 73 2 
68 Liberia 4 0 4 
69 Libya 174 138 36 
70 Lithuania 3 2 1 
71 Madagascar 30 25 5 
72 Malawi 18 18 0 
73 Malaysia 6178 5890 288 
74 Maldives 273 265 8 
75 Mali 18 18 0 
76 Malta 16 14 2 
77 Mauritania 1 0 1 
78 Mauritius 81 78 3 
79 Mexico 44 44 0 
80 Mongolia 1 1 0 
81 Morocco 9 9 0 
82 Mozambique 57 55 2 
83 Myanmar 154 124 30 
84 Namibia 4 4 0 
85 Nepal 253 235 18 
86 Netherlands 147 146 1 
87 New Zealand 310 303 7 

85 
88 Niger 2 2 0 
89 Nigeria 435 412 23 
90 Norway 36 35 1 
91 Oman 3537 3391 146 
92 Pakistan 308 279 29 
93 Palestine 4 2 2 
94 Panama 23 22 1 
95 Papua New 
Guinea 
10 10 0 
96 Paraguay 0 0 0 
97 Peru 13 13 0 
98 Philippines 279 258 21 
99 Poland 144 138 6 
100 Portugal 145 112 33 
101 Qatar 14193 14085 108 
102 Republic Of 
Korea 
55 53 2 
103 Romania 46 45 1 
104 Russian 
Federation 
284 250 34 
105 Rwanda 11 11 0 
106 Sao Tome And 
Principe 
3 3 0 
107 Saudi Arabia 31272 29593 1679 
108 Senegal 61 59 2 
109 Serbia 18 16 2 
110 Seychelles 39 38 1 
111 Sierra Leone 14 13 1 
112 Singapore 829 810 19 
113 Slovakia 4 3 1 
114 Slovenia 6 5 1 
115 South Africa 204 184 20 
116 South Sudan 16 16 0 
117 Spain 128 124 4 
118 Sri Lanka 224 211 13 
119 Sudan 104 100 4 
120 Suriname 29 27 2 
121 Swaziland 3 1 2 
122 Sweden 82 73 9 
123 Switzerland 68 63 5 

86 
124 Syria 9 5 4 
125 Taiwan 19 15 4 
126 Tajikistan 14 13 1 
127 Tanzania 161 158 3 
128 Thailand 404 373 31 
129 The Republic Of 
Congo 
6 5 1 
130 Togo 7 3 4 
131 Trinidad And 
Tobago 
13 6 7 
132 Tunisia 6 6 0 
133 Turkey 89 77 12 
134 Turkmenistan 2 2 0 
135 Usa 3537 3370 167 
136 Uganda 102 96 6 
137 Ukraine 223 214 9 
138 United Arab 
Emirates 
10098 9830 268 
139 United Kingdom 1215 1171 44 
140 Uzbekistan 54 45 9 
141 Venezuela 12 12 0 
142 Vietnam 83 79 4 
143 Yemen 90 87 3 
144 Zambia 71 52 19 
145 Zimbabwe 14 13 1 
 Total 92324 88544 3780 
 
 
4.14 Noting that a large number of grievances are still pending in the Gulf Countries, Australia etc.  
the Committee sought to know about the reason for such pendency and the mechanism through 
which the Ministry proposes to resolve these. The Ministry in their reply have submitted that the 
number of grievances registered for a particular country generally is in proportion of the number of 
Indians residing in that country. As Gulf countries and Australia have a large number of Indians living 
and working there, it is expected that the registration of grievances and number of unresolved 
grievances at any point of time would be higher there as compared to other countries. Missions/Posts 
take all possible measures, within the ambit of local laws, to resolve the grievances. 
 

87 
4.15 In respect of Gulf countries, a total of 67132 grievances have been registered on MADAD 
portal since its beginning while 64629 of these have been resolved which translates to 96.27% 
resolution. For Australia, a total of 914 grievances have been registered on MADAD portal since its 
beginning while 858 of these have been resolved which translates to 93.87% resolution.    
 
4.16 Elaborating further the Ministry have submitted that one important aspect of these grievances 
about the requests registered on the two portals (MADAD and CPGRAMS) and also directly received 
by Missions/Posts is that these relate to foreign entities. Prima facie, most of the grievances are not 
directly related to consular service being provided by the Mission/Post but relates to problems faced 
by Indians with a foreign government, foreign employer or foreign university etc. Missions/Posts have 
to take up the matter through the host government and its agencies for resolution as per the law of the 
land. 
 
4.17 Many pending cases on MADAD Portal are due to incomplete information submitted by the 
complainants, non-cooperative compliance of foreign sponsors/employers/agencies etc. There are 
cases in which the role of Indian Mission is limited due to matter being sub-judice or those involving 
police investigation etc at the local level. These complexities contribute to a prolonged resolution time. 
In few cases, the relatives of Indian nationals, imprisoned for committing a crime abroad, file cases on 
MADAD and request for repatriation of their relative.  Since these Indians are released after 
completing their sentences, there is no early resolution of the case. 
 
4.18 The Missions/ Posts manage to resolve substantial number of cases through direct 
communication with the foreign parties involved and mediation with relevant agencies involved in 
specific cases etc.  In addition to this,  Missions frequently communicate with the Ministry of Foreign 
Affairs (MFA) of concerned country through Note Verbale (official communications through letters, 
mails etc. wherever necessary). In some of the cases, Missions also provide legal assistance to 
Indians through list of empanelled lawyers (list of which is available on Mission’s website). Since in a 
vast majority of cases filed on MADAD, the applicant has a grievance with foreign employer, foreign 
government agencies or foreign educational institutes and not with this Ministry or Indian Embassy, 
the resolution of the cases take time. 
 

88 
4.19 The Committee sought to know about the average time taken for redressal of a grievance on 
the MADAD Portal, the Ministry in their reply have submitted that the time taken for redressal of a 
grievance registered on the MADAD Portal depends on a number of factors including the response 
time from foreign employer and foreign governments. As per standard procedure, grievances received 
on portal are actively followed up and responded to on high-priority.  MADAD has an inbuilt 
mechanism for identifying and escalating cases where the response in not received in time. 
Concerned Mission and Post abroad takes all necessary steps to resolve these cases as soon as 
possible.  While the cases related to repatriation and transportation of mortal remains can be resolved 
in time, those relating to release or return of imprisoned Indians are difficult to resolve as they have to 
complete the legal process in foreign countries. 
 
4.20 Elaborating further, the Secretary (CPV & OIA) during the sitting held on 27.11.2024 have 
submitted that: 
“As far as the MADAD portal is concerned, if you look at the rate of resolution, most of the 
cases are resolved.  Unless there is a real problem and one is involved in some judicial 
process and requires some kind of an approval of the local Government, that is where things 
get delayed in this process.  Otherwise, the platform is such that it is monitored at all levels.  
We move very fast and try to resolve this.  Usually, experience shows that wherever there is a 
judicial process somewhere involved, the things have got delayed and we have not been able 
to resolve the problem.” 
  
4.21 On being pointed out that almost 4000 cases is not a small number, the Secretary submitted 
that it is a global picture and not confined to a single country.   
 
C. CENTRALISED PUBLIC GRIEVANCE REDRESS AND MONITORING SYSTEM 
(CPGRAMS) 
 
4.22 Parallel to the above mentioned MADAD Platform, the Centralized Public Grievance Redress 
and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) portal has also been designed and developed by the Department 
of Administrative eforms& Public Grievances (DARPG). It was launched in June 2007. The 
Government of India has made every effort to systematize the nature of grievance redressal through 
various ways, i.e. feedback, letters, registered communications, emails, etc. These inputs may be 
submitted by mail, over the Internet, or in person. 
 

89 
4.23 The “Grievance Redressal” primarily includes the receipt and processing of complaints 
received from citizens in respect of matters related to Ministry of External Affairs in order to provide 
services more effectively and in time bound manner. After examination of the grievance, corrective 
action is taken by the PSP Division, in coordination with the concerned Division/Mission/Post. 
 
4.24 Joint Secretary (PSP) is the nodal officer in respect of the public grievances received on 
CPGRAMS portal. The Ministry have informed that the Public Grievances are received through six 
modes on CPGRAMS: 
 
i. President’s Secretariat: Grievances received through President Secretariat’s Portal. 
ii. PM’s Office: Grievances received from PM’s Office. 
iii. Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances: Grievances received on 
the portal of Department of Administrative Reforms and Public Grievances. 
iv. Directorate of Public Grievances: Grievances received on the portal of Directorate of 
Public Grievances in the Cabinet Secretariat of Government of India. 
v. Pension Cases: Grievances of pension related cases in respect of CPO Cadre and 
MEA officials are received at this portal. 
vi. Direct Receipts: Grievances received directly from the public. 
 
 
4.25 Being the Nodal Agency, DARPG, monitors the grievances of various Ministries/ Departments 
including MEA and issues the necessary directions in respect of timely disposal of the grievances 
received on CPGRAMS portal during their monthly review meetings. The maximum time limit for 
redressal of a grievance is 21 days. Grievance redressal is a continuous exercise so timely disposal of 
public matters is ensured. 
 
4.26 As regards the efforts being made for timely disposal of public grievances and clearing the 
pendency for smooth redressal and satisfaction of Indian Citizens who are in a distress abroad, the 
Ministry has submitted that dedicated Special Campaigns are being launched every year since 2021 
for clearing the pendency and redressal of issues. Special Campaign 4.0 had been launched for the 
period between 02nd to 31st October, 2024. During the Special Campaign, Grievances had been 
marked for disposal during the first phase i.e. 16th to 30th September, 2024. Subsequently, dedicated 
efforts have been put forward for disposal of these grievances and clearing the pendency and 
informing the grievants though Mails, reminders on CPGRAMS Portal, telephone etc. The Ministry 
have informed that during the course of the campaign i.e. 02-31 October, 2024 there have been 264% 

90 
rate of disposal for marked/ pending grievances. Till 12.11.2024, there are only 280 grievances 
pending from Mission/Post’s end. 
Grievance 
Received 
Grievances 
Resolved 
Pending Disposal % 
19,956 19651 285 99 
 
4.27 Asked about the difference between the MADAD Platform and the Centralized Public 
Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) portal the Ministry in their written reply have 
submitted as under: 
“Centralized Public Grievance Redress and Monitoring System (CPGRAMS) is an online 
platform available to the citizens 24x7 to lodge their grievances to the public authorities on any 
subject related to service delivery. On CPGRAMS portal ; citizens raise their grievances for 
early resolution related to services rendered by the concern various Government Departments. 
On this portal citizens can raise their problems, grievances, or pleas to the Central govt. and 
State Government Ministries and Departments. An applicant registers a grievance through 
CPGRAMS portal (www.pg.portal.gov.in) and tracks the status online. It is a single portal 
connected to all the Ministries/Departments of Government of India and States. The 
CPGRAMS portal has been designed and developed by the Department of Administrative 
Reforms & Public Grievances (DARPG). It was launched in June 2007. DARPG is the nodal 
Ministry to monitor the status of the grievance redressal in the CPGRAMS portal by the 
Ministries/Departments. The grievances received in the Department are forwarded to the 
Ministries/Departments concerned. Redressal of grievances is done by respective 
Ministries/Departments in a decentralized manner. During the year 2024 till 13 Dec 2024 
Ministry of External Affairs(MEA) has received 14,840 grievances out of which 14173 
grievances were disposed in timely manner with satisfactory rate of 96%.  
 
MADAD is an online portal run by the Ministry of External Affairs for Indians residing outside 
India to register online grievances pertaining to the Consular Services offered by the Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad. Basically MADAD portal provides the support in resolution of the 
various kind of problems faced by the Indian Diaspora living abroad such as Asylum Cases, 
Imprisoned Abroad, Mortal Remains, No Obligation to Return India (NORI), Repatriation, 
Seafarer Issues, Students Studying abroad their issues, OCI Card etc.  Consular Services 
Management System (MADAD) through Indian Missions/Post extends their help to resolve the 
above mentioned issues of the Indian Citizens living abroad. MADAD empowers Indian 
citizens to search Missions / Posts in foreign countries for registering their concern. Indian 
Diaspora can register and track grievances pertaining to the various Consular Services offered 
by the Indian Embassies at their portal on www.madad.gov.in. 
 
4.28 Asked whether presence of multiple portals for grievance redressal of Indians abroad, can 
have an adverse effect of delaying grievance redressal due duplicate forums, the Ministry in their 

91 
written reply have submitted that while CPGRAMS portal deals with the grievances received from 
general public residing in the country and it basically handles the various grievances received with 
regard to the deficiencies in the various types of services rendered by the Government Departments 
i.e. Central or State, the MADAD portal is an extended hand of the MEA exclusively for the Indian 
Nationals living abroad to help them in foreign countries.  
 
4.29 Asked about the percentage of increase of grievances registered in the portal during the last 
three years, the Ministry have furnished the following data: 
 
Public Grievances received in the CPGRAMS portal 
Year Received Disposed Percentage of 
Increase 
2022 18066 16999 -9% 
2023 21739 20233 20% 
2024 17863 17092 -17% 
    
  
 
D. E-SANAD SERVICES 
 
4.30 E-Sanad portal was launched in year 2017. E-Sanad is an electronic service delivery platform 
for apostille and attestation of documents issued by Government of India aiming at contactless service 
to people with an objective to facilitate the applicants to file application (upload documents online, pay 
applicable fee online) on the portal and Ministry or RPO/Branch Secretariats can download the 
papers, verify it and paste apostille stickers or put attestation stamp, seal and signature and send 
them back to the applicant by Speed Post. Since its inception, a total 16,47,399 documents have been 
successfully processed by the Ministry so far and numbers are steadily increasing on year-to-year 
basis. As on date, more than 650 government institutions/ educational institutes are on-board with e-
Sanad portal through digi-locker as well as backward integration.  
 
4.31 The e-Sanad portal of the Ministry of External Affairs is a central portal and an applicant 
residing in any part of the country can access the portal and upload his/ her pre-authenticated 
documents online which are processed at New Delhi and sent back to the applicants by affixing 
Apostille sticker or attestation (as desired by the applicant) through Speed Post. The same 

92 
mechanism is also available to the any applicant abroad, where he or she can upload the pre 
authenticated document which will be delivered at the given address in India. As regards expansion of 
e-Sanad in states, it may be noted that 15 Passport Offices as well as 4 Branch Secretariat are also 
providing these services to the applicants making e-Sanad a pan-India platform.  
 
4.32 Another aspect is that the applicants require authentication to be done from Ministry of 
External Affairs, New Delhi, as the same is a requirement by the host country and hence these 
services are applied at CPV Division, New Delhi. Our Missions/ Posts abroad also perform notarial 
functions where the Indian nationals can avail attestation/ authentication services in the most 
expeditious manner (same day in all cases except where documents are sent by post). Online 
appointment systems are also available to these applicants through the e-Sewa portal which is 
operational in all Indian Missions/Posts abroad since Nov 2020. 
 
4.33 Asked about time taken by the Ministry to process apostille and attestation of documents 
submitted under E-Sanad portal, the Ministry have submitted that Usually, applications are processed 
within 7 working days once such documents reach MEA. It has been further stated that the duration 
for end-to-end services will vary depending on the time taken by individual Document Issuing 
Authorities (DIA) in verifying the documents submitted by the applicant 
4.34 Asked regarding the details of RPOs/Branch Secretariats providing E-Sanad services pan 
India, the Ministry have furnished the following data : 
 
 As on 18 December 2024, the following RPOs are providing E-Sanad services pan India: 
 
Sl No RPOs/Branch Secretariats providing services on E-Sanad 
1 RPO Ahmedabad 
2 RPO Bangalore 
3 RPO Bhopal 
4 RPO Chandigarh 
5 RPO Kochi 
6 RPO Goa 
7 RPO Lucknow 
8 RPO Thiruvananthapuram 
9 RPO/Branch Secretariat, Mumbai 
10 RPO/Branch Secretariat, Kolkata 
12 RPO/Branch Secretariat, Guwahati 
13 CPV Division, MEA, New Delhi 

93 
PART - II 
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS OF THE COMMITTEE 
 
1. Conversion of PIO Cards to OCI Cards 
The Committee note that a Person of Indian Origin (PIO) is one who is presently holding a 
foreign passport and whose any of the ancestors was an Indian national while a Non-Resident 
Indian (NRI) is a citizen of Indian holding an Indian Passport and is ordinarily residing outside 
India. An OCI Cardholder  is a person registered as Overseas Citizen of India (OCI) under 
section 7A of The Citizenship Act, 1955 and enjoys benefits like multiple entry, multi-purpose 
lifelong visa to visit India  and parity with NRIs in financial, economic and educational fields 
except in the acquisition of agricultural or plantation properties. The Committee further note 
that the Scheme of PIO cards has been discontinued since 2015 and all PIO cardholders 
(handwritten and machine-readable) have been advised to convert their PIO card to OCI card 
before December 31, 2025. While appreciating the merger of PIO and OCI Cards, the Committee 
note that despite a decade of discontinuation of the PIO Scheme, there are still a large number 
of PIO Card holders who are yet to convert them to OCI cards.  As per available data, only 
51,58,262 OCI cards have been issued so far. Considering the fact that there are over 19.57 
million PIOs spread across the globe, the response under the OCI Card Scheme has been slow 
and the number of OCI cards issued is far inadequate. The Committee, hence, feel that there is 
an urgent  need to  dispel any apprehensions that the overseas Indians may have in this 
regard and urge the Ministry to take proactive steps towards wider dissemination of the 
information that the process is not automatic and the PIO Card holders need to  formally apply 
for an OCI card to receive a physical, machine-readable document as handwritten PIO cards 
are no longer accepted for travel due to international standards. Concerted efforts through 
social media platforms, Diaspora organisations, State Governments and other stakeholders 

94 
may be taken so as to ensure the completion of conversion of all PIO cards to OCI cards by the 
deadline of 31st December 2025.  
(Recommendation No. 1) 
 
2. Revocation / Denial of OCI Cards  
The Committee understand that the OCI card issuance/revocation falls under the purview of 
MHA, while its implementation is done primarily through Indian Missions/Posts abroad. The 
Committee have come across concerns about revocation of OCI Cards, rejection of OCI Cards, 
denial of travel permission at airports, etc. from several quarters. In this regard, the Committee 
are of the view that the OCI Card carries with it an implicit promise of multiple entry, multi-
purpose lifelong visa to visit India, etc. and actions dishonoring the same on flimsy reasons 
would damage the country’s international image as a welcoming nation for its Diaspora and 
potentially impact economic decisions/discourage investment. The Committee, hence, desire 
that Ministry of External Affairs (MEA), in coordination with the Ministry of Home Affairs (MHA), 
may chalk out procedural safeguards to ensure clear communication channels including 
regular updates on requests made, sharing of relevant information on suspected violations 
and collaboration on the decision making. They may also ensure consistency and due process 
while revoking/denying OCI Cards, with the MHA primarily handling the legal aspects and the 
MEA managing international communication.  
(Recommendation No. 2) 
 
3. Working on an Agreed Definition for ‘Non-Resident Indians’ 
When it comes to Non-Resident Indians (NRIs), the Committee find that a common definition 
is lacking and multiple definitions are in vogue across the country or even between States.  
It is also different amongst the various Acts of the Government of India. The Committee are 

95 
of the view that multiplicity of definitions has a potential for multiple interpretations which in 
turn impacts the decision making process and accessibility of services. The Committee feel 
that there is an urgent need for a common definition of the term across the nation to avoid 
confusions. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry of External Affairs work 
towards proposing a common definition for the term ‘Non-Resident Indians’ which would be 
binding on all Acts as well as the State Legislations in tandem with other stakeholder 
Ministries/Departments.  
(Recommendation No. 3) 
4. Aadhaar Facilitation for Overseas Indians  
The Committee note that Overseas Indians are facing difficulties in getting Aadhaar Cards in 
the country. The Committee have been given to understand that UIDAI, which is the competent 
authority in the matter has not made any arrangement for setting up Aadhaar facilitation 
centers outside India. Today, in India, Aadhaar is an essential document providing a portable 
proof of identity verifiable through Aadhaar authentication on-line anytime, anywhere. An  
Aadhaar Card is an essential document for literally every form of registration and transaction 
facilitating access to various services like banking, property transactions, healthcare and 
government benefits, especially when the card holders reside in the country for extended 
periods, while also streamlining processes like tax filing and KYC verification. The Committee 
are of the considered view that extending facility of Aadhaar cards to Overseas Indians will 
promote greater integration of Indians living abroad into the Indian society. The extension of 
the facility of Aadhaar cards to Overseas Indians will also align with the goal of creating a 
unified identity system in India, enabling them to participate fully in the country's economic 
and social activities while maintaining their non-resident status. The Committee, therefore, 

96 
urge the Ministry to work in coordination with UIDAI in identifying the bottlenecks involved, 
including procedural difficulties, technical grievances etc., and resolve the same.   
(Recommendation No. 4) 
 
5. Voting Rights to NRIs 
 The Committee are aware that through an amendment to Section 20A of the 
‘Representation of People Act 1950’ in 2010, NRIs have been conferred limited voting rights. 
As per existing norms, NRIs who have enrolled in the voters list have to be present physically 
to cast their votes. Since travelling to India is an onerous task considering the logistical and 
practical problems involved, only a few among the registered voters come down for voting. 
The Committee feel that due to limitations in exercising their franchise, the issues/concerns of 
NRIs are being completely side-lined from electoral politics. The Committee are given to 
understand that the matter regarding grant of voting rights to NRIs is currently pending with 
the Ministry of Law and Justice (MoLJ). The Committee are further given to understand that the 
issue will also need amendments in the Representation of People Act 1950’ and 1951 as well 
as engagement with national political parties before implementation. The Committee feel sad 
that despite being one of the largest emigrant populations in the world, direct involvement in 
India’s electoral politics is limited for our NRIs though the right to vote is universally 
recognised as an important ingredient of a vibrant democracy. With ever growing 
technological advancements and capabilities, the Committee feel that solutions like 
Electronically Transmitted Postal Ballot System (ETPBS) can be looked into for extending the 
voting rights of NRIs. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to vigorously pursue the 
matter with the Ministry of Law and Justice, the Election Commission of India and other 
stakeholders and come up with clear timelines for the reforms while keeping the Committee 

97 
apprised of the developments in the matter. The Committee will continue consideration of this 
question, in consultation with the authorities concerned. 
(Recommendation No. 5) 
 
6. Need for Authentic Data on the Indian Diaspora 
The Committee note that as per the official records and inputs received from Missions and 
Posts, Indian Diaspora comprise of 15.85 million NRIs and 19.57 million PIOs and OCIs, 
adding to a total of 35.42 million in January 2024. However, as per the UN Population 
Division’s estimate there were around 17.86 million Indian migrants in 2020 implying that the 
number of migrants would have significantly increased by now than the figures reflected by 
the Ministry. The Committee are concerned to note that the Ministry does not have any 
authentic data on the Indian Diaspora as registration with Indian Embassies is voluntary and 
the official data collection is restricted to Emigration Check Required (ECR) countries. The 
Committee have been surprised to note that despite being aware of the magnitude of the issue, 
no efforts are being made by the Ministry to address the same. While acknowledging that 
accurately tracking the large Indian Diaspora spread across the globe is a challenging task 
requiring enhanced data collection methods through regular surveys, census data, and 
collaboration with host countries, the Committee feel that lack of reliable data acts as a major 
hurdle in the international migration governance. In the absence of a comprehensive and up-
to-date database, effective framing of programmes for migrants as well as proper delivery of 
welfare schemes for them would be challenging. The Committee, therefore, desire that the 
Ministry together with the Bureau of Immigration may devise mechanisms to collect and 
collate reliable data on migrants and returnees on real time basis and apprise the Committee 
of the same. 
(Recommendation No. 6) 

98 
7. Data Collection by Bureau of Immigration 
Currently, the only available national-level migration data pertains to Emigration Check 
Required (ECR) category migrants. However, ECR category migrants are becoming a minority 
in the migrant population and the ECR data often lead to misrepresentation of international 
migration from the country. The Committee are aware that the most reliable data is that 
collected at various ports by Bureau of Immigration on various categories of migrants 
including temporary labour migrants, students, long-term migrants, etc. The Committee, 
hence, desire that data collection efforts by Bureau of Immigration at exit and entry points 
must be strengthened by adopting safe, secure technological platforms, supported by an 
effective monitoring mechanism. The data, thus collected may be shared with other 
stakeholders, especially other Central Government Departments and State Governments.  
(Recommendation No. 7) 
 
8. Comprehensive Labour Market Information Database 
To facilitate future migration, the Committee desire that a comprehensive Labour Market 
Information (LMI) database for the Indian Diaspora should be developed. This database must 
include, but not be limited to, real-time data on employment trends, wage patterns, 
occupational sectors, skill mismatches and remittance flow among NRIs, PIOs and OCIs. Such 
data would not only improve migration management but also help migrants make informed 
decisions, matching their skills with available opportunities abroad. Strengthening such data 
collection and sharing mechanisms for the same is also essential for ensuring efficient and 
transparent migration governance.  
(Recommendation No. 8) 
 

99 
9. Inward Remittances from NRIs 
The Committee note that inward remittances from NRIs have witnessed a steady increase 
during the last three years and in 2023-24 it was 118.7 billion US Dollars. The Committee are 
aware that the hard power that the Non-Resident Indians wield through  the money they send 
back to their families and relatives in India, bolster India's economy by fuelling consumption, 
enhancing foreign exchange reserves and ensuring macroeconomic stability. Considering the 
fact that NRI investments have emerged as a significant driving force in shaping the trajectory 
of the Indian economy by playing a pivotal role in catalyzing growth across various sectors, 
there should be consistent efforts to foster greater economic engagement with the Diaspora. 
Remittances being the second largest source of external financing after service exports and 
accounting for a significant chunk of  India's GDP, the Committee desire that the Government 
should streamline online transfer platforms, reduce transaction fees, communicate 
government policies regarding NRI remittances, address taxation concerns, etc. to build trust 
and transparency. In addition to easing out business opportunities, the Government should 
promote other investment options available to NRIs in India, like mutual funds, stocks, and 
real estate. Above all, MEA should actively engage with NRI communities to understand their 
needs and concerns regarding sending money back to India.  
(Recommendation No. 9) 
10. Policy of ‘Care, Connect, Celebrate and Contribute’ 
The Committee observe that India’s Diaspora policy framework is centered around the four 
‘C’s’ namely Care, Connect, Celebrate and Contribute. The Committee note that the shift in the 
Diaspora policy was brought about with the merger of the Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs 
and the Ministry of External Affairs in January 2016. While acknowledging that the 4Cs uphold 
the welfare and protection of our Diaspora, connect them to their roots, and celebrate their 
achievements, the Committee feel that India’s Diaspora policy is still at nascent stage. Much 

100 
needs to be done to tap into the potential of Indians living abroad and policy document on its 
Diaspora needs to be drafted by the Government. The Committee do not agree with the 
Ministry’s perception that the diversity of Indian Diaspora does not permit formulation of a 
single, tight and unique policy. The Committee are of the considered view that lack of a 
dedicated Diaspora policy document hinders our ability to fully leverage the potential of the 
large overseas Indian community, impacting economic growth, foreign relations, knowledge 
transfer, and overall national development by limiting engagement with skilled professionals 
and investors living abroad, while also failing to adequately address the concerns and needs 
of the Diaspora population. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry bring out a 
policy document on Indian Diaspora in tune with their aspirations to serve as a guiding 
principle for deeper and wider engagement with the Diaspora community. 
(Recommendation No. 10) 
 
11. Working Group on Schemes/Programmes for the Welfare of Diaspora 
 
The Committee note that a Working Group was constituted under the Chairmanship of 
Secretary (CPV&OIA) to analyze the objectives, working and challenges of various 
schemes/programmes/initiatives for the welfare of the Indian Diaspora and the group met for 
the first time on 22 December, 2021. However, no meeting is seen to have been held since 
then. The Committee  underline that regular meetings of the Working Group are imperative for 
identifying potential issues in the implementation of schemes, facilitating communication 
between different departments, and  making informed decisions to achieve better policy 
outcomes. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to ensure biannual meeting of the 
Working Group to analyze the objectives, working and challenges of various 

101 
schemes/programmes/initiatives for the welfare of the Indian Diaspora and intimate the 
Committee about the schedule worked out for holding the meetings. 
(Recommendation No. 11) 
 
12. All-of-Government Approach in Diaspora Matters 
 
The Committee understand that India’s engagement with its Diaspora has moved from ‘All of 
Ministry approach’ towards an ‘All-of-Government approach’ in which other wings of the 
Government, other Ministries and Departments as well as the State Governments are 
involved in all aspects of Diaspora affairs.  The Committee have been informed that the 
collaborative model of ‘All-of-Government approach’ ensures that the diverse and evolving 
needs of the Diaspora are met more effectively by drawing on the expertise and resources of 
multiple government stakeholders. The Committee, however, note from the testimony 
received from the State representatives that the State Governments do not feel connected 
most of the time. Since the concerns of Indian Diaspora transcend Ministries and are largely 
State specific, the Committee recommend that regular consultations are held with States to 
align concerns/issues of the Diaspora with the policy priorities.   
(Recommendation No. 12) 
 
13. Missions as Home Away from Home.  
 
The Committee are informed that the Indian Missions/Posts abroad works with the motto 
‘Indian Embassies: Home away from Home’ and a robust system of grievance redressal which 
includes walk-in, email, multilingual 24x7 emergency numbers, grievance redressal portal like 
MADAD, CPGRAMS, e-Migrate, and social media etc. is in place in all Embassies. However, the 
Committee are concerned about the extent to which our missions abroad are accessible or 

102 
inaccessible to NRI workers and students. Despite having every mechanism possible to help 
and facilitate our Diaspora in our Missions, the experience of many members of the common 
Diaspora appears to be on the contrary. The Committee, therefore, recommend that all mission 
staff should be given specialized training in gender sensitivity, cultural awareness, labour 
laws, and rights of migrant workers to equip them provide more empathetic and informed 
support to our Diaspora facing diverse challenges abroad so that our Missions actually 
become ‘Home away from Home’. 
(Recommendation No. 13) 
 
14. Handling Grievances of Diaspora 
 
Keeping in view the fact that the Indian Missions/Posts are the direct link between India and its 
Diaspora community, the Committee desire that Embassies adopt standardized and 
transparent policies for handling grievances, ensuring that all cases are reviewed 
systematically rather than through ad-hoc consular outreach and contact. Responses should 
focus on addressing root causes and offering long-term solutions to migrant issues. The 
presence of multiple contact points and the lack of standardized operating procedures hinder 
timely resolution of grievances affecting migrants. The Committee, hence, desire that our 
Embassies should maintain a publicly accessible database that tracks complaints and ensure 
transparency in providing essential information including contact details of Nodal Officers. 
(Recommendation No. 14) 
 
15. Local Language Capacity in Missions 
 
The Committee observe that there is not enough local language capacity in our missions in 
terms of the languages spoken by the migrant labourers. This lack of State-specific liaisons 

103 
within embassies complicates communication and delays necessary interventions. Though the 
Ministry has maintained that communication so far has not been a hindrance in addressing 
labour issues and that the officers/officials in the Ministry of External Affairs, coming from 
different States of India with diverse social background, have the ability to directly interact 
with the migrant labourers in their native language to address their issues, the Diaspora 
Organisations which cater to grievances affecting migrants at ground level belie the claim. The 
Committee feel that it is important to address the issue of local language capacity so that poor 
emigrants do not feel that they cannot understand what is being said to them by the 
representatives of their own country. Hence, the Committee desire that the Ministry take into 
consideration the language of the major Diaspora groups present in a particular country while  
deploying officers/staff in our Missions, especially in Gulf countries.   
(Recommendation No. 15) 
 
16. Community Welfare Wing in Missions 
 
The Committee note that a dedicated Community Welfare Wing has been established in 
Missions and Posts where there is a sizeable Indian community. The Committee are of the view 
that such wings could facilitate closer contact between Indian Diaspora and Indian 
Missions/Posts. The Committee urge the Ministry do apprise them about the objectives 
achieved through such community welfare wings in Missions/Posts and establish Community 
Welfare Wing in all important Indian Missions/Posts on priority basis. 
(Recommendation No. 16) 
 

104 
17 Bilateral and Multilateral Agreements on Transfer of Sentenced Persons 
 
The Committee find that India has so far signed 31 bilateral Agreements on Transfer of 
Sentenced Persons with Australia, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Bosnia & Herzegovina, Brazil, 
Bulgaria, Cambodia, Egypt, Estonia, France, Hong Kong, Iran, Israel, Italy, Kazakhstan, 
Republic of Korea, Kuwait, Maldives, Mauritius, Mongolia, Qatar, Russia, Saudi Arabia, 
Somalia, Spain, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Turkiye, United Arab Emirates (UAE), United Kingdom and 
Vietnam, by virtue of which Indian prisoners lodged in foreign countries can be transferred to 
India to serve the remainder of their sentence and vice-versa. With India signing two 
multilateral conventions on Transfer of Sentenced Persons, namely Inter-American Convention 
on Serving Criminal Sentences Abroad and Council of Europe Convention on Transfer of 
Sentenced Persons, the Committee note that most of the countries in Europe, North America 
and South America are covered for the purpose. However, countries in Asia, Africa and few 
countries in Eastern Europe are yet to be covered by bilateral agreements. The Committee, 
hence, recommend that the Government, through the Ministry of Home Affairs, which is the 
nodal Ministry for this subject, may pursue, process and sign such agreement with the 
remaining countries. 
(Recommendation No. 17) 
 
18. Transfer of Sentenced Persons from Foreign Jails 
The Committee find with dismay that despite having bilateral and multilateral 
agreements/conventions on Transfer of Sentenced Persons which covers several  countries 
in Middle East, Europe, North America and South America, only 8 Indian prisoners were 
transferred from foreign countries to India in the last three years. This low success rate in 
bringing back Indian prisoners calls for an assessment of the efforts taken in this regard. 
Keeping in view the large number of prisoners languishing in foreign jails, the Committee 
desire that the Government study the obstacles in implementing the agreements/ conventions 
and, if need be, amend existing agreements or create new ones to facilitate smoother 
repatriation of prisoners. The Committee also stress the need to enhance diplomatic efforts 

105 
and negotiations with other countries to streamline the process of transferring prisoners and 
ensuring fair treatment for Indian nationals in foreign jails. 
(Recommendation No. 18) 
 
19. Implementation of Agreements on Transfer of Prisoners 
The Committee note that at present 10,152 Indian prisoners including under-trials are lodged 
in foreign prisons. There are 12 countries where Indians are imprisoned in large numbers, 
viz., Bahrain (272), China (185), Italy (164), Kuwait (387), Malaysia (371), Nepal (1187), Oman 
(117), Qatar (740), Saudi Arabia (2647), Sri Lanka (143), United Arab Emirates (2479) 
and United Kingdom (288). The Committee have been informed that nine of these countries 
are covered under existing agreements on Transfer of Sentenced Persons and that MHA is 
working on negotiating such agreements with the other three countries, namely, Nepal, 
Malaysia and Oman.  The Committee understand that the Ministry of Home Affairs is the nodal 
Ministry for negotiating and implementing the agreements on transfer of sentenced persons. 
In view of the large number of Indians lodged in prisons abroad, the Committee desire that no 
efforts are spared in getting the agreements implemented and the  Missions/Posts remain 
extra vigilant to ensure that the rights of the Indian prisoners in foreign jails are protected. At 
the same time, the nodal Ministry may continue to make efforts in right earnest to transfer 
more sentenced Indians, especially from the countries where they are lodged in large 
numbers. 
(Recommendation No. 19) 
 

106 
20. Expeditious Finalisation of MMPAs and LMAs with Countries having large Indian 
Diaspora 
 The Committee find that India has signed Migration and Mobility Partnership 
Agreements/ MoUs (MMPAs) or Labour Mobility Agreements/ MoUs (LMAs) with several 
countries where the Indian Diaspora is present. MMPAs aim at harnessing India’s demographic 
dividend and fostering mobility for our students, academics, business people and 
professionals. India has MMPAs signed with France, the UK , Germany, Australia , Austria, 
Italy  and Denmark. The Labor and Manpower Cooperation MOUs/Agreements are in place with 
the Gulf Cooperation Council countries, Japan, Portugal, Mauritius, Israel, Taiwan and 
Malaysia. Further, to safeguard the specific interest of domestic workers in GCC Countries, 
agreements on Labor Cooperation for Domestic Sector have been signed with Saudi Arabia, 
UAE and Kuwait. However, the Committee note that we do not have any labour protection 
agreements with many countries where our Diaspora is in large numbers. Since it is extremely 
important to have legally binding agreements to protect the interest of our Diaspora while 
working across borders, the Committee recommend that the Government should actively 
engage in concluding more such agreements with destination countries, especially those with 
significant potential to offer benefits and opportunities for Indian nationals including skilled 
workers, professionals and students. They also desire that the ongoing discussions with 
various countries, particularly with countries in Europe and the Far East on MMPAs and LMAs 
may be finalized at the earliest under intimation to the Committee. 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
 

107 
21. Impact Assessment of MMPAs and LMAs 
The Committee acknowledge that Migration and Mobility Agreements (MMPAs) and Labour 
Mobility Agreements (LMAs) are aimed at providing safe and legal migration opportunities to 
Indian workers in potential employment destinations all over the world. However, the impact of 
such MoUs/Agreements and the manner in which they have translated into better deals and 
more job opportunities for potential migrant workers are not known. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Ministry should carry out an impact assessment of the existing Migration and 
Mobility Agreements and Labour Mobility Agreements while monitoring the implementation 
aspect of such MoUs/Agreements to ensure that the issues of interest of the migrant workers, 
including their grievances, are actually addressed through the said MoUs/Agreements’. 
(Recommendation No. 21) 
 
22. Bilateral Labour Agreements Safeguarding the Rights of Migrant Workers 
 The Committee desire that the Government should enter into Bilateral Labour 
Agreements (BLAs) and Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) with many more countries with 
clear stipulations regarding working condition, wages, accommodation, health care, 
repatriation rights and dispute resolution mechanism in the employment contract, monitoring 
of recruitment agencies, granting migrants equal rights as locals, etc. to safeguard the rights 
of migrant workers. The Committee further desire that the existing bilateral agreements on 
labour mobility should be strengthened through periodic monitoring and evaluation.  
(Recommendation No. 22) 
 
23. International Instruments for Protection of Diaspora 
 The Committee take cognizance that apart from bilateral arrangements on migration & 
mobility and labour migration, the Government is also deeply engaged with international and 

108 
multilateral organisations for enhancing the horizon of India’s initiatives in fostering safe, 
orderly, and regular migration pathways. However, it is observed that India is not yet a party to 
any international instrument for protection of Diaspora. The reason for choosing not to 
become a party to certain specific instruments is based on the implications of such 
international convention/ instrument on national policies and priorities. While honouring our 
multifaceted approach allowing for flexibility and context-specific solutions that are 
responsive to the unique circumstances in different countries, the Committee are concerned 
about the limited range of bilateral agreements/MoUs and welfare measures we have in place 
as on  date in comparison to the extent and spread of our Diaspora. Hence, the Committee 
recommend that the Government may actively explore ways to strengthen cooperation and 
collaboration on Diaspora-related matters at international as well as multilateral levels. Efforts 
may also be taken to examine the feasibility of being a party to key international instruments 
aimed at protecting and promoting the welfare of Diaspora communities which work to ensure 
humane treatment and address potential exploitation of migrant populations across borders.  
(Recommendation No. 23) 
 
24. Global Compact for Migration 
 
 The Committee find that India is one among the 152 countries that adopted the Global 
Compact for Migration, the first-ever UN global agreement on a common approach to 
international migration, in December, 2018. The compact strives for better management of 
migration at local, national, regional and global levels. Since the State Governments are the 
key stakeholders in the migration discourse, the Committee desire that a co-ordination 

109 
committee, including the Centre and State Governments, may be set up to ensure effective 
implementation of global compact objectives.  
(Recommendation No. 24) 
 
25. Setting up of More Protector of Emigrants (PoE)Offices 
 The Committee note that the process of emigration of Indian workers, with Emigration 
Clearance Required (ECR) category passports is regulated under the Emigration Act, 1983, 
which is administered by the Ministry of External Affairs through the Protector General of 
Emigrants (PGE). The Protector General of Emigrants oversees the functioning of all Protector 
of Emigrants (PoE) offices across India. As of now there are 16 offices of the Protector of 
Emigrants located Mumbai, Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata, Chandigarh, Hyderabad, Cochin, 
Thiruvananthapuram, Jaipur, Raebareli, Patna, Bengaluru, Guwahati, Ranchi, Bhubaneswar 
and Agartala. However, the Committee note that PoE offices are not there in States like Gujarat 
and Telangana which account for a large number of emigrants. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Ministry may explore the feasibility of establishing PoE offices in States where 
currently such offices do not exist in addition to setting up additional PoE offices in migration 
hotspots including States like Punjab, Kerala, etc. to ensure better outreach and support for 
emigrants.  
(Recommendation No. 25) 
 
26. Criminalization of Recruitment Malpractices 
 The Committee observe that the Recruiting Agents (RA) are required to obtain 
Registration Certificate (RC) from the Protector General of Emigrants (PGE) before they can 
engage in recruitment of Indian workers for overseas employment.  The process of registration 
of RA is done through a web-based application, e-Migrate portal, which brings all the 

110 
stakeholders, including the RAs, Foreign Employers (FEs) and the prospective emigrants on a 
common platform. The Committee was further informed that the Ministry initiates action 
against agents involved in exploitation, abuse, or other illegal practices through issuing Show 
Cause Notices or suspending the licenses ,etc. and publishes the list of unregistered RAs on 
the e-Migrate portal. Till October 2024, a total of 3,094 unregistered agents in country have 
been notified. However, the proliferation of unregistered/illegal RAs and illegal migration 
through them is indicative of the lacunae in the existing system which is extremely 
disconcerting.  The Committee are of the opinion that the penalties and fines provided for in 
the Emigration Act are insufficient considering the severity of crimes committed by 
unscrupulous recruiters. Hence, in addition to having a vigorous oversight mechanism for 
RAs, the Committee recommend that the Government should bring in provisions to effectively 
criminalize illegal recruitment practices and impose stringent punishment, including 
imprisonment, to address the widespread exploitation of migrant workers and to deter 
fraudulent recruitment practices.  
(Recommendation No. 26) 
 
27. Coordination Among Stakeholders in Cracking Fraudulent Practices in Emigration 
 The Committee have been informed that the Protector of Emigrants maintains close 
coordination with law enforcement agencies, like police and cybercrime units, to tackle 
fraudulent practices and reinforce the integrity of the emigration process. Similarly, regular 
coordination is maintained with Bureau of immigration for discussing patterns/trends in 
emigration and sharing details of violations with each other. However, the reality on ground 
speaks volumes on how the scamsters circumvent the efforts already in place. The Committee, 
hence, recommend that inter-agency co-ordination among law enforcement agencies and 

111 
inter-  ministerial exchanges may be stepped up through frequent assessment exercises of all 
stakeholders to track down and prevent operations of illegal networks which dupe citizens 
with fake job offers. 
(Recommendation No. 27) 
 
28. Prioritization of State-Run Recruitment Agencies 
 The Committee find that in States like Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, 
etc. there are Recruitment Agencies which have received license from the MEA and act as 
State recruitment agencies. As of now, there are 13 such State Recruitment Agencies in 
various States.  In order to ensure safe and ethical recruitment practices, the Committee are of 
the opinion that the Government should prioritize such State-run recruitment agencies, which 
can even adhere to a zero-cost migration model, where employers bear the recruitment costs. 
They, therefore, desire that the Ministry to take it up with all high-emigration States to 
encourage them to have their own State- run Recruitment Agencies and replicate the best 
practices of the best performing States in this regard. In addition to working out ways and 
means to strengthen them, without prejudice to the rights of legitimate private recruitment 
agencies, the Government should also incorporate at least one State-run Agency into bilateral 
labour agreements to widen their scope and impact.  
(Recommendation No. 28) 
 
29. Recruitment of Female Domestic Workers Through State Recruitment Agencies 
 The Committee understand that since 2016, women who are ECR (Emigration Clearance 
Required) passport holders can travel abroad to ECR countries for employment only through 
13 State Government recruitment agencies, if they are 30 years and above.These agencies are 
NORKA Roots and ODEPC of Kerala; OMCL of Tamil Nadu;  UPFC of Uttar Pradesh; OMCAP of 

112 
Andhra Pradesh; TOMCOM of Telangana;  RSLDC of Rajasthan; KUWSSB of Karnataka; 
KVTSDC of Karnataka; M/s Pan IIT alumni Reach for Jharkhand Foundation of Jharkhand and 
Bihar State  and Overseas Placement Bureau of Bihar. Basically, only State-run Recruitment 
Agents have the mandate to recruit women domestic workers going to the ECR countries and 
the private recruitment agents are kept out of the process. The Committee consider this as a 
laudable step in ensuring this very vulnerable category of overseas job seekers are not 
exploited by private agents. However, the Committee are worried that the prospective 
domestic workers from most of the States are not lucky to be under this safety net and are at 
the mercy of unscrupulous agents. The Committee, hence, recommend that the Ministry may 
immediately take up with all the States to set up State-run Recruitment Agents, especially in 
States likes Punjab, Gujrat, Orissa and the North East. The Ministry should keep strict 
vigilance through the Protector of Emigrants that no loophole is there in the system and the 
private agents violating the provisions are punished strictly. 
(Recommendation No. 29) 
 
30. Outcome Oriented Awareness Campaigns Against Illegal Recruitment Practices 
 The Committee have taken note of the various efforts undertaken by the government to 
raise awareness about illegal recruitment practices including advisories/alerts, press releases, 
outreach activities, etc. But the ever-increasing instances of illegal migration highlights a 
persistent lack of awareness, necessitating alternative solutions to combat the issue.  
According to the Committee, the problem calls for a multi-pronged approach with MEA 
coordinating and working in tandem with several other Ministries for effectively organizing 
awareness campaigns. The Committee desire that in high-out emigration states, outcome-
oriented campaigns in vernacular languages using local channels, social media platforms, civil 

113 
society organisations and Panchayati Raj Institutions may be resorted to for wider coverage 
and adaptation.  
(Recommendation No. 30) 
 
31. Deportation of Illegal Immigrants from United States  
 In the wake of deportations of illegal Indian immigrants back to the country from the 
United States and probable mass deportations in the future, the Committee had expressed 
their feelings in unequivocal terms about the humanitarian concerns surrounding the issue. In 
this regard, the Committee have been apprised that since India is against illegal immigration, 
the country is committed to taking back its national who is an illegal immigrant to another 
country. Further, it was informed that most countries have necessary SOPs in place to handle 
deportation-related matters and, accordingly, MEA too has an SOP in place, whereby 
nationality and security verification process is undertaken by MEA in coordination with other 
agencies.   Responding to the Committees’ shared feelings about detainees restrained by 
handcuffs, waist chains, and leg irons during flights by US Air Force, it was informed that the 
US actions were in accordance with the Restraints Policy No. 11155.1, Section 5.10, effective 
from November 19, 2012.  The Committee were further informed that honouring the repeated 
requests from MEA not to shackle deportees, particularly women and children, in the second 
deportation flight undertaken on 15 February, 2025, women and children were not shackled by 
the US Immigration and Customs Enforcement. Though the Committee also view that it is the 
mandated responsibility of any government to take back its citizens who have entered and 
lived in a country without proper documentation, they desire that the Government should deal 
with situation in a more empathetic manner upholding the human rights of migrants and 

114 
explore ways and means to facilitate the return of such illegal immigrants to India without 
hurting their self-respect.   
(Recommendation No. 31) 
 
32. Reintegration of Returned Indian Deportees 
 The Committee have been informed that the responsibility of reintegration of returned 
Indian deportees rests with the respective State governments from where the emigrants 
belong. However, since involuntary returns and reintegration in countries of origin have 
repercussions on the human rights of migrants, the Committee are of the view that solid 
reintegration programs are required mainly by the Central Government to prevent those who 
have already been returned do not risk their lives by undertaking dangerous journeys again.  
Hence, they recommend  specific and detailed re-integration programmes by the Government, 
integrating the inputs, expertise and experience of those States which have developed ways 
and means to reintegrate workers returning from abroad.   
(Recommendation No. 32) 
33 Streamlining Legal Migration 
 The Committee observe that E-Migrate is a comprehensive e-Governance portal 
developed to facilitate safe and legal migration of Indian workers abroad. The e-Migrate 
project, launched in 2015, is designed to facilitate emigration of ECR category workers 
emigrating to notified countries for employment purposes. The Committee are happy to note 
that e-Migrate (Version 2.0) was launched on 14 October, 2024 and was integrated with the 
Passport Seva Project (PSP) of MEA for validation of Passport details of migrant workers 
registering on this portal and with the Bureau of Immigration (BoI) of the Ministry of Home 
Affairs for online validation of EC granted by POEs. The new portal has also been integrated 
with UMANG, Bhashini, Digilocker, SPV- CSC (Meity) DG Shipping systems and SBI e-payment 

115 
gateway.  The Portal provides for a contactless and paperless process to conduct recruitment 
process for FEs (Foreign Employers) and Recruiting Agents (RAs) as a fully digitized B-2-B 
platform. The portal also provides a comprehensive and online database of emigrants to 
Missions, RAs, FEs and insurance agencies to make the whole emigration cycle faster and 
transparent. While acknowledging the importance of e-Migrate portal as a transformation 
initiative of the Ministry of External Affairs aimed at making the emigration process easy, 
organized & humane, the Committee desire that the portal is kept up to date with easy to 
navigate provisions and free of technical glitches.  
(Recommendation No. 33) 
 
34. Make the Campaign 'Surakshit Jayen Prashikshit Jayen' More Meaningful 
 The Committee have been informed that, as per the Emigration Rules, the Recruitment 
Agent can collect only the prescribed amount in respect of services rendered from the 
prospective emigrant by giving a receipt for the amount collected and any act contrary to it, is 
punishable. But, a 2023 International Labour Organisation (ILO) report found that nearly 60 per 
cent of low-skilled Indian workers migrating to Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries paid 
exorbitant recruitment fees, leading to debt bondage. Though the Government has introduced 
the e-Migrate system to streamline ethical overseas recruitment, the Committee are sure that 
its effectiveness depends on accessibility and awareness. The Committee, therefore, desire 
that the campaign 'Surakshit Jayen Prashikshit Jayen' (Go Safe, Go Trained) live up to its 
name by highlighting the recruitment fees to be paid to agents, provisions for ensuring self 
protection, , etc. and strive for well-informed migrant youths who are prepared for a 
seamlessly integrated and safe stay abroad. 
(Recommendation No. 34) 
 

116 
35. Need for a Mechanism to Track Labour Migration to Non ECR Counties.   
 The Committee find that the e-Migrate system captures key data related to the 
Emigration Check Required (ECR) category migrant workers right from when she/he applies 
for foreign employment in the system. Emigrant data is also shared with Embassies and 
Consulates to facilitate easy tracking and assistance when needed. However, the Committee 
note that the Government only tracks people moving to ECR countries with an ECR Passport 
and not migration to non ECR counties.  Though the e-Migrate portal has also opened 
registration for non-ECR countries, such an online registration for Indian Emigration Check 
Not Required (ECNR) passport holders is voluntary and not mandatory.  Hence, the data is not 
captured. While noting that the Government only tracks people moving to ECR countries with 
an ECR Passport, the Committee are convinced that it is quite important to have a mechanism 
to detect/track labour migration to even non ECR counties. Hence, they recommend that the 
Government may come up with possible options to capture the data despite the constraints 
faced and apprise the Committee of the same.  
(Recommendation No. 35) 
 
36 Professionals Trapped in Job Rackets in Southeast Asia 
 The Committee have noted instances of dubious firms involved in fake recruitment job 
offers having lured Indian nationals mostly through social media channels to South-East Asian 
countries including Cambodia, Myanmar, Lao PDR to keep them as bonded labourers to carry 
out cybercrime and other fraudulent activities from scam centers operating in these countries. 
Though the exact number of Indian nationals stuck in these countries is not known, the 
Committee have been informed that through concerted efforts, 1091 Indian national from 
Cambodia, 770 from Laos and 497 from Myanmar, including software engineers have been 

117 
rescued till date. This, further highlights the vulnerabilities faced by Indian job seekers, even 
professionals, in the hands of unscrupulous agents and middlemen. The Committee find that 
the advisories and social media posts about the fake job rackets or similar communications 
issued by the Ministry or respective Indian Missions/Posts abroad through their official 
websites  are unable to prevent our nationals from getting enticed and entrapped in the 
fraudulent job offers in these countries. The Committee, hence, recommend that the Ministry 
may need to go much beyond  mere listing out fake agents in its efforts to protect Indians from 
trafficking and cyber slavery. Even the educated Indian professionals  need to be educated 
through all channels possible that genuine foreign employers usually require educational 
certificates  attested by the Ministry of Human Resource Development (HRD) and the MEA and  
legitimate companies have  professional websites with clear contact details and overall  
feedback from employees on platforms like Glassdoor or LinkedIn. Above all, the Committee 
desire that our embassies or consulates in the destination countries should always be 
available  for assistance in verifying the employer through email or phone calls. 
(Recommendation No. 36) 
 
37. Integration of Returnee Migrants 
The Committee note that as per the information available with the Ministry, about 5,95,101 
emigrants have returned  to Indian from foreign countries from 2019 to 2024. This is a 
significant number. This surge, largely driven by COVID crisis, economic disruptions, stricter 
immigration policies and a reduction in job opportunities abroad has created considerable 
reintegration challenges. The Committee note that a national level policy on re-integration of 
migrant returnees is still awaited. The Committee further note that Kerala is the only State in 
India that offers economic reintegration and welfare programmes for returning migrants, all of 

118 
which are worth emulating by other States and even other countries.  The Committee are of the 
view that though the responsibility for rehabilitation of Indian migrants is currently placed on 
State Governments, with the Central Government providing neither logistical nor financial 
support, it is high time that this gap is addressed. To address this gap, the Government, in 
coordination with States, should develop a sustainable rehabilitation and reintegration policy 
with shared responsibilities between the Centre and State Governments. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Centre should assist State Governments through grants and 
soft loans to help integrate the returnee migrants into the domestic industries so that they 
continue to be economically productive. Such a collaborative approach only would ensure a 
more comprehensive and sustainable system for migrant reintegration across India. 
(Recommendation No. 37) 
 
38. Need to Prioritize New Emigration Bill 
 Keeping in view the contemporary global migration dynamics and the requirements of 
Indian citizens, the Committee have underscored the pressing need for a comprehensive 
legislative overhaul to replace the outdated provisions of the Emigration Act 1983 and the 
Committee find that a legislation on Emigration [Overseas Mobility (Facilitation and Welfare) 
Bill, 2024] for the same is on the anvil. This presents a long overdue opportunity to reform the 
recruitment process for seeking overseas employment. The Ministry has informed the 
Committee that the proposed draft is under internal consultation and, thereafter, will be put up 
for public consultation which will be followed up by Inter-Ministerial consultations along with 
the Draft Cabinet Note. Though the efforts to revamp the migration management framework 
through the introduction of a new Bill is commendable, the Committee are not happy with the 
delay in the process despite witnessing harrowing incidents of illegal emigration from our 

119 
country day in and day out. The Committee, hence recommend that the Bill should be  
prioritized and the Committee may be intimated about the timelines for presenting the new Bill 
in both houses of Parliament.   
(Recommendation No. 38) 
 
39. Consultations Required for Finalising the New Emigration Bill 
 The Committee understand that the proposed Bill to replace the Emigration Act, 1983 
aims at establishing a hassle-free, robust, transparent and comprehensive emigration 
management framework that facilitates safe and orderly migration for Overseas Employment 
aspirants.  However, to address the challenges posed by evolving landscape, wider 
consultations are required beyond putting it up for public consultation. In this regard the 
Committee urge that once the elements of the Bill are identified, specific consultations should 
be made with the Standing Committee, the State Governments and the Diaspora Organisations 
to make it a healthy Bill worthy of implementation.  
(Recommendation No. 39) 
 
40. Need to Address Student Migration in the  Emigration Bill 
 The Committee also note that under emigration, the student migration is generally not 
covered and currently, the Emigration Bill does not cover student migration. But the 
Committee see from the available data and surveys that the student community form a 
sizeable per cent of all emigrants from the country. When irregular and unscrupulous 
recruitment elements misguide students about universities and job opportunities abroad, a 
large number of students end up doing menial jobs, not wanting to come back empty-handed 
and become a socio-economic problem in the countries from where they migrate. So, the 

120 
Committee desire that the Ministry should give due importance to student migration also in the 
new Emigration Bill and student recruitment agencies need to be put under the scanner. 
(Recommendation No. 40) 
 
41. Creation of a Centralised, Real-Time Migration Database 
 Effective policymaking requires robust migration data governance. While 
acknowledging that MEA’s PoE offices track Emigration Clearance Required (ECR) data, and 
migration estimates exist from Census 2011 and the National Sample Survey 2020-21, the 
Committee note that a centralised, real-time migration database remains absent. They, 
therefore, recommend that under the proposed new legislation, the Government must make 
provision for establishing a national migration database or social registry, to track outgoing 
and returnee migrants, their skills, employment sectors, and remittance patterns. Integrating 
passport, visa and emigration data portals would positively aid policy formulation and social 
welfare provisioning. 
(Recommendation No. 41) 
 
42. Settlement of Claims under Pravasi Bharatiya BimaYojana (PBBY) Scheme 
 Pravasi Bharatiya Bima Yojana (PBBY) is a mandatory insurance scheme initially 
launched in 2003 for Emigration Check Required (ECR) category workers going to ECR 
countries for overseas employment. PBBY provides an insurance cover of Rs. 10 lakhs in case 
of accidental death or permanent disability and some other benefits at a nominal insurance 
premium of Rs. 275/ Rs. 375 for a period of two/three years. The Scheme has been 
comprehensively revamped in 2017 with facility for online renewal. The Committee find with 
dismay that only 2197 claims have been settled out of 80,37,200 policies issued since its 
inception. From FY 20-21 to FY 23-24, out of 418 claims, only 156 have been settled showing a 

121 
dismal settlement ratio. Given the large number of migrants, having very limited claims seems 
odd to the Committee making them feel that  there is a problem in the way the scheme is 
working. This is especially so, when the PBBY scheme provides for reimbursement of medical 
expenses up to Rs.1 lakh on hospitalization in emergencies,  reimbursement of cost of 
transportation of mortal remains in accidental death along with cost of return airfare of one 
attendants, etc. This, the Committee feel might be on account of not honouring most of the 
claims by insurance companies on flimsy grounds.  Since migrants workers are the most 
vulnerable section of the Diaspora community, the Committee are of the view that they should 
not be left at the mercy of insurance companies making the scheme   infructuous. The 
Committee, hence, recommend that our missions should assist and guide the emigrant during 
the claim process and direct the insurance companies not to deny the claims without proper 
justification.  Further, the missions may also help emigrants navigate the complaint process 
when their claims are not honoured. The Missions may also ensure that the cost of 
transportation of mortal remains in accidental death of an insured emigrant is reimbursed by 
the companies and apprise the Committee of the details of such reimbursement done in the 
last five years.  
(Recommendation No. 42) 
 
43. Utilisation of the Indian Community Welfare Fund 
 Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) has been set up in all Indian Missions and 
Posts abroad to meet the contingency expenditure incurred by them for carrying our various 
on-site welfare activities for Overseas Indian citizens on a means-tested basis. This is a self 
sustained fund without any budgetary support and sourced from service charges on issuance 
of Visa/OCI/PIO cards; Passport services and attestation of documents; voluntary contribution 

122 
by Indian community; and income from interests accrued through investments and deposits. 
The Committee note that the ICWF guidelines cover three key areas namely Assisting 
Overseas Indian nationals in distress situations (Boarding and Lodging, Air passage, Legal 
Assistance, Emergency Medical Care, Transportation of Mortal Remains), Community Welfare 
activities and Improvement in Consular services. However, the Committee are surprised to 
note that the overall utilisation of the Indian Community Welfare Fund is apparently less than 
fifty per cent of the collected fund despite sizeable Indian Diaspora  in requirementof 
assistance on all aspects covered under the fund. It is felt that even after expanding the scope 
of the fund, not enough assistance could be extended to the distressed Indian nationals and, 
hence, desire to be apprised of the reasons for the same. The Committee, while underscoring 
the need for a more generous approach to the requirements of assistance by our Diaspora 
also desire that our missions should generate more awareness regarding the ICW Fund, the 
assistance provided therein and the way to get in touch with the Missions/Posts in case of 
emergencies rather than resorting to the plea that  Indian emigrant workers proceeding abroad 
are apprised about ICWF during PDOT.  
(Recommendation No. 43) 
 
44. Setting Up of Legal Panels in Missions/Posts 
 It is seen that under ICWF, provisions are there for setting up legal panels in countries 
with sizeable Indian Diaspora, paying of fines/penalty for petty crimes for release of prisoners 
and assisting Indian women in distress. However, the Committee find that till June 2024 only  
4213 Indian nationals were extended legal assistance from  the fund. Keeping in view the fact 
that migrant workers and distressed Indian women are the most vulnerable sections of the 
Diaspora community and may not have the resources for legal assistance in case of need, the 

123 
Committee recommend that legal panels may be set up in all the Indian Missions/Posts having 
Diaspora community, irrespective of the size of the Diaspora and immediate legal assistance 
should be provided when requested for the same.  
(Recommendation No. 44) 
 
45. Expeditious Transportation of Mortal Remains 
 The Committee are informed that the CPV Division in the Ministry of External Affairs is 
the nodal Division to coordinate with all Missions / Posts abroad to provide help to Indian 
nationals in distress including in cases of deaths, local cremation/burial or transportation of 
mortal remains to their hometowns in India and settlement of insurance / compensation 
claims. Transportation of mortal remains involves completion of certain formalities by the local 
authorities before such body/bodies are allowed to be transported to India and, in case of 
unnatural deaths, police investigations are to be completed, the procedures of which differ 
from country to country resulting in no fixed time frame for eventual transportation. Though 
the Committee note that our Missions attach highest importance to the issue of expeditious 
transportation of mortal remains of Indians who die abroad, there are instances galore when 
extreme difficulties were faced by the kith and kin of the deceased in bringing the dead bodies 
back home. In view of the emotions involved in such cases, the Committee desire that the 
nodal division in MEA and the Missions/Posts abroad should accord utmost priority to 
ensuring expeditious transportation of the mortal remains by making all efforts needed to 
obtain the necessary clearances. In this regard, it would be advisable for all Missions to have a 
Death Registration Desk  with a designated email id to be monitored all the time. The details of 
the same  should be made available in the website of the Ministry and the Mission.   
(Recommendation No. 45) 
 

124 
46. Fund   for Transportation of Mortal Remains  
 The Committee are aware that the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) is used for 
transportation of mortal remains of deceased Indian nationals to India, under the provisions of 
ICWF guidelines. In 2002, an amount of Rs. 8,45,83,770/-was used for the same whereas in 
2023, the expenditure incurred out of ICWF on transportation of mortal remains was Rs. 
2,32,51,964/-.  The Committee find from the data provided by the Ministry that since 2012 till 
June 2024, airlifting of 3808 mortal remains of Indian nationals were done by Missions/Posts 
using ICWF. The Committee are of the feeling that as of now Indian Community Welfare Fund 
is being utilized in limited cases which in evident from the small number of cases. According 
to the Committee, the right to get the mortal remains transported to the homeland at the 
expense of the Government, particularly with less well-off people should be recognized. While 
urging the empowerment of the Missions with adequate funds, the Committee desire that the 
procedure for utilizing the Indian Community Welfare Fund for transportation of mortal 
remains may be further simplified and the authorities vested with discretionary powers in our 
Missions to take action without awaiting clearance from New Delhi. Missions may also be 
sensitized to take a humane approach rather than a bureaucratic one in offering help, 
especially financial assistance, in such cases.  
(Recommendation No. 46) 
 
47. Extension of ICWF on Deaths of Students Abroad 
 The Committee have viewed that in many countries, especially in Gulf countries, 
philanthropic agencies as well as well meaning members of the respective communities 
extend assistance in transporting dead bodies. They have further observed that when children 
from poor families who have taken loans for study abroad die in accidents or otherwise, the 

125 
family falls into an extremely sad plight of not being able to afford to bring the dead bodies 
back or to repay the student loan they took for him. In those cases, the Committee desire the 
Ministry to explore whether it can be made a policy to make special provisions under the 
Indian Community Welfare Fund for meeting expenditures for the same.  
(Recommendation No. 47) 
 
48. PoEs as Actual First Point of Contact in Case of  Deaths of Indians Abroad 
 The Committee have been informed that in case of death, Protector of Emigrants (PoE) 
works closely with Indian Missions for the timely dispatch of mortal remains and it acts as the 
first point of contact between the emigrant's family and agencies abroad. It was further given 
to understand that POEs also work in assisting the family in obtaining insurance claims by 
coordinating with Missions to gather necessary legal and medical documents. The Committee, 
however, are a bit apprehensive about the actual experience of many families who have faced 
the death of a bread winner abroad vis-a-vis the handholding offered by the PoEs in the 
respective States. The Committee, hence, desire PoEs to actually live up to what is being 
claimed by becoming the actual first point of contact between the emigrant's family and 
agencies abroad and in ensuring the settlement of their Insurance claims. The name and 
contact details of the nodal officer for the same from PoE should be prominently shown in the 
website.  The Committee also desire to see the PoE-wise data of instances of dispatch of 
mortal remains and settlement of insurance claims handled by them during the last three 
years. 
Recommendation No. 48) 
 
 49. Utilization of Pre-Departure Orientation Training Programme Funds 

126 
Pre-Departure Orientation Training Programme was launched by the Ministry of External 
Affairs in January, 2018 under the ‘Surakshit Jaayein Prashikshit Jaayein’ campaign of the 
Government of India, for enhancing soft skills of Indian emigrant workers, going abroad 
specially to Gulf and other ECR countries.  Under this programme, the emigrant workers are 
given one day free of cost orientation training aiming to help them understand local rules and 
regulations of the destination country and their culture, tradition, language etc.  PDOT also 
sensitizes migrant workers about pathways to safe and legal migration and various 
government programmes for their welfare and protection. The Committee are given to note 
that since the inception of the PDOT programme in 2018, a total of 1,72,220 emigrant workers 
have been imparted orientation training till 31st December 2024 and financial assistance from 
the allocated budget is disbursed to the State government run departments/agencies. 
However, the Committee are startled to see that in 2022-23, out of the Budget Grant, nil was the 
funds released to the State Agencies in 2023-24, Rs. 79.77 lakhs out of Rs. 1.20 Crore was 
given out and in 2024-25, out of Rs. 1 crore Budget grant, only Rs. 16.08 lakhs have been 
released till January 2025. The Committee are really concerned about the performance of the 
scheme and hence recommend that a review of the PDOT scheme may be undertaken to 
identify the issues in its effective implementation under intimation to this Committee within 
three months.  
(Recommendation No. 49) 
 
50. Blue Print for Expanding PDOT 
 The Committee are aware that 36 PDOT centers are operational in UP, Rajasthan, 
Punjab, Maharashtra, West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Telangana, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Bihar, 
Odisha, Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka and out of them 14 centers are managed by National 

127 
Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) and 22 by State Government Agencies. The Ministry 
has informed that they are is in the process of taking the total number of PDOT centres to 100 
by partnering with industry bodies such as CII, FICCI, ASSOCHAM and Common Services 
Centre, e-Governance Service India Limited of Ministry of Electronics and Information 
Technology.  The Committee are further informed that online PDOT has been launched in April 
2021 to reach out to prospective emigrants who live far away from PDOT centres, especially 
women participants. While acknowledging that these initiatives will go a long way in delivering 
training for more migrants, the Committee are quite apprehensive about the actual 
implementation  vis a vis tall claims on paper. The Committee, hence, recommend that there 
should be a clear blue print for expanding PDOT Centres and the status of opening them, may 
be apprised to the Committee, , including in the north-eastern region. The Committee also 
desire to know  the target for online and offline PDOT training programmes for the current year 
and the number of persons likely to be covered for both the trainings.  
(Recommendation No. 50) 
 
51. Revision and Updation of PDOT Manuals and Booklets 
 
 The Committee note that the PDOT curriculum content has been standardized all over 
the country and Comprehensive PDO Manuals for Master Trainers have been developed in 
seven languages i.e. Hindi, English, Bangla, Malayalam, Punjabi, Tamil and Telugu. In this 
regard, the Committee desire to be informed about the details of country-specific pre-
departure handbooks/booklets prepared by the India Centre for Migration so far. They also 
recommend that these booklets are revised and updated periodically so that prospective 

128 
emigrants are acquainted with the latest rules and regulations of the destination countries as 
well as about safe and legal migration. 
(Recommendation No. 51) 
 
52. Outcome of Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) Conventions 
The Committee note that the Pravasi Bharatiya Divas (PBD) is being celebrated since 2003 to 
recognize the contribution of Overseas Indian Community in the development of India and 
celebrate Indian Diaspora’s connection with its roots. The biennial Convention provides a 
platform to the overseas Indian community to engage with the government and people of the 
land of their ancestors for mutually beneficial activities. These conventions facilitate 
networking among the overseas Indian community residing in various parts of the world and 
enable sharing of experiences in various fields. The Committee note that for the last few years, 
the Government of India has been organizing the PBD Convention in partnership with one of 
the State Governments and the recent ones were held in the cities of Gandhinagar (Gujarat), 
Bengaluru (Karnataka), Varanasi (Uttar Pradesh), Indore (Madhya Pradesh) and with the very 
latest being held in Bhubaneswar from 8-10 January, 2025. The Committee are however 
surprised to note that no Outcome Report of the Pravas iBharatiya Divas  is being prepared by 
the Ministry. The Committee fail to understand how in the absence of Outcome Reports the 
Ministry is able to assess tangible benefits or failure of the Convention or  to make 
improvements in areas where it is lagging. To make PBDs meaningful and outcome oriented, 
beyond being just grand celebrations, the Committee recommend that the Ministry prepare 
Outcome Report and, to begin with, the Outcome Report of the 18th PBD held at Bhubaneswar 
may be prepared and placed before this Committee.  
(Recommendation No. 52) 
 

129 
53. Participation in PBDs 
The Committee note that on an average over 3500 members of Indian Diaspora participate per 
edition in the Convention. It is stated that the revision of the format of the PBD in 2015 has 
enhanced the participation of the Diaspora besides having participation from HoGs/ HoSs& 
Ministers of Indian origin from other countries, renowned businessmen, eminent members of 
the Diaspora abroad and experts from various fields. The Ministry has endeavored to get 
Diaspora participants from various sectors and disciplines, including but not limited to, trade, 
business, youth, sports, science & technology, academics, research, engineering and culture 
as well as from various segments of society, including youth Diaspora, migrant workers and 
women. The Committee are further informed that the participation in PBD celebration is open to 
all members of the Indian Diaspora, including the semi-skilled emigrant workers. The 
Committee, however, regret to note that the Ministry does not maintain any data detailing the 
profile or statistics about the jobs of the participants. In the absence of such data, the 
Committee apprehend that participation may be limited to high profile participants and the 
benefits of the Convention may not extend to the low / semi-skilled and blue-collar workers. 
The Committee desire that the Ministry evolve a mechanism whereby data with respect to the 
participants are collected and regularly maintained so as to ensure that the participation and 
involvement in these Conventions is accommodative of the vulnerable sections of the Diaspora 
community too. 
(Recommendation No. 53) 
 
54. Regional Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Conferences (RPBDs) 
 The Committee note that Regional Pravasi Bharatiya Divas Conferences (RPBDs) were 
being organised by the Ministry in different parts of the world to reach out to a vast majority of 

130 
our Diaspora, who, for various reasons, were unable to attend the main biennial event in India 
and benefit from its deliberations. The Committee further note the Ministry has so far 
successfully organized 10 regional PBDs, with the last one being held in Singapore in 2018. 
Due to COVID pandemic, the Regional PBDs could not be held in 2020 and 2022. The Ministry 
has further informed that the policy of holding Regional PBD has not been abandoned by them 
and that the next Regional Pravasi Bharatiya Divas is expected to be organized in 2026. The 
Committee feel that Mini/Regional PBDs are a means to embrace and involve thousands more 
of Overseas Indians and utilize their potential to showcase India in the countries where the 
events are scheduled. Delay in conducting such events result in loss of opportunities for 
overseas Indians to connect and engage with their homeland. The Committee, hence, desire 
that Regional PravasiBharatiya Divas 2026 is organized without fail in a manner that 
compensates for the gap of eight years and the tentative plan for the same may be 
communicated to the Committee. 
(Recommendation No. 54) 
 
55. Loka Kerala Sabha 
The Committee find that in 2017, the State Government of Kerala introduced the Loka Kerala 
Sabha, a platform designed to involve Non-Resident Keralites in policy making process. The 
Committee have been informed that the initiative allows Non- Resident Keralites from around 
the world to share their ideas, discuss issues, and submit policy suggestions directly to the 
Government of Kerala. Given that State Governments are often the primary entities interacting 
with migrants and managing migration-related challenges, the Committee welcome such 
initiatives as it empowers the Diaspora community to play an active role in shaping policies 
that impact their lives. The Committee urge the Ministry to encourage other State Governments 

131 
also, especially the ones with large Diaspora community, to look into the feasibility of providing 
similar platforms allowing NRIs from their State engage with their government and contribute 
to the society where their roots are. 
(Recommendation No. 55) 
 
56. Know India Programme 
The Committee note that the Know India Programme was launched with the purpose of 
familiarizing the People of Indian Origin (PIO) youth between the age group of 21-35 years with 
contemporary India, through a three-week orientation programme and providing them an 
exposure to the country of their origin. It aims to promote awareness on different facets of life 
in India and the progress made by the country in various fields. The Committee note that 81 
editions of KIP have been completed since its inception in 2003, with the participation   of 
more than 2800 Indian Diaspora Youth from 54 countries. The programme was revamped to 
widen its scope and coverage and the Ministry is currently conducting eight to nine editions of 
KIP during each financial year since FY 2023-24. Considering the fact that the programme 
envisages direct engagement of the Government with the Overseas Indian youth, most of 
whom visit India for the first time, the Committee urge the Ministry to consider incorporating 
more diverse regional experiences, facilitating meaningful interactions with local communities, 
providing tailored learning tracks based on participants' interests while ensuring accessibility 
and inclusivity to a wider range of participants beyond merely a tourist’s experience. The 
Ministry may also consider creating online platforms for KIP alumni to network, share 
experiences, collaborate on projects and offer mentorship opportunities to guide participants 
in applying their learning in their professional lives. 
(Recommendation No. 56) 

132 
 
57. Participation of Girmitiya Countries in Know India Programme 
 The Committee note that the participation level of some of the Girmitiya countries is very low 
or nearly negligible in Know India Programmes. The Committee are concerned to note that in  
comparison to 2023-2024, participation of Girmitiya countries has decreased in 2024-25. The 
Committee urge the Ministry to utilize its embassies and consulates in Girmitiya countries to 
actively promote the programme through dedicated campaigns, information sessions and 
social media initiatives collaborating with community leaders/ organizations in these countries 
and tailor the programme itinerary to include cultural experiences related to the Girmitiya 
legacy. 
(Recommendation No. 57) 
 
58. Bharat KoJaniye (BKJ) Quiz  
The Committee are aware that Bharat KoJaniye (BKJ) Quiz is an initiative of the Government 
started in 2015 to motivate overseas Indians and foreign youth to enhance their knowledge 
about India. The BKJ Quiz was revamped in 2024 with an aim to  increasing the level of 
participation that had remained low since 2015. Accordingly, the age limit has been expanded 
to 14-50 years from the previous range of 18-35 years and the quiz was held for two categories 
PIO / Foreign Nationals and Non-Resident Indians. The Committee are happy to see that the 
efforts have resulted in the participation of a total of around 1,08876 from 203 countries in the 
5th Edition of the Quiz and the top 15 winners in two categories (NRI and PIO) have been 
invited to visit India on a two-week long BKJ Yatra along with their participation in the 18th PBD 
Convention held in Bhubaneswar. The Committee hope that through effective publicity and 
collaboration with Social Media Influencers, etc. and taking innovative steps like issuing digital 
participation certificates, the Ministry is able to further enhance participation in the next 

133 
edition of Bharat Ko Janiye (BKJ) Quiz and motivate overseas Indians and foreign youth to 
enhance their knowledge about India. 
(Recommendation No. 58) 
 
59. Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora  
The Committee note that under the Promotion of Cultural Ties with Diaspora (PCTD), the 
Ministry provides grants to Indian Missions/Posts abroad to support their initiatives aimed at 
strengthening ties with the Overseas Indian Community to preserve, maintain and showcase 
Indian heritage and legacy. The scheme aims to nourish and strengthen the cultural bonds 
between India and its Diaspora and reinforce the cultural identity of the persons of Indian 
origin. However, the Committee note with dismay that the Budget provided for PCTD in both 
BE 2023-24 and 2024-25 was only Rs. 4 crores and the funds released to Missions/Posts for 
financial year 2023-24 & 2024-25 are Rs. 3,48,38000 and Rs. 3,80,50000 respectively. For BE 
2025-26 the provision is Rs. 6 crores. The Committee wonder,how the Indian Missions and 
Posts are expected to organize cultural events with such limited resources available to them 
and are surprised that the Ministry had projected only Rs.10 crores for 66 Missions in the 
current FY despite knowing that it is difficult to meet the expectations of growing Indian 
community living abroad to organize cultural events by the Indian Missions in their countries 
with limited funds. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to make further improvements 
in its Budgetary projections taking into consideration the requests received from 
Missions/Posts and impress upon the Ministry of Finance to provide adequate Budgetary 
provisions so that the Missions are able to support their initiatives to strengthen ties with the 
Overseas Indian Community without being hindered by financial constraints. 
(Recommendation No. 59) 

134 
 
60. Videsh Sampark Programme 
The Committee note that the Videsh Sampark Programme aims at engaging with the relevant 
stakeholders within the State Governments. It gives a platform for organizing brainstorming 
sessions with the State Governments on various challenges faced by the Indian Diaspora 
overseas and to enhance engagement with the Indian States to address the same. The 
Committee have been informed that under this programme, conferences are held in the State 
capital where MEA officials brief senior State Government officials and other stakeholders in 
the State about the initiatives, programmes and schemes implemented by the Ministry. The 
Ministry  is, in fact, enthused that the utility of this Programme in sensitizing the State 
Governments on issues pertaining to the overseas Indians cannot be overstated. However, 
much to the surprise and anguish of the Committee, it is observed during the examination of 
the subject that many States are left uncovered under the programme for years together as the 
Ministry has been conducting on an average one or two Videsh Sampark Programmes in a 
year. So far Videsh Sampark Programmes have been conducted with State Governments of 
Telengana in May 2017, Maharashtra in August 2017, Kerala in September 2017, Gujarat in 
August 2018, Madhya Pradesh in September 2018, Karnataka in February 2020, Punjab and 
Haryana in June 2023, Bihar in July 2024, Tripura in July 2024 and Uttarakhand in September 
2024. The Committee feel that there is serious need to look into the schedule of Videsh 
Sampark Programme to ensure frequent and wider engagement/ consultation with the States. 
The Committee, urge the Ministry to look into the feasibility of conducting the programme 
zone-wise, so that representatives from more than one State can benefit from the engagement.  
(Recommendation No. 60) 
 

135 
61. State Governments as Partners in Migration Management 
The Committee are aggrieved to note that the States  feel there is lack of concern on part of 
MEA with regard to matters relating to Indian Diaspora. The Committee are worried about 
minimal or, at times, no contact  with States  by MEA on issues relating to the welfare of NRIs, 
including those of migrant workers abroad. The Committee are aware that the Protector of 
Emigrants (PoE) offices located in various states serve as the nodal field office of MEA for 
matters related to emigration and associated grievances, acting as a vital link between Indian 
Missions, the emigrant’s family, local authorities, etc. and is well-positioned to engage with the 
State police and administration. The Ministry has maintained that regular and timely response 
to the communications from various State authorities on the issue of emigration is ensured.  
However, the feedback in this regard is not so positive. Given the fact that State Governments 
are often the primary entities interacting with migrants and managing migration-related 
challenges, the Committee strongly feel that unless Ministry actively ropes-in the State 
Governments and make them partners, the Ministry will fail to achieve the objectives with 
regard to Diaspora management. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to formulate a 
strategy, designate officers who would be interacting with the State Governments and work 
towards cohesive collaboration with State Governments to achieve meaningful utilization of 
various welfare schemes for the Diaspora 
(Recommendation No. 61) 
 
62. Setting up of One Stop Centre (OSC) in Indian Missions Abroad 
The Committee are aware that in 2021, the Ministry of Women & Child Development and MEA 
collectively decided to set up One Stop Centre (OSC) in Indian Missions abroad to provide 
emergency shelter, police help and medico legal assistance to women in distress. Further, it 

136 
has been apprised that the One Stop Centre (OSC) Scheme is   under Nirbhaya Fund and the 
proposal for setting up seven OSCs with shelter homes in Bahrain, Kuwait, Oman, Qatar, UAE, 
Saudi Arabia (Jeddah and Riyadh) and 2 OSCs without shelter homes in Toronto and 
Singapore have been approved by the Empowered Committee of the Ministry of Women and 
Child Development (WCD) on 23.10.2024. The Committee are concerned that even after 4 years 
since announcing the Scheme, not even one OSC could be opened abroad, despite repeated 
recommendations by this Committee. The Scheme seems to be imbued with official apathy 
and chronic delay which needs to be addressed at the earliest.  The Committee strongly feel 
that the failure of this Scheme will undermine the ability of our Missions/Posts abroad to help 
women in distress. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry take proactive steps to 
accelerate the pace of implementation of the 9 OSCs in the countries as per approval during 
the FY 2025-26 itself and the Committee may be apprised of the progress in this regard.  
(Recommendation No. 62) 
 
63. Engagement with Indian Students by Missions Abroad  
As per data available with the Ministry, there are 17,79,097 Indian students studying in various 
Schools/Universities/Tertiary Institutions abroad as on 01.01.2024. The Committee note that 
the Ministry collects yearly data on Indian Students studying abroad from Missions and Posts 
abroad, but information regarding their return / continued stay is not kept by the Ministry. The 
Committee are of firm view that non-availability of comprehensive data in respect of our 
students in a foreign country by our Missions is a lacuna and it is important to have authentic 
list that covers the bulk of our students. Moreover, without such imprint, our Missions/Posts 
will not be in a position to reach out to them in times of need/crisis. Having said this, the 
Committee urge Indian Missions abroad to actively engage with Indian students, encouraging 

137 
them to register on their portals, thus contributing to a more comprehensive data set. The 
Missions/posts may also partner with universities / and student organizations to facilitate 
data collection and every event organized in the Missions should be utilized for collecting 
information 
(Recommendation No. 63) 
 
64. Timely Redressal of Students Grievances 
The Committee have been informed that Indian Missions/Posts abroad encourage Indian 
students to remain connected on a regular basis and make all possible efforts to respond to 
the outstanding issues faced by them on priority basis. The Committee have been assured that 
the grievances of the students are responded to almost on a real time basis through telephone 
calls, walk-ins, emails, social media, 24x7 emergency helpline, open houses and the MADAD 
Portal.  Any complaint received from the Indian students abroad is taken up with the 
concerned University/Institution and the host Government, as the case may be, for requisite 
action. The Committee however find that the students don’t consider our Missions as easily 
approachable or friendly and that perception needs to change. It should be the endeavour of 
our Missions to win the confidence of our student community by minimising the response time 
to their grievances and striving for near complete resolution rates. The Committee may also be 
apprised of the Open Houses arranged by our Missions during the last three years, Mission-
wise. 
(Recommendation No. 64) 
 
65. Standard Operating Procedures for Student Outreach 
The Committee have been informed that the Indian Missions/Posts abroad invite students 
enrolled in various Universities under their jurisdiction for welcome ceremonies organized 

138 
almost as soon as they reach the foreign shores for pursuing higher studies. Heads of Indian 
Missions/Posts also organize Orientation Programmes for Indian students and brief them on 
challenges / threats, if any, that they may confront during their stay in foreign lands and 
mechanisms to take counter measures. Senior Embassy officials visit Educational Institutions, 
interact with Indian students and their associations. However, these efforts do not seem to 
yield much. Being a country having the highest number of students studying abroad, next only 
to China, the Committee urge the Ministry to put in place Standard Operating Procedures 
regarding student outreach and engagement by our Missions abroad. In the absence of such 
SOPs, emergency response mechanism of the Missions/posts in crisis situations would be far 
from effective. 
(Recommendation No. 65) 
 
66. Safety and Security of Indian Students Abroad 
The Committee view Indian students studying abroad as brand ambassadors of the country. 
However, random instances of violence put their lives in danger. The Committee note that 
during the last three years, 14 Indian students have died in foreign countries due to 
violence/attacks. From a reply in the Parliament, it is seen that 403 incidents of death of Indian 
students abroad have been reported from 2018 till February 2024 due to various reasons 
including natural causes, accidents and medical conditions. The Committee desire that the 
Ministry take proactive steps to create some sort of safety net for our students by evolving a 
policy framework regarding the protection of Indian students, especially in  conflict-prone 
areas across the world. The Ministry may also consider the creation and maintenance of a real 
time data base of students studying abroad as an essential component of their safety and 
security framework.  

139 
(Recommendation No. 66) 
 
67. Assessment of Diaspora Engagement Programmes 
The Committee have been informed that the general response from the Indian Diaspora 
towards Diaspora Engagement Programmes of the Ministry is positive and welcoming. It is 
further assured that the feedback of the participants in each of the Diaspora Engagement 
Programmes is examined seriously and diligently to continuously improve such schemes. This 
exercise also contributes to policy making at various levels. While appreciating Ministry’s 
efforts towards improving Diaspora Engagement Programmes, the Committee further urge the 
Ministry to formalize annual assessment of each of these programmes by incorporating 
questionnaire survey of the beneficiaries with a focus on identifying areas of concern to them 
and also to ensure that these programmes remain aligned with the evolving needs and 
capabilities of the Diaspora population. 
(Recommendation No. 67) 
 
68. Dissemination of Information on Schemes for Diaspora 
The Committee note that Indian Missions/Posts abroad are making all out efforts to 
disseminate and popularize the programmes for the welfare of the Indian Diaspora through 
their websites, social media handles including Facebook and Twitter, community channels, 
WhatsApp, virtual newsletters, etc. However, the Committee feel that there are sections of the 
Diaspora community who are still unaware of the welfare schemes for them. The Committee, 
therefore, desire that the Ministry make concerted efforts to spread awareness amongst the 
Indian Diaspora about the various welfare programmes being laid out by the Ministry by 

140 
leveraging digital platforms, using community centres, places of worships, Diaspora  
organisations etc. 
(Recommendation No. 68) 
 
69. Global Pravasi Rishta Portal 
The Committee note that the Global Pravasi Rishta Portal was launched with an aim to 
providing a platform for connecting Pravasis with the Government of India through the 
Missions and Posts abroad. The portal is a two-way communication channel between the 
Government of India and the Indian Diaspora abroad and can be used for dissemination of 
information and creation of database of Diaspora based on voluntary registration. However, 
the Committee are disappointed to note that the Global Pravasi Rishta Portal has been 
temporarily suspended due to malware attack susceptibility. It has been assured that the 
Ministry is working on the restoration of the Portal, or creation of an alternate application with 
similar scope at the earliest for which the tendering process is already underway and the 
portal is expected to be re-launched within one year. Since the Global RISHTA portal is one of 
the main platforms connecting Pravasis with the Government of India through the Missions 
and Posts abroad, the Committee desire that the process may be accelerated to ensure that 
the re-launch is done during this year itself.  
(Recommendation No. 69) 
 
70. Expansion of MADAD Portal in Regional Languages 
 The Committee note that MADAD is an online comprehensive grievances redressal 
portal launched as part of the good governance initiative by the Government. The portal is 
accessible to all Indian nationals abroad in distress, including to those who have been 
stranded overseas due to various reasons. MADAD can be accessed through website 

141 
(www.madad.gov.in) or through mobile app. All Indian Missions and Posts abroad and the 
MEA’s Branch Secretariats in Chennai, Guwahati, Hyderabad, Kolkata and Mumbai are linked 
to this portal for consular grievance tracking and follow-up. The Committee have been 
informed that the MADAD Portal is regularly monitored at various levels and Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad take action on the complaints and update the status regularly. The 
Committee find that the grievances being handled in MADAD comprise of a range of consular 
issues including repatriation, transportation of mortal remains, death compensation, work 
related problems, imprisonment cases, marital disputes, consular services, passport issues, 
court cases, students’ issues, etc. Multilingual Call Centres (Under PBSK), Student 
Registration, Prisoners Module, Integration with the portal “eMigrate”, Integration with State 
Governments in India, Module for assistance through Indian Community Welfare Fund, etc. 
have also been added to the scope of the portal. The Committee, however, note that MADAD is 
available bilingually in Hindi and English languages only. The Committee are of the considered 
view that this is definitely an impediment to a large number of overseas Indians who may not 
be able to put forth their grievance effectively in English and Hindi. The Committee desire that 
the Ministry may look into the feasibility of expanding the ambit of the portal, including in 
regional languages that are used by a significant number of Diaspora.  
(Recommendation No. 70) 
 
71. Resolution of Grievances through MADAD Portal 
 
The Committee note that all grievances registered on the portal are automatically transferred 
to the concerned Mission/Post who take up the matters with the concerned foreign 
government and its agencies for redressal. The time taken for redressal of a grievance 
registered on the MADAD Portal depends on a number of factors including the response time 

142 
from foreign employer and foreign governments. The Ministry have informed that, as per 
standard procedure, grievances received on portal are actively followed up and responded to 
on high-priority. Further, MADAD has an inbuilt mechanism for identifying and escalating 
cases when the response in not received in time. Concerned Mission and Post abroad also 
take all necessary steps to resolve these cases as soon as possible.  The Committee are, 
however, concerned to note that despite the best efforts of the Ministry there are still 3987 
cases pending in the portal.  The Committee desire that the Ministry make efforts to bring 
about qualitative and quantitative improvements in the grievance redressal system to reduce 
the response time and accelerate the settlement of cases, especially in the Gulf countries.  
(Recommendation No. 71) 
 
72. E- Sanad Service 
The Committee note that E-Sanad is an electronic service delivery platform for apostille and 
attestation of documents issued by Government of India aiming at contactless service to 
people. The Committee further note that the e-Sanad portal is a central portal and an applicant 
residing in any part of the country can access the portal and upload his / her pre-authenticated 
documents online which are processed at New Delhi and sent back to the applicants by 
affixing Apostille sticker or attestation (as desired by the applicant) through Speed Post.  The 
same mechanism is also available to any applicant abroad, where he or she can upload the pre 
authenticated document which will be delivered at the given address in India. The Committee 
note that currently 15 Passport Offices as well as 4 Branch Secretariats located in various 
States are providing these services to the applicants. Given that the service is in such high 
demand with number of applications being received by the Ministry steadily increasing on 

143 
year-to-year basis, the Committee desire that the Ministry may consider rolling out the E- 
Sanad services  across India.  
(Recommendation No. 72) 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                 Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                    
26  March, 2025                                                                                        Chairperson,                                
05  Chaitra, 1946 (Saka)                                           Committee on External Affairs 

144 
Appendix –I 
 
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS  
(2024-25) HELD ON 27 NOVEMBER, 2024 
 
The Committee sat on Wednesday, 27 November, 2024 from 1600 hrs. to 1820 hrs. in Committee 
Room ‘D’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
 
 Dr. Shashi Tharoor,  Chairperson 
 
 Lok Sabha 
 
  Smt. D. K. Aruna 
 Shri Vijay Baghel 
  Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
  Shri Arun Govil 
 Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
 Shri Navaskani K. 
 Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
 Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
 Shri Sanatan Pandey 
 Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
 Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
 Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
 Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
 Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
 Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
 
 Rajya Sabha 
 
 Dr. John Brittas 
 Smt. Kiran Choudhry 
 Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
 Dr. K. Laxman 
 Shri A. D. Singh 
 Kunwar Ratanjeet Pratap Narayan Singh 
 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 Shri Rajeev Shukla 

145 
Secretariat 
 
 1. Shri Anjani Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director 
 3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Deputy Secretary 
 4. Ms. Maya Menon   - Under Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 Sh. Arun Kumar Chatterjee Secretary (CPV&OIA) 
 Shri Aseem Raja Mahajan Joint Secretary 
(Gulf) 
 Ms. Pratibha Parkar Joint Secretary (Parl. & Coord.) 
 Shri Ankan Banerjee Joint Secretary (Diaspora Engagement) 
 Dr. Binoy George Joint Secretary (CPV) 
 Sh. Surinder Bhagat Joint Secretary (OE&PGE) 
 Shri Anish Rajan Joint Secretary (PSP-II) 
 Shri S. Koventhan Director (PSP) 
 
2. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs to the sitting 
of the Committee convened for briefing on the subject “Indian Diaspora Overseas, including NRIs, 
PIOs, OCIs and Migrant Workers: All Aspects of their Conditions and Welfare, including the Status of 
the Emigration Bill.”  After outlining the subject for deliberation, the Chairperson drew the attention of 
the witnesses to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of 
the proceedings. 
 
3. Thereafter, Secretary, (CPV&OIA) gave a brief overview of the subject covering inter-alia the 
Diaspora policy of the Government, objectives and aims of the policy, the proposed 18th Pravasi 
Bharatiya Divas Convention scheduled in January 2025, various welfare schemes of the Ministry, 
migration and mobility partnership agreements and labour manpower agreements entered into by the 
Government, mechanisms established by the Ministry to monitor grievances of Indian nationals 
abroad, the pre-departure orientation training programme, the e-migrate portal, status of Emigration 
Bill etc.  
 

146 
4. During the course of the briefing, Members of the Committee raised several queries which 
inter-alia included initiatives taken by the Government to harness the potential of the diaspora, various 
policies and programs undertaken by the MEA for the Diaspora, the non functioning of Global Pravasi 
Rishta Portal, pendency of grievance redressal cases in MADAD portal, criteria for Pravasi Bharatiya 
Samman, transportation of mortal remains of Indians from abroad, e-governance in immigration, 
facilities/platforms for distressed Indian women abroad, migration and mobility partnership 
arrangements with other countries, action taken by MEA in respect of Indians lodged in foreign jails, 
issue of cyber slavery of Indian IT professionals, issue of undocumented Indians in US, database of 
the migrant workers, steps being taken by MEA to address issues of exploitation, human trafficking 
and unfair labour practices faced by migrant workers abroad, rehabilitation of the returned workers, 
status of the Emigration Bill and the challenges faced in its drafting and introduction etc. 
 
5. The representatives from the Ministry of External Affairs responded to the queries of the 
Members. The Committee also desired that replies may be furnished to the points raised by the 
members of the Committee at the earliest. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the 
Ministry for valuable and insightful inputs on the topic. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim proceeding of the Sitting has been kept on record. 

147 
Appendix –II 
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25) 
HELD ON 21 JANUARY, 2025 
 
 The Committee sat on Tuesday 21 January, 2025 from 1100 hrs. to 1315 hrs. in Committee 
Room ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 2. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
 3. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
 4. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
 5. Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
 6. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
Rajya Sabha 
 7. Smt. Kiran Choudhry 
 8. Dr. K. Laxman 
 9. Kunwar Ratanjeet Pratap Narayan Singh 
 10. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 
Secretariat 
 
 1. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director 
 2. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Deputy Secretary 
 3. Ms. Maya Menon   - Under Secretary 
 
 
List of Organisations 
 
NORKA ROOTS 
 1. Dr. K Vasuki, IAS   - Norka Secretary 
 2. Shri Ajith Kolassery,   - Chief Executive Officer 
 
Department of NRIs Affairs, Government of Punjab 
 1. Sh. Dilip Kumar,  IAS  - Principal Secretary  
 2. Shri Rajpal Singh, IPS  - DIG, NRI Affairs Wing, Punjab 
 
People of Indian Origin Chamber of Commerce & Industry (PIOCCI), Delhi 
 1. Shri Munish Gupta,  - Secretary & International Coordinator 
 
Centre for Diaspora Studies Central University of Gujarat, Gandhinagar (Gujarat) 
 1. Dr. Naresh Kumar,   - Chairperson & Professor 
 

148 
2. The Chairperson welcomed the representatives from NORKA Roots, Kerala, Department of 
NRI Affairs, Government of Punjab, People of Indian Origin Chamber of Commerce and Industry 
(PIOCCI) and Centre for Diaspora Studies, Gujarat to the sitting of the Committee convened for an 
interaction on the subject “Indian Diaspora Overseas, including NRIs, PIOs, OCIs and Migrant 
Workers: All Aspects of their Conditions and Welfare, including the Status of the Emigration Bill.”  
After outlining the subject for deliberation, the Chairperson drew the attention of the witnesses to 
Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings. 
3. Thereafter, representative from PIOCCI briefed the Committee, inter-alia on voting rights to 
NRIs, hardship being faced by OCIs and PIOs in getting an Aadhaar Card, expansion of Know India 
Programme, Pravasi Bharatiya Diwas, dual citizenship, etc. Thereafter, the representatives from 
Department of NRIs Affairs, Government of Punjab briefed the Committee, inter-alia on issues relating 
to repatriation of mortal remains of person who dies abroad, loan opportunity from banks for people 
who go abroad for employment, lack of specific data on NRIs, multiplicity of definition of the term 
‘NRI’, lack of personnel in the Embassies who understand State nuances, NRI divorces, serving of 
summons to people residing outside India, etc. The representatives of NORKA Roots also apprised 
the Committee on the need felt for centralized approach to emigration issues, lack of consultation with 
the State Governments on emigration policies and schemes, aspects pertaining to proposed 
Emigration Bill, student migration, State Recruitment Agencies, upskilling of workers, lack of NRI data, 
lack of formal system for transport of mortal remains, need for national level reintegration policy for 
migrants, NRI prisoners in jails abroad, etc. Thereafter, representative from Centre for Diaspora 
Studies, Gujarat briefed the Committee on the need for setting up of international data resource centre 
on migration diaspora and a new centre/department in the field of migration and diaspora studies in 
universities or institution across India, etc. 
4. During the course of the briefing, Members of the Committee raised several queries which 
inter-alia included perspective of the Diaspora organizations and State representatives on the various 
programmes offered by the Ministry of External Affairs, their take on the challenges being faced by the 
Indian Diaspora abroad, effectiveness of Videsh Sampark programme, action being taken by 
respective State Governments to raise awareness about the consequences of unlawful migration 
pathways and unscrupulous travel agencies and recruitment agents, access to national criminal 
databases, cybercrime involving NRIs, clarifications on concerns arising during NRI divorce cases, 
dual citizenship, representation of NRIs in the Parliament, voting rights to NRIs etc. 

149 
5. The representatives from the State and Diaspora Organizations responded to the queries of 
the Members. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives for valuable and insightful inputs on 
the topic. The Committee also desired that additional suggestions, if any, may be furnished to the 
Committee at the earliest.  
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim proceeding of the Sitting has been kept on record. 

150 
Appendix –III 
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25) 
HELD ON  04 FEBRUARY, 2025 
 
The Committee sat on Tuesday, 04 February, 2025 from 1530 hrs. to 1650 hrs. in Committee Room 
No. 62, Samvidhan Sadan, New Delhi. 
Present 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor -  Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
1. Shri Vijay Baghel 
2.  Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
3. Shri Arun Govil 
4. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
5. Shri Sanatan Pandey 
6. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
7. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
8. Dr. John Brittas 
9. Dr. K. Laxman 
10. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
11. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
12. Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
 
Secretariat 
 1. Shri Anjani Kumar  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director 
 3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut - Deputy Secretary 
 4. Ms. Maya Menon   - Under Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
1. Shri Arun Kumar Chatterjee  - Secretary (CPV&OIA) 
2. Shri Aseem R Mahajan  - Joint Secretary (Gulf) 
3. Ms. Pratibha Parkar   - Joint Secretary (Parl. & Coord.) 
4. Dr. K. J. Srinivasa   - Joint Secretary (PSP) & CPO 

151 
5. Dr. Binoy George   - Joint Secretary (CVP) 
6. Shri Surinder Bhagat  - Joint Secretary (OE) & PGE 
7. Shri Rajesh Parihar   - Director (XPD) 
8. Shri S. Koventhan  - Director (PSP) 
9. Shri Jitendra Rawat  - Director (OE) 
10. Shri Sanjeev Manchanda - Director (Policy) 
11. Shri SRH Fahmi  - Director (CPV) 
 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the representatives of the Ministry of External Affairs 
to the sitting of the Committee convened for taking oral evidence on the subject “Indian Diaspora 
Overseas, including NRIs, PIOs, OCIs and Migrant Workers: All Aspects of their Conditions and 
Welfare, including the Status of the Emigration Bill.”  After outlining the subject for deliberation, the 
Chairperson drew the attention of the witnesses to Direction 58 of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok 
Sabha regarding confidentiality of the proceedings. 
 
3. Thereafter, Secretary, (CPV&OIA) gave the latest update on the subject covering inter-alia the 
Know India Programmes conducted, 18th Pravasi Bharatiya Diwas convention held in Bhubaneshwar 
in Odisha in January, 2025 and the various events organized during the convention.   
 
4. During the course of the briefing, the members of the Committee raised several queries which 
inter-alia included lack of accurate data of Indian Diaspora, multiplicity of definition of the term ‘NRI’,  
concerns of State and Diaspora organizations about lack of engagement between the Central and 
State Governments and the diaspora organizations, lack of outreach to the States under the Videsh 
Sampark Programme, voting rights to NRIs, lack of a specific international instrument for the 
protection of the diaspora, concerns about accessibility of Indian missions abroad to NRI workers and 
students, lack of systematic engagement with students abroad pendency of grievances, deportation 
from US, usurping of NRI property, exploitation of female workers abroad especially in middle east, 
fraudulent NRI marriage concerns, OCI cards- their issuance, revocation and dishonour, language 
constraints in MADAD portal, status of one stop centres, action taken by MEA in respect of Indians 
lodged in foreign jails, issue of unregistered agents, Pravasi Bhartiya Divas organised in 
Bhubaneswar etc.  
 

152 
5. The representatives from the Ministry of External Affairs responded to the queries of the 
Members. The Committee also desired that replies may be furnished to the points raised by the 
members of the Committee at the earliest. The Chairperson then thanked the representatives of the 
Ministry for valuable and insightful inputs on the topic. 
 
The Committee then adjourned 
(The witnesses then withdrew) 
A verbatim proceeding of the Sitting has been kept on record. 

153 
Appendix –IV 
 
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTEENTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS (2024-25) HELD ON 26 MARCH, 2025 
  
The Committee sat from 1725 hrs. to 1800 hrs. in Committee Room No. 2, Extension Building, 
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
  
 Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
  
 Lok Sabha 
  Smt. D. K. Aruna 
  Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
  Shri Arun Govil 
 Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
 Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
 Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
 Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
 Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
 Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
 Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
 Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
 Shri Naveen Jindal 
 Rajya Sabha 
 Dr. John Brittas 
 Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
 Dr. K. Laxman 
 Ms. Kavita Patidar 
 Shri A. D. Singh 
 Kunwar Ratanjeet Pratap Narayan 
Singh 
 Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
 Shri Rajeev Shukla 
 Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 

154 
1.      Mr. Anjani Kumar                                -          Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan              -          Director             
3.      Ms. K.M. Tunglut                                -          Deputy Secretary 
4.      Ms. Maya Menon                                -          Under Secretary 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
Sl no. Name of the Officer Designation 
 Shri Vikram Misri Foreign Secretary 
[Leader of Delegation] 
 Shri Balasubramanian Shyam Joint Secretary (BM) 
 Ms. Pratibha Parkar Joint Secretary (Parl & Coord) 
 Ms. Priyanka Sohoni Director (FSO) 
 
           
2.        At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee.  
3.      The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on the subject ‘Indian Diaspora 
Overseas, including NRIs, PIOs, OCIs and Migrant Workers: All Aspects of their Conditions and 
Welfare, including the Status of the Emigration Bill.’ 
4.        The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions for incorporation in the draft 
Report. The Members suggested some modifications. After deliberations the Committee adopted the 
draft Report with these modifications. 
5.  The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the Report incorporating the 
suggestions made by the Members and present the same to Parliament.  
The Committee then adjourned. 

155 
ANNEXURE-A 
Data on Indian Diaspora Abroad 
(as of January 2023) 
Data on Indian Diaspora Abroad 
(as of January 2024) 
S.No. Country/Ter
ritory PIOs NRIs 
Total 
Overseas 
Indians 
PIOs NRIs 
Total 
Overseas 
Indians 
1.  Afghanistan 0 100 100 0 0 0 
2.  Albania 6 450 456 7 450 457 
3.  Algeria 23 3800 3823 23 3800 3823 
4.  Andorra 200 50 250 200 50 250 
5.  Angola 65 2400 2465 67 2514 2581 
6.  Antigua & 
Barbuda 400 250 650 200 300 500 
7.  Argentina 1800 800 2600 1853 825 2678 
8.  Armenia 13 3000 3013 20 4500 4520 
9.  Aruba 400 600 1000 400 600 1000 
10.  Australia 626000 350000 976000 626000 350000 976000 
11.  
Austria & 
Montenegro & 
Holy See 
18200 14010 32210 18200 14300 32500 
12.  Azerbaijan 74 1481 1555 76 1007 1083 
13.  Bahamas 20 280 300 20 280 300 
14.  Bahrain 3822 308662 312484 3899 323908 327807 
15.  Bangladesh 0 7500 7500 0 7000 7000 
16.  Barbados 2500 600 3100 2500 600 3100 
17.  Belarus 144 1121 1265 147 927 1074 
18.  Belgium 10946 17207 28153 11396 17438 28834 
19.  Belize 1300 200 1500 1300 200 1500 

156 
20.  Benin 4 996 1000 4 996 1000 
21.  Bhutan 0 60000 60000 0 60000 60000 
22.  Bolivia 0 74 74 0 48 48 
23.  
Bonaire & 
Smaller 
Islands 
12 54 66 12 54 66 
24.  Bosnia & 
Herzegovina 2 13 15 2 20 22 
25.  Botswana 3000 9000 12000 3000 9000 12000 
26.  Brazil 632 983 1615 1002 3046 4048 
27.  British Virgin 
Islands 20 80 100 20 80 100 
28.  Brunei 
Darussalam 203 13797 14000 211 15000 15211 
29.  Bulgaria 121 700 821 103 700 803 
30.  Burkina Faso 350 150 500 350 150 500 
31.  Burundi 35 465 500 35 700 735 
32.  Cambodia 52 1750 1802 52 1753 1805 
33.  Cameroon 0 1000 1000 0 1000 1000 
34.  Canada 1347715 898050 2245765 1859680 1016274 2875954 
35.  Cabo Verde 0 100 100 0 25 25 
36.  Cayman 
Islands 100 700 800 100 900 1000 
37.  
Central 
African 
Republic 
0 50 50 0 70 70 
38.  Chad 0 120 120 0 120 120 
39.  Chile 2150 1851 4001 2150 1800 3950 
40.  China 1060 7400 8460 1060 7400 8460 
41.  China (Hong 
Kong) 11106 32796 43902 11350 32790 44140 
42.  China 442  4086 4528 501 5303 5804 

157 
(Taiwan) 
43.  Colombia  139 475 614 159 483 642 
44.  Comoros 178 42 220 178 42 220 
45.  
Congo 
(Democratic 
Republic of) 
5000 13000 18000 5000 15000 20000 
46.  Congo 
(Republic of) 0 850 850 0 850 850 
47.  Cook lslands 320 10 330 5 0 0 
48.  Costa Rica 20 1011 1031 39 1011 1050 
49.  Côte d'Ivoire 
(Ivory Coast) 5 1617 1622 7 2738 2745 
50.  Croatia 29 88 117 29 11982 12011 
51.  Cuba 1 1139 1140 2 868 870 
52.  Curacao 800 700 1500 800 700 1500 
53.  Cyprus 342 6908 7250 367 14612 14979 
54.  Czech 
Republic 374 8546 8920 408 9090 9498 
55.  Denmark 2958 15534 18492 3187 17460 20647 
56.  Djibouti 4 1000 1004 8 1000 1008 
57.  
Dominica 
(Commonweal
th of) 
500 40 540 500 40 540 
58.  Dominican 
Republic 0 33 33 0 57 57 
59.  East Timor 0 100 100 0 100 100 
60.  Ecuador 74 264 338 82 269 351 
61.  Egypt 392 3007 3399 392 3141 3533 
62.  El Salvador 1 20 21 1 20 21 
63.  Equatorial 
Guinea 0 250 250 0 250 250 
64.  Eritrea 1 200 201 0 172 172 

158 
65.  Estonia 428 1900 2328 428 1900 2328 
66.  
Eswatini 
(formerly 
Swaziland) 
40 1900 1940 40 1900 1940 
67.  Ethiopia 86 5900 5986 7 5900 5907 
68.  Fiji 313798 2283 316081 313798 2283 316081 
69.  Finland 10749 8245 18994 13114 8245 21359 
70.  France 90000 29000 119000 90000 29000 119000 
71.  
France 
(Reunion 
Island) 
300000 159 300159 300000 159 300159 
72.  France 
(Guadeloupe) 57000 180 57180 57000 180 57180 
73.  France 
(Martinique) 8000 90 8090 8000 90 8090 
74.  France (St. 
Martin) 1800 150 1950 1800 150 1950 
75.  Gabon 300 1200 1500 300 1200 1500 
76.  Gambia 20 2000 2020 20 2100 2120 
77.  Georgia 17 10122 10139 17 5750 5767 
78.  Germany 50542 358021 408563 52864 208000 260864 
79.  Ghana 309 10000 10309 321 15000 15321 
80.  Greece 1089 12300 13389 1514 33486 35000 
81.  Grenada 4500 200 4700 4500 200 4700 
82.  Guatemala 15 60 75 18 65 83 
83.  Guinea 
(Republic of) 47 1365 1412 51 1390 1441 
84.  Guinea-
Bissau 0 200 200 0 300 300 
85.  Guyana 308000 700 308700 320000 1500 321500 
86.  Haiti 0 47 47 0 36 36 
87.  Holy See 30 15 45 30 15 45 

159 
88.  Honduras 2 30 32 2 30 32 
89.  Hungary 277 8457 8734 277 8457 8734 
90.  Iceland 544 301 845 104 528 632 
91.  Indonesia 4411 10000 14411 120000 14817 134817 
92.  Iran 418 5600 6018 445 10320 10765 
93.  Iraq 8 16500 16508 4 17100 17104 
94.  Ireland 30111 18500 48611 31386 30000 61386 
95.  Israel 85000 18000 103000 85000 20000 105000 
96.  Italy 38000 190000 228000 39170 167333 206503 
97.  Jamaica 68000 2000 70000 68000 5000 73000 
98.  Japan 1324 39373 40697 1548 46262 47810 
99.  Jordan 167 16540 16707 153 16897 17050 
100. Kazakhstan 300 7770 8070 420 9815 10235 
101. Kenya 60000 20000 80000 60000 20000 80000 
102. Kiribati 50 2 52 50 2 52 
103. Korea (DPR) 1 15 16 1 15 16 
104. Korea 
(Republic of) 249 15219 15468 287 16714 17001 
105. Kuwait 2134 924687 926821 2244 993284 995528 
106. Kyrgyzstan 47 15985 16032 48 16550 16598 
107. Laos  100 600 700 113 587 700 
108. Latvia 60 2940 3000 100 2900 3000 
109. Lebanon 37 3000 3037 40 3000 3040 
110. Lesotho 
(Kingdom of) 1500 1500 3000 1500 1500 3000 
111. Liberia 2 3000 3002 2 3000 3002 

160 
112. Libya 0 3000 3000 0 0 0 
113. Liechtenstein 0 37 37 0 35 35 
114. Lithuania 100 1500 1600 100 4470 4570 
115. Luxembourg 663 4610 5273 813 4508 5321 
116. Macedonia 9 44 53 8 29 37 
117. Madagascar 7674 2826 10500 7674 2826 10500 
118. Malawi 8500 8143 16643 8500 8143 16643 
119. Malaysia 2753500 163127 2916627 2751000 163127 2914127 
120. Maldives 131 27065 27196 135 27065 27200 
121. Mali 3 450 453 3 558 561 
122. Malta 150 12000 12150 250 18000 18250 
123. Marshall 
Islands 2 14 16 2 7 9 
124. Mauritania 0 310 310 0 310 310 
125. Mauritius 863566 20222 883788 871140 23708 894848 
126. Mexico 2650 8000 10650 2650 8000 10650 
127. 
Micronesia 
(Federated 
States of) 
0 35 35 0 35 35 
128. Moldova 9 950 959 9 950 959 
129. Monaco 43 10 53 43 10 53 
130. Mongolia 9 100 109 9 100 109 
131. Montserrat 200 15 215 200 15 215 
132. Morocco 116 409 525 116 434 550 
133. Mozambique 25262 3000 28262 25262 3000 28262 
134. Myanmar 2000000 2500 2002500 2000000 2660 2002660 

161 
135. Namibia 70 450 520 70 450 520 
136. Nauru 0 20 20 0 20 20 
137. Nepal 4 700000 700004 4 700000 700004 
138. Netherlands 197000 66000 263000 178000 50787 228787 
139. New Zealand 130000 120000 250000 120000 150000 270000 
140. Nicaragua 1 39 40 1 39 40 
141. Niger 0 250 250 8 150 158 
142. Nigeria 100 51700 51800 51700 100 51800 
143. Niue 5 5 10 0 0 0 
144. Norway 11697 10285 21982 10955 16890 27845 
145. Oman 1808 673558 675366 1864 684771 686635 
146. Pakistan 0 0 0 0 0 0 
147. Palau 0 29 29 0 29 29 
148. Palestine 3 17 20 2 11 13 
149. Panama 11000 4000 15000 11000 4000 15000 
150. Papua New 
Guinea 55 4000 4055 62 4000 4062 
151. Paraguay 400 200 600 400 200 600 
152. Peru 174 181 355 180 192 372 
153. Philippines 2316 147684 150000 2492 147518 150010 
154. Poland 1100 20000 21100 1200 23000 24200 
155. Portugal 10909 90000 100909 13682 90000 103682 
156. Qatar 1533 817665 819198 1609 835175 836784 
157. Romania 305 5700 6005 327 5700 6027 
158. Russia 1750 30032 31782 2653 60172 62825 

162 
159. Rwanda 60 2940 3000 60 2940 3000 
160. Saint Kitts & 
Nevis 200 100 300 100 500 600 
161. Saint Lucia 18600 550 19150 18600 550 19150 
162. 
Saint Vincent 
& The 
Grenadines 
6600 50 6650 6600 50 6650 
163. Samoa 340 10 350 50 0 50 
164. San Marino 0 0 0 0 0 0 
165. Sao Tome and 
Principe 1 20 21 1 20 21 
166. Saudi Arabia 2912 2387004 2389916 2906 2460603 2463509 
167. Senegal 20 2000 2020 20 2100 2120 
168. Serbia 21 2500 2521 21 2800 2821 
169. Seychelles 5047 8180 13227 5058 8180 13238 
170. Sierra Leone 6 3000 3006 12 3000 3012 
171. Singapore 300000 350000 650000 300000 350000 650000 
172. Sint Maarten 3000 2170 5170 3000 2170 5170 
173. Slovak 
Republic 51 1620 1671 51 2949 3000 
174. Slovenia 57 313 370 86 822 908 
175. Solomon 
lslands 0 20 20 0 20 20 
176. Somalia 0 100 100 0 100 100 
177. South Africa 1400000 60000 1460000 1640000 60000 1700000 
178. South Sudan 0 10000 10000 0 900 900 
179. Spain 14480 51440 65920 15986 51606 67592 
180. Sri Lanka 1600000 6687 1606687 1600000 7500 1607500 
181. Sudan 900 3450 4350 35 50 85 

163 
182. Suriname 160000 150 160150 160000 160 160160 
183. Sweden 18000 42000 60000 20000 40000 60000 
184. Switzerland 8743 18541 27284 8996 17059 26055 
185. Syria 0 80 80 0 97 97 
186. Tajikistan 0 1500 1500 0 1800 1800 
187. Tanzania 40000 15000 55000 40000 15000 55000 
188. Thailand 125000 25000 150000 125000 25000 150000 
189. Togo 10 659 669 10 973 983 
190. Tonga 50 5 55 50 5 55 
191. Trinidad and 
Tobago 548279 1266 549545 548279 1266 549545 
192. Tunisia 31 80 111 0 0 0 
193. Türkiye 
(Turkey) 231 2300 2531 223 3083 3306 
194. Turkmenistan 4 100 104 4 105 109 
195. 
Turks & 
Caicos 
Islands 
50 200 250 50 200 250 
196. Tuvalu 20 2 22 20 0 20 
197. Uganda 2660 30000 32660 2660 35000 37660 
198. Ukraine 708 2150 2858 726 2610 3336 
199. United Arab 
Emirates 139 3554274 3554413 14574 3554274 3568848 
200. United 
Kingdom 970969 369000 1339969 1495318 369000 1864318 
201. United States 
of America 3450715 1796811 5247526 3331904 2077158 5409062 
202. Uruguay 50 750 800 55 773 828 
203. Uzbekistan 49 4200 4249 61 5939 6000 
204. Vanuatu 306 10 316 15 0 15 

164 
205. Venezuela 19 24 43 19 33 52 
206. Vietnam 91 2500 2591 462 7550 8012 
207. Yemen 427 0 427 420 700 1120 
208. Zambia 25000 5000 30000 25000 5000 30000 
209. Zimbabwe 9000 500 9500 9000 1000 10000 
 Total  18229230 15332054 33561284 19571375 15850612 35421987 
 
***** 
 
 

ANNEXURE-B 
OI-11012/13/2017-OIA I 
Government of India 
Ministry of External Affairs  
[Overseas Indian Affairs Division] 
 
 
Akbar Bhawan, Chanakyapuri, 
New Delhi: 31thAugust, 2017 
To 
 
All Missions/Posts. 
 
Subject: Revision in Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF)guidelines 
 
 
The Union Cabinet has approved revision of the Indian Community Welfare 
Fund (ICWF) guidelines. The revised scheme will come into effect from 01" 
September, 2017. 
The revised guidelines expand the scope of welfare measures that can be 
extended through the fund. The service charges on consular services has also been 
modified and notified accordingly vide Gazette Notification dated 16 August, 2017. 
The copy of revised guidelines as well as Gazette Notification is hereby 
attached for ready reference. 
 
 
 
 
 
Deputy Secretary to the Government of India 
24197978/24121528 
6 ds1oia1@mea.gov.in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
OI-11012/13/2017-OIA I 
Ministry of External Affairs 
 
Guidelines on Indian Community Welfare Fund 
Established in Indian Missions/Posts abroad 
 
1. Background 
 
a. The ‘Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) was established in the Indian 
Missions of 17 Emigration Clearance Required (ECR) Countries and Maldives after 
due approval of the Cabinet, vide letter No. OI-11012/25/2007- US(EP-I) dated 12th 
October, 2009 of the Ministry to meet contingency expenditure incurred by them for 
carryingoutvariouson-sitewelfareactivitiesforOverseasIndianCitizensindistress. 
 
b. Revised guidelines for utilization of ICWF were issued with the concurrence of IFD 
vide Dy. No. 4476/Dir(F)/12 dated04.08.2012. 
 
c. After due consultations with the Department of  Expenditure,  Ministry of  Finance 
the following guidelines are being issued to enhance the utilization of the  fund,  
expand the scope of activities and purposes for which the fund can be used, and 
enable activities for welfare of both distressed overseas Indians, and the Indian 
community. 
 
2. Source ofICWF 
 
2. i.a. Service  Charges The Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) set up   
in the Missions will have the following revised charges: 
 
I Funds raised by the Indian Missions by levying a service charge on Consular 
Services asunder: 
 
(i) For Visa, OCI/ PIO Cards – US $3 /- per document rounded off in local 
currency to the next whole/round number 
(ii) For Passport Services – US $2 /- per document rounded off in  local 
currency to the next whole/round number 
(iii) For attestation of employment document – US  $2/- per worker rounded off 
in local currency to the next whole/round number 
(iv) Attestation of other documents and other miscellaneous consular services 
rendered by Mission (other than in death cases) – US $2/- per worker 
rounded off in local currency to the next whole/round number 
 
2.i.b. The charges so levied shall be in local currency rounded off to the next 
whole/round number. The official exchange rate prevalent at the time of such 
calculation shall be used, and shall not be changed thereafter during  the Financial 
Year keeping in view that charges so levied are adequate to meet requirements of 
Missions/Posts and to build a suitable reserve to  meet  unforeseen contingencies.  
The service charge may be revised by this Ministry from time totime.

 
2.ii. Voluntary contributions by Indian community. 
 
Missions/Posts may receive contributions into ICWF from local Indians or Indian 
community organizations and shall issue a receipt thereto indicating clearly  the  
names and addresses of such contributors. Such receipts should be included in their 
monthly statement of ICWF accounts sent to MEA and PrCCA. 
 
2.iii. Income from deposits and investments: If surplus ICWF funds  are  
maintained in FDs, the interest accrued through the investment shall be deposited on 
yearly basis in the main ICWF corpus. 
 
2.iv. Existing welfare Funds operating in Mission/Posts shall be merged with  
ICWF  after performance  audit of existing Fund by the  O/o Principal Chief Controller  
of Accounts. A certificate in this regard will be furnished to MEA. 
 
2.v For Missions/Posts which have not set-up ICWF so far, Ministry of External 
Affairs would provide budgetary support for setting up the ICWF in  the  Indian 
Missions to the tune of Rs. Five lakh annually, for three(3) years or till the period the 
fund becomes self sustaining, whichever is earlier. The amount would be limited to 
meet the deficit in financial resources of Missions, with due regard to the utilization of 
the amount released during previous years. 
 
3. Criteria for Utilisation 
 
3. i. ICWF funds can be used to assist only Indian citizens residing  in  the  host 
country or those in distress while visiting a foreign country. Persons of Indian Origin 
and Overseas Citizens of India Card Holders are not eligible for individual financial 
assistance from ICWF. 
 
3. ii. ICWF can be utilized for the benefit of Indian nationals in distress on a means 
tested basis provided the officer approving ICWF expenditure has satisfied himself  
that the beneficiary deserves to be assisted. 
 
3. iii Ordinarily only such Indian National(s) who have entered the  host  country  
legally shall be eligible to receive benefits under this Fund.  In cases where it  is not  so, 
assistance may be provided after HOM/HOP has recorded his satisfaction to the effect 
that the circumstances of the case necessitate providing assistance  under ICWF. 
 
4. Procedures for approval 
 
4.i. Missions/Posts will consider requests from Indian nationals, written or verbal, for 
grantofassistance.Allverbalrequestsshallbefollowedbywrittenconfirmation. 
 
4.ii. Written proposals for expenditure from ICWF should originate from the Welfare 
officer/Consular officer/Community Affairs officer of the  Mission/Post  who  will 
examine and submit them to the competent authority for approval with his/her 
recommendation, on a case-to-case basis. In Missions/Posts where such officers are 
not designated, the HoM/HoP may designate an appropriate level officer  for  
proposing such assistance. 

 
4.iii Approval of expenditure from ICWF will be at the level of HoM/HoP subject to 
ceilings specified for various ICWF related items of expenditure in Sections  A, B and  
C of the Guidelines respectively. HoM/HoP should ensure that ICWF shall not be 
usedforroutineactivitiesorexpensesforwhichbudgetspendingisavailable. 
 
4.iv HoM/HoP may formally authorize DCM/DHC/DCG to approve requests for 
assistance from ICWF subject to an upper limit of 
 
US$ 2000 per case in ECR Countries; 
US$ 1000 per case in Other Countries. 
4.v If HoMs/HoPs consider it necessary to deploy the Fund in most deserving cases, 
for services not indicated in these guidelines or if Mission/Posts’ funds are not 
adequate to meet a contingency, they shall send a detailed self contained proposal, 
alongwith facts, justification etc. seeking prior approval of Ministry. 
 
4. vi Proposals received from Missions/Posts will  be  considered in  the Ministry, by 
a Committee comprising of following members: 
(i) Joint Secretary, OIA Division, MEA (dealing with ICWF); 
(ii) Joint Secretary (CPV), MEA; and 
(iii) Director (Finance) or DS (Finance),MEA. 
 
4. vii The recommendation of the above Committee shall be submitted to Foreign 
Secretary. Proposals involving expenditure upto Rs. 25 lakhs can be approved by 
Foreign Secretary. Proposals involving expenditure beyond Rs. 25 lakhs shall be 
submitted to EAM for approval. 
 
4. viii Requests for transfer of additional ICWF funds  from other  Missions/Posts(if 
there is shortage of funds in the ICWF account of the recipient Mission), to assist 
distressed overseas Indians during crisis/emergency  situations,  shall  be  submitted 
by HoM/HoP concerned, to the Ministry for approval ofEAM. 
 
5. Assistance from ICWF will be permissible for the following activities: 
 
a. Section ‘A’: Individual Financial Assistance for Indian nationals in distress 
b. Section ‘B’: Support for Community Welfare Activities 
c. Section ‘C’: Improvement in Consular Services

 
Section A 
 
Individual Financial Assistance for Distressed Indian nationals 
 
6. Boarding and lodging (B&L) for deserving distressed Indian  nationals  
abroad on a means tested basis in Budget category or shelters run by 
Mission/Post or NGOs empanelled with Mission. 
 
6.i. ECR countries : B&L for distressed Indian nationals upto 30 days extendable  
upto a maximum of 60 days  by HoM/HoP, if circumstances so warrant. If period of B  
& L exceeds 60 days, prior approval of Foreign Secretary may be sought, indicating 
reasons for seeking extension, and the total cost to be incurred in each case. 
 
6.ii. Other countries: B&L subject to an upper limit of 30 days with approval of 
HOM/HOP. If period of B&L exceeds the above limits, extension can be done for a 
furtherperiodofnotmorethan30dayswithpriorapprovalofForeignSecretary. 
 
7. Air passage to India to stranded Overseas Indians. 
 
7.i. Mission/Post can pay for one-way airfare by cheapest class on Air India or any 
other cheaper carriers having direct connection, on a means tested basis,  for 
deserving distressed Indian nationals, from the country of departure of  overseas 
Indian to the nearest airport/ first port of arrival in India with the prior approval of 
HOM/HOP. 
 
7.ii. With prior approval of HoM/HoP, air passage to a Doctor  /an  attendant  (for 
mortal remains) when local government mandates so or to accompany primary 
beneficiary in case of permanent disability or serious injury / illness of primary 
beneficiary, on recommendation of a doctor/hospital in the latter case. HOM/HOP to 
approve two-way airfare to the accompanying Doctor/or attendant of primary 
beneficiary. 
 
8. LegalAssistance 
 
8.i. Eligibility: On a means tested basis to deserving overseas Indian nationals who 
have committed minor crimes, offences or have been falsely implicated by their 
employer and put in jails; fishermen/seamen/sailors/Indian students in distress; and 
Indian women abandoned/ cheated / abused by their NRI/PIO or foreign spouses  
(uptosevenyearsaftertheirmarriage)(DetailedguidelinesareatAnnexure-A). 
 
Priority may be given to release of Indian nationals who have completed their prison 
sentence; filing bail applications in respect of those qualifying for bail; filing of 
applications for remission of sentences in cases of petty offences;  assistance  to 
Indian migrant workers who have been abused/cheated/tortured by their 
employer/sponsor/ insurance company. 
 
8.ii. Missions/Posts may seek Foreign Secretary’s prior approval, with proper 
justification, for legal assistance on a mean-tested basis to Indian nationals, charged 
for organized/serious crimes such as trafficking of arms and humans; murder; sexual

 
crimes or for trafficking of drugs (where there  is  reasonable ground  to believe that  
the Indian national may not be at fault)etc. 
 
8.iii. Appointment of panel of lawyers: GCC + Top 20 countries with major 
Overseas Indian national population, as per list enclosed at Annexure-B 
 
Missions/Posts may appoint on basis of GFR principles, on  annual contract, a panel  
of 3-5 local lawyers/firms proficient in local language and law, and  who  enjoy 
credibility and have commitment and experience to  assist deserving Indian nationals  
in distress. Mission/Post may finalize a rate contract with the  law firm for  different 
legal services to be provided (including filing bail applications, petitions for remission  
of sentence; review of sentence; mercy petitions etc.). 
 
Ministry should be informed about the appointment of the panel; and  whenever there 
is any change in the panel appointed. Details of the law firms  hired  and  rates  
chargedbythemshallbemadeavailableonthewebsiteoftheMission/Consulate. 
 
8. Iv Financial Limits for Legal Assistance 
 
HOM/HOP can authorize legal assistance subject to an upper limit of US$10,000 per 
person/case, provided the recipient is not receiving such assistance  from  a  third 
party, (employer, sponsor or family etc.) and the beneficiary does  not  have  the  
means to pay for legal expenses. The amount includes expenditure on a trained, 
experienced local interpreter (empanelled by Embassy at specified rates agreed on a 
yearly basis) if court hearings are in local language. 
 
Prior approval of Foreign Secretary shall be sought for providing legal assistance 
beyond the prescribed limits. Foreign Secretary can approve proposals 
uptoUS$20,000. Proposals which exceed this amount shall be submitted to EAM for 
prior approval. 
 
9. Transportation of Mortal Remains (TMR) 
 
9.i. Expenditure on incidentals and airlifting mortal remains of deceased Indian 
national to India or local cremation/burial of deceased in such cases where the 
employer, sponsor or insurance company is unable or unwilling to do so as per the 
contract and the family is unable to meet the cost. 
 
9. ii. Mission/Post may provide Free of Cost (FOC)  letter  to Air  India/Indian Airlines  
or pay for the one way airfare for TMR from the concerned airport in the country of 
departure of remains to the nearest airport to the place of destination in India, in 
deserving cases on means tested basis. Wherever deemed necessary, the 
Mission/Post, with the approval of HOM/HOP, may also provide airfare by the  
cheapest class for a relative/attendant to accompany the mortal  remains  by  the  
same flight. 
 
9. iii. Mission/Post can pay for cremation / burial of deceased Indian national in the  
host country subject to authorization of HoM /HOP and family members where the 
situation demands so. 

 
9.iv. Before payment is released HOM/HOP may satisfy himself that related 
expenditure cannot be borne under contract  of  deceased  (with  the 
employer/sponsor) or the insurance policy of deceased. 
 
9.v. Mission/Post may pay for expenditure on embalming charges, and services 
charges of the agency which facilitates transportation of remains to  India.  
Mission/Post may constitute a panel of such agencies on an annual basis, with rates 
(as commensurate with prevailing local rates)  specified  for  different  services 
provided or actual costs, wherever local government agencies are  handling  such 
work. 
 
9. vi. Belongings of deceased: In ECR countries and Malaysia, based  on request  
from the family of the deceased, HOM/HOP may authorise in deserving cases, 
payment for transportation (preferably by sea cargo) of  important  personal  
belongings of the deceased Indian national to the nearest port/airport in India, upto a 
maximum of 100 kgs as per actuals  and approved  rates  of concerned Mission/Post 
foritspanelofpackers/forwardingagentswithanupperlimitofUS$500percase. 
 
10. Payment for small fines and penalties: 
 
10. i. Providing payment of small fines & penalties in respect of Indian nationals for 
minor offences/crimes; for illegal stay in the host country where prima  facie  the  
worker is not at fault, and to enable release of Indian nationals from jail/detention 
center (and to enable his repatriation). 
 
For illegal stay one-time payment of maximum of US$2000 per case for no fault of 
Indian national. 
 
For release from jails/detention centres, subject to an upper limit of US$4000  per 
case. 
 
Payment shall be made by Indian Mission/Post on behalf of Indian national directly to 
concerned authorities and not to the Indian national. 
 
Prior approval of Ministry to be obtained for such payments to Indian nationals  
involved in serious and organized crimes such as trafficking of drugs (where there is 
reasonable ground to believe that the Indian national may not be at fault), arms and 
humans; and sexual crimes. 
 
11. Emergency Medical Care: 
 
11.i HoM/HoP may authorize emergency medical care to overseas Indians who are 
involved in an accident (with serious life threatening injuries) have life-threatening 
medical conditions or suffer a serious disability, if the employer/sponsor/insurance 
company is unwilling to meet expenses or the family is unable to meet the cost (on 
means tested basis) or unable to reimburse expenses to Mission/Post). 
 
Missions shall set up a panel of hospitals (with rate contract for specific services for 
medical care and medical emergencies) which can be recommended to distressed

 
Indian nationals availing assistance under ICWF. Panel of such hospitals to be 
separate from that of the panel for diplomatic staff of Mission. 
 
MEA should be informed about the appointment of the panel; and whenever there is 
any change inthe panel appointed by Mission/Post. The details of  the  panel  hospitals 
hired on contract  by the Mission and the  rates  charged by such hospitals  for different 
medical care services shall be made available on the website of the Mission/Consulate. 
 
11.ii. Expenditure by Missions/Posts in such cases should be for specific medical 
procedures only subject to an upper limit of US$5000. 
 
11.iii. Any expenditure beyond this amount and upto an upper limit of US$10,000 is 
subject to prior approval of Foreign Secretary. Proposals which exceed this amount 
shall be submitted to EAM for approval with proper justification. Proposals should 
contain an estimate of maximum expenditure to be incurred and should  be  for  
specific medical procedures, subject to a maximum amount that is indicated. No 
approvals would be given for open ended treatments. 
 
11.iv. While making such payments or sending proposals to MEA, HoM/HoP may 
satisfy himself that the beneficiary does not have the means to pay, or does not hold 
an insurance policy under which such treatment can be undertaken; that the family  
has no means to pay; and that the employer/sponsor is unwilling to pay for medical 
expenses. 
 
Section B 
Community Welfare Activities 
 
12. Mission/Post is authorized to spend on community activities pertaining to the 
Indian community, subject to an overall upper limit of 10% in ECR countries and7.5 
% Indian in other countries of total ICWF collection till the previous financial year  on  
following items*: 
 
12.i. For ECR Countries only: A one-time payment of a matching grant upto a 
maximum of US$30,000 per asset can be paid by Mission/Post to support setting up 
assets/infrastructure such as shelter homes for distressed Indian nationals, 
crematoriums; and community centres for Indian nationals in ECR Countries. ICWF 
support in this regard will be a top-up contribution, to augment funding raised by the 
Indian community or other sponsors/organizations. Prior approval of  Foreign  
Secretary shall be sought for proposals up toUS$40,000. 
 
Where such facilities have already been set up, HOM/HOP can approve a grant of a 
maximum of US$10,000 per asset per annum for expansion / upgradation of existing 
facilities.

 
12.ii Mission/Post is authorized to spend, subject to a maximum of US$ 10,000 per 
annum, to promote Indian Culture for activities which include: 
 
Indian cultural programmes organized by recognized Indian Diaspora 
organizations at major Indian Festivals, National Days of India; Indian culture 
Programs by recognized local artists or Indian artists based in India etc. 
 
Payment of honorarium for teachers/faculty teaching Indian languages, art 
forms. The teachers can be from Indian Diaspora or local community. The 
students availing the facility shall pay nominal fee for hiring venue and 
administrative costs. 
 
13. Welfare activities for Indian students: Missions/Posts shall organize  an  
Annual Day for Indian students at Universities/educational institutions to discuss 
problems, issues faced by Indian students, including their  visa,  residence  status, 
work permit, financial, welfare and other issues with participation of students. Senior 
officials of Mission/Consulate to preside over/organize such events. 
 
Financial Limits (excluding expenditure for hospitality purposes): 
Upto US$ 1500 per annum- where students are less than 500 
Upto US$ 2500 per annum - where students are between 500-1000   
Upto US$ 5000 per annum - where students are between 1000-5000 
UptoUS$10,000perannum-wherestudentsarebetween5000-10000 
Upto US$ 15,000 per annum - where students are between 10000-20000 
Upto US$ 20,000 per annum - where students are more than 20000 
 
* (under no circumstances, expenditure on Community Welfare Activities should 
include expenses towards extending hospitality) 
 
Section C 
Improvement in Consular Services 
 
Mission/Post is authorized to spend on administrative expenses pertaining to 
schemes/welfare measures etc. with prior approval of HoM/HoP subject to an overall 
upper limit of 15% in ECR countries and 7.5 % in other countries of total ICWF 
collection till the previous financial year for following purposes: 
 
For ECR countries only : 
 
14.a Missions/Posts with prior approval of HoM/HoP, may hire a maximum of two 
local staff (on the same terms and conditions as contingency basis staff)for consular 
services and managing work relating to e-Migrate, Madad, Nationality Verification 
portals, etc for a period of one year. The engagement of local contingent staff should 
not be against local laws of the country. Necessary break in service should  be given 
so as to ensure that these contingent staff do not claim any absorption or any other 
benefit under local laws. Proposals for extending the services of such local staff by 
additional periods of one year at a time should be sent to Foreign Secretary for prior 
approval.

 
14.b Hire vehicles on a need basis for visits to jails, police stations; detention  
centres; labour camps; welfare camps; shelters for distressed Indians; prisons; 
hospitals; morgues and to airports for deportation/repatriation of distressed Indian 
nationals) to handle increase in consular work. 
 
14.c Hiring of local interpreters on a case-to-case basis for consular visits. 
 
14.d Design, publication, translation costs of  pamphlets  by  Mission/Post  about 
local labour laws, regulations, norms, dos & don’ts, welfare measures pertaining to 
overseas employment in the host country subject to a maximum of US$5000 per 
annum. 
 
14.e Organizing labour camps / consular camps for interacting with Indian migrant 
workers and informing them about issues related to overseas employment; labour 
laws; welfare and protection measures of GOI, subject to a  maximum of  US$5000  
per annum excluding travel and stay costs. May incur an additional expenditure  
subject to a maximum of US $ 5000 per annum towards creating awareness among 
the community for benefit of safe migration through media/workshops etc. 
 
14.f Missions/Posts may setup 24 x  7 toll-free helplines, walk-in resource centres  
for providing information, advise, guidance on problems faced by distressed Indian 
nationals; and helping them register their grievance with  the Mission/Post.  Helplines 
or resource centres may also be set-up through a service provider, with competitive 
bidding as per GFR, with the approval of CPV Division. 
 
14.g Development of e-Governance solutions, applications to address Consular/ 
welfare  matters  (including centralized platforms  by Ministry), subject to a maximum  
of US$ 20,000 as one time cost and/or annual recurring cost of US $5,000.While 
incurring such expenditure, Mission/Post must ensure that these e-Governance 
solutions and applications are compatible with existing MEA and other GoI e-portals 
and should not lead to duplication of effort. 
 
Consular Expense: All Countries: 
 
14.h Missions/Posts, with prior approval of HoM/HoP, may hire a maximum of two 
local staff on contingency basis for a period of not more than three months  for  
consular work, in circumstances which result in sudden and unexpected increase in 
consular work due to unforeseen circumstances, such as natural disasters, war, civil 
war, evacuation, and political in stability. The engagement of local contingent staff 
should not be against local laws  of  the country.  Necessary break in service should  
be given so as to ensure that these contingent staff do not claim any absorption or any 
other benefit under local laws. These local staff, intended to deal with sudden/seasonal 
spikes in consular demand, would be in addition to the two  local  staff referred to in 
para 14.a above in respect of ECRc ountries. 
 
14.i Any extension of hiring of local staff beyond the periods specified above shall  
be subject to the prior approval of Foreign Secretary. 

 
14.j Missions/Posts, with prior approval of HoM/HoP, may incur one-time 
expenditure on creation of infrastructure or asset within premises of Mission/  
Consulate to enhance amenities provided for Indian nationals in Consular/Reception 
area. 
 
14.k One-time expenditure for overall improvement of Consular area (setting up 
tea/coffee vending machines, water dispenser, photocopier, TV & cable, computer, 
printer & internet  kiosk in consular  wing,  and reception area of consular section (to  
be used by applicants) subject to an upper limit of US$10000 per annum. 
 
14.l Annual operational and maintenance costs related to such items/equivalent 
subject to an upper limit of USD $ 5000 per annum. 
 
14.m After lifetime of these items, new items/equipments can be purchased as per 
GFR provisions, with the approval of HoM/HoP. 
 
15. Record about ICWF beneficiary 
 
An endorsement shall be made in the Passport and PRIDE (centralised database) of 
ICWF Beneficiary as under: 
 
The holder of this passport was the beneficiary of ICWF assistance for 
evacuation/other   services    provided    by    the    Mission/Consulate  
in……………..on .................. DD/MM/YYYY 
 
16. Administration and Financial Management 
 
16.i. It is mandatory for every Mission/Post to open a separate  personal  deposit 
ICWF account in local currency entitled ‘ICWF Account’ for the  purpose  as  
prescribed in the Civil Accounts manuals. 
 
16. ii. MEA may, on a proposal received from a Mission/Post and after consultation  
with  IFD and  Pr CCA, exempt the Mission/Post from opening or allowing it to close   
its existing ICWF account. 
 
16.iii. Daily collection of ICWF surcharge will be  deposited  in  the  bank account on 
the next working day by the Accountant. 
 
16. iv. HOM/HOP may constitute a Committee of three officers consisting DCM/DCG 
and Officers dealing with Labour, Consular, Community Welfare or Administration to 
review the operations of the fund every quarter. 
 
16. v. A separate Cash Book will be maintained for ICWF with all receipts and 
withdrawals reflected, on the lines of the Cash Book being maintained under the 
existing procedures of Cash and Accounts. 
 
16. vi. A Drawing and Disbursing Officer (DDO) of appropriate level with one other 
signatory to be decided by the HOM, will operate the PDA and will be responsible for 
all the transactions from the Fund. 

 
16. vii. Release of Payments from ICWF shall be made only  through  
cheques/DD/bank account/e-payment etc., on the basis of written approvals of the 
competent authority (in the Mission/Post/Ministry, as the case may  be)  duly  
supported with original invoices / bills etc., in respect of the service/assistance  
provided to the ICWF beneficiary, under appropriate receipt/acknowledgement, and,  
no direct cash payments shall be allowed to the beneficiaries of ICWF. 
 
16.viii Missions/Posts, with approval of HOM/HOP, can build and maintain a Corpus 
Fund, for handling crisis and / or emergency situations, which may be equal to an 
amount not exceeding 50%  of the funds collected in the ICWF account and invested  
in US$ GBP or Euros, in staggered and  multiple FDs in Indian PSU banks operating   
in host country or in local banks where Indian PSU banks are not operating. Interest 
accrued from FDs is to  be deposited on yearly basis in the Corpus fund. If HoM/HoP  
is of the considered view that funds may be invested in FDs beyond 50% of the 
collection in the ICWF account, the same may be done with prior approval of the 
Ministry. 
 
16.ix The Corpus Fund is to built after maintaining sufficient balance for any 
unforeseen contingency that may arise. 
 
16.x A statement containing a detailed account of collection  and  utilization  of  the 
fund will be submitted for each financial year, latest by 30th  April  of the  following  
year, to the MEA by the Missions. A monthly update about utilization of ICWF funds 
under for various purposes will be uploaded on MADAD website’s ICWF module. 
 
16.xi Mission/Post shall maintain a register showing therein -  month  wise  receipts 
with relevant information of the Depositor and brief description of the receipt. The 
Register will also show the quarterly balance of total collections  made  and 
expenditure made out of the funds for purposes of ascertaining the amount available 
for disbursement out of the fund. Vouchers pertaining to receipts  and  payments  
made out of the fund by the Missions will also be attached with the cash account for 
the month for reconciliation at the Office of the Pr.CCA, MEA and MEA. 
 
16. xii All expenditure to be incurred on activities to be financed from the Fund as 
approved by the Ministry will be sanctioned by competent authority by following the 
normal procedure and copies of sanctions will be  issued  to all concerned  including 
the Pay & Accounts Office. 
 
16. xiii. In case of devaluation of local currency (due to war or a crisis of similar 
nature), HOM/HOP can authorize shifting ICWF funds to  a separate  US$,GBP  or 
Euro account (not Chancery account) under intimation to  MEA  (OIA  Division,  IFD 
and Pr. CCA), along with adequate justification. 
 
17. Imprest:  HOM/HOP may decide an appropriate advance sum of a maximum  
of US$10,000/- as the Imprest amount under the custody of DDO or an Officer 
designated for the purpose. A separate account of expenditure of Imprest will be 
maintained in the Imprest Advance Register reflecting the details of expenditure, 
amount of advance recouped from time to time etc. The Register with all relevant 
details of expenditure on account of disbursement will be put up at  least  every  
quarter for periodical scrutiny of the HOM/HOP. 

 
18. Audit of Accounts 
 
The accounts of ICWF maintained at various Missions shall be audited  by  the  
Internal Audit Wing of the Office of the Pr.CCA, MEA  and  will also be subject to 
Statutory Audit. 
 
19. Amendments to Guidelines 
 
19.i. Amendments in these guidelines may be made by the Ministry of External 
Affairs in consultation with the Department of Expenditure. 
 
19.ii. The above guidelines have been issued after consultation with Ministry of 
Finance / Department of Expenditure who concurred vide their OM No. 3(43) 
E.Coord/2007 dated 19th June, 2017. These guidelines shall become effective from 
September 1, 2017. All earlier guidelines issued or clarifications given by erstwhile 
Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs / Ministry of External Affairs shall be deemed to 
have been revoked. 

 
ANNXEURE- A 
 
Legal/financial assistance to Indian women deserted by their overseas 
Indian/foreigner husbands . 
 
1. Objective: 
 
1.1 The objective of the assistance under ICWF is to provide some financial 
assistance to needy Indian women in distress (who have been deserted by their 
overseasIndian/foreignerhusbands)forobtainingcounselingandlegalservices. 
 
1.2 Counseling and legal services would be provided through credible Indian 
Women’s Organizations/Indian Community  Associations/NGOs  identified  for 
providing such services and empanelled with the Indian Missions. 
 
2. Scope of and Eligibility for the Scheme: 
 
2.1 Assistance under ICWF would be available to Indian women who have been 
deserted by their overseas Indian / foreigner husbands or are facing divorce 
proceedings in a foreign country, subject to the following conditions:- 
 
(i) “Desertion” in the context of eligibility for providing financial assistance under 
the MEA’s Scheme would mean the voluntary abandonment of the wife by her 
husband. Also, if the husband - by his words- and or actions compels  the  wife  to 
leave the matrimonial home or stay away without reasonable cause, he  will be guilty  
of desertion, though the wife has seemingly separated from him. Desertion is 
frequently coupled with non-support, which is a failure to provide monetary resources 
for those to  whom such an obligation is  due, denial of visa status  for continued stay  
in the foreign country concerned, meting out harassment to a woman, where such 
harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person related to her to meet any 
unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on account of  failure by  
her or any person related to her to meet such demand. 
 
(ii) Coverage of the Scheme: Applicable in all Missions and Posts abroad. 
 
(iii) The woman is an Indian passport holder. 
 
(iv) The marriage of the woman has been solemnized in India or overseas with an 
overseas Indian or a foreigner. 
 
(v) The term “Overseas Indian” in this case would include Non-Resident Indians 
(NRIs) and Persons of Indian Origin(PIOs). 
 
(vi) The woman is deserted in India or overseas within seven years of  the  
marriage; or 
 
(vii) Divorce proceedings are initiated within seven years of marriage by her 
overseas Indian / foreigner husband, or

 
(viii) An ex-parte divorce has been obtained by the overseas Indian / foreigner 
husband within seven years of marriage and a case for maintenance  and  alimony is 
to be filed byher. 
 
(ix) Assistance would not be available to a woman having a criminal case decided 
against her, provided that a criminal  charge  of  Parental Child Abduction shall  not be 
a bar if the custody of the child has not yet been adjudicated upon by a competent 
Court. 
 
(x) The domicile of the Indian woman  seeking relief under the Scheme  may not  
be relevant for allowing the benefit. 
 
(xi) Preference will be given to applicants on the basis of financial need. 
 
(xii) The assistance will be limited to a maximum of US$ 4000 per case The 
assistance will be released to the empanelled legal counsel of the applicant or Indian 
Community Association / Women’s organization / NGO concerned  to  enable  it  to 
take steps to assist the woman in documentation and preparatory work for filing the 
case.

 
ANNXEURE- B 
 
(I) GCC Countries 
 
1. Saudi Arabia 
2. UAE 
3. Kuwait 
4. Oman 
5. Qatar 
6. Bahrain 
 
 
(II) Countries with major Overseas Indian Population (NRIs) [excluding GCC 
Countries] 
 
1 USA 
2 Nepal 
3 Singapore 
4 UK 
5 Malaysia 
6 Australia 
7 Canada 
8 Italy 
9 Philippines 
10 Germany 
11 New Zealand 
12 South Africa 
13 Bhutan 
14 China 
15 Hong Kong (SAR of China) 
16 Nigeria 
17 Spain 
18 Russian Federation 
19 Japan 
20 Netherlands 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
704] 
 
 
 
 
    
EXTRAORDINARY  
II— — (i) 
PART II—Section 3—Sub-section (i) 
PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY 
REGD. NO. D. L.-33004/99 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL 
AFFAIRS 
NOTIFICATION 
New Delhi, the 16th August, 2017 
G.S.R. 1027(E).— In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 8 of the Diplomatic and 
Consular Officers (Oaths and Fees) Act, 1948 (41 of 1948), the Central Government hereby makes 
the following Rules further to amend the Diplomatic and Consular Officers (Fees) Rules, 1949 
namely:- 
1. (a) These rules may be called the Diplomatic and Consular Officers (Fees) Amendment 
Rules,2017. 
(b) They shall come into force w.e.f. September 1,2017. 
(c) These will be applied to all Indian Diplomatic Missions/Posts where Indian Community 
Welfare Fund has been set up. 
2. In the Diplomatic and Consular Officers (Fees) Rules, 1949, for Schedule-1, clause 11 the 
following shall be amended as:- 
 
 Matter in respect of which an additional fee is leviable in 
Scale of Fee (in US$) [Rounded off in 
local currency to the next whole/round 
number] 11. (i) Visa and OCI cards 
(ii) Passport 
(iii) Attestation of employment document 
(iv) Attestation of other documents and other 
Misc. Consular services (other than in 
death cases) 
US $3/- per 
document US $2/- 
per document US 
$2/- per worker 
US $2/- per 
worker 
 


 
[No.T-234/2/2007] UPENDER SINGH RAWAT, Jt. Secy. (CPV) 
 
Note: Principal rules published vide Notification No. 420-con. dated 8th November, 1949 
and subsequently amended by:- 
(i) Notification No.  GSR 1977    dated14-11-1967 
(ii) Notification No.  GSR 817(E) dated13-10-1976 
(iii) Notification No.  GSR 326(E) dated02-04-1979 (iv) Notification No.  GSR 862(E) dated01-11-1985 (v) Notification No.  GSR 688(E) dated15-10-1993 
(vi) Notification No.  GSR 712(E) dated18-11-1993 
(vii) Notification No.  GSR 912(E) dated20-12-2001 
(viii) Notification No.  GSR 256(E) dated28-03-2007 
(ix) Notification No.  GSR 541(E) dated09-08-2007 (x) Notification No.  GSR 752(E) dated15-10-2009 (xi) Notification No.  GSR 398(E) dated12-05-2010 
(xii) Notification No.  GSR 254(E) dated23-03-2011 
(xiii) Notification No. GSR 325(E) dated18-04-2011 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Uploaded by Dte. of Printing at Government of India Press, Ring Road, 
Mayapuri, New Delhi-110064 and Published by the 
Controller of Publications, Delhi-110054. 

ANNEXURE-B
Pravasi Bharatiya Samman Awardees
Sl. No. Country Name Year of the Award Field 
1 Canada Shri Ujjal Dosanjh 2003 Public Affairs
2 Guyana Sir Shridath 
Surendranath Ramphal 2003 Public Affairs
3 Hong Kong Dr. Hari N. Harilela 2003 Business
4 Kenya Shri Manilal Premchand
Chandaria 2003 Business
5 Malaysia Dato Seri S. Samyvellu 2003 Public Affairs
6 Mauritius R. T. Hon’ble Sir 
Anerood Jugnauth 2003 Public Affairs
7 Oman Shri Kanaksi Gokaldas 
Khimji 2003 Business
8 South Africa Prof. Fatima Meer  2003 Public Affairs
9 UK Lord Navnit Dholakia 2003 Public Affairs
10 USA Shri Rajat Gupta 2003 Management
11 Fiji Shri Mahendra Pal 
Chaudhry 2004 Public Affairs
12 Guyana H.E. Bharat Jagdeo 2004 Public Affairs
13 Kenya Shri Fitz Remedios 
Santana DE Souza 2004 Public Affairs
14 Kuwait Dr. Mariam Chisti 2004 Public Health
15 New Zealand Smt.  Sukhi Turner 2004 Public Affairs
16 Oman Shri P. Mohammed Ali 2004 Business
17 UK Lord Meghnad Desai 2004 Public Affairs
18 USA Prof. Dipak C. Jain 2004 Management
19 USA Dr. Kalpana Chawla 
(Posthumously) 2004 Astronaut
20 USA Dr. Narinder Singh 
Kapany 2004 Business
21 USA Shri Shashi Tharoor 2004 Literature
22 Zimbabwe Justice Mr. Ahamed 
Mossa Ebrahim 2004 Public Affairs
23 Fiji Shri Vijay Singh 2005 Sports
24 Germany Prof Alokeranjan 
Dasgupta 2005 Poetry
1

25 Hong Kong Shri M. Arunachalam 2005 Business
26 Philippines Dr. Sant Singh Virmani 2005 Agricultural Science
27 South Africa Ms. Amina Cachalia 2005 Public Affairs
28 South Africa Shri Ahmed Kathrada 2005 Public Affairs
29 Tanzania Sir (Dr.) J.K. Chande 2005 Public Affairs
30 Trinidad & 
Tobago Shri Basdeo Panday 2005 Public Affairs
31 UAE Shri Yusuffali M.A. 2005 Business
32 UK Lord Bhikhu Chhotalal 
Parekh 2005 Political Science
33 UK Shri Vikram Seth 2005 Literature
34 USA Prof Sunil Khilnani 2005 Political Science
35 USA Dr. Sam Pitroda 2005 Technology
36 USA Prof. Jagdish Bhagwati 2005 Economics
37 USA Shri Manoj Night 
Shyamalan 2005 Films
38 Guyana Shri Yesu Persaud 2006 Business
39 Hong Kong Shri Rusy M. Shroff 2006 Business
40 Israel Shri Eliahu Bezalel 2006 Agriculture
41 Mauritius Shri Abdool Raouf 
Bundhun 2006 Public Affairs
42 Philippines Smt. Pratima Kale 2006 Rural Development
43 Qatar Shri C. K. Menon 2006 Community Leadership
44 Reunion Island Shri Jean-Paul 
Virapoulle 2006 Public Affairs
45 Saudi Arabia Dr. Majid Uddin Kazi 2006 Medicine
46 Seychelles Dr. V . Ramadoss 2006 Community Leadership
47 South Africa Shri Sisupal Rambharos 2006 Philanthropy
48 Thailand Shri Shivnath Rai Bajaj 2006 Business
49 UK Sir Gulam Kaderbhai 
Noon 2006 Business
50 USA Dr. Sudhir Parikh 2006 Community Leadership
51 USA Shri Niranjan S. Shah 2006 Community Leadership 
52 USA Shri Fareed Zakaria 2006 Journalism
53 Canada Shri Dave Sukhdip 
Singh Hayer 2007 Public Affairs
2

54 Fiji Sir Moti Tikaram 2007 Public Affairs
55 Germany Shri Sibabrata Roy 2007 Community Affairs
56 Jamaica Shri Kenneth S. 
Benjamin 2007 Business
57 Kenya Shri Pheroze Nowrojee 2007 Community Affairs
58 Malaysia Tan Sri Dato Dr.  K. R. 
Somasundram 2007 Public Affairs
59 Portugal Dr. Abdool Magid 
Abdool Karim Vakil 2007 Business
60 South Africa Shri Billy Nair 2007 Public Affairs
61 UAE Shri Syed M. 
Salahuddin 2007 Business
62 UAE Dr. B.R. Shetty 2007 Business
63 UK Lord Diljit Rana 2007 Business
64 USA Shri Gopal Raju 2007 Media
65 USA Shri Nirmal K. Sinha 2007 Community Affairs
66 USA Dr. P. Jayaraman 2007 Culture
67 USA Dr. M. Anirudhan 2007 Business
68 Australia Shri Neville Joseph 
Roach 2008 Community Service
69 Bahrain Dr. Ravi Pillai 2008 Business
70 Japan Shri A. P. S. Mani 2008 Community Service 
71 Mauritius
Dr. the Hon. 
Navinchandra 
Ramgoolam
2008 Public Service
72 New Zealand Judge Ajit Swaran Singh 2008 Public Service
73 Saudi Arabia Shri Rafiudin 
Shamsudin Fazulbhoy 2008 Community Service 
74 Sweden Shri Bicky Chakraborty 2008 Business
75 Trinidad & 
Tobago
National Council of 
Indian Culture (NCIC) 2008 Community Service 
76 UAE Shri Krishnamurthy 
Kumar 2008 Community Service 
77 UK Lord Karan Bilimoria 2008 Business
78 USA Dr. Thomas Abraham 2008 Community Service 
79 USA Dr. Joy Cherian 2008 Public Service
80 Bahrain Shri  Soman Baby 2009 Community Service
3

81 Canada Shri Deepak Obhrai 2009 Public Service
82 Madagascar Shri Ylias Akbaraly 2009 Community Service 
83 Malaysia Tan Sri G. Vadiveloo 2009 Public Service
84 Mauritius Shri Angidi Veeriah 
Chettiar 2009 Public Service
85 Oman Shri P.N.C. Menon 2009 Philanthropy
86 South Africa Shri Parmananthan 
‘Prema’ Naidoo 2009 Public Service
87 Suriname Shri Ramdien Sardjoe 2009 Public Service
88 The Netherlands Shri Ram Lakhina 2009 Community Service 
89 UAE Shri J.R. Gangaramani 2009 Community Service 
90 UK Baroness Shreela 
Flather 2009 Public Service
91 USA Prof. C.K. Prahalad 2009 Management
92 USA Prof. Sumit Ganguly 2009 Public Service
93 Brunei 
Darussalam
Shri Mohinder Singh 
Bhullar 2010 Community Service 
94 Fiji Shri Yanktesh Permal 
Reddy 2010 Community Service 
95 Japan Shri Ryuko Hira 2010 Community Service 
96 Japan (Smt.) Dr. Ruby Umesh 
Pawankar 2010 Medicine
97 Oman Shri Suresh Kumar 
Virmani 2010 Community Service 
98 South Africa Shri Pravin Jamnadas 
Gordhan 2010 Public Service
99 South Africa Dr. Tholisiah Perumal 
Naidoo 2010 Community Service 
100 Tanzania Dr. Rajni Kanabar 2010 Medicine
101 Thailand Shri Deepak Mittal 2010 Business
102 Trinidad & 
Tobago
Dr. Lenny Krishendath 
Saith 2010 Public Service
103 UAE Dr. Azad Moopen 2010 Medicine
104 USA Dr. Mani Lal Bhaumik 2010 Community Service 
105 USA Shri Ashok Kumar 
Mago 2010 Community Service 
106 USA Shri Upendra J. 
Chivukula 2010 Public Service
4

107 Australia Prof. Veena 
Harbhagwan Sahajwalla 2011 Science
108 Canada Ms. Lata Pada 2011 Arts
109 Hong Kong Shri  Harindrapal Singh 
Banga 2011 Business
110 Israel Shri Hohammad Munir 
Nazir Hassan Ansari 2011 Community Service 
111 Liberia Shri Upjit Singh 
Sachdeva 2011 Community Service 
112 Malaysia Tan Sri Dato’ Ajit Singh 2011 Public Affairs
113 New Zealand Sir Anand Satyanand 2011 Public Affairs
114 Qatar
Indian Community 
Benevolent Forum, 
Qatar
2011 Community Service 
115 Saudi Arabia Dr. Mohiaddin Syed 
Karimuddin 2011 Community Service 
116 Sri Lanka Shri Mano Selvanathan 2011 Business
117 The Netherlands Shri Saleh Wahid 2011 Community Service 
118 UAE Shri Mohan Jashanmal 2011 Community Service 
119 UK Baroness (Dr.) Sandip 
Verma 2011 Public Affairs
120 USA Shri Ashook Kumar 
Ramsaran 2011 Community Service 
121 USA Dr. Rajiv Shah 2011 Public Affairs
122 Bahrain Shri P.V . Radhakrishna 
Pillai 2012 Community Service 
123 Cambodia Prof. Sachchidanand 
Sahai 2012 Promoting India
124 Canada Indo-Canada Chamber 
of Commerce 2012 Public Service
125 Cote D’ Ivoire Shri Deepak Naraindas 
Shivdasani 2012 Community Service 
126 Germany Dr. Victor Shahed 
Smetacek 2012 Science
127 Indonesia Shri Sri Prakash Lohia 2012 Business
128 Mozambique Shri Jose Parayanken 2012 Business
5

129 Oman Shri Kiran 
Navinchandra Asher 2012 Community Service 
130 Qatar Mr. Hassan Abdulkarim 
Chougule 2012 Community Service 
131 Singapore H.E. Mr. S.R. Nathan 2012 Public Service
132 South Africa Dr. Khorshed Noshir 
Ginwala - Rustomjee 2012 Public Service
133 Trinidad & 
Tobago
H.E. Ms. Kamla Persad 
Bissessar 2012 Public Service
134 Ukraine Shri Rajesh Kumar 
Saraiya 2012 Business
135 USA Prof. Surendra Kumar 
Kaushik 2012 Economics
136 USA Dr. Kalpalatha 
Kummamuri Guntupalli 2012 Medicine
137 Australia Australia India Society 
of Victoria 2013 Community Service
138 Germany Prof. Dr. Gursharan 
Singh Chhatwal 2013 Science
139 Guinea Mr. Ashok Shambhomal
Vaswani 2013 Community Service 
140 Kuwait Indian Doctors Forum, 
Kuwait 2013 Community Service 
141 Malaysia Tan Sri Ravindran 
Menon 2013 Community Service 
142 Mauritius Mr. Rajkeswur Purryag 2013 Public Service
143 Mexico Dr. Rasik Vihari Joshi 2013 Literature
144 New Zealand Dr. Satendra Kumar 
Singh 2013 Community Service 
145 Reunion Island Mr. Gilbert Canabady 
Moutien 2013 Business
146 Saudi Arabia Mr. Mohammed Rabeeh
Karuvanthodi 2013 Business
147 South Africa Mr. Ismail Ebrahim 
Ebrahim 2013 Public Service
148 UAE Mr. Bava Pandalingal 2013 Community Service 
149 UK Ms. Patricia Maria 
Rozario 2013 Music
150 USA Dr. Narendra 
Ramakrishna Kumar 2013 Healthcare
6

151 USA Mr. Subash Razdan 2013 Public Service
152 Australia Ms. Senator Lisa Singh 2014 Public Service
153 Bahrain Mr. Kurian Varghese 2014 Business
154 Canada Mr. Vasdev Chanchlani 2014 Business & Public Service
155 Fiji Ramakrishna Mission 2014 Community Service 
156 France Mr. Bikas Chandra 
Sanyal 2014 Education & Culture
157 Papua New 
Guinea Mr. Sasindran Muthuvel 2014 Public Service
158 Saudi Arabia Shri Shihabudeen Vava 
Kunju 2014 Community Service 
159 South Africa Mrs. Ela Gandhi 2014 Public Service
160 The Netherlands Mr. Satnarainsing Rabin
Baldew Singh 2014 Public Service
161 UAE Dr. Shamsheer Vayalil 
Parambath 2014 Healthcare Business
162 UK Mr. Shailesh lakhman 
Vara 2014 Public Service
163 USA Dr. Parthasarathy 
Chiramel Pillai 2014 Science
164 USA Ms. Renu Khator 2014 Education
165 Australia Mrs. Mala Mehta 2015 Education and Community
Service
166 Guyana H.E. Mr. Donald 
Rabindernauth Ramotar 2015 Public Service
167 Mexico Dr.Rajaram Sanjaya 2015 Scientific Research
168 New Zealand Mr. Kanwaljit Singh 
Bakshi 2015 Public Service
169 Oman Mr. Rajmal Parakh 2015 Social Service
170 Seychelles Mr. Duraikannu 
Karunakaran 2015 Judicial Service
171 South Africa Dr. Essop Goolam 
Pahad 2015 Public Service
172 UAE Mr. Shah Bharathkumar 
Jayantilal 2015 Community Service 
173 UAE Mr. Ashraf 
Palarakunnummal 2015 Social Service
174 Uganda Mr. Mahendra Nanji 
Mehta 2015 Public Service
7

175 UK Prof. Nathu Ram Puri 2015 Education and Community
Service
176 UK Lord Raj Loomba 2015 Public Service
177 USA Mr. Satyanarayana 
Nadella 2015 Business Management
178 USA Dr. Lulla Kamalesh 2015 Scientific Research
179 USA Dr. (Mrs.) Nandini 
Tandon 2015 Management of Healthcare
and Business
180 Australia Dr. Gorur Krishna 
Harinath 2017 Community Service  
181 Bahrain  
Rajasekharan 
PillaiValavoor 
Kizhakkathil
2017 Business 
182 Belgium Antwerp Indian 
Association 2017 Community Service 
183 Brunei 
Nazeer 
AhmedMohamed 
Zackiriah 
2017 Community Service 
184 Canada Mukund Bhikhubhai  
Purohit 2017 Business  
185 Djibouti Nalinkumr Sumanlal 
Kothari 2017 Community Service 
186 Doha Dr. Raghavan 
Seetharaman 2017 Business Management
187 Fiji Vinod Chandra Patel 2017 Social Service 
188 France Raghunath Marie 
Antonin Manet 2017 Arts & culture  
189 Israel Dr.Lael Anson E.Best 2017 Medicine Science 
190 Japan Prof. Sandip Kumar 
Tagore 2017 Arts & Culture
191 Libya Ariful Islam 2017 Community  service 
192 Malaysia Dr. 
MuniandyThambirajah 2017 Education & Community
service 
193 Mauritius Hon’ble Pravind Kumar 
Jugnauth 2017 Public Service
194 Portugal H.E.Mr.Antonio Luis 
Santos da Costa 2017 Public service 
195 Saudi Arabia Ms. Zeenat Musarrat 
Jafri 2017 Education  
196 Singapore Singapore Indian 2017 Community service
8

Association 
197 Sweden Mr. Carni Balaraman 
Sanjeev  2017 Medicine 
198 Thailand Susheel Kumar Saraff 2017 Business  
199 Trinidad & 
Tobago
Winston Chandarbhan 
Dookeran 2017 Public Service  
200 UAE Vasudev Shamdas 
Shroff 2017 Community Service  
201 UAE
India Social and 
Cultural Centre, Abu 
Dhabi 
2017 Philanthropy and
Community Service  
202 UK Rt. Hon’ble Priti Patel 2017 Public  Service  
203 UK Neena Gill 2017 Public  Service 
204 USA Hari Babu Bindal 2017 Environmental
Engineering  
205 USA Dr.Bharat haridas Barai 2017 Community Service
206 USA Nisha Desai Biswal 2017 Public Affairs 
207 USA Dr. Mahesh Mehta 2017 Community Service 
208 USA Ramesh Shah 2017 Community Service 
209 USA Dr. Sampatkumar 
shidramapa Shivangi 2017 Community Leadership  
210 Australia Nihal Singh Agar 2019 Social Service
211 Bhutan Rajinder Nath 
Khazanchi 2019 Civil Engineering
212 Canada Ramesh Chotai 2019 Business
213 China Amit Waikar 2019 Business
214 Egypt Indian Community 
Association in Egypt 2019 Community Service
215 France Malini Ranganathan 2019 Academics & Arts
216 Guyana Guyana Hindu Dharmic 
Sabha 2019 Community Service
217 Italy Bitthal Das Maheshwari 2019 Business
218 Jamaica Guna Sekhar Muppuri 2019 Medical Science &
Entrepreneurship
219 Kenya P. V . Sambasiva Rao 2019 Technology
220 Kenya Prakash Madhavdas 
Heda 2019 Medical Science
221 Kuwait Rajpal Tyagi 2019 Architecture
9

222 Myanmar Banwarilal Satya 
Narayan Goenka 2019 Business Management
223 New Zealand Bhavdeep Singh Dhillon 2019 Business
224 Norway Himanshu Gulati 2019 Public Service 
225 Oman Vinodan Verambally 
Thazhikuniyil 2019 Business
226 Poland Jagadeswara Rao 
Maddukuri 2019 Entrepreneurship
227 Qatar Purnendu Chandra 
Tiwary 2019 Training & Simulation
228 South Africa Swami 
Saradaprabhananda 2019 Community Service
229 South Africa Anil Sooklal 2019 Diplomacy
230 Switzerland Rajendra Kumar Joshi 2019 Science 
231 Tanzania Shamim Parkar Khan 2019 Public Service
232 UAE Surender Singh 
Kandhari 2019 Business
233 UAE Zulekha Daud 2019 Medical Science &
Business
234 UAE Girish Pant 2019 Business
235 Uganda Rajesh Chaplot 2019 Chartered Accountancy
236 USA Gita Gopinath 2019 Academics
237 USA Chandra Shekhar 
Mishra 2019 Science
238 USA Kiran Chhotubhai Patel 2019 Medical Science
239 USA Gitesh Jayantilal Desai 2019 Structural Engineering
240 Armenia NGO Cultural Diversity 
for Peaceful Future 2021 Promoting Indian culture
241 Azerbaijan Dr. Rajani Chandra 
D’Mello 2021 Medicine
242 Bahrain Mr. Baburajan Vava 
Kalluparambil Gopalan 2021 Community Service
243 Botswana Mrs. Jamal Ahmad 2021 Business
244 Cameroon Mr. Janakiraman 
Ravikumar 2021 Closer ties with India
245 Czech Republic Mr. Debashish 
Chaudhuri 2021 Art and Culture
10

246 Ethiopia Mr. Mohammed Husein 
Hasanali Sardharwala 2021 Business
247 Fiji Sai Prema Foundation 2021 Community Service
248 Germany Dr. Balasubramanian 
Ramani 2021 Education
249 Hong Kong Mr. Lal Lokumal 
Chellaram 2021 Business
250 Japan Dr. (Prof.) Muralidhar 
Miryala 2021 Science & Technology
251 Japan Mr. Rajib Shaw 2021 Education
252 Maldives Mr. Salil Panigrahi 2021 Tourism
253 Mexico Dr. Ravi Prakash Singh 2021 Science & Technology
254 Netherlands H.E. Mr. Eugene 
Rhuggenaath 2021 Public Service
255 New Zealand Hon’ble Ms. 
PriyancaRadhakrishnan 2021 Public Service
256 Nigeria Indian Cultural 
Association (ICA) 2021 Community Service
257 Qatar Dr. Mohan Thomas 
Lazarus Pakalomattom 2021 Medicine
258 Reunion (France) Mr. Jean Regis 
Ramsamy 2021 Media & Community
Service
259 Saudi Arabia Mr. Siddeek Ahmed 2021 Business
260 Sudan Dr. Anil Kumar Chotalal
Mithani 2021 Medical
261 Suriname H.E. Shri Chandrika 
persad Santokhi 2021 Public Service
262 Switzerland Dr. Sachi Gurumayun 2021 Biotech Agronomy
263 Thailand Mr. Vashdev Tikamdas 
Purswani 2021 Business
264 UK Resham Singh Sandhu 2021  Public Service
265 USA Mr. Arvind Phukan 2021 Environment Technology
266 USA Ms. Nilu Gupta 2021 Promoting Indian Culture
267 USA
Federation of Indian 
Associations NY , NJ & 
CT
2021 Community Service
268 USA Dr. Sudhakar 2021 Medicine
11

Jonnalagadda
269 USA/ Singapore Dr.MukeshAghi 2021 Business
270 Australia Prof. Jagadish 
Chennupati 2023 Science & Technology/
Education
271 Bhutan Prof. Sanjeev Mehta 2023 Education
272 Brazil Prof. Dilip Loundo 2023 Art & Culture/Education
273 Brunei 
Darussalam
Dr. Alexander Maliakel 
John 2023 Medicine
274 Canada Dr. Vaikuntam Iyer 
Lakshmanan 2023 Community Welfare
275 Croatia Mr. Joginder Singh 
Nijjar 2023 Art & Culture/Education
276 Denmark Prof. Ramjee Prasad 2023 Information Technology
277 Ethiopia Dr. Kannan Ambalam 2023 Community Welfare
278 Germany Dr. Amal Kumar 
Mukhopadhyay 2023 Community
Welfare/Medicine
279 Guyana H.E. Dr. Mohamed 
Irfaan Ali 2023 Politics/Community
Welfare
280 Israel Ms. Reena Vinod 
Pushkarna 2023 Business/Community
Welfare
281 Japan Dr. Maqsooda Sarfi 
Shiotani 2023 Education
282 Mexico Dr. Rajagopal 2023 Education
283 Poland Mr. Amit Kailash 
Chandra Lath 2023 Business/Community
Welfare
284 Republic of 
Congo
Mr. Parmanand 
Sukhumal Daswani 2023 Community Welfare
285 Singapore Mr. Piyush Gupta 2023 Business
286 South Africa Mr. Mohanlal Hira 2023 Community Welfare
287 South Sudan Mr. Sanjaykumar 
Shivabhai Patel 2023 Business/Community
Welfare
288 Sri Lanka Mr. Sivakumar Nadesan 2023 Community Welfare
289 Suriname Dr. Dewanchandrebhose
Sharman 2023 Community Welfare
290 Switzerland Dr. Archana Sharma 2023 Science & Technology
291 Trinidad & 
Tobago
Justice Frank Arthur 
Seepersad 2023 Community
Welfare/Education
292 UAE Mr. Siddharth 
Balachandran 2023 Business/Community
Welfare
12

293 UK Mr. Chandrakant 
Babubhai Patel 2023 Media
294 USA Dr. Darshan Singh 
Dhaliwal 2023 Business/Community
Welfare
295 USA Mr. Rajesh 
Subramaniam 2023 Business
296 Uzbekistan Mr. Ashok Kumar 
Tiwary 2023 Business
*****
13