 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth 
Report of the Committee on External Affairs on the subject 
'India's Soft Power and Cultural Diplomacy: Prospects & 
Limitations'] 
 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
July, 2023 /Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
  
 
 
 
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2022-23) 
 
                          SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA 
23 
 

 
 
 
TWENTY THIRD REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2022-23) 
 
 
(SEVENTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by  the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth 
Report of the Committee on External Affairs on the subject 
'India's Soft Power and Cultural Diplomacy: Prospects & 
Limitations'] 
 
  
 
  
 
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28.07.2023 
Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 28.07.2023 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
JULY, 2023 /Sravana, 1945 (Saka) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
COEA No. __     
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2023 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Ru les of Procedure and Conduct of 
Business in Lok Sabha (____________ Edition) and printed by  

 
 
CONTENTS 
 
      PAGE 
   
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE (2022-23) .................  (ii)                                         
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………. ………....……………(iii)      
 
      
  
Chapter I Report…………………………………………………………………  1 
 
Chapter II Observations /Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government……………………………… 
 
 
23 
Chapter III Observations / Recommendations which the 
Committee do not d esire to pursue in view of the 
Government’s Replies………………………………………… 
 
 
 
89 
Chapter IV Observations / Recommendations in respect of 
which Replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and require 
reiteration…………………………………………………………… 
 
 
 
 
90 
Chapter V Observations / Recommendations in respect of 
which Final Replies of the Government are still 
awaited………………………………………………………………………. 
 
103 
 
 
  
  
APPENDICES 
 
I Minutes of the Twentieth Sitting of the Committee held on   20 
July, 2023……..................................................... 
 
 
107 
II Analysis of Action Taken by the Government on the 
Observations / Recommendations contained in the 
Sixteenth Report of the Committee on External Affairs  
(17th Lok Sabha)………………………………………………………………. 
 
 
 
 
109 
 
       
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 

 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2022-23) 
Shri P.P. Chaudhary, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2.    Smt. Harsimrat Kaur Badal 
3.    Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
4.    Shri Kalyan Banerjee 
5.    Shri E. T. Mohammed Basheer 
6.    Shri Dileshwar Kamait 
7.    Smt. Preneet Kaur 
8.    Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
9.    Smt. Poonam Pramod Mahajan 
10.  Shri Srinivas Reddy Manne 
11.  Shri P. C. Mohan 
12.  Smt. Queen Oja 
13.  Shri Ritesh Pandey 
14.  Dr. K. C. Patel 
15.  Shri N.K. Premachandran 
16.  Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
17.  Shri Soyam Bapu Rao 
18.  Shri Vishnu Datt Sharma 
19.  Shri Rebati Tripura 
20.  Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
21.  Vacant 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22.  Smt. Jaya Bachchan 
23.  Smt. Misha Bharti 
24.  Shri Anil Desai 
25.  Shri Ranjan Gogoi 
26.  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
27.  Shri Prakash Javadekar 
28.  Dr. Wanweiroy Kharlukhi 
29.  Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
30.  Shri Kapil Sibal 
31.  Shri Abdul Wahab 
Secretariat  
1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai     –  Joint Secretary 
2.  Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   –  Director  
3. Ms. K. Muanniang Tunglut  - Deputy Secretary 
4. Shri Anurag Sandil   - Assistant Committee Officer 
 
 (ii) 
 
  
 
 

 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2022 -23) having 
been authorized by the Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, 
present t his Twenty Third Report (17 th Lok Sabha) on action taken by the 
Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained in the 
Sixteenth Report of the  Committee on the subject ‘India’s Soft Power and 
Cultural Diplomacy: Prospects & Limitations’. 
 
2. The Sixteenth Report was presented to the Hon’ble Speaker under 
Direction 71A of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha on 5 September 
2022 and presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12 
December, 2022. The Action Taken Replies of the Gove rnment on all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 15 
June, 2023 English Version) and 19June, 2023 (Hindi Version). 
 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at 
their Sitting held on 20 July, 202 3. The Minutes of the Sitting of the 
Committee have been given at Appendix-I to the Report. 
 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of the 
Committee on External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                           P.P. CHAUDHARY,                     
20 July, 2023                                                       Chairperson,                                 
29 Ashadha,1945 (Saka)                   Committee on External Affairs 
 
(iii) 
 
 

1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
  
        This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the 
action taken by the Government on the 
observations/recommendations contained in the Sixteenth  Report of 
the Committee on the subject ‗India‘s Soft Power and Cultural 
Diplomacy: Prospects & Limitations‘. The Sixteenth Report was 
presented to Hon‘ble Speaker on 5 September, 2022 under 
Direction 71A of the Directions by the Speaker, Lok Sabha and 
presented to Lok Sabha/laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 12 
December, 2022. 
2.    The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of 
External Affairs on all the 45 observations/recommendations contained 
in the Report. These have been categorized as follows: - 
 (i)        Observations/Recommendations which have 
been       accepted by the Government: - 
  
Recommendation Nos.  2, 3, 4, 5,   8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 18, 19, 
20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27,   29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36, 
39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 and 45. 
Total-35  
Chapter-II 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do 
not desire to pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
Nil                                 
        Total- Nil 
Chapter-III 

2 
 
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which 
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the 
Committee and require reiteration: - 
  
Recommendation Nos . 1, 6, 15, 16 17, 37 and 
38                                                                               Total-7   
Chapter-IV 
iv. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final 
replies of the Government are still awaited: - 
Recommendation Nos. 7, 9 and 28 
Total-3  
Chapter-V 
  
3.    The Committee desire that the final replies to the 
comments and observations/recommendatio ns contained in 
Chapter-I of this Report and recommendations included in 
Chapter V may be furnished to the Committee within three 
months of the presentation of this Report.  
  
4.    The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the 
Government on som e of their observations/recommendations that 
require reiteration or merit comments.  
  
  
  
  
  

3 
 
 ASSESSMENT OF INDIA’S SOFT POWER POTENTIAL AND 
STRATEGY FOR ITS OPTIMUM UTILIZATION 
  
 Recommendation No. 1 
5.    The Committee in their 16 th Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 
‗The Committee are aware that India‘s soft power projection 
predates the usage of the term in popular parlance in 21st 
century. Soft power is broadly described as the ability to 
influence others through appeal and  attraction using non -
coercive means. In this sense, India possesses a vast repertoire 
of soft power resources with widespread global appeal. These 
include, its cultural heritage evident in arts, dances, literature, 
cuisine, yoga, traditional medicine, cin ema and entertainment, 
sports, historical monuments, India‘s democratic traditions, 
Constitution, unity in diversity and contributions in resolving 
contemporary environmental issues, scientific/technological 
accomplishments and socio-economic innovations.         
The Committee further note that ‗Smart Power‘, which is 
reflected in judicious use of soft as well as hard power, is most 
representative of India‘s engagement with the world. India‘s 
extensive and diverse soft power capabilities represent a unique 
and sui generis case in study of soft power and cultural 
diplomacy. The Committee, however, are dismayed to note that 
despite the existence of a wide array of soft power resources and 
continued persuasion by the Committee, there have been 
deficiencies on p art of MEA in projecting it effectively to achieve 

4 
 
foreign policy goals particularly due to lack of coordination, 
absence of national policy, inadequate budget and human 
resource. The Committee, therefore, recommend that MEA 
should conduct a thorough asses sment of our soft power 
potential and devise strategies for optimum utilization of the 
same in achieving India‘s foreign policy objectives on priority 
basis and apprise the Committee accordingly. The Committee 
also recommend that the MEA should capitalize in multilateral 
diplomacy channels and abundantly incorporate Track 2 and 
Track 3 diplomacy in India‘s foreign policy strategies.‘  
6. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:  
―Government‘s efforts aiming   at influencing foreign public 
opinion and   attitudes who in turn may influence their 
government‘s actions towards another nation include ‗nation -
branding; diaspora outreach, digital engagement and 
Government sponsored activities focusing on   communicating 
directly with foreign publics wi th a view to projecting soft power 
abroad. All such activities of the Government serve as an 
effective tool to build a positive image with public of other 
countries. Apart from Ministry of External Affairs(MEA) and 
Indian Council for Cultural Relations(ICC R) other Departments 
involved in projecting India‘s soft power abroad are (i) Ministry of 
Culture through Lalit Kala Akademi: Sangeet Natak Akademi 
and  National School of Drama, (ii) Ministry of Textiles:   through 
Development Commissioner (Handicrafts) an d Development 
Commissioner (Handlooms), (iii) Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting via Directorate of Film Festivals, (iv) Ministry of 
AYUSH and (v) Ministry of Tourism. All these departments of the 
Government undertake different activities to achieve the desired 
goals.  
  
ICCR, as part of well devised strategies for optimum 
utilization of soft power potential, contribute towards promotion 
of Indian culture abroad   through its wide range of 

5 
 
activities  which  include inter -alia, teaching of Yoga, Dance,  
Music and Hindi, organizing/supporting conferences/ seminars/ 
workshops in different fields of Indian culture, supporting Chairs 
of Indian Studies in the foreign universities; gifting of 
busts/statues of Mahatma Gandhi and other national heroes, 
exchanging visual art exhibitions, and celebration of International 
Day of Yoga at iconic centres abroad. Under the guidance of the 
Ministry, ICCR has taken various new initiatives as well to 
develop cultural relations and create mutual understanding with 
other nat ions, including new forays in projecting India‘s 
democratic credentials, cuisines, arts & crafts etc. ICCR has 
enhanced its outreach across the globe through various online 
activities and started various initiatives related to Buddhism as 
part of ICCR‘s cultural diplomacy‖. 
  
7. Despite the existence of extensive and diverse soft power 
resources and capabilities the Committee, had felt that there 
have been deficiencies on the part of MEA in projecting it 
effectively to achieve foreign policy goals due to va rious 
reasons. The Committee had, therefore, recommended that 
MEA should conduct a thorough assessment of our soft power 
potential, devise strategies for optimum utilization of the same 
and capitalize it in  multilateral diplomacy channels. In its 
Action Ta ken Reply, the MEA has apprised the Committee 
regarding the initiatives taken by ICCR and the 
Ministries/Departments involved in projecting India’s soft 
power abroad.  While acknowledging the efforts being made by 
all the relevant arms of the Government in  soft power 

6 
 
projection, the Committee are constrained to point out that the 
Ministry has chosen to remain silent on the recommendation of 
the Committee with regard to assessment of India's soft power 
potential. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their ear lier 
recommendation and urge the Ministry to take immediate steps 
for assessing India’s soft power potential so that strategies for 
optimum utilization of the same in achieving India’s foreign 
policy objectives are devised and pronounced. Efforts to 
capitalize it in  multilateral diplomacy channels may also be 
initiated without delay and the progress achieved in this regard 
may be communicated to the Committee.  
  
STUDY ON INTERNATIONAL BEST PRACTICES ON SOFT POWER 
PROJECTION 
Recommendation No. 3 
  
8.    The Committee in their Report had observed/recommended as 
under: 
  
‗The Committee note that the Ministry has only gathered inputs 
through analyzing the soft power activities of few countries and 
also not undertaken any formal study as yet on international bes t 
practices of the manner in which other countries have leveraged 

7 
 
soft power instruments. On the basis of such informal 
observations of the Ministry, the Committee note that the soft 
power organization of countries such as China, United Kingdom, 
Japan, USA, Russia and France focuses on language promotion, 
leadership programme, cultural activities, and promotion of art 
forms. Though the Committee are aware that ICCR performs 
most of these activities, they feel that there is immense scope for 
improvement and expansion of such activities. The Committee 
are, therefore, of the considered opinion that a formal study of 
international best practices of soft power projections should be 
done on priority basis and the learnings from such a study must 
be factored in while formulating India‘s soft power projection and 
strategy.‘ 
 9.    The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:  
―Government is already performing plethora of activities which are 
essentially an important component of soft power activities 
undertaken to project India‘s soft power abroad.   The strategically 
devised policies for promotion of soft power are of dynamic and 
evolving in nature. Nevertheless, the Government , given the 
immense scope for improvement and expansion of such 
activities  note down the suggestion of Committee to undertake 
a  formal study of international best practices of soft power 
projections  on priority basis and to factoring   in the leanings from 
such a study   while formulating India‘s soft power projection and 
strategy.‖ 
  
10. The Committee had opined that a formal study of 
international best practices of soft power projections should be 
done on priority basis and the learnings from such a study must 
be factored in while formulating India’s soft power projection 

8 
 
and str ategy. In its Action Taken Note furnished to the 
Committee, the Ministry has submitted a stereotype reply 
stating that the suggestion of the Committee has been noted 
down. However, the Committee were given to understand 
earlier that the Ministry has alread y gathered some inputs 
through the analysis of soft power activities of a few countries. 
Given the immense scope for improvement and expansion of 
soft power activities, the Committee urge the Ministry to 
undertake the said study without delay and utilize   the inputs 
derived from the study in India’s soft power projection and 
strategy. The Committee also desire that the progress and 
outcome achieved in this regard may be intimated to them.  
  
COORDINATION COMMITTEE ON SOFT POWER PROJECTION  
  
Recommendation No. 6 
  
11.  The Committee in their 16 th Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 
‗The Ministry of External Affairs has highlighted four key factors 
inhibiting effective conduct of India‘s soft power and cultural 
diplomacy – inadequate budgetary allocation, lack of coordination 
among multiple institutions, shortage of skilled manpower and 

9 
 
lack of clarity about the mandate of ICCR. The Committee note 
that informal arrangement have been made by MEA with various 
GOI Ministries and agencies such as Ministry of  Culture, Ministry 
of Youth and Sports Affairs, Ministry of AYUSH, Ministry of 
Science & Technology, etc. The Committee also observe that NITI 
Aayog had held three brain storming sessions to address the 
issue of lack of coordination and suggested the const itution of a 
Coordination Committee consisting of representatives from all the 
concerned Ministries. In pursuance of the Committee‘s 
recommendation on establishing a coordinated mechanism 
between MEA and other line Ministries involved in soft power 
projection, the Committee note that the Monitoring Committee 
under MEA‘s lead is under proposal. In view of the urgent need 
for greater synergy and coordination among the various 
Ministries/ Departments /agencies involved in India‘s soft power 
and cultural diplom acy, the Committee recommend that the 
Coordination Committee may be constituted at the earliest.‘  
12.   In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted as under:  
―MEA is   working on strengthening Coordination among   key 
departments looking after Culture, Education, Sports & Youth 
Affairs and AYUSH   . Efforts   to enhance   cooperation with the 
Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Secretariats   to project democracy, 
constitutional values, electoral practices, good governance and 
other aspects of soft power, in a more sustained manner to 
foreign Parliamentarians, legislature staff and media are 
underway.  ICCR closely works with the Ministry of Culture(MOC) 
in implementation of Cultural Exchange Programmes(CEPs) for 
which (MOC) is the nodal Ministr y with active role of 
ICCR‘s  Cultural Centres and Ministry‘s network of Missions . The 
Standing Committee for planning and coordinating Festivals of 

10 
 
India abroad is chaired by Secretary(Culture) where DG, ICCR is 
also a member. The Governing Body of ICCR includes members 
from Ministry of Culture as well as all major principle 
organizations working in the area of soft culture.  
  
        Minister of State for External Affairs, Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
is also Minister of State for Culture of India. Recommendati on of 
the Hon‘ble Parliamentary  Committee to constitute  the 
Coordination Committee has been noted.‖ 
  
13.    The Committee had noted that MEA itself had identified 
the lack of coordination among the multiple institutions as a 
key factor enabling effective conducts of India's soft power but 
nothing was being done to establish any coordination 
mechanism. In response to the recommendation of the 
Committee for constituting Coordination Committee on soft 
power projection and cultural diplomacy the Ministry has o nly 
replied that the recommendation has been noted. Since the 
Committee feel that only a coordinated mechanism between 
MEA and Other line Ministries/Departments would bring 
greater synergy and coordination, the Committee reiterate 
their earlier recommendat ion of  constituting the Coordination 
Committee on soft power projection and cultural diplomacy and 
bringing it in action without further delay.  
ADEQUATE BUDGETARY RESOURCES FOR ICCR 
 Recommendation No. 7 
14.    The Committee in their 16 th Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 

11 
 
‗Non-availability of adequate finances is one of the factors 
derailing the effective facilitation of India‘s soft power projection. 
Soft power capabilities require capital, both human as well as 
financial to be ef fective. A cursory glance at the budgetary 
allocation to India‘s ICCR and Confucius Institutes of China or 
UKS‘s British Council or Germany‘s Goethe Institute is testimony 
to the hurdles in our institutional efficacy. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend th at the Government should increase 
ICCR‘s budgetary allocation by at least 20 % than what is being 
provisioned as of now.‘ 
15. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under:  
―The Ministry deeply appreciates views of the Hon‘ble Committee, 
and w ork towards providing adequate budgetary resources to 
ICCR so as to effectively carry-out its mandate.‖ 
  
16. Having felt that the non -availability of adequate finances is 
one of the factors derailing the effective facilitation of India’s 
soft power projection and after comparing the budgetary 
allocation to ICCR vis -à-vis other foreign institutes, the 
Committee had recommended to increase ICCR’s budgetary 
allocation by at least 20%. In its Action taken Reply, the 
Ministry has stated that it is working towards providing 
adequate budgetary resources to ICCR so as to effectively carry 
out its mandate. In view of t he need for projection of India’s 
soft power abroad and the role of ICCR in this regard, the 

12 
 
Committee look forward to the Ministry allocating adequate 
funds and providing extra budgetary resources, if required,   so 
that the soft power capabilities of ICCR  is enhanced and the 
organization is able to carry out its mandate effectively.  
  
  
SETTING UP OF STUDY GROUP ON WORKING OF ICCR  
 Recommendation No. 9 
17.    The Committee in their 16 th Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 
‗While ICCR was establishe d some 71 years ago, global situation 
has witnessed several drastic changes thereafter. Hence, an 
institutional device conceived some seven decades back needs a 
relook in the context of its organizational set functionality and 
efficacy. The Committee recom mend that the Ministry should 
appoint a Study Group firstly to assess the working of ICCR in 
comparison to British Council, the American Centre and the 
Confucius Institute etc and later suggest ways to further 
strengthen ICCR.‘ 
 18. The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
―Recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee to appoint a Study 
Group firstly to assess the working of ICCR in comparison to 
British Council, the American Centre and the Confucius Institute 
and later to suggest ways to furt her strengthen ICCR, has been 
noted.  ICCR would put up the recommendation to its Governing 
Body seeking their guidance and   the way forward on  identifying 

13 
 
the scope and suitable partner to execute the proposed 
assessment of ICCR‘s functioning‖. 
   
19. Th e Committee in their original Report had desired the 
Ministry to appoint a Study Group, firstly to assess the working 
of ICCR in comparison to British Council, American Centre and 
Confucius Institute and later, to suggest ways to further 
strengthen ICCR. I n its reply, the Ministry has stated that the 
ICCR would put up the recommendation to its Governing Body 
seeking their guidance in identifying a suitable partner to 
execute the proposed assessment of the functioning of ICCR. In 
the opinion of the Committee , precious loss of time should be 
avoided in such exercises and instead, finalize all the 
modalities to complete the assessment at the earliest and take 
measures for further strengthening of the ICCR  in a time bound 
manner. The steps taken and progress ach ieved in this regard 
may be intimated to the Committee within three months of the 
presentation of this report.  
  
FEEDBACK FOR EVOLVING COUNTRY-SPECIFIC APPROACH FOR 
TOURISM PROMOTION  
Recommendation No. 15 

14 
 
  
20.  The Committee in their 15 th Report had obs erved/recommended 
as under: 
‗The Committee are aware that tourism is a key indicator of a 
country‘s soft power capital. They are given to understand that 
the Ministry of Tourism with eight offices worldwide has been 
collaborating with MEA and other Line Mi nistries for showcasing 
tourist destination and products of the country. To promote 
tourism, various efforts have also been made viz, launching of 
the ‗Incredible India‘ campaign, participation in tourism 
fairs/exhibitions/expos/road shows, signing of 
Agreements/Memorandums of Understanding (MoUs) with 
countries, identifying wellness and medical tourism areas, 
spreading awareness about Buddhist Circuit/Pilgrimage, and so 
on. India‘s age old Indian philosophy of ‗Atithidevo Bhava‘ 
clubbed with immense potential in tourism sector, the Committee 
are confident that India‘s global outreach is bound to escalate. 
The Committee are also elated to note that the Incredible India 
campaign has been effective in promoting Brand India and there 
have been regular informati ve posts and updates on the official 
social media platforms. The Committee feel that there is still a 
need to increase the number of tourism offices abroad and adopt 
country-specific approach for promotional activities. The 
Committee therefore urge the Gov ernment to come up with 
proposals incorporating feedback from all types of travelers 
starting from backpackers to high end tourists in evolving 
country specific approach.‘ 
21.  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted as under: 
―Ministry of External Affairs would work with relevant 
stakeholders and invite Missions/Posts to seek feedback from 
foreign tourists and travelers.‖  
  

15 
 
22.   The Committee had felt the need to increase  the number 
of tourism offices abroad by adopting country -specific 
approach for promotional activities and hence, had urged the 
Government to come up with proposals incorporating feedback 
from all types of travelers starting from backpackers to high 
end tourists. In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry has stated 
that it would work with relevant stakeholders and invite 
Missions/Posts to seek feedback from foreign tourists and 
travelers. The Committee find that no specific action has so far 
been taken by the Ministry and reiterate their  earlier 
recommendation for evolving a country –specific approach for 
promotional activities related to tourism.  
                CREATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE FOR TOURISM  
Recommendation No. 16 
23.  The Committee in their 16 th Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 
‗The Committee find that in our country the differential pricing 
exists for entry tickets to historical monuments in the country. 
While understanding that the earnings from foreign tourists is a 
major source of revenu e for the Government, they are of the 
view that such differential pricing leads to a loss of large segment 
of foreign travelers. Moreover, in a globalized world the 

16 
 
differential pricing for citizens and foreigners is unnecessary and 
hence the Committee des ire that the pricing system may be re -
visited. The Committee also desire that adequate infrastructure 
and public transportation be created around tourist hubs and 
heritage sites and creation of a common tourist passes for entry 
to multiple heritage sites, as prevalent in most European 
countries, may be explored to streamline the process and avoid 
long queues at sites.‘ 
 24.   In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted as under: 
―Ministry deeply appreciates the observations of th e Hon‘ble 
Committee particularly on increasing and upgrading touristic 
infrastructure, and use of technology to streamline processes and 
procedures‖. 
25.  Finding that differential pricing exists for entry tickets to 
historical monuments in the country, th e Committee had 
desired that the pricing system may be re -visited.  The 
Committee had also desired that creation of adequate 
infrastructure including public transportation around tourist 
hubs/heritage sites and  common tourist passes for entry to 
multiple heritage sites as is prevalent in most European 
countries, may be explored. However, the Action Taken Reply is 
silent on the action taken or proposed to be taken to address 
the issues other than expressing its appreciation about the 

17 
 
recommendation. The Com mittee, therefore, reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry to take follow -up 
action with the concerned Ministry and apprise them about the 
progress made in this regard.  
                        RELIGIOUS AND MEDICAL TOURISM 
                                Recommendation No. 17 
  
26.  The Committee in their 16 th Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 
‗The Committee observe that religious tourism and medical 
tourism have emerged as areas with immense tourism potential. 
As an ancient ci vilization and a land of many religions, India has 
been cashing on this potential. The Committee have been 
informed that to create awareness about India‘s Buddhist Circuit/ 
Pilgrimage and attract foreign tourist to Buddhist sites in India, 
the Internationa l Buddhist Conclave (IBC) is being organized 
regularly by the Government. The Committee also note that 
under the Champion Sector Scheme, marketing & promotion for 
Buddhist circuits in overseas markets is also taken up through 
dedicated media campaign. The Committee are also pleased to 
observe that India is emerging as a preferred country for medical 
treatments due to its advanced quality healthcare, affordable 
costs, lesser waiting time & easy medical visa process. The 
Committee feel that there should be a consistent and 
comprehensive focus on these emerging and promising arenas of 

18 
 
tourism in India. They, therefore, recommend that Government 
should adopt a multi -pronged approach to capitalize on India‘s 
potential as a hub for religious and medical tourism by  building 
requisite infrastructure and skilled expertise. The Ministry of 
Tourism may be directed to issue written and online 
material/brochures on medical tourism and religious tourism in 
all the Missions/Posts abroad for enhanced promotional activities 
in these areas.‘ 
27.  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted as under: 
―Attracting foreign tourists to avail medical facilities in India 
under ―consumption of services abroad‖ is an important means of 
revenue generation. A w hole of government approach is adopted 
in this regard. Tourism and Technology has been identified as a 
key element to be focussed upon by Missions/Posts‖.  
 28.  The Committee had recommended that the Government  
should adopt a multi -pronged approach to capi talize on India’s 
potential as a hub for religious and medical tourism and the 
Ministry of Tourism may also be directed to issue written and 
online material/brochures in all the Missions/Posts abroad. 
The Ministry has replied that a whole of Government app roach 
is adopted in this regard and Tourism and Technology has been 
identified as a key element to be focused upon by 
Missions/Posts, without mentioning any of the initiatives taken 
and efforts made in response to the Committee’s 
recommendation. The Commit tee, therefore,   reiterate their 
earlier recommendation and urge the Ministry to take concrete 

19 
 
steps in coordination with other concerned Ministries under 
intimation to the Committee. 
                EQUAL OPPORTUNITY FOR ALL CULTURAL TROUPES  
Recommendation No. 37 
  
29.  The Committee in their 16 th Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 
‗ICCR is mandated to create a sound understanding of Indian 
culture abroad and towards this end, it routinely sends cultural 
troupes, including dance and musical performers. However, on 
various occasions cultural troupes from some border states or 
states with a huge population of tribal communities are provided 
inadequate opportunities to go abroad and present their art. This 
happens as Ambassador and High Commissioners of India abroad 
prefer certain group of artists and ICCR in a way remains 
constrained to send cultural troupes for which there is an 
expressed demand. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
ICCR reformulates certain rules and regulations to  ensure that 
artistes from all regions and States get an opportunity to 
showcase their talent abroad in an equitable manner.‘ 
30.  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted as under: 
―While ICCR always endeavors to maintain a regional 
balance  while sending the cultural troupes abroad, as pointed   by the 
Hon‘ble Committee members, Missions abroad 
recommended   particular form of dance group in consideration of the 
local   aspirations from Musical groups from India.   ICCR in the  best 
interest of   propagation of true culture, chose to send the groups 
suitable to the occasion and potential   footfall for programme.   The 
recommendation of the Committee  to  reformulates certain rules   and 
regulations to ensure that artistes from all  regions and States get an 

20 
 
opportunity to showcase their talent abroad in an equitable   manner is 
kindly noted.‖  
 31.  Having noted that adequate opportunities are not 
provided to cultural troupes from some border States or States 
having tribal population to go abroad and present their art, the 
Committee had recommended reformulation of certain rules 
and regulations by ICCR to ensure equal opportunity to all 
troupes. However, the reply of the Ministry stating that the 
recommendation of the Committee has b een noted, is not 
satisfactory as efforts made in this regard have not been 
mentioned or the Ministry/ICCR seem to have taken no action 
at all. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and urge the Ministry/ICCR to take follow -up 
action on its recommendation and reformulate the rules and 
regulations governing the same so as to ensure equitable 
opportunity to artistes from all regions and States particularly 
to the border states and states with significant tribal 
population to showcas e their art and talent abroad. The 
Committee may also be apprised of the progress made in this 
regard.  
  

21 
 
INDIAN CULTURAL CENTRES ABROAD 
Recommendation No. 38 
 32.  The Committee in their 16 th Report had observed/recommended 
as under: 
‗The Committee are aw are that currently 37 Indian Cultural 
Centres (ICCs) are functional overseas and three are proposed to 
be set up in Paris, Washington and Tel Aviv. As principal 
instrument of India‘s institutional cultural outreach abroad, 
Indian Cultural Centres are locat ed in countries with significant 
strategic, economic, political and cultural interests. The 
Committee are surprised to note that despite these parameters in 
place, the Ministry does not have a Indian Cultural Centre in the 
entire Gulf Region. The Committee , therefore, recommend that a 
Cultural Centre should be opened in the Gulf also in view of the 
large Diaspora and India‘s strong and sustained strategic and 
cultural ties with the region. The Committee also recommend 
that the much delayed centres in Washin gton, Paris and Tel Aviv 
should also be opened by the end of this year.‘ 
33.  In their Action Taken Reply, the Ministry of External Affairs 
submitted as under: 
―Setting up of Indian Cultural Centres abroad is part of ICCR‘s 
efforts to promote Indian cultur e all over the world, within the 
framework of India‘s foreign policy. Procedure for opening of 
Cultural Centres abroad include recommendation of the 
concerned Indian Mission abroad and bilateral relations between 
India and the host country, proposed activi ties to be undertaken, 
population with number of PIOs, completion local formalities and 
obtaining approvals and number of students from host country 
studied/studying  under ICCR scholarship programme. 
  Recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee to open India n 
Cultural Center in U.A.E, in view of presence of   large diaspora 
and India‘s strong and sustained strategic and cultural ties with 
U.A.E,  has been noted‖.  

22 
 
 34.  Being surprised at the absence of   Indian Cultural Centre 
in the entire Gulf region, the Committee had recommended 
for  opening of a cultural centre in the region. The Committee 
had also recommended that the much delayed cultural centres 
in Washington, Paris and Tel Aviv should be opened by the end 
of the year.   In its Action Taken Reply, the Ministry had cited 
procedural requirements and local formalities for opening of 
cultural centres in  Washington, Paris and Tel Aviv while stating 
that the recommendation of the Committee for opening cultural 
centre in UAE has been noted. In the opinion of t he Committee 
after noting the recommendation some concrete efforts should 
have been made by the Ministry in that direction and act 
sincerely to overcome all the procedural bottlenecks and 
complete all the required formalities. The Committee, 
therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge the 
Ministry to open Indian cultural centres in  Washington, Paris 
and Tel Aviv without further delay. In view of the large 
Diaspora and India’s strong and sustained strategic and 
cultural ties with the Gulf regi on, the process for opening a 
cultural centre there should also be prioritized for its early 
completion. 
  

23 
 
CHAPTER II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
          The Committee are aware that soft power capabilities have 
great relevance and potential in augmenting positive perceptions 
about a country and its national interests. India with its wide 
ranging instrument of soft power has a definite advantage i n 
comparison to many other countries. However, in absence of 
formulation of a clear cut policy on our soft power projection this 
may not have been possible. The Committee is constrained to 
note that despite making specific recommendation by the 
Committee in this regard in their 13th Report of 16th Lok Sabha 
the policy is still at consultation stage. The Committee, therefore, 
strongly desire that the Ministry should prepare a policy 
document on India‘s soft power projections, delineating India‘s 
soft power t oolbox and manner in which it is being projected 
abroad along a vision statement for the future. The Committee 
also desire to be kept informed about the progress made in this 
regard within three months.     
     
Reply of the Government 
 
 Government is taking all possible measures to avail the 
advantages of India‘s soft power capabilities.  To give a 

24 
 
synchronized effect of Government‘s activities undertaken by 
other Departments,   MEA as an Empowered execution agency of 
the Government in th e lead, seek inputs from other  
organizations and  tools of soft power to supplement its  efforts   
to carry forward the mandate of soft power as per country 
specific soft power demand prepared in consultation with Indian 
Mission of that specific country. As one of the stakeholders in 
promoting India‘s soft power ICCR, under guidance of Ministry of 
External Affairs has undertaken necessary preparatory exercises  
including meetings with stake holders, seeking views from the 
Missions, taking inputs from HOMs in the specially organized 
session, taking valuable suggestions of experts on the subject by 
way of arranging lectures and conferences. A policy paper on 
ICCR‘s inputs on Soft Power has been prepared and submitted to 
members of Governing Body of ICCR for t heir further valuable 
suggestions.  After due internal consultation, the inputs will be 
provided to MEA for taking over -all view on India‘s soft power 
projection  in consultation with all other stake holders 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
 The Committee note that the Ministry has only gathered 
inputs through analyzing the soft power activities of few countries 
and also not undertaken any formal study as yet on international 
best practices of the mann er in which other countries have 

25 
 
leveraged soft power instruments. On the basis of such informal 
observations of the Ministry, the Committee note that the soft 
power organization of countries such as China, United Kingdom, 
Japan, USA, Russia and France foc uses on language promotion, 
leadership programme, cultural activities, and promotion of art 
forms. Though the Committee are aware that ICCR performs 
most of these activities, they feel that there is immense scope for 
improvement and expansion of such activ ities. The Committee 
are therefore, of the considered opinion that a formal study of 
international best practices of soft power projections should be 
done on priority basis and the learnings from such a study must 
be factored in while formulating India‘s s oft power projection and 
strategy.      
    Reply of the Government 
 Government is already performing plethora of activities 
which are essentially an important component of soft power 
activities undertaken to project India‘s soft power abroad.  The 
strategically devised policies for promotion of soft power are of 
dynamic and evolving in nature. Nevertheless, the Government , 
given the immense scope for improvement and expansion of such 
activities  note down the suggestion of Committee to undertake a  
formal study of international best practices of soft power 
projections  on priority basis and to factoring  in the leanings 
from such a study   while formulating India‘s soft power 
projection and strategy. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 The Committee understand that Covid-19 pandemic has been 
a disruptive factor in conduct of foreign policy and diplomacy at 

26 
 
the global scale. The Committee also observe that every 
component of India‘s soft power diplomacy - scholarships, 
exchange of visits, cultural delegations, etc, have been impacted 
adversely due to the pandemic. Despite such challenges, the 
Indian Council of Cultural Relations (ICCR) have been able to 
cater to the needs of international students and initiated reforms 
for better management of scholarship programme. The 
Committee are also pleased to note that the traditional Indian 
form of greeting – Namaste acquired greater recognition as a 
global form of greeting during the pandemic. The Committee 
further note with satisfaction that the Ministries of External Affairs 
and Culture have embraced digital and virtual mode to carry 
forward India‘s soft power and cultural diplomacy. However, 
realizing that the post -Covid world will be more technology 
driven, the Commit tee would exhort the Ministry to adopt 
innovative ICT technologies to make India‘s soft power and 
cultural diplomacy more effective and relevant. 
     
Reply of the Government 
 ICCR has adapted itself to the new realities post Covid -19 
and has adopted many technology driven methodologies  to cater 
to the  new challenges. These include  enhancing its outreach 
across the globe through various online activities, updating the 
existing  A2A portal and launch of new portal Ghyan-setu, singing 
of MOUs with educational institutes . Suggestion of the 
Committee to   adopt innovative ICT technologies to make India‘s 

27 
 
soft power and cultural diplomacy more effective and relevant has 
been noted. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 The Committee are cognizant that the intangible elements of 
soft power are difficult to quantify. The Ministry has submitted 
that two factors have delayed the process for developing the 
matrix, namely challenge in measuring outcomes of soft power 
related activities and shortage of expertise. Currently, the Report 
by Expert Committee is under consideration by the ICCR and 
other think tanks. 
  
 The Committee, however, feel th at a study could establish 
the linkages between our soft power and tangible outcomes in the 
field of diplomacy and hence they fail to comprehend the glaring 
delay in developing India‘s Soft Power Matrix. There are various 
global institutions and organizati ons that have developed indices 
for measuring soft power. The Ministry should take cues from 
such available data and use it as a foundation for developing the 
matrix. The Committee reiterate their stance and strongly 
recommend that the Ministry should have  objective metrics for 
evaluating soft power outcomes through a ‗Soft Power Matrix‘ at 
the earliest. 
    Reply of the Government 

28 
 
 Government has been in the process of developing the 
matrix to measure and quantity the effects of the Government‘s 
efforts in promotion of India‘s soft power.  In this direction , ICCR    
after detailed discussions with the think tanks/ experts including 
MEA (PPR Div.) and taking into consideration the deliberations of 
the Conference on Soft Power held on 19 -20 December 2018 
organized in collaboration with Centre for Soft Power (India 
Foundation), appointed an expert to identify the initial inputs to 
develop an approach to soft power matrix to measure 
effectiveness of policies and provide a guide to the way forward. 
The findings were further examined by the RIS, a think tank with 
acknowledged expertise and knowledge in the area of soft power  
 
The recommendations outline a mechanism for having 
synergy among the various stakeholders. As per RIS, Soft Power 
Matrix would differ from time to time for any country and hence, 
need include different  constituents of soft power.   
  Soft Power is an evolving and dynamic concept and keeps 
on changing with priorities/policies of the Government and 
bilateral/international developments. 
 MEA/ICCR will continue to take forward the Government‘s 
strategy related to implementation of Soft Power Matrix in a 
holistic manner. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 India is uniquely positioned for its rich culture. As compared 
to other countries India‘s potential for developing International 
Relations on the count of culture is simply great. Therefore, in 
order to give further impetus to our efforts aimed at 

29 
 
strengthening aimed at strengthening India‘s cultural relat ions 
with major countries all over the world, it is necessary to 
strengthen our Cultural Relationship Development or soft power 
arm- Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR), it is necessary 
to evolve and adopt a well thought out Cultural Relationship 
Policy of India at the earliest. In the absence of such a policy, our 
efforts to accomplish our Mission of development of cultural 
relationship re likely to remain half hearted and less result 
oriented. The Committee therefore recommend that the Ministry 
should take urgent steps firstly to evolve and later adopt National 
Policy on Cultural Relationship Development across the countries 
or National Soft Power Policy. 
   Reply of the Government 
          Government is already working on the Cultural 
Relationship Policy of India.  In this direction ICCR, C has 
prepared a policy paper on India‘s Soft Power and submitted to  
the members of  its Governing Body  for their further valuable 
suggestions. After due internal consultation, the Policy paper will 
be discussed with all the stake holders under the leadership of  
Ministry of External Affairs. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
      
    Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry of Culture and the 
Ministry of External Affairs are directly engaged in the task of 
promotion of India‘s cultural diplomacy. While on one hand the 

30 
 
Ministry of Culture formulates policy and evolves all projects for 
propagation of culture on the other hand, ICCR is the executing 
arm in the external domain which includes preservation and 
conservation of cultural heritage and promotion of tangible and 
intangible art and culture within and outside India. Within 
through its 39  Indian Cultural Centres abroad and 19 Regional 
Offices in India undertakes activities such as academic and 
cultural exchanges, scholarship programmes, organization of 
seminars, bringing out publications, etc. While noting the 
complementary role of ICCR an d Ministry of Culture in cultural 
diplomacy, the Committee desire that a Working Group of both 
the Ministries may be formed to have coordinated and focussed 
approach in chalking out our cultural diplomatic activities. The 
Committee also feel that there is a need to have a consolidated 
database of information about cultural assets and resources i.e. 
cultural inventory at one place for essential planning and effective 
utilization of our resources for the benefit of our country. 
 
 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of External Affairs has initiated action for framing a 
working Group constituting representatives from MEA, MOC and 
ICCR.  The Working Group so constituted wouldchalk out 
coordinated and focussed approach on diplomatic activities and 
also prepare  a consolidated database of information of cultural 
assets and resources .  The fact that Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi is 

31 
 
Minister of State for External Affairs  and Ministry of Culture will 
facilitate completion of the task in time given timelines.     
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023]  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
 With the objective of dissemination of Indian art and culture, 
the Ministry of Culture has signed 109 bilateral cultural 
agreements and 74 Cultural Exchange Programmes. As a 
member of var ious multilateral organizations such as Brazil 
Russia India China and South Africa (BRICS), Shanghai 
Cooperation Organization (SCO), Bay of Bengal Initiative of 
Multi-sectoral Technical and Economic Cooperation (BIMSTEC), 
Asia Europe Meeting (ASEM), United  Nations Education Scientific 
and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), India actively participates 
in multilateral cultural activities. While acknowledging the 
plethora of activities undertaken by ICCR to utilize India‘s rich, 
ancient and diverse culture in fos tering bilateral and multilateral 
cultural relations, the Committee desire that the Ministry of 
External Affairs and Culture should  proactively communicate 
these initiatives to the domestic as well as global audience 
through all media platforms. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 All the Cultural Exchange Programme/Memorandum of 
Understandings/Programme of Cooperations as well as Cultural 
Agreements signed by Ministry of Culture are put in public 
domain through official website of Ministry of External Affairs. 

32 
 
MEA through its XPD Division proactively communicates bilateral 
and multilateral cultural initiatives to the domestic as well as 
global audience through all media platforms including print, 
electronic and social media. 
XPD Division remain in touch with the  print media outlets 
whether it is foreign media, national or regional media and 
depending upon the amplification required due coverage is given 
to them in these outlets. XPD Division in recent years have 
worked extensively in widening the regional media o utreach 
where news pieces on the abovementioned initiatives are 
disseminated/circulated in the local languages.  
On the social media front MEA handles along with the 
Missions/Posts‘ social media platforms carry out publicity efforts. 
Language hubs are also  identified within Missions/Posts‘ where 
the information, creatives, videos etc can be translated in major 
foreign languages and can be given in the Missions/Posts with 
predominant use of that language for wider amplification. 
 Several cultural initiatives on the sidelines of the multilateral 
events have been amplified proactively in the last year and XPD 
Division along with the Missions/posts‘ will continue doing so in 
the future as well.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023]  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
 Assisting countries in our neighbourhood and in extended 
neighbourhood to restore, refurbish or re -built historical 
monuments that display an Indian influence is an important form 
of our cultural diplomacy. The Ministry of External Affairs alon g 
with the Archaeological Survey of India (ASI) have restored 
historical monuments in Angkor Wat Temple (Cambodia), Bagh E 
Babur (Afghanistan), Preah Vihar Temple), Vat Phou Temple 

33 
 
(Laos), Ananda Temple (Myanmar), Charm Monuments 
(Vietnamm), Tashichho Dzon g (Bhutan), Trikuteshwara Temple 
and Jaffna Cultural Centre (Sri Lanka) and so on.  Currently, 
conservation work of Friday Mosque (Maldives), Wangdue 
Phodrang Dzong (Bhutan) and Guru Dev Tagore‘s ancestral 
home in Bangladesh are being executed by ASI. 
  
 MEA has informed that a new and separate division to handle 
projects abroad with assistance from the Ministry of Culture and 
the Archaeological Survey of India is being established. The 
Committee are pleased to learn that our contribution in building 
or re -building monuments with Indian influence is widely 
appreciated through the entire region. The Committee desire to 
be apprised about the progress made with regard to creation of 
the new Division along with details of budgetary allocation and 
proposed human capital in terms of organizational structure and 
outcomes of this initiative. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 With a view to accord high priority to the implementation of 
various cultural, conservation and heritage development projects 
abroad for promotion o f Indian cultural heritage linkages, a 
dedicated Division (DPA -IV Division) was created in January 
2020, within the Development Partnership Administration (DPA).  
This Division has since been undertaking development 
partnerships mainly in Cambodia, Vietnam  and Lao PDR for 
culture and heritage conservation projects; collaborate with 
international and national institutions for the purpose of temple 
restoration, manuscript preservation and intangible cultural 

34 
 
heritage preservation; and develop and disseminate a repository 
of information in this area. 
 
Budget Allocation: A separate budget head titled ―Aid for 
Cultural and Heritage Projects‖ was created in FY 2020 -21.  An 
amount of Rs 10 Cr was allotted in 2021-22 and 2022-23.  
 
Organizational Structure: In view of the specialized nature of 
work that the new Division is expected to carry out, it was 
decided to equip the Division with one Director level officer, two 
Under Secretaries, and Two consultants apart from support staff. 
 
Outcome of Initiative: Even before  the formal creation of a 
separate Division, MEA has been positioning the execution of 
cultural projects, especially conservation and heritage site 
restoration projects as an important feature of our development 
partnership with countries across the world. This is because as an 
ancient civilization state, India‘s culture and civilization has 
impacted other cultures and civilizations in other geographies like 
East Asia, the middle East and Africa. The use of India‘s technical 
expertise in conservation, excavation and cultural management is 
seen positively and welcomed in the partner countries, and forms 
an important aspect of our development cooperation. 
 
 With the creation of a dedicated Division, there is greater 
diplomatic recognition for India‘s efforts a nd a renewed focus on 
undertaking such projects. India has received several new 
requests from our partner countries, like taking up additional 
blocks of Temples in the My Son Complex (Vietnam);restoration 
of monuments  like Dong Duong Buddhist Monastery in  the 
Quang Nam Province and Nhan Cham Tower (Vietnam); 
assistance in Digital documentation of heritage sites (Cambodia); 
assistance for Ramayana Mural conservation (Cambodia) and 
digitization of Indic manuscripts in various libraries abroad 
through the SamHiTA initiative. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023]  
 

35 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
 Under the National Mission on Cultural Mapping (NMCM), 
Ministry of Culture is developing a comprehensive data base of 
artists, art forms and other resources gathered from the Ministry 
of Textiles, Sangeet Natak Akademi, Lalit Kala Akademi, Sahitya 
Akademi, National School of Drama, Centre for Cultural 
Resources and Training, Zonal Cultural Centres, Kalakshetra 
Foundation, etc. The Committee observe that the cu ltural 
Mapping exercise is being carried out through a robust IT-enabled 
platform and the data will be used to create a database for ‗Mera 
Gaon Meri Dharohar‘. As per the Ministry of Culture data of 10712 
villages have been collected so far. In this contex t, the 
Committee desire that the Ministry of External Affairs should 
ensure that this database is used strategically to showcase our 
multifaceted and diverse approach. The database may also be 
shared on the website of the Ministry and be made a part of our  
soft power diplomatic tool. 
    Reply of the Government 
 Under the National Mission on Cultural Mapping (NMCM), 
work on 'Mera Gaon Meri Dharohar' is in progress, and data of 
more than 80,000 village dossiers have been prepared by the 
Common Service Centre s (CSC) and the same have been 
uploaded on the MGMD Web -Portal. The web portal is fully 
operational and after the  formal launching he web portal would 
provide the facility of crowd sourcing data on Indian villages and 
registration of artists and art pract ices leading to the preparation 
of National Registers of artists and art forms in India. 
 Ministry of External Affairs would utilize this database   
strategically to showcase India‘s multifaceted and diverse 

36 
 
approach. The database will also be shared on th e website of the 
Ministry and be made a part of our soft power diplomatic tool.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
 The presence of an extensive and vibrant Indian Diaspora 
abroad with their growing political and economic profile has 
emerged as a unique soft power asset of the country. The Indian 
Diaspora has emerged as a major partner in promotion of cultural 
diplomacy in their respective countries. While noting the 
recognition gained by our diasporic communit ies in recent years, 
the Committee feel that there is a strong need for their strategic 
engagement in advancing a positive narrative about India and her 
global image. Keeping this in view, the Committee recommend 
that the Ministry should put in place a mec hanism for proactive 
interaction with Indian Diaspora in the Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad and through designated events solicit their feedback and 
suggestions for better engagement with the host country on 
regular basis. 
     
 
Reply of the Government 
 Our Missions and Posts abroad have established mechanism 
for engaging with the Indian Diaspora. In the larger Missions, 
there is a designated representational grade officer looking after 

37 
 
community affairs and welfare. In smaller Missions, the Head of 
the Missi on and the number two officer in the Mission directly 
interact with the diaspora on various issues including aspects 
related to their welfare. 
 In countries where there is a substantial Indian diaspora, 
consular camps are conducted on a regular basis in di fferent 
cities to bring the consular services at the doorstep for the 
community members and facilitate greater access to these 
services. Our Missions and Posts abroad regularly participate in 
multicultural and social events and various festivals organized by 
the Indian Diaspora. Such events, in fact, are organized at the 
level of HOM as well where healthy participation of diaspora 
members is seen. The Head of Missions from time to time also 
engage with Indian students and faculty at various foreign 
universities. Organizing of theme based quiz shows, essay writing 
competitions, cultural events are also done by our Missions and 
Posts for the community members. Wide publicity is also given to 
these events through social media. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
 India‘s branding as the ‗world‘s largest democracy‘ has 
immense global appeal. As a vibrant parliamentary democracy 
with multi -party-political system ensuring smooth transfer of 
power through regular peaceful ele ctions, India has been held in 
great esteem across the globe. The Committee note that MEA is 
working closely with Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Secretariats and 
the Election Commission in the task of promoting democracy as 
India‘s strength. The Ministry also actively supports and facilitates 
regular goodwill exchange visits by Parliamentarians. ICCR‘s Next 
Generation Democracy Network Programme is another avenue 

38 
 
that helps young leaders to witness India‘s democratic system 
and its rich heritage. The Committee, however, feel that there is 
tremendous scope to further leverage our democratic credential 
as a soft power tool and hence, the Ministry should work closely 
with the Parliament Secretariat and Election Commission towards 
this end and make them an inclusive part of goodwill, exchange 
visits and interactions. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 The observations of the Hon‘ble Committee, that there is 
tremendous scope to further leverage our democratic credential 
as a soft power tool is well appreciated . Ministry would work 
closely with the Parliament Secretariat and Election Commission 
towards this regard   and make these Democratic institutions 
inclusive part of goodwill, exchange visits and interactions. As the 
Hon‘ble Committee is aware, ICCR has already been p romoting 
India‘s democratic tradition under its flagship programme Gen 
Next Democracy Network , which was started in November 2021. 
Till date, a total of 196 young leader from 51 democratic 
countries have already visited India in 8 groups under the 
programme. The goal of the programme to cover 75 democratic 
countries until 15th August, 2023. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
 Yoga is the ancient Indian practice of physical and mental 
well being. The Committee are  pleased to note that The United 

39 
 
Nations General Assembly declared 21st June as the International 
Day of Yoga (IDY). This global recognition underscores the 
immense popularity of Yoga and manifests its effectiveness as a 
soft power tool. The Ministry of AY USH is the nodal Ministry for 
International Day of Yoga celebrations and has been celebrating 
IDY since last five years at national as well as at international 
level. The Committee note that in order to institutionalize the 
teaching of Yoga overseas, ICCR has established the Indo -
Turkmenistan Centre for Yoga and Traditional Medicine in 
Ashgabat and the India -China Yoga College at Yunnan Minzu 
University, China. In view of the surge in yoga teaching and 
centres across the globe, the Committee would recommend  that 
the Ministry of AYUSH in collaboration with MEA constitute a Yoga 
Certification Board for certifying Indian yogic practices and 
therapies. Collaboration with the Indian Diaspora should also be 
encouraged to disseminate yoga training abroad, in region s 
where it is not yet popular. 
    Reply of the Government 
 Ayurveda and Yoga have been two major contributions of 
India to the world. In existence for more than millennia, these 
systems are a shared heritage of the Indian subcontinent 
including countries of the region such as Bangladesh, Bhutan, 
Nepal, Pakistan an d Sri Lanka. Systems of Ayurveda and Yoga 
contribute to holistic health —therapeutic care while maintaining 
the physical, mental and spiritual well -being of people in a 
sustainable way. In recent decades, Ayurveda and Yoga have 
received lot of attention gl obally to the extent that many 
countries have engaged in Ayurveda and Yoga related activities. 
India, like other countries, has been employing cultural tools for 

40 
 
long in its international relations. Effective use of cultural and 
civilizational links (Sansk riti evam Sabhyata) is one of the five 
pillars of India's diplomacy. 
Ministry of Ayush has taken the following 
initiatives/collaborations to disseminate yoga training abroad: 
• Provided financial support to UNESCO for the appointing a 
Yoga Teacher to conduct regular Yoga classes for 6 months in the 
premises of UNESCO, Paris by Permanent Delegation of 
India(PDI), Paris. 
• The Ministry of Ayush and the World Health Organization 
(WHO) jointly developed the m -Yoga mobile application, which 
was launched by the H onorable Prime Minister of India on 21st 
June, 2021 on the occasion of International Day of Yoga-2021. 
The Ministry of Ayush is the nodal Ministry for observation of 
the International Day of Yoga (IDY) which is organized every 
year. IDY observation is focu sed on a Mass Yoga demonstration 
based on Common Yoga Protocol (CYP) which is made available to 
public including Indian diaspora through the Yoga Portal 
(yoga.Ayush.gov.in). 
• One of the highlights of IDY -2022 was "Yoga: The Guardian 
Ring", which underline s "One Sun, One Earth" concept and 
showcased the unifying power of Yoga. It was a live yoga 
programme with the movement of the Sun. The yoga 
programmes from over 75 Plus countries in different time zones 
were telecast live on DD India channel. 
• The Minist ry of Ayush also organizes International 
Conference on Yoga every year which is attended by renowned 
personalities from various fields as well as International 
Delegates. Till date 05 International conferences on Yoga have 
been successfully organized by th e Ministry of Ayush in different 
part of the country. Ministry also supports organizing 
International Yoga conferences in different countries. 
• The Ministry of Ayush introduced 5 -Minute Yoga protocol for 
people to promote break of 5 -Minutes from work sche dule to 

41 
 
practice yoga to refresh, de -stress and re -focus. The Ministry of 
Ayush also developed and launched the Y -Break mobile 
application for the same. 
• The Ministry of Ayush has deputed Ayush Experts at the 
Ashgabat, Turkmenistan under the MoU signed be tween the 
Government of India and the Government of Turkmenistan on 
cooperation in Yoga and Traditional Medicines. 
• Morarji Desai National Institute of Yoga (MDNIY) an 
autonomous institution under the Ministry of Ayush, has signed 
MoUs with the following foreign organizations for the promotion of 
Yoga: 
 Divine Values School, Ecuador (DVSE). 
 India Yoga Center (IYC), Korea. 
 Leaders Development Institute, Ministry of Sports, Saudi 
Arabia 
With the objective of promoting Yoga as a career skill and to 
bring standards & uniformity in the teaching and practice of Yoga 
in India and across the globe with a view of attaining holistic 
health and preserving human values, Yoga Certificate Board 
(YCB) in March, 2022. The Board functions under the 
Chairmanship of Secre tary(Ayush) with the assistance of the 
following Committees; 
a. Steering Committee 
b. Technical Committee 
c. Assessment Committee 
d. Standing Finance Committee 
 
 
The Board has achieved the following: - 
(i) Approved Master Level Certification in Yoga in add ition to 
the already existing certification courses, namely, Yoga Protocol 

42 
 
Instructor, Yoga Wellness Instructor, Yoga Teacher & Evaluator, 
and Yoga Master. 
(ii) Approved introduction of Yoga Therapy certification in three 
categories, namely, Assistant Yoga Therapist, Yoga Therapist, and 
Therapeutic Yoga Consultant. 
(iii) Accredited 63 Yoga institutions in the categories of Leading 
Yoga Institutions (17), Yoga Institutions (5), Yoga Training 
Centers (39), and Yoga Therapy Centers (2) so far. 
(iv) Accredited 17 Personnel Certification Bodies (including 
ICCR). ICCR for promoting  and propagating  Yoga in India and 
abroad. 
(v) Taking initiatives to upscale the Yoga Certification Board at 
the global level. 
(vi) Entered into collaboration with some foreign countri es like 
the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia for the promotion of Yoga and 
provided technical advice for setting up institutes for the 
accreditation like Foundation Hastinapur in Argentina. 
Outreach effects - Ministry of Ayush has entered into an 
agreement in July 2 019 with WHO for the implementation of the 
m-Yoga-an mHealth Program for Yoga by Moraji Desai National 
Institute of Yoga (MDNIY) on behalf of the Ministry. The Project 
involved the following tasks to be done in a phased manner: - 
i. Common Yoga Protocol for General Wellness; 
ii. Yoga for Mental Health and Resilience; 
iii. Yoga for Adolescences; & 
iv. Yoga for Pre-Diabetic. 
 
 In the first phase, an M -Yoga App relating to Common Yoga 
Protocol for General Awareness was launched on the occasion of 
IDY-2021 by the Honorable Prime Minister. The work relating to 
the remaining three is in progress. The application contains 
learning & practice videos and audios based on Common Yoga 

43 
 
Protocol (CYP) which can be used by all - with the objective of 
promoting One World - One Health. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023]  
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20) 
 The Committee note that the Mi nistry of AYUSH undertakes 
various activities and measures at international level with the 
mandate to promote/ popularize AYUSH systems (Ayurveda, 
Yoga, Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha, Sowa-Rigpa and Homeopathy) 
of medicine across the globe. These include sign ing of country to 
country MoUs, collaboration with World Health Organization, 
undertaking collaborative research, setting up of AYUSH chairs, 
establishment of AYUSH information Cells, Central Sector Scheme 
for promotion of international cooperation and so on. The 
Committee are of the firm view that Ayurveda, considering the 
popularity it has already gained has the power to become a 
prominent tool of soft power across the world. Taking cues from 
Yoga, the Committee desire that the Government should give 
diplomatic push to Ayurveda in getting global recognition. The 
Ministry should facilitate to open more and more AYUSH centres 
overseas in a strategic and planned manner. 
 
     
Reply of the Government 

44 
 
 Ayurveda's individualized approach to treatment based on 
information drawn from Prakriti (innate nature of an individual's 
body and mind) includes not only physical characteristics but also 
psychological. Recent developments in modern medicine such as 
the concept of "precision medicine" i.e. customized patient c are 
based on a person's genetic information has drawn similarities 
with Ayurveda. Capitalizing on these trends and developments, 
one of the national policyobjectives is to promote Ayurveda and 
Yoga as India's soft power tools. Medical tourism is one such 
strategy which aims to make India a global medical value travel 
hub with Ayurveda and Yoga playing a crucial and large role in 
the vision of 'Heal in India'. Indian systems of medicine are 
envisioned to move beyond the borders of India and become an 
acceptable healthcare system globally. The Ministry of Ayush has 
undertaken following initiatives to achieve the global recognition 
of Ayurveda: 
• Signed 24 Country to Country MoUs for Cooperation in 
field of Traditional Medicine and Homoeopathy with 
foreign nations. 
• Signed 40 MoUs with international institutes for 
undertaking Collaborative Research / Aca -demic 
collaboration. 
• Signed 15 MoUs with international institutes for setting 
up of Ayush Academic Chairs in foreign nations. 
• Supported the establishment o f 39 Ayush Information 
Cells in 35 foreign nations. 
• Offers scholarships to foreign nationals for undertaking 
Ayush courses in recognized AYUSH institutions in India 
under International Ayush Fellowship/Scholarship 
Programme. 
Given WHO -GMP (COPP) to 31 Ayurvedic Drug 
manufacturers to facilitate the export of Ayurveda, Siddha, and 
Unani & Homoeopathy Drugs. 

45 
 
• Signed an agreement with WHO to establish WHO -
GCTM in Jamnagar, Gujarat, the ground -breaking 
Ceremony of which was attended by the Hon'ble Prime 
Minister of India, Director General of WHO and other 
esteemed dignitaries on 19.04.2022 in Jamnagar, 
Gujarat. This Centre aims to provide support to 
implement WHO's traditional medicine strategy (2014 -
23) and to support nations in developing policies & 
action plans to strengthen the role of traditional 
medicine as part of their journey to universal health 
coverage. 
• Establishment of A Panchakarma Centre in Cuba by the 
Ministry of Public Health, Cuba with the technical 
support of the Ministry of Ayush in 2019.  Under the 
Country-to-Country MoU signed with Cuba, the Ministry 
of Ayush deputed one Ayurveda Expert and two 
Ayurveda thera -pists to Havana, Cuba, for providing 
their services for the Panchakarma Centre at, Havana, 
Cuba in November, 2019. 
• Ministry of Ay ush and WHO launched four WHO 
benchmark documents developed by Traditional, 
Complementary and Integrative Medicine Unit, WHO as 
part of the collaboration agreement (PCA) between 
Ayush Ministry and WHO on 12 February 2022, has 
published four benchmarks docu ments pertaining to 
training and practice of Ayurveda & Unani System on 
its IRIS repository. 
• Research: An MoU has been signed between All India 
Institute of Ayurveda (AIIA), Sarita Vihar, New Delhi 
and London School of Hygiene & Tropical Medicine 
(LSH&TM), UK for conducting the study on 
"Ashwagandha for promoting recovery from Covid-19 in 
the UK" on 22 July 2021. The study is a Randomized, 
placebo controlled double blind trial. The study has 
been approved by the Medicines and Healthcare 
Products Regulator y Agency (MHRA) and certified by 

46 
 
WHO-GMP. It is being conducted and monitored as per 
the internationally recognized GCP (Good Clinical 
Practices) guidelines. 
• An MoU has been signed between All India Institute of 
Ayurveda (AIIA), Sarita Vihar, New Delhi a nd 
Frankfurter Innovation szentrum Biotechnologies GmbH 
(FIZ), Frankfurt Germany on 15.06.2021 for conducting 
Collaborative Research study entitled "Understanding 
the molecular mechanism of Guduchyadi tablets in 
combating COVID -19 infection - In-vitro & in -vivo 
study". This MoU signed under an umbrella MoU signed 
between AIIA and FIZ, Germany for research 
collaboration in 2019. 
• Secondment: The Ministry of Ayush, Government of 
India and the World Health Organization South East 
Regional Office (WHO SEARO) si gned a Letter of 
Exchange (LoE) for depu-tation secondment/deputation 
of an AYUSH expert to WHO's regional traditional 
medicine pro-gramme in New Delhi. 
• Ministry has signed an agreement with WHO for the 
secondment of grade P4 at WHO SEAR office at New 
Delhi. Ministry has signed an agreement with WHO for 
the secondment at grade P5 to the World Health 
Organization (WHO), Traditional, Complementary and 
Integrated Medicine Unit within the Department of 
Integrated Health Services (IHS). 
• ISO (Quality Standards of AYUSH Products): Ministry of 
AYUSH is developing Indian Standards as well as 
International (ISO) Standards in collaboration with 
Bureau of Indian Standards (BIS). Development of such 
IS/ISO standards are poised to augment the domestic 
as well as cross -border trade of AYUSH products and 
services. 
Initiatives with SCO Forum: 

47 
 
• Virtual Conference of Experts and Practitioners of 
Traditional Medicine: Virtual Conference as a side event 
of the meeting of experts and practitioners of 
Traditional Medicine was held on February 3, 2023.The 
virtual conference was attended by experts and 
practitioners of Traditional Medicine from 25 SCO 
countries and partner countries. 
• SCO Expert Working Group on Traditional Medicine: 
The draft Terms of Reference (ToR) of the Exp ert 
Working Group on Traditional Medicine developed and 
circulated by India were discussed to develop the 
consensus of SCOmember states on February 9th to 
10th,2023 in New Delhi. The ToR is approved by the 
experts and is subjected to necessary approvals as  per 
provisions in respective countries. The EWG  will 
facilitate the opportunity for communication on various 
issues to increase trade and market access in the SCO 
Member States, Observers, and Dialogue Partners. 
• B2B Conference & Expo on Traditional Med icine, 
Shanghai Co -operation Organization (SCO): B2B 
Conference & Expo on Traditional Medicine, Shanghai 
Co-operation Organization was held on March 2nd to 
3rd , 2023 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023]  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 21) 
 The Committee note that India exports AYUSH and herbal 
products worldwide to about 100 countries and majority of our 
exports are in the form of value -added extracts of medicinal 
plants (herbal products) and in the form of dietary supplements 
and nutraceuti cals. However, Ayurvedic products are still not 

48 
 
recognized in foreign countries. The Ministry has informed that 
Ayurveda is recognized in eleven countries, namely, Nepal, 
Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri -Lanka, UAE, Colombia, Malaysia, 
Switzerland, South Africa, Cuba, Tanzania. In five European 
Union countries- Romania, Hungary, Latvia, Serbia and Slovenia 
Ayurvedic treatment is regulated. The Committee have been 
apprised by the Ministry of External Affairs that Ayurveda does 
not have a recognized pharmacopeia and  therefore it is being 
exported as dietary supplements and nutraceuticals, etc. The 
Committee strongly recommend that the Government should 
make concerted efforts to get recognition of Ayurveda as a 
system of medicine and adopting pharmacopeia of India so that it 
can be exported as medicine. The Committee would like to be 
kept informed about the progress made in this regard. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 
 The Ministry of Ayush undertakes the following activities to 
get the recognition of Ayurveda as a syste m of medicine and 
adopting pharmacopeia of India so that it can be exported as 
medicine: 
• Ministry of Ayush, Government of India in consultation 
with the Department of Commerce has supported to 
establish Ayush Export Promotion Council (AEPC) to 
promote th e export of AYUSH products/ medicines as 
well as AYUSH services.  
 

49 
 
• Ministry of Ayush has also signed 24 Country to 
Country MoUs for Cooperation in the field of Traditional 
Medicine and Homoeopathy with foreign nations with 
the mandate to Exchange experie nce in the regulation 
of teaching, practice, drugs and drugless therapies etc. 
• An India -EU Technical Working Group (TWG) on 
Ayurveda has been established. The Technical Working 
Group has the representation of technical experts from 
the Ministry of AYUSH,  Government of India, the 
European Commission, the European Medicines Agency 
(EMA) and its Committee on Herbal Medicinal Products 
(HMPC). 
• United States Pharmacopeia (USP) Convention and 
Pharmacopeia Commission of Indian Medicine and 
Homeopathy (PCIM & H)  signed an MoU for 
collaborative research activities on 24th August 2016. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 22) 
 The Committee note that Sports and Youth Exchange is 
another dimension of soft power that requires focused attention. 
As informed, National Sports Federations and the International 
Sports Organizations organize sport events and the Government 
only provides financial support and diplomatic support in terms of 
linkages with our diplomatic Missions outside India. Further, the 
Ministry of External Affairs through Board of Control for Cricket in 
India (BCCI) has trained athletes from Afghanistan, Maldives and 
Bhutan. As regards, projection of soft power through the Youth 
Exchanges, the Committee have been informed that in 

50 
 
accordance with the National Youth Policy, 2014 the Department 
of Youth Affairs exchange of Youth Delegations with friendly 
countries is taken up on reciprocal basis for promoting exchange 
of ideas, values and culture amongst the youth of different 
countries. 
 
 The Committee are happy to note that India is expanding its 
utilization of soft power assets by according focus on sports and 
youth affai rs. As a country with enormous youth population, 
these two arenas look promising. The Committee, therefore, 
desire that the Government should appoint Youth Ambassadors to 
communicate and market Brand India across the globe. The 
Ministry of External Affairs  is also exhorted to explore various 
options to train athletes and sportspersons from our 
neighbourhing countries as a component of our Neighbourhood 
First Policy. 
   Reply of the Government 
  Afghanistan: 
 Prior to the political developments in Afghanistan, 
Government of India was strongly pursuing 'Cricket Diplomacy' in 
Afghanistan and the same was also very popular amongst the 
common Afghans. In this endeavour, BCCI/relevant agencies 
signed hosting agreeme nts with the Afghanistan Cricket Board 
(ACB) to allow them to use Cricket grounds at Noida, Lucknow 
and Dehradun. Moreover, Government also provided assistance 
to build Cricket grounds in Balkh and Kandhar province in 
Afghanistan.   

51 
 
Government have continu ed special people -to-people ties 
and facilitated the participation of Afghan Cricket players to 
participate in IPL series. Furthermore, Government have also 
facilitated the participation of Afghan players in other sporting 
events like Chess Olympiad 2022, AFC Asian Cup Qualifiers 2023 
etc.  
 
Bangladesh: 
 With respect to Bangladesh, Government has  been 
engaging with the youth of Bangladesh through programs such as 
visit of Youth Delegation to India since 2012,   a joint initiative of 
MEA and Ministry of You th Affairs & Sports. A 99 member 
delegation visited India in October 2022 as part of this program. 
In line with the recommendation of the committee, sporting 
talent from across Bangladesh could be invited to train in India's 
elite training sports academies  spread across all fields. The 
Ministry has informed Ministry of Youth Affairs & Sports regarding 
the proposal for further action at their end. 
           
Maldives:  
 The  activities undertaken to promote youth cooperation 
include with Maldives include   
 
i)Visit of  14 member Maldivian youth delegation comprising 
representative from National Youth Council and Students Unions  
both National Universities had visited India from 10 -17 Nov, 
2021.     
ii) Government gifted Cricket Sports equipments   to the Mald ives 
in May 2022 and also arranged training for   Maldivian cricket 
coaches and umpires in two separate training modules in Nov 
2019. 

52 
 
iii) Arranged  a 6 -month Athletic Training Camp   at   Netaji 
Subhash Southern Centre Bengaluru.  
iv) Hosted a 13 member M aldives' athletic team of Maldivian 
Athletes for 2023 Indian Ocean Island Games. 
v) Arranged training camps in recent past for various Maldivian 
Sports Associations and also provided  Indian coaches  to train 
Maldivian  youth in various sports like TT, Badminton, etc.  
 
Myanmar: 
"With a view to promote youth exchanges, participants from 
Myanmar have been invited to take part in India -ASEAN Youth 
Summits. Myanmar sportspersons have also travelled to India to 
take part in international sport events. In 2019, 28 sportspersons 
from Myanmar received training in the discipline of badminton, 
shooting and hockey in India. While cricket is not popular in 
Myanmar, training of Myanmar sportsperson in other disciplines 
can be an avenue of capacity building. A draft MoU between 
Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports and Myanmar's Ministry of 
Education is also under discussion between the two countries." 
Bhutan: 
 
 GoI attaches high importance to enhancing youth exchanges 
between India and Bhutan with a special focus on areas  such as 
sports, technology, culture, and entrepreneurship development. 
India is offering more than 1000 scholarships to Bhutanese 
Youth annually. Bhutan is allotted 325 in -person training slots for 
upgrading administrative and technical skills of government 
officials and private sector employees. A special customised ITEC 
progamme for training 100 Bhutanese young entrepreneurs at 
the prestigious Entrepreneurship Development Institute of India 
(EDII), Ahmedabad started in September 2022. 

53 
 
 In the fie ld of sports, India has been providing support to 
Bhutan through development of sports infrastructure, as part of 
the overall development assistance programme to Bhutan. Some 
of the potential areas include - developing institutional 
arrangements between spo rts bodies of the two countries for 
training of youth and professional athletes, training of trainers, 
visits of prominent Indian athletes to Bhutan, partnership with 
the educational institutions in sports, archery in Bhutan, hosting 
sporting events, collaboration in indigenous Sports etc." 
Nepal: 
 Options of pursuing training athletes and sportspersons from 
Nepal in India  and more such institutional programme   can be 
explored in consultation with various sports federations/bodies.  
The Government, as a c omponent of its Neighborhood  First 
Policy, has been exploring and undertaking many capacity 
building measures to training athletes and sports persons of 
neighboring countries and will continue to enhance more and 
more such activities. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23) 
 The Committee note that the Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting through Prasar Bharati, External Services Division of 
All India Radio, Film Facilitation Office, etc have been playing a 
prominent role in the projection of India‘s soft power and cultural 
diplomacy. Positive narrative and agenda setting is one of the key 
goals of soft power diplomacy. Media can play a critical role in 
countering negative perceptions about India. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs and 
the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting should spell out a 

54 
 
Public Relations strategy to tell the Indian story in an effective 
and powerful manner. 
    Reply of the Government 
 The Film Facilitation Office regularly advertises in trade 
media regarding the initiatives taken by the Government to 
promote India as preferred filming destination as well as to 
further ease of doing business while filming in India. The 
advertisements also highlig ht the Champion Sector scheme for 
incentives for foreign films shot in India and for official co -
productions. The FFO also regularly participates in the film 
markets associated with major international film festivals like 
European Film Market in Berlin, Cannes Film Market in France and 
the Toronto International Film Festival in Canada to popularize 
the initiatives of the government. The FFO is also considering 
conducting roadshows and other outreach activities in select 
international target markets with the active guidance and support 
of the Ministry of External Affairs as part of its international 
outreach programme. The recommendation of the committee is 
noted and the FFO will actively support the Ministry of 
Information and Broadcasting as well as the Min istry of External 
Affairs in formulating and implementing a Public Relations 
strategy to further convey the initiatives of the government in an 
effective and powerful manner. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 24) 
 The Committee note that Prasar Bharati, India‘s public service 
broadcaster, in the process of developing a global outreach to 
increase the footprint of its International Services has re -oriented 
‗DD India‘ channel as the English news channel and signed 
Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) with foreign broadcasters 

55 
 
of other countries. The Committee feel that there is an urgent 
need of reorienting DD India further so as to make it globally 
relevant and influential. The Government is urged to come up 
with a plan for revamping the focus, structure and functioning of 
DD India to further enhance its global outreach and inform the 
Committee about the follow up action. 
      
    Reply of the Government 
 With a view to expand the global Prasar Bharati has signed 
an MOU with ―Yupp TV‖, an over-the-top (OTT) platform, which is 
a  gateway for television viewers across the glob. With this, DD 
India is now available on the OTT platform of Yupp TV in USA, 
UK, Europe, Middle East, Singapore, Australia and New Zealand. 
It also h as its presence worldwide through collaboration with 
various international broadcasters like BTV of Bangladesh and 
KTV of South Korea. 
 
DD India is part of Asia -Pacific Broadcasting Union and 
inputs related to India including initiatives of Hon‘ble Prime 
Minister and Government, special achievements and milestones 
as well as MEA briefings are consistently uploaded on AVN 
website which are then accessed by Public Broadcasters of Asia -
Pacific nations. Further DD News and DD India are available on 
various plat forms such as  Satellite, DTH, Mobile app, Social 
Media platforms-YouTube, Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and DD 
News website-http://ddnews.gov.in 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
 
 

56 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 25) 
 While Indian television news may not yet have made any 
impact globally, the Hindi film industry, popularly known as 
Bollywood, has emerged as one of the most notable examples of 
global entertainment emanating from outside the Western world. 
The Committee are of the strong view that ad ded emphasis 
needs to be given to the global imprint of our Cinema as an 
instrument of soft power while taking effective steps to celebrate 
and popularize our movies abroad, including regional cinema. 
The Film Facilitation Office may also promote our histo rical sites, 
scenic locations for purpose of shooting and also set up a portal 
about such locations national as well as international films. They 
may also give wide publicity to the single window facilitation for 
the foreign producers through our Missions/Posts abroad. 
     
Reply of the Government 
 The web portal of the Film Facilitation Office www.ffo.gov.in 
lists various locations in India including historical sites and 
monuments as well as other scenic locations which are attractive 
to filmmakers. The FFO has made a short audio visual on India's 
scenic locations and the various films that have highlighted such 
locations. This audio visual is regularly screened at various for a 
and is also promoted through digital media. The FF0 regularly 
engages with the nodal officers at 124 Indian Missions abroad to 
give wide publicity to the single window facilitation for 
international filmmakers and also filming incentive scheme. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 

57 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 26) 
 The perce ption of India across the world as a country of 
knowledge and wisdom has ancient roots. The Committee discern 
that the Ministry of Education is actively engaged in 
strengthening relations with other countries through educational 
cooperation and collaboration through bilateral agreements, joint 
programmes, scholarship programmes and so on. The Committee 
are pleased to learn that MEA is working closely with the Ministry 
of Education to establish a common admission portal for foreign 
students called the Educat ion India. While Indian Diaspora and 
students have been recognized in fields of arts, sciences, 
engineering, technology and humanities, Indian educational 
institutions do not fare well in world rankings. The Committee, 
therefore, urge the Government to mak e concerted efforts to 
improve the standard of our Universities, Institutes and learning 
centres at par with international norms so that India can emerge 
as a sought after destination for education. 
 
   Reply of the Government 
        Government has releas ed National Education Policy 2020. 
The NEP 2020 recommends ―path -breaking reforms that aim at 
paradigm shift by equipping our students, teachers and 
educational institutions with the right competencies and 
capabilities and creating an enabling and reinvigo rated education 
eco-system for a vibrant new India‖ (NEP 2020). Consequent 
upon release of NEP 2020, University Grants Commission (UGC) 

58 
 
has issued guidelines for Internationalization of Higher Education. 
The Guidelines enumerate various strategies and init iatives for 
internationalization through a wide range of activities such as 
internationally relevant curricula, brand building of Indian Higher 
Education institutions abroad, academic and research 
collaboration with foreign universities, credit recognition  under 
twinning arrangements, global citizenship approach and engaging 
with foreign alumni. Some of the salient points proposed by UGC 
include the following: 
i. Internationalisation at Home:  The most important 
of all strategies related to interna -tionalisation is 
―Internationalisation at Home‖, which means 
integrating the dimensions of international learning 
environment within our higher education institutions. 
HEIs are encouraged to put nece ssary effort towards 
‗internationalisation at home‘ as discussed in these 
Guidelines without compromising the requirements of 
the Indian context. 
ii. Credit Recognition under Twinning Arrangement:  
Under a Twinning arrangement, Indian students are 
enrolled with a higher education institution in India but 
complete part of their programme at a partnering 
institution from another country complying with 
relevant national regulations. However, the degree 
under Twinning arrangement shall be given solely by 
the Ind ian Higher Educational Institution. The idea 
behind Twinning programme is holistic development of 
the learners with the help of cultural exchanges and 
social cohesion. Mobility under Twinning programme 
will equip the learners with best practices, approache s 
and methods of teaching and learning in international 
institu-tions. This will aid in capacity building of our 
institutions and help our students in career choices. 
Indian Higher Educational Institutions are encouraged 
to offer degree pro -gramme under tw inning 
Arrangement. 

59 
 
iii. Global Citizenship Approach: Global  awareness and 
interconnectedness are increas -ingly sought after in 
today‘s global knowledge society. International 
dimension to cur -riculum, international offering in 
educational activities, international competencies in our 
faculty and students etc. will propel our institutions 
towards internationalisation of higher education. 
Internationalisation is not an end in itself but a driver 
of qualitative change in higher education. One of the 
foremost qualitative changes is fostering global ethos 
within our universities and making our learners ‗Global 
Citizen‘. Global citizen is someone who is aware of and 
understands the wider world and actively works 
towards making our planet more equal, fair and 
sustainable. Higher Educational Institutions may take a 
Global citizen approach at their institution. 
iv. ICT based Internationalisation:  Digital revolution 
and Information and Communica-tion Technology (ICT) 
have ushered in new possibilities in process and 
delivery of higher education. With the expansion of ICT, 
it has touched virtually all dimensions of higher 
education and it has a major role to play in 
internationalisation of higher education. ICT brings with 
it new educational opportunities along with flex ibilities 
in approach. ICT can overcome traditional barriers to 
internationalisation. The borderless nature of ICT has 
the potential to transform the internationalisation 
process. Transformation with the help of ICT in itself is 
a motivation for Higher Edu cational Institutions to 
undertake several measures to revitalize the higher 
education system. 
v. Academic & Research Collaboration: Academics and 
research in Higher Education Institutions around the 
world faces a number of wide ranging and interlinked 
global challenges such as food security, energy 
security, infectious disease etc. Collaboration among 
the top universities is essential to identify causes, 

60 
 
addressing concerns and deal -ing with the impacts. 
This will also accelerate the progress of our instit utions 
and enhance the quality of our education. Higher 
Educational Institutions are encouraged to enter into 
collaborating activities, complying the relevant norms 
and Regulations. 
vi. Brand Building Abroad:  A systematic brand building 
campaign by the Hig her Educa -tional Institutions is 
very essential for global standing of the Higher 
Educational Institu -tions and also for attracting 
students from abroad. This will include using all forms 
of communication and outreach, including social media. 
Higher Educat ional Institutions are encouraged to 
undertake brand building exercise to make India and 
their institutions at-tractive study destinations. 
vii. Alumni Connect: The Alumni are a strong support to 
any Higher Educational Institu -tion. An active Alumni 
Association can contribute in academic matters, student 
support as well as mobilization of resources – both 
financial and non-financial. Connecting with Alumni will 
enable the institutions to utilise the services of the 
alumni as brand ambas -sadors to showcase t he 
strengths of Indian Higher Education system. Alumni of 
foreign origin as well as Indian alumni living abroad can 
play a crucial role in brand building of the Indian Higher 
Education Institutions abroad and making India a global 
study destination. Higher education institutions in India 
need to create a culture for alumni to reconnect, devise 
suitable vehicles for brand building and give due 
recognition to their contributions. The ―Alumni Connect‖ 
encourages Indian HEIs to engage with Alumni (of 
foreign origin and Indians living abroad). 
viii. Office for International Affairs:  Establishment of an 
Office for International Affairs at institutions level will 
facilitate and operationalize effective approaches as 
discussed in all the previous strategies/initiati ves 

61 
 
earmarked in these Guidelines. This Office for Interna -
tional Affairs in each University will be a single point 
contact and an integral part of in -ternationalisation of 
higher education in India. 
 
 With the above efforts, the Government is hopeful to 
improve the standards of higher educational institutes/centre of 
high learning and therefore, to make India a global destination in 
providing premium education at affordable price. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 27) 
 Indian Council of Cultural Relations (ICCR), an autonomous 
body under the Ministry of External Affairs, is the nodal 
organization entrusted with the task of projection of India‘s soft 
power abroad. The Committee are aware that the primary 
mandate of ICCR is maintenance of external cultural relations and 
fostering as well as strengthening cultural relations and mutual 
understanding with other countries. The Committee have been 
informed by the Ministry of External Affairs that under the 
Chairmanship of Vice President of ICCR, a Committee was formed 
to restructure the constitution as well as mandate of ICCR. 
However, the Covid -19 pandemic had halted the process. In the 
considered opinion of the Committee, there is an urgent need for 
a complete overhaul of the s tructure, mandate and functioning of 
the ICCR so that it is able to project Indian culture in a 
comprehensive, cohesive, transparent and inclusive manner. The 

62 
 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should 
ensure that the process of restructuring  of ICCR is finalized and 
the blueprint of the same may be submitted to them within three 
months. 
    Reply of the Government 
 Keeping in view the changing world scenario and consequent 
challenges for the mankind in the present world, ICCR has 
prepared a Vision & Mission document in the following manner:  
Vision : Promoting understanding of India -as a nation as 
well as civilization, Indians, Indian culture; globally projecting 
India‘s cultural and civilization attributes and the relevance of 
these attributes in promoting good relations with all. 
Mission Redefined:  
i) To promote an enlightened understanding of Indian 
Civilization and Culture internation -ally, with special 
focus on intellectual and academic as well as cultural 
and creative communities. 
ii) To organize music, dance, theatre and other art and 
fine art performances and exhibitions with the intention 
of creating understanding about Indian culture 
internationally. 
iii) To create knowledge resources and pedagogical 
material for structured academic c ourses on Indian 
Culture and Civilization and to conduct courses, 
seminars, conferences, etc. 
iv) To talented students, teachers, academics, subject 
experts and eminent persons, to India through visits 
and other means in order to expose them to Indian 
culture and the idea of India experientially. 
The above Vision & Mission documents is under active 
consideration of Governing Body/General Assembly of ICCR.  

63 
 
Once approved, the commensurate restructuring of  ICCR 
would be undertaken. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 29) 
 In order to overcome the limited budgetary resources 
available with the ICCR for carrying out its expanding activities, 
the Committee have been suggesting the Ministry to explore 
avenues for extra -budgetary resources. It is satisfying to know 
that MEA has adopted innovative modalities for projection of 
Indian culture abroad through cost sharing arrangements with 
host organizations abroad and with State Governments for 
hosting incoming cultural troops.  The Committee exhort the ICCR 
to continue exploring other innovative financing models, 
particularly, Public Private Partnership to supplement the grants 
in aid received from MEA. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 While ICCR will continue to explore projects on PPP (Public 
Private Partnership) model, ultimately the adequate budgetary 
allocations for soft power projection will have to come from the 
Government. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023]  
 
 
 

64 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 30) 
 The Committee recommend that in view of factors like 
changing global scenario, need for competing with countries that 
are opening Centres for country studies and limitations on front 
of resources, ICCR should undertake some zoning of its cultural 
Centres a nd evolve a mechanism to share human resources to 
the fullest. They also recommend that ICCR should try and 
provide more capable and experienced persons to provide 
leadership to the ICCs over the world. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 As some  of Indian Missions in addition to the core country 
are also accredited to other small countries, ICCs follow the same 
practice to expand their jurisdiction to the accredited countries.  
Recommendations of the Hon‘ble Committee are noted  for 
implementation where eve r feasible. Directors of ICCs are 
deployed taking into consideration their qualification, experience 
and suitability for the assignment by following the due selection 
process through an open advertisement, nomination by President 
and selection of ICCR officials. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023]  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 31) 
 In view of the fact that ICCR has a considerably high number 
of employees employed on either ad hoc or temporary basis, the 

65 
 
Committee recommend that ICCR should evolve a fresh Human 
Resource Policy to have better result orientation. ICCR should 
also think of sizing its Regional Offices at various places in the 
country and utilize the saved resources on a more productive 
cause. 
    Reply of the Government 
In the re -organisation of ICCR‘s work and to ensure 
efficiency and economy in its operations, and taking all aspects 
into consideration, the Statutory Bodies of ICCR had decided to 
merge seven Regional Offices namely, Bhopal, Bhubaneswar, 
Chennai, Goa, Hyderabad, Trivandr um and Varanasi with the 
Zonal Offices which became operational w.e.f. 1st July, 2022. 
Consequent upon this restructuring,  ICCR has brought down its 
offices from 18 to 11 on 1st July, 2022. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023]  
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 32) 
 Considering the need to have right kind of institutional 
leadership for ICCR, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should appoint persons with keen interest in soft power 
projection. Persons passionate about the cause of c ultural 
relationship promotion only can provide right kind of relationship. 
   Reply of the Government 
 ICCR has been organizing capacity building training 
programmes specially tailored to meet the requirements of ICCR 
for the employees of ICCR.  Observati on  of the Committee that 
persons passionate about the cause of cultural relationship 
promotion only can provide right kind of relationship and  the 

66 
 
need to have right kind of institutional leadership for ICCR has 
been noted. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 33) 
 ICCR was established when the term Soft power was yet to 
evolve. In view of the emerging issues in the domain of 
international cultural relationship and the fact that culture is the 
most effective distinguish ing feature of India as a nation, ICCR 
should adopt a suitable Motto and also have a well defined vision 
and mission statement. 
    Reply of the Government 
 Keeping in view the changing world scenario and consequent 
challenges for the mankind in the present world, ICCR has 
prepared a Vision & Mission document in the following manner:  
Vision : Promoting understanding of India -as a nation as 
well as civilizatio n, Indians, Indian culture; globally projecting 
Indis‘s cultural and civilization attributes and the relevance of 
these attributes in promoting good relations with all. 
Mission Redefined:  
i) To promote an enlightened understanding of Indian 
Civilization a nd Culture internation -ally, with special 
focus on intellectual and academic as well as cultural 
and creative communities. 
ii) To organize music, dance, theatre and other art and 
fine art performances and exhibitions with the intention 
of creating understa nding about Indian culture 
internationally. 

67 
 
iii) To create knowledge resources and pedagogical 
material for structured academic courses on Indian 
Culture and Civilization and to conduct courses, 
seminars, conferences, etc. 
iv) To talented students, teacher s, academics, subject 
experts and eminent persons, to India through visits 
and other means in order to expose them to Indian 
culture and the idea of India experientially. 
The above Vision & Mission documents is under active 
consideration of Governing Body/General Assembly of ICCR.  
Once approved, the commensurate restructuring of  ICCR 
would be undertaken. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 34) 
 In pursuance of its objectives, ICCR carries out a range of 
academic and cultural activities. These include scholarship 
programmes, Visitors Programme, organizing 
Conferences/Seminars, Chairs Programme, Horizon Series 
Programme, promotion of yoga, conducting exhibitions, sending 
and receiving culture troupes of dance, etc. The Committee feel 
that there is a dire need for dissemination of information about 
the various activities that are being undertaken by ICCR for 
deepening India‘s soft power and cultural outreach. The Ministry 
should also incorporate accomplishments of successful soft power 
organizations of UK, Germany, China and include language 
promotion of various Indian languages and art forms within the 
ambit of ICCR activities. 
     
Reply of the Government 

68 
 
 ICCR has taken many new initiatives including deputing 
Hindi teachers abroad, exploring, engaging local resource persons 
for teaching and popularizing Hindi in foreign countries, 
instituting World Sanskrit and Distinguished Indologist Awards to 
recognize the contribution of foreign scholars  towards promotion 
of Indian philosophy, history, art, culture, India languages, 
literature and civilization etc.   ICCR has signed MOUs with Antra 
Rashtriya Hindi Vishav Vidhyalay, Warda, Cental Hindi 
Directorate, Chandigarh  and IGNU for conducting on line Hindi 
learning classes for foreign nationals.  Similar action is underway 
to promote other classical languages including Sanskrit and 
Tamil.  ICCR has also established 17 Hindi chairs at various 
universities/institutions abroad.    
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 35) 
 The Committee note that scholarship programme is an 
important component of ICCR‘s activities. The Council offers 
scholarship at all levels (under -graduate, post -graduate and 
Ph.D) in all mainstream disciplines, except medicine  to the 
nationals of different countries mainly from neighbouring, African 
and Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) countries. The 
Ministry has informed that around 7,000 students from 180 
countries are studying under ICCR scholarship schemes and 
several ICCR alumni are highly placed in various vocations in 
their respective countries. In the past, there have been several 
complaints about ICCR scholarships which, inter alia, included 

69 
 
non-award of scholarship, scholarship given for subject different 
than applied for, non -disbursement of scholarships on time, 
difficulties in obtaining reimbursement of medical expenditure on 
time, etc. The Ministry has informed that steps such as direct 
interface of ICCR Admission to Alumni (A2A) portal with 
universities, he alth insurance policy, introduction of PFMS for 
direct transfer of scholarship dues to students account, field visits 
by team from OCCR headquarters to Regional offices have been 
taken to minimize the complaints/grievances of students. As a 
major part of I CCR activities, scholarship is tied to our global 
image and prestige. The Committee therefore, urge that the 
Ministry should ensure that there is regular interface between the 
foreign students getting scholarships and ICCR. Further, all the 
Indian Missions /Posts abroad should be reached out for wider 
dissemination about the scholarships offered through ICCR. 
    Reply of the Government 
         Missions are already using different means of dissemination 
of information including electronics, print and social  media in 
addition to the public inter face with the students and general 
public. 
 Regular interface activities between international students  
and ICCR include field visits by team from ICCR headquarters to 
Zonal/Sub-Zonal offices to interact with maximum number of 
students, organizing international students cultural festival 
―Friendship through Culture‖, summer/winter study tours and day 
to day interactions with ICCR officials.  Interaction through social 
media platforms and 24x7 online grievances redressal   system 
are other forms of improving interface with students. With a view 
to co nnecting all foreign scholars who have studies in India 

70 
 
including ICCR scholars, ICCR has developed India Alumni portal 
(www.iccr.almaconnect.com). The aim of the India Alumni portal 
is in line with Hon‘ble Prime Minster‘s vision to build an India 
alumni n etwork to engage them and keep them 
connected/updated on a dynamic India so they can be the bridges 
of friendship and India‘s unofficial cultural Ambassadors in their 
own unique ways. It is a single platform for all past and present 
foreign scholars to reg ister, interact, maintain their Indian 
linkages and remain anchored to the India ―they carry‖. 
 ICCR would continue to improve  these efforts with the new 
evolving changes. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 36) 
 Sending Indian Cultural troupes outside the country is an 
important part of the activities of the ICCR. These troupes 
perform in countries across the world and such performances play 
a significant role in protecting our soft power. The Ministry has 
informed that there exists a panel of artistes in various art forms 
such as theatre & puppetry, Carnatic, Hindustani, dance including 
folk and modern experimental. Empanelment of artist takes place 
on the basis of recommendation of the Expert Sub Committee 
constituted by ICCR. While the lists of empanelled artists are 
available on ICCR website, the Committee did not find the names 
of members of the Expert Committees. The Committee, therefore, 
urge the Ministry to ensure greater transparency in the process 
for empa nelment of artists by displaying the details about the 
empanelment process including lists of Experts/ Sub -Committees 

71 
 
on the official website of ICCR. ICCR is also directed to ensure 
that adequate regional representation is provided to artists while 
sending them abroad. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 As kindly noted by the Hon‘ble Committee members  that 
there exists a panel of artistes in various art forms such as 
theatre & puppetry, Carnatic, Hindustani, dance including folk and 
modern experimental and that the  empanelment of artist takes 
place on the basis of recommendation of the Expert Sub 
Committee constituted by ICCR. With respect to the observation 
of Hon‘bel Committee members that while the lists of empanelled 
artists are available on ICCR websit e, the names of members of 
the Expert Committees are not available in the public domain, 
ICCR in compliance with the instructions of Hon‘ble Committee 
members have shared the list of experts with the  Lok Sabha 
Secretariat (Committee on MEA). Further, ICCR  is in the process 
of updating/reviewing the panel of artists.  Once done the list of 
empanelled  artists the Empanelment Expert Committee members 
would be put in the public domain. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 39) 
 The Ministry has enlisted lack of finances, difficulty in 
identification of space and policies of host countries as 
constraining factors in opening of new Cultural Centres abroad. 
The Committee note that in 2016, ICCR had constituted a 
Committee under  Ambassador Veena Sikri to conduct 
performance audit of Indian Cultural Centres. It has been 
informed that the said Committee has submitted its Report and 

72 
 
the recommendations are being considered for implementation. 
In this backdrop, the Parliamentary Comm ittee desire to have a 
detailed status note on the implementation status of the 
recommendations and implementation schedule made within 
three months. 
     Reply of the Government 
          In 2016 ICCR set up a Committee under Ambassador 
Veena Sikri, to conduct performance audit of Indian Cultural 
Centres.   The recommendations of the Committee include  
 
(i)Enhanced Coordination between ICC and Embassy 
(ii)The task of soft power projection assigned to the ICCs need to 
be supplemented with more coordination between the Mission 
and ICCR.  
(iii) The entire sector of education, where ICCR plays the leading 
role, should be  covered by the ICCs.  
(iv) Selection process of Directors should   ensure  selection of  
capable, efficient and culturally rich individuals to head the ICC. 
(v) Re-devising of the soft power projection process  in 
such a manner that it has flexibility to accommodate the 
interests of host    country and   the special interests in  Indian 
education and culture expressed by credible institutions across 
the world, 
 
(vi) Reorganizing of ICC to increase Coordination among all the  
stakeholders(MEA, Embassies and ICCs), 
(vii) Transfer of  Education work which is being carried by many 
of the Missions  to the ICCs.   and  
(viii).incorporating soft power projection among the goals and 
objectives of India‘s foreign policy.  
 
 Most of the recommendations of Ambassador Veena Sikri  
such as coordination between Mission, ICC and MEA, 
incorporating suggestions of Mission/ICC in the POA of ICCR, 
reforms in selection process of Directors of ICCs, better 

73 
 
coordination amongst the stake holders revisiting the vision and 
Mission of ICCR have been implemented.  Soft power has always 
been and will continue  to the integral part of India‘s foreign 
policy goals. Other recommendations of the Committee are 
under consideration of the Government/ICCR. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 40) 
 The Committee note that ICCR has 19 Regional Offices across 
different States of India that undertake outreach activities at the 
State level for both cultural and academic work. The three major 
responsibilities of the Regional Offices are looking after foreign 
students of ICCR scholarships,  hosting incoming cultural troupes, 
and engaging local artists. Over the issue of overlapping mandate 
between ICCR Regional Centre and Ministry of Culture‘s Regional 
Zonal Centres, the Committee have been apprised that the 
process of putting in place a ser ies of Videsh Bhavans in all the 
States to coordinate the foreign policy aspects of each State with 
the Ministry is underway and the role of Regional Offices is 
proposed to be subsumed under the Regional Videsh Bhawans. 
Welcoming the decision of the Ministry on establishment of Videsh 
Bhawans, the Committee recommend that such Bhawans should 
be opened in each State capital for better coordination with State 
Governments The Ministry should submit a roadmap for setting 
up the Videsh Bhawans along with timelin e and budgetary 

74 
 
requirements to this Committee within three months of the 
presentation of this Report. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
         In 2016, MEA had initiated the process of establishing 
Videsh Bhawans as Integrated Office Complexes in all State 
Capitals with a view to bringing all subordinate offices of MEA 
such as RPO, ICCR Centre, Branch Secretariat and Protector of 
Emigrants under one roof to enhance the efficiency of services to 
be provided to the public and also for better coordination among  
the State/UT administration and the Ministry. 
 Towards the objective, Ministry has assessed the feasibility 
of construction of new building and /or converting existing RPO 
Properties into Integrated Office Complexes as RPO Projects only. 
The present statu s of RPO Projects in the respective State 
Capitals as follows: 
a) RPO building in Mumbai was renovated as the 
Integrated Complex of MEA offices in Maharashtra and 
inaugurated in August, 2017. 
b) Land has been acquired to construct Integrated Office 
Complexes in Hyderabad, Chennai and Amravati. 
c) Construction has already commenced in RPO, Ranchi. 
d) In Bhopal, the construction commenced in February 
2019 and is nearing completion. 
e) RPO, Kolkata Construction project is in the design 
stage. 
f) Renovation of the existing RPO buildings in Lucknow, 
Bhabaneswar and Bengaluru. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 

75 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 41) 
 The Committee note that in order to impart greater synergy 
in media outreach activities and public diplomacy initiatives within 
MEA, the External Publicity (XP) Division was merged with the 
Public Diplomacy (PD) Division to create the External Publicity & 
Diplomacy (XPD) Division. The XPD Division provides publicity 
material and other inputs to the different Divisions of the Ministry 
and the Indian Embassies and Consulates abroad to facilitate 
their engagement, partnership and dialogue with the relevant 
stakeholders for India‘s soft power promotion. The Committee 
observe that the role of the XPD Division includes com missioning 
of short films, documentaries, audio -visual clips for social media 
promotion, publishing e -books, coffee table books, procuring 
books for supplying to Indian Embassies and Consulates abroad 
and organizing Distinguished Lecture Series. The Commit tee are 
pleased to know that the XPD Division has played an instrumental 
role in worldwide celebrations of 125th Birth Anniversary of B.R. 
Ambedkar, 150th Birth Anniversary of Mahatma Gandhi and 
550th Birth Anniversary of Guru Nanak Dev.  
 
 As a key facili tator in India‘s soft power and cultural 
diplomacy within the Ministry of External Affairs, the Committee 
urge that the XPD Division should expand India‘s public diplomacy 
footprint and resort to active usage of print and social media to 
maximize the tangible outcomes. The Committee also desire that 

76 
 
with the active involvement of Indian Missions/Posts abroad, the 
Division should continue to make focused and persistent efforts 
towards popularization of Indian personalities and historical 
events on a regular basis.     
Reply of the Government 
          External Publicity and Public Diplomacy Division (XPD 
Division) continues with its efforts to effectively articulate India‘s 
position on key foreign policy issues in accordance with its 
mandate and hasexpanded India‘s public diplomacy footprint with 
the ac tive usage of print & electronic media and the new -age 
social media to maximize the tangible outcomes and to project 
the ‗India Story‘ and other notable achievements of the country 
to an international audience.  
The disruptions caused by the Covid -19 pandemic presented 
its own set of challenges and the XPD Division adapted 
accordingly to successfully function during that time.It was of 
critical importance to keep domestic and global audience 
informed about the developments during the pandemic and the 
various initiatives taken by the government to tackle related 
challenges, thus publicity and outreach became a crucial aspect 
during the pandemic. 
XPD Division fully utilized its presence on social 
mediaplatforms like Facebook, Twitter, Instagram and YouTube to 
give authentic and real time information. Ministry, Indian 
Embassies and Consulates‘ social media handles became a crucial 
source for sharing details of repatriation, vaccines and aid along 
with visuals. Apart from these, specific activities were also 
undertaken related to specific campaigns and events including 
Vande Bharat Mission, Vaccine Maitri and Aid from Abroad during 
second wave. 

77 
 
 
As the situation has improved the Division has amalgamated 
its experiences and skills learnt in those challenging times to 
further its effective functioning at present in print, electronic and 
social media domain.   
Digital outreach 
MEA has been a pioneer in GOI to embrace a robust social 
media presence and digital identity with a consistently growing 
number of followers across platforms. 
MEA has over 3.84 million followers on Twitter with @ MEA 
India having 2.29 million followers and @Indian Diplomacy having 
1.5 million followers, adding approximately 110,000 followers 
since last year. Missions and Posts have also continued  to 
increase engagement with the diaspora and the local population 
in the host country through social media platforms. Today around 
194 Indian Missions/Posts have a presence on Twitter; 191 
Missions/Posts have presence on Facebook; and around 132 
Missions have a presence on Instagram, with more being 
encouraged to join the platform. This all-round digital outreach by 
the Ministry has enabled faster, direct and accurate dissemination 
of information on Ministry and Mission/Posts‘ activities to an 
audience not just in India but all across the world.  
Missions/Posts‘ through their social media platforms 
highlight the important activities/events undertaken by them in 
their local languages, which form a narrative giving shape to 
India story in the host countries. This is also amplified by MEA 
handles which take the achievements of the Missions/Posts to the 
domestic as well as larger international audience.   
Further MEA social media platforms in tandem with 
Missions/Posts‘ social media platforms also amplify variou s 

78 
 
domestic campaigns which find resonance abroad. Prime 
Minister‘s Mann ki Baat programme is one such initiative where 
Missions/Posts contribute to the crowd sourcing of ideas and 
further carry forward and amplify Hon‘ble Prime Ministers 
Messages in their host countries. 
 MEA‘s YouTube channels – The Division manages two 
YouTube channels for the Ministry; MEA India channel has a total 
of over 191,000 subscribers, Indian Diplomacy channel has over 
148,000 subscribers as of December 2022. 
MEA Flicker account (MEA photogallery) continues to serve 
as a repository of photos for all of MEA‘s major events, in India 
and abroad, with a photo bank of 44,420 HD photos as of 
December 2022. 
MEA‘s Sound Cloud account (MEA India) is a useful audio clip 
database for accessi ng audio clips of all media briefings. Video 
Clips of all media briefings are also uploaded on YouTube.   
Last year, XP Division in collaboration with the Ministry of 
Ayush and ICCR organised the Guardian Yoga Ring event to 
celebrate 8th International Day of Yoga 2022. As part of Guardian 
Yoga Ring event, Indian Embassies and Consulates, located 
across continents and several time zones, organized IDY activities 
which were telecast live on Doordarshan as a relay from 3 am to 
10 pm (IST) on 21 June 2022. Arou nd 80 Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad participated in this initiative. 
The popularity and success of MEA‘s efforts in expanding 
digital outreach and branding itself as a ‗digitally forward‘ Ministry 
is demonstrated by the continuous growth of its followers ac ross 
social media platforms. 
  
 

79 
 
Visual Outreach – Films and Documentaries 
The XPD Division commissions‘ documentaries aimed at 
positive projection of India‘s image abroad. FTP links of the 
documentaries commissioned by this division are shared with 
Indian Missions/Posts abroad for presentation and screening 
purposes. These documentaries are also uploaded on MEA 
YouTube channel ―Indian Diplomacy‖ for ease of reference and 
use. Non commercial screening rights of popular Bollywood and 
Regional feature films ar e procured and shared with Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad through FTP links/DCPs for screening by 
them as well as for participation in local film festivals. 
Other publicity material such as Customized sets of popular 
Indian Classical/Bollywood Music Cards, v ideos & photographs of 
Eminent leaders shared with Missions/Posts abroad for organizing 
publicity campaigns, photographic exhibitions etc. & photographs 
on Parakram Diwas and India@ 75 also uploaded on Intranet. 
Customized sets of popular Indian Classical/ Bollywood music 
cards also used as gifts/presents purposes by MEA and our 
Missions/Posts abroad. 
During last year, the Division commissioned many short 
films and videos in an effort to popularise Indian personalities and 
historical events. These include: ( i) Lotus Trail - India's Buddhist 
Linkages with South -East Asia and East Asia countries. (ii) Film 
on Passport Seva (iii) India@75: A Journey of Transformation (iv) 
8th International Day of Yoga with AKAM theme. (v) 26/11 
Mumbai Terror Attacks (vi) Film on Indian Diaspora (vii) Series of 
short videos to celebrate Azadi Ka Amrit Mahotsav etc. in India & 
abroad. 
PUBLIC OUTREACH 
 

80 
 
1. Government’s Achievements in the field of Foreign 
Policy 
The Division brought out a hardbound book titled ‗Citizen -
Centric Foreign Policy‘ showcasing  the achievements of the 
government in the field of foreign policy covering the period of 
last 8 years. To affect a greater outreach, an e -book version as 
well as a Hindi translated version of the same were was also 
brought out and were hosted on the Ministry‘s website. 
2. Commissioning of e-books  
 The Division regularly brings out e -books with a view to 
showcase significant events/VVIP visits etc. Last year the 
following e -books were commissioned: a) Highlights of Prime 
Minister Narendra Modi‘s visit to Uzbekistan b) India‘s  
Engagement with Global Partners c) Prime Minister Narendra 
Modi‘s visit to Germany & UAE d) Path to Nirvana e) Citizen - 
Centric Foreign Policy f) Jan Kendrit Videsh Neeti (Citizen -Centric 
Foreign Policy – Hindi version) g) Furthering the Force for Global 
Good h) On a Pious Note i) Making it easy to travel, Making it 
secure to travel j) Highlights of Prime Minister Narendra Modi‘s 
Visit to Germany, Denmark & France k) India‘s Arctic Policy 
 Books and Periodicals 
1. Book Committee 
A Book Committee was established in 2003 as a public 
diplomacy tool to select books from several categories namely 
Indian Classics, Foreign Policy and Strategic Affairs, Technology 
and Popular Science, Hindi & Sanskrit, Art & Culture, Religion & 
Spirituality, Children Books and Politics & Economy for the 
Missions/post abroad library as well as for presentation purposes. 
The 43rd Book Committee meeting which was held in July 2022, 

81 
 
total 408 titles were selected. Demand of approximately 3 3000 
Copies was received from 89 Missions/Posts for different titles.  
2. India Perspectives  
The bimonthly flagship magazine of the Ministry is now 
available in a digital format in 16 languages. The web version of 
the magazine allows customization of the content and option to 
download and electronically disseminate it through social media 
by the Missions and Posts. The magazine covers selective themes 
such as partnership, life & style, innovation & institutions, 
economy and sports, tour & travel etc.  It c an be read online at 
www.indiaperspectives.gov.in and www.mea.gov.in . 
XPD Division will continue its efforts in a renewed pace to 
expand India‘s public diplomacy footprint.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 42) 
 The Committee note that the Policy Planning and Research 
(PP&R) Division is involved in medium and long -term planning 
and organizing public diplomacy initiatives with the strategic and 
academic community. Since 2016, the Division has been 
organizing three ann ual flagship events - Raisina Dialogue, the 
Indian Ocean Conference and the Global Technology Summit to 
underscore various facets of India‘s soft power. The Committee 
recommend that the Division should engage more vigorously and 
constructively with foreign think tanks, Universities and academic 
communities to widen the net of India‘s global outreach. The 
Division should also devise mechanisms to formulate annual 
policy and plan for enhanced cultural engagement with different 

82 
 
countries and circulate it to th e concerned Missions/Posts abroad 
for timely execution. 
    Reply of the Government 
   Ministry through its PPR Division has  taken  a number of 
initiatives on planning and organizing public diplomacy.  Besides 
these initiatives, another important element of cultural diplomacy 
is India‘s increasing focus on assisting countries in neighborhood 
and in the extended Indo -Pacific to restore, rebuild or refurbish 
their historical monuments that display Indian influence. 
Restoring of temples in Cambodia(Preah Viha r Temple), 
Laos(Wat Phou Temple), Myanmar(Ananda Temple in Bagan) and  
Vietnam(Cham monuments in My Son) are few examples. 
Ministry  has intensified coordination with other Ministries 
and Departments. The success of new   projects such as Gandhi 
@ 150, Gur u Nanak Devji@550,Constitution Day@70 are the 
result of support received from other Departments.  Ministry     
has involved  foreign think tanks, Universities and academic 
communities to widen the net of India‘s global outreach and to  
devise mechanisms to  formulate annual policy and plan for 
enhanced cultural engagement with different countries.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 43) 
The Committee are aware that Indian Missions/Posts abroad 
have been playing a critical role in advancing India‘s soft power 

83 
 
and cultural outreach. The Committee note that all the cultural 
activities of Indian Council of Cultural Relations (ICCR) are carried 
out through close coordination with the Missions/Posts in the 
concerned country. Missions/Posts also chalk out country -specific 
requirements and activities that can be effective in promotion of 
the soft power. The Committee also notice that the Missions 
identify the major cultural events happening in the host country 
and recommend a fitting participation from India.  
 
 While acknowledging the significant role performed by the 
Indian Mission/Posts abroad, the Committee feel that there is lack 
of vigor in c ountering negative press that have the impact of 
tarnishing our image abroad. The Committee therefore 
recommend that the Ministry should ensure every Mission/Post 
has one Public Relations officer, specifically for the purpose of 
giving diplomatic push to B rand India. The Missions/Posts should 
continue charting annual cultural enhancement plans for 
constructive, focused and meaningful cultural engagement with 
the concerned country. 
    Reply of the Government 
 
 Each and every Mission/Post of India abroad   has a Press, 
Information and Culture (PIC) wing. The officer in -charge of the 
PIC wing performs the task of liaison with local media (print, 
electronic, management of social media), besides organizing 
events to promote various aspects of Indian culture (art, music, 
dance, Indian films, Yoga, Ayush etc). Missions/Posts prepare 

84 
 
annual publicity plan charting out the activities to be carried out 
for media and cultural outreach in the forthcoming year and share 
it with the Ministry. PIC wing plans outreach programs and events 
for different segments of the local community and local 
associations like Friends of India clubs etc. PIC wing also reaches 
out to Indian Diaspora, members of local Indian and student 
community, think tanks and academia etc. 
 
Ministry updates Missions/Posts on policy stands of 
Government of India on the issues of national and international 
importance. XPD Division prepares publicity material like 
creatives, infogrpahics, booklets, information bro chures, short 
videos, digital content, as well as   commission articles for the 
use of Indian Missions/posts abroad for their local publicity 
purpose, as also to counter disinformation on case -to-case basis. 
Missions/Posts are asked to disseminate the publ icity material to 
foreign interlocutors and members of Indian community and 
share it through popular social media platforms for wider local 
outreach.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 44) 
 The Committee note that Research and Information System 
for Developing Countries (RIS) is an autonomous body within 
MEA and is entrusted with the task of conducting research on 
international economic issues. Role of RIS in soft power 
projection involves So uth-South cooperation, sharing India‘s 
development experience with partner countries, propagating 
Indian Technical and Economic Cooperation (ITEC) programmes, 

85 
 
hosting India Brazil South Africa (IBSA) scholars, promotion of 
traditional medicine system, etc.  The Committee also note that 
RIS has set up a Global Development Centre to serve as a single 
window depository of India‘s developmental experience, expertise 
and capabilities. While noting that RIS has been playing a 
pioneering role in promoting India as an economic power, the 
Committee find that its mandate is still rooted in Cold War 
lexicon. The Committee, therefore, urge that the MEA should re -
formulate the objectives, functions and structure of RIS to make 
it more contemporary and relevant. 
    Reply of the Government 
 The dynamic and evolutionary character of RIS as a credible 
institution having an ever increasing national, regional and global 
reach has become possible due to the dynamic character of its 
aims and objectives enshrined in its Memorandum  of Association 
which have given it  the required flexibility not only to move with 
the times but also to be futuristic in its functioning as far as 
evidence based policy research  studies and programmes are 
concerned. Over the years, its foundational  pri nciples, robust 
governance structure and strong band of domain specific subject 
experts in its Faculty  have  enabled  it to emerge as a policy 
research institution.  RIS is pleased to note that the Committee 
has rightly acknowledged the above position. Th erefore, the 
widening spectrum and dynamism character of RIS  is well 
established. The following activities are well reflective of the 
dynamic character of RIS. 
 

86 
 
• The work programmes of RIS is consciously charted out 
by the eminent members of its Governin g Council 
consisting of Foreign Secretary and  Secretary 
(Economic Relations) from the MEA; Secretary, 
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance; 
Secretary, Department of Science and Technology; and 
Secretary, Ministry of Com-merce, apart from a number 
of highly eminent persons with specialization in the 
field of Social Sciences, Science and technology.  They 
are also assisted by its Research Ad -visory Committee, 
which consists of  a band of highly  eminent subject 
scholars and academicians from across the country.  
 
• The broad framework of the RIS work programme is 
based on four pillars: 
 Global Economic Governance and Cooperation 
 Trade, Investment and Economic Cooperation 
 Trade Facilitation, Connectivity and Regional 
Cooperation 
 New Technologies and Development Issues 
• The cross -sectoral  pioneering policy research being 
done at RIS  in frontier areas  is of  far -reaching  
importance to the country for its accelerated economic 
growth and attain -ment of Atamnirbhta in the field of 
fintech, FTAs, B lue Economy, SDGs, Health and 
Wellness, including Traditional Medicines, e -commerce, 
Science Diplomacy, closer re-gional connectivity.  
 

87 
 
• Over the years, RIS  has  established a number of  
institutional platforms for specialized research in these 
areas.  These platforms include ASEAN -India Centre 
(AIC), Global Development Centre (GDC), Blue 
Economy Forum (BEF, Forum on Indian Traditional 
Medicine (FITM),Forum for Indian Science Diplomacy 
(FISD), Science, Technology and Innovation Policy 
(STIP) Forum, IPA-RIS BIMSTEC Centre of Excellence 
 RIS work programme has substantially diversified  in 
terms of policy relevant research to meet the current 
and emerging challenges in the field of international 
trade, investment, finance, agriculture,  Science, 
Technology and Innovation, health and wellness and 
digital technology, including digital health and payment 
mechanisms, paving the way for accelerated economic 
development within the country and abroad. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 45) 
 The Archaeological Survey of India (ASI), as an attached 
office under the Ministry of Culture, is the premier organization 
for the archaeological researches and protection of the cultural 
heritage of the nation. As part of its cultural diplomacy, ASI and 
MEA have been actively involved in restoration of historical sites 
and monuments in our immediate as well as extended 
neighbourhood. ASI has crossed national boundaries and 
undertaken conservations works in Bhutan, Vietnam, Nepal, 

88 
 
Maldives, Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, Cambodia, Laos and so on. The 
Committee feel that such endeavours have opened up new 
avenues for international diplomatic and economic cooperation. 
The Committee suggest that the Ministry of External Affairs 
should cooperate with ASI and tap these new avenues for 
promoting India‘s cultural diplomacy by forging collaboration with 
international and national institutions. 
    Reply of the Government 
 Ministry of External Affairs and Archaeological Survey of 
India (ASI) are actively involved in restoration of historical sites 
in other countries.  Over the years, ASI has undertaken 
conservations works in Bhutan, Vietnam, Nepal, Maldives, 
Afghanistan, Sri Lanka, Cambodia, Laos. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
  

89 
 
CHAPTER III 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE 
COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE 
GOVERNMENT’S REPLY 
 
 
NIL 
  

90 
 
CHAPTER IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN 
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT AND REQUIRE 
REITERATION 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 1) 
 The Committee are aware that India‘s soft power 
projection predates the usage of the term in popular parlance in 
21st century. Soft power is broadly described as the ability to 
influence others through appeal and attraction using non-coercive 
means. In this sense, India possesses a vast repertoire of soft 
power resources with widespread global appeal. These include, its 
cultural heritage evident in arts, dances, literature, cuisine, yoga, 
traditional medicine, cinema and entertainment, sports, historical 
monuments, India‘s democratic traditions, Constitution, unity in 
diversity and contributions in resolving contemporary 
environmental issues, scientific/technological accomplishments 
and socio-economic innovations.  
 
 The Committee further note that ‗Smart Power‘, which is 
reflected in judicious use of soft as well as hard power, is most 
representative of India‘s engagement with the world. India‘s 
extensive and diverse soft power capabilities represent a unique 
and sui generis case in study of soft power and cultural 
diplomacy. The Committee, however, are dismayed to note that 
despite the existence of a wide array of soft power resources and 

91 
 
continued persuasion by the Committee, there have been 
deficiencies on part of M EA in projecting it effectively to achieve 
foreign policy goals particularly due to lack of coordination, 
absence of national policy, inadequate budget and human 
resource. The Committee, therefore, recommend that MEA should 
conduct a thorough assessment of  our soft power potential and 
devise strategies for optimum utilization of the same in achieving 
India‘s foreign policy objectives on priority basis and apprise the 
Committee accordingly. The Committee also recommend that the 
MEA should capitalize in multi lateral diplomacy channels and 
abundantly incorporate Track 2 and Track 3 diplomacy in India‘s 
foreign policy strategies. 
     
Reply of the Government 
 
 Government‘s efforts aiming  at influencing foreign public 
opinion and  attitudes who in turn may influ ence their 
government‘s actions towards another nation include ‗nation -
branding; diaspora outreach, digital engagement and 
Government sponsored activities focusing on  communicating 
directly with foreign publics with a view to projecting soft power 
abroad. All such activities of the Government serve as an 
effective tool to build a positive image with public of other 
countries. Apart from Ministry of External Affairs(MEA) and Indian 
Council for Cultural Relations(ICCR) other Departments involved 
in projecting India‘s soft power abroad are (i) Ministry of Culture 

92 
 
through Lalit Kala Akademi: Sangeet Natak Akademi and  
National School of Drama, (ii) Ministry of Textiles:  through 
Development Commissioner (Handicrafts) and Development 
Commissioner (Handlooms), (i ii) Ministry of Information and 
Broadcasting via Directorate of Film Festivals, (iv) Ministry of 
AYUSH and (v) Ministry of Tourism. All these departments of the 
Government undertake different activities to achieve the desired 
goals.  
 
ICCR, as part of well  devised strategies for optimum 
utilization of soft power potential, contribute towards promotion 
of Indian culture abroad  through its wide range of activities  
which  include inter -alia, teaching of Yoga, Dance, Music and 
Hindi, organizing/supporting conferences/ seminars/ workshops in 
different fields of Indian culture, supporting Chairs of Indian 
Studies in the foreign universities; gifting of busts/statues of 
Mahatma Gandhi and other national heroes, exchanging visual art 
exhibitions, and celebration of International Day of Yoga at iconic 
centres abroad. Under the guidance of the Ministry, ICCR has 
taken various new initiatives as well to develop cultural relations 
and create mutual understanding with other nations, including 
new forays in projecting In dia‘s democratic credentials, cuisines, 
arts & crafts etc. ICCR has enhanced its outreach across the 
globe through various online activities and started various 
initiatives related to Buddhism‘s part of ICCR‘s cultural diplomacy. 
 

93 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 7 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 The Ministry of External Affairs has highlighted four key 
factors inhibiting effective conduct of India‘s soft power and 
cultural diplomacy – inadequate budgetary allocation, lack of 
coordination among multiple institutions, shortage of skilled 
manpower an d lack of clarity about the mandate of ICCR. The 
Committee note that informal arrangement have been made by 
MEA with various GOI Ministries and agencies such as Ministry of 
Culture, Ministry of Youth and Sports Affairs, Ministry of AYUSH, 
Ministry of Scien ce & Technology, etc. The Committee also 
observe that NITI Aayog had held three brain storming sessions 
to address the issue of lack of coordination and suggested the 
constitution of a Coordination Committee consisting of 
representatives from all the concerned Ministries. In pursuance of 
the Committee‘s recommendation on establishing a coordinated 
mechanism between MEA and other line Ministries involved in soft 
power projection, the Committee note that the Monitoring 
Committee under MEA‘s lead is under prop osal. In view of the 

94 
 
urgent need for greater synergy and coordination among the 
various Ministries/ Departments /agencies involved in India‘s soft 
power and cultural diplomacy, the Committee recommend that 
the Coordination Committee may be constituted at the earliest. 
     
Reply of the Government 
 MEA is  working on strengthening Coordination among  key 
departments looking after Culture, Education, Sports & Youth 
Affairs and AYUSH   . Efforts  to enhance  cooperation with the 
Lok Sabha and Rajya Sabha Secre tariats  to project democracy, 
constitutional values, electoral practices, good governance and 
other aspects of soft power, in a more sustained manner to 
foreign Parliamentarians, legislature staff and media are 
underway.  ICCR closely works with the Minis try of Culture(MOC) 
in implementation of Cultural Exchange Programmes(CEPs) for 
which (MOC) is the nodal Ministry with active role of ICCR‘s   
Cultural Centres and Ministry‘s network of Missions . The 
Standing Committee for planning and coordinating Festiv als of 
India abroad is chaired by Secretary(Culture) where DG, ICCR is 
also a member. The Governing Body of ICCR includes members 
from Ministry of Culture as well as all major principle 
organizations working in the area of soft culture.  
 Minister of State  for External Affairs, Smt. Meenakshi Lekhi 
is also Minister of State for Culture of India. Recommendation of 

95 
 
the Hon‘ble Parliamentary  Committee to constitute  the 
Coordination Committee has been noted.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023]  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 13 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
 The Committee are aware that tourism is a key indicator of a 
country‘s soft power capital. They are given to understand that 
the Ministry of Tourism with eight offices worldwide has been 
collaborating with MEA and other Line Ministries for showcasing 
tourist destination and products of the country. To promote 
tourism, various efforts have also been made viz, launching of 
the ‗Incredible India‘ campaign, participation in tourism 
fairs/exhibitions/expos/road shows, signing of 
Agreements/Memorandums of Underst anding (MoUs) with 
countries, identifying wellness and medical tourism areas, 
spreading awareness about Buddhist Circuit/Pilgrimage, and so 
on. India‘s age old Indian philosophy of ‗Atithidevo Bhava‘ 
clubbed with immense potential in tourism sector, the Co mmittee 
are confident that India‘s global outreach is bound to escalate. 

96 
 
The Committee are also elated to note that the Incredible India 
campaign has been effective in promoting Brand India and there 
have been regular informative posts and updates on the o fficial 
social media platforms. The Committee feel that there is still a 
need to increase the number of tourism offices abroad and adopt 
country-specific approach for promotional activities. The 
Committee therefore urge the Government to come up with 
proposals incorporating feedback from all types of travelers 
starting from backpackers to high end tourists in evolving country 
specific approach.      
    Reply of the Government 
   
 Ministry of External Affairs would work with relevant 
stakeholders and invite  Missions/Posts to seek feedback from 
foreign tourists and travelers. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023]  
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 22 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 

97 
 
 The Committee find that in our country the differential pricing 
exists for entry tickets to historical monuments in the country. 
While understanding that the earnings from foreign tourists is a 
major source of revenue for the Government, they are of the 
view that such differential pricing leads to a loss of large segment 
of foreign travelers. Moreover, in a globalized world the 
differential pricing for citizens and foreigners is unnecessary and 
hence the Committee desire that the pricing system may be re -
visited. The Committe e also desire that adequate infrastructure 
and public transportation be created around tourist hubs and 
heritage sites and creation of a common tourist passes for entry 
to multiple heritage sites, as prevalent in most European 
countries, may be explored to  streamline the process and avoid 
long queues at sites. 
     
    Reply of the Government 
 Ministry deeply appreciates the observations of the Hon‘ble 
Committee particularly on increasing and upgrading touristic 
infrastructure, and use of technology to streamline processes and 
procedures.  
[File No. AA/Parl/125/61/2022 dated 03/11/2022] 
 
Comments of the Committee 

98 
 
(Please see para No. 25 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
 The Committee observe that religious tourism and medical 
tourism have emerged as areas with immense tourism potential. 
As an ancient civilization and a land of many religions, India has 
been cashing on this potential. The Committee have been 
informed that to create awareness about India‘s Buddhist Circuit/ 
Pilgrimage and attract foreign tourist to Buddhist sites in India, 
the International Buddhist Conclave (IBC) is being organized 
regularly by the Government. The Committee also note that 
under the Champion  Sector Scheme, marketing & promotion for 
Buddhist circuits in overseas markets is also taken up through 
dedicated media campaign. The Committee are also pleased to 
observe that India is emerging as a preferred country for medical 
treatments due to its adv anced quality healthcare, affordable 
costs, lesser waiting time & easy medical visa process. The 
Committee feel that there should be a consistent and 
comprehensive focus on these emerging and promising arenas of 
tourism in India. They, therefore, recommend  that Government 
should adopt a multi -pronged approach to capitalize on India‘s 
potential as a hub for religious and medical tourism by building 
requisite infrastructure and skilled expertise. The Ministry of 
Tourism may be directed to issue written and on line 

99 
 
material/brochures on medical tourism and religious tourism in all 
the Missions/Posts abroad for enhanced promotional activities in 
these areas. 
 
    Reply of the Government 
 Attracting foreign tourists to avail medical facilities in India 
under ―consumption of services abroad‖ is an important means of 
revenue generation. A whole of government approach is adopted 
in this regard. Tourism and Technology has been identified as a 
key element to be focussed upon by Missions/Posts. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 28 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 37) 
 ICCR is mandated to create a sound understanding of Indian 
culture abroad and towards this end, it routinely sends cultural 
troupes, including dance and musical performers. However, on 

100 
 
various occasions cultural troupes from some border states or 
states with a huge population of tribal communities are provided 
inadequate opportunities to go abroad and present their art. This 
happens as Ambassador and High Commissioners of India abroad 
prefer certain group of artists and ICCR in a way remains 
constrained to send cultural troupes for which there is an 
expressed demand. The Committee, therefore, recommend that 
ICCR reformulates certain rules and regulations to ensure that 
artistes from all regions and States get an opportunity to 
showcase their talent abroad in an equitable manner. 
    Reply of the Government 
While ICCR always endeavors to maintain a regional balance 
while sending the cultural troupes abroad, as pointed  by the 
Hon‘ble Committee members, Missions abroad recommended 
particular form of dance group in consideration of the local 
aspirations from Mu sical groups from India.  ICCR in the best 
interest of propogation of true culture, chose to send the groups 
suitable to the occasion and potential  footfall for programme.  
The recommendation of the Committee  to  reformulates certain 
rules and regulations to ensure that artistes from all regions and 
States get an opportunity to showcase their talent abroad in an 
equitable manner is kindly noted.  
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 

101 
 
(Please see para No. 31 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 38) 
 The Committee are aware that currently 37 Indian Cultural 
Centres (ICCs) are functional overseas and three are proposed to 
be set up in Paris, Washington and Tel Aviv. As principal 
instrument of India‘s institutional cultural outreach abroad, 
Indian Cultural Centres are located in countries with significant 
strategic, economic, political and cultural interests. The 
Committee are surprised to note that despite these parameters 
in place, the Ministr y does not have a Indian Cultural Centre in 
the entire Gulf Region. The Committee, therefore, recommend 
that a Cultural Centre should be opened in the Gulf also in view 
of the large Diaspora and India‘s strong and sustained strategic 
and cultural ties with  the region. The Committee also 
recommend that the much delayed centres in Washington, Paris 
and Tel Aviv should also be opened by the end of this year. 
    Reply of the Government 
 Setting up of Indian Cultural Centres abroad is part of 
ICCR‘s efforts to promote Indian culture all over the world, within 
the framework of India‘s foreign policy. Procedure for opening of 
Cultural Centres abroad include recommendation of the 
concerned Indian Mission abroad and bilateral relations between 

102 
 
India and the host cou ntry, proposed activities to be undertaken, 
population with number of PIOs, completion local formalities and 
obtaining approvals and number of students from host country 
studied/studying  under ICCR scholarship programme. 
 
Recommendation of the Hon‘ble Com mitted to open Indian 
Cultural Center in U.A.E, in view of presence of  large diaspora 
and India‘s strong and sustained strategic and cultural ties with 
U.A.E,  has been noted. 
 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 34 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 
 

103 
 
CHAPTER V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF 
WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL 
AWAITED 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 Non-availability of adequate finances is one of the factors 
derailing the effective facilitation of India‘s soft power projection. 
Soft power capabilities require capital, both human as well as 
financial to be effective. A cursory glance at the budgetary 
allocation to India‘s ICCR and Confucius Institutes of China or 
UKS‘s British Council or Germany‘s Goethe Institute is testimony 
to the hurdles in our institutional efficacy. The Committee, 
therefore, recommend that the Government should increase 
ICCR‘s budgetary allocation by at least 20 % than what is being 
provisioned as of now. 
        
Reply of the Government 
 The Ministry deeply appreciates views of the Hon‘ble 
Committee, and work towards providing adequate budgetary 
resources to ICCR so as to effectively carry-out its mandate. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023]  
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 16 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 

104 
 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
 While ICCR was established some 71 years ago, global 
situation has witnessed several drastic changes thereafter. 
Hence, an institutional device conceived some seven decades 
back needs a relook in the context of its organizational set 
functionality and efficacy. The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should appoint a Study Group firstly to asses s the 
working of ICCR in comparison to British Council, the American 
Centre and the Confucius Institute etc and later suggest ways to 
further strengthen ICCR.      
Reply of the Government 
 Recommendation of the Hon‘ble Committee to appoint a 
Study Group firstly to assess the working of ICCR in comparison 
to British Council, the American Centre and the Confucius 
Institute and later to suggest ways to further strengthen ICCR, 
has been noted.  ICCR would put up the recommendation to its 
Governing Body seeking their guidance and  the way forward on  
identifying the scope and suitable partner to execute the 
proposed assessment of ICCR‘s functioning.   
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
Comments of the Committee 
(Please see para No. 19 of the Chapter– I of the Report) 
 

105 
 
Recommendation (Sl. No. 28) 
 Over the years, the Committee have been flagging the issue 
of inadequate budgetary and manpower resources within ICCR as 
key factors impeding the effective realization of India‘s soft power 
diplomacy. The Committee observe that MEA has one of the 
smallest soft power budgets in the world, which is 
incommensurate with the expanding mandate and activities of 
ICCR. MEA on several occasions have admitted to the Committee 
about the adverse impact of budgetary allocation on its overall 
functioning. While analyzing the budgetary allocation made to 
ICCR during the past five years, the Committee discerned that 
while on one hand the ICCR has been p ointing out to the 
shortage of funds, the projected budgetary allocation by MEA is 
itself small. The Committee therefore recommend that ICCR 
should make an objective assessment of its financial 
requirements and accordingly seek higher budget in the next 
financial year. The Committee also desire that ICCR compile data 
of financial resources and outreach activities of soft power 
organizations of other countries to make a compelling case for 
increased budgetary allocation. The Committee would strongly 
recommend that the Government should provision enhanced 
budgetary allocation of Rs. 500 crore to ICCR for conducting 
India‘s soft power and cultural diplomacy in a robust and 
extensive manner.      
 

106 
 
Reply of the Government 
 Ministry deeply appreciates views of Hon ‘ble Committee. 
Adequate budgetary support would be provided to ICCR based on 
it‘s program and activities. 
[File No. AA/Parl/125/104/2022 dated 24/05/2023] 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                P.P. CHAUDHARY,                     
20 July, 2023                                                                                     Chairperson,                                       
29 Ashadha, 1945 (Saka)                                      Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
  

107 
 
Appendix-I 
 
MINUTES OF THE  TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE STANDING 
COMMITTEE  ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2022 -23) HELD ON 20 
JULY, 2023 
 
  The Committee sat on Thursday, the 20th July, 2023 from 
1600 hrs. to 1640 hrs. in  Committee Room No. ‗3‘, Extension 
Building, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi. 
 
  Present 
           Shri P.P. Chaudhary   –  Chairperson 
  MEMBERS 
  LOK SABHA 
 2. Shri. Dileshwar Kamait 
 3. Smt. Preneet Kaur 
 4. Smt. Goddeti Madhavi 
 5. Smt. Poonam Mahajan 
6. Shri P. C. Mohan 
 7. Smt. Queen Oja 
 8. Shri Ritesh Pandey 
 9. Dr. K. C. Patel 
 10. Shri N. K. Premachandran 
 11. Smt. Navneet Ravi Rana 
 12. Shri Manne Srinivas Reddy 
 13. Dr. Harsh Vardhan 
  
  
 RAJYA SABHA 
 14. Shri Anil Desai 
 15. Shri Abdul Wahab 
 16. Dr. Ashok Kumar Mittal 
  

108 
 
  
 SECRETARIAT 
 
 1. Dr. Ram Raj Rai  - Joint Secretary 
 2. Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan - Director  
 3. Ms. K Muanniang Tunglut - Deputy Secretary 
  
2. At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the 
Sitting of the Committee. 
3. The Committee took up for consideration the following draft 
Reports:- 
   (i)  XXX                   XXX                XXX           XXX 
 (ii) Draft Report on Action Taken by the Government on the 
 Observations/Recommendations contained in the Sixteenth 
Report of the  Committee on the subject ‗India‘s Soft Power and 
Cultural Diplomacy: Prospects  and Limitations‘. 
4.       The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, 
if any, for incorporation in the draft Reports. The Members suggested 
some minor modifications. After deliberations, the Committee adopted 
the draft Reports with these minor modifications. 
5. The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to finalize the 
Reports incorporating the suggestions made by the Members and 
present the same to Parliament. 
  The Committee then adjourned 
 

109 
 
Appendix-II 
 (Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
  
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON 
THE OBSERVATIONS/ RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN 
THE SIXTEENTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (17TH LOK SABHA) 
                                           
(i)  Total Number of Recommendations    45  
 
(ii)  Observations/Recommendations which have been 
accepted by the Government. 
  
Recommendation Nos. 2, 3, 4, 5,   8, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 18, 
19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27,   29, 30, 31, 32, 33, 34, 
35, 36, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44 and 45. 
                                                                  Total-35 
Percentage:  77.78% 
  
(iii) Observations/Recommendations which the 
Committee do not desire to pursue in view of the 
Government's replies. 
       
NIL  
                                                      Total- Nil 
 Percentage: 0 % 
  
 (iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which replies of the Government have not been 
accepted by the Committee and require   reiteration. 
  
Recommendation Nos.  1, 6, 15, 16, 17,  37 and 38 
                                                              Total-07 
 Percentage: 15.55% 
  
(v)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of 
which final replies of the Government are still 
awaited. 

110 
 
  
Recommendation Nos.  7, 9 and 28  
                                                                                
        Total- 03 
Percentage:  6.67% 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
 