 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the 
Fourth Report of the Committee on the subject ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of 
External Affairs for the year 2024-25’] 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
           August, 2025/Shravana,1947 
  
 
 
 
 
  
 
COMMITTEE 
      ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2024-25) 
 
                          EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA 
07 
 

 
 
 
 
SEVENTH REPORT 
 
COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
(2024-25) 
 
 
(EIGHTEENTH LOK SABHA) 
 
 
MINISTRY OF EXTERNAL AFFAIRS 
 
 
[Action Taken by the Government on the observations/recommendations contained in the Fourth 
Report of the Committee on the subject ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for 
the year 2024-25’] 
 
 
 
 Presented to Lok Sabha on 07 August, 2025 
     Laid on the Table of Rajya Sabha on 07 August 2025 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT 
NEW DELHI 
 
 
 
August, 2025/Shravana,1947 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
 
 
 
 
 
 
COEA NO.--      
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Price: Rs. …. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
© 2025 by Lok Sabha Secretariat 
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok Sabha 
(____________ Edition) and printed by  
  

 
 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25) ………………. (ii) 
INTRODUCTION…………………………………………………………………………………...….(iii)  
                          
CHAPTER 1 REPORT  01 
CHAPTER 2 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED Y THE 
GOVERNMENT 
 
15 
CHAPTER 3 OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE 
TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
 
62 
CHAPTER 4 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
64 
CHAPTER 5 OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES 
OF THE GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
70 
ANNEXURES 
ANNEXURE- I LIST OF ALL STRATEGIC OUTREACH INITIATIVES UNDERTAKEN BY THE 
MINISTRY OUTSIDE DELHI SINCE 2023. 
71 
APPENDICES 
APPENDIX I MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE COMMITTEE HELD ON 04 
AUGUST 2025. 
73 
APPENDIX II ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE 
ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (18TH LOK SABHA) 
 
75 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(i) 
 

COMPOSITION OF THE COMMITTEE ON EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (2024-25) 
Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
 
Lok Sabha 
 
2. Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3. Shri Vijay Baghel 
4. Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5. Shri Abhishek Banerjee 
6. Shri Arun Govil 
7. Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
8. Shri Navaskani K. 
9. Shri Kripanath Mallah 
10. Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
11. Shri Asaduddin Owaisi 
12. Shri Sanatan Pandey 
13. Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
14. Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
15. Shri Y. S. Avinash Reddy 
16. Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
17. Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
18. Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
19. Ms. Bansuri Swaraj 
20. Shri Akshay Yadav 
21. Shri Naveen Jindal 
 
Rajya Sabha 
 
22. Dr. John Brittas 
23. Smt. Kiran Choudhry 
24. Smt. Sagarika Ghose 
25. Dr. K. Laxman 
26. Ms. Kavita Patidar 
27. Shri A. D. Singh 
28. Kunwar Ratanjeet Pratap Narayan Singh 
29. Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 
30. Shri Rajeev Shukla 
31. Shri Satnam Singh Sandhu 
Secretariat  
1. Shri Anjani Kumar   –   Joint Secretary 
2.       Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan   –   Director  
3. Ms. Maya Menon   _  Under Secretary 
 
 
(ii) 
 
 

INTRODUCTION 
 
 
 I, the Chairperson, Committee on External Affairs (2024-25) having been authorized by the 
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, present this Seventh Report (18th Lok Sabha) on action taken 
by the Government on the Observations /Recommendations contained in the Fourth Report of the Committee 
on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2024-25. 
2. The Fourth Report was presented to the Lok Sabha on 03 February 2025 and laid on the Table of the 
Rajya Sabha on 18 December, 2024. The Action Taken Replies of the Government on all the 
Observations/Recommendations contained in the Report were received on 04 June, 2025 (English Version) 
and 16 June, 2025 (Hindi Version). 
3. The Committee considered and adopted this Action Taken Report at their Sitting held on 04 August, 
2025. The Minutes of the Sitting of the Committee has been given at Appendix-I to the Report. 
4. An analysis of the action taken by the Government on the Observations/Recommendations contained 
in the Fourth Report of the Committee on External Affairs is given at Appendix-II. 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                               Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                   
07 August, 2025                                                                                                              Chairperson,                                
16 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)                                                      Committee on External Affairs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
      (iii) 

Page | 1 
 
CHAPTER-I 
  
This Report of the Committee on External Affairs deals with the action taken by the 
Government on the observations/recommendations contained in their Fourth Report on the 
subject ‘Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2024-25’ which was 
presented to the Lok Sabha on 30 January, 2025 and laid on the Table of the Rajya Sabha on 
18 December, 2024. 
  
2.        The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of External Affairs on all 
the 48 observations/recommendations contained in the Report. These have been categorized 
as follows: - 
  
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government: - 
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 
19, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, 30, 33, 34, 35, 36, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46 
and 48. 
 Total- 40 
Chapter-II 
(ii)    Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies:- 
  Recommendation No. 22                                                 
        Total- 1 
Chapter-III 
  
(iii)    Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and require reiteration: - 
Recommendation Nos. 20, 21, 31, 32, 37 and 47                                      
Total- 6 
Chapter-IV 

Page | 2 
 
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of 
Government are still awaited: - 
 Recommendation No. 26        
Total- 1 
Chapter-V 
 
3.        The Committee desire that the final replies to the comments contained in 
Chapter-I and observations/recommendations contained in Chapter-V of this Report may 
be furnished to the Committee within three months of the presentation of this Report.  
  
4.        The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their 
observations/recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.  
  
Overseas Mobility (Facilitation and Welfare) Bill, 2024 
(Recommendation No. 20) 
  
5.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:           
  
  “Keeping in view the contemporary global migration dynamics and the needs of 
Indian citizens, the Committee has over the years underscored the pressing need for a 
comprehensive legislative overhaul to replace the outdated provisions of the Emigration 
Act 1983. After much delay, the Ministry is seriously considering enacting a new law 
tentatively titled ‘Overseas Mobility (Facilitation and Welfare) Bill, 2024’.  The Ministry 
has further informed the Committee that the proposed draft is under consultation with 
line Ministries and will, thereafter, be put up for public consultations.  The Committee 
desire that it should be consulted on the salient features of the Bill and the enactment of 
a revised act reflecting changed global migration realities should be done in a time 
bound manner i.e. not later than one year. An update about the progress made in this 
regard may be submitted to the Committee within three months.  

Page | 3 
 
 
6.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
 “The proposed ‘Overseas Mobility (Facilitation and Welfare) Bill, 2024 seeks to 
replace the existing  Emigration Act, 1983 with an aim of accessing a global 
workplace for citizens of India by developing a mechanism for safe, legal, 
orderly and regular mobility for employment and stay abroad through processes 
provided therein and for matters connected therewith or incidental thereto. The 
draft Bill 2024 has been revised in consultations with the relevant authorities, 
the same is under internal consultations. Thereafter, it will be put for public 
consultations for 30 days, which will be followed up, by Inter-Ministerial 
consultations with the relevant line ministries along with the Draft Cabinet Note 
on the revised draft. The Committee’s  observations are duly noted.” 
  
7.      The Committee, over the years, in their various reports, have underscored the 
pressing need for a comprehensive legislative overhaul of the outdated provisions of the 
Emigration Act 1983. The Committee note that after much delay, the Ministry is now 
seriously considering enacting a new law tentatively titled ‘Overseas Mobility 
(Facilitation and Welfare) Bill, 2024. In their original Report, the Committee had desired 
that they be consulted on the salient features of the Bill and the enactment of a revised 
act reflecting changed global migration realities in a time bound manner i.e. not later 
than one year. The Committee, however, note that despite exhorting the need to fast 
track the legislative reforms and even after a passage of over six months since the 
presentation of the Report, the draft  Bill is still up for internal consultation only and is 
yet to be put up for public consultation.  The Committee are of the considered view that 
there has been enough delay in the process. The Committee, therefore, while reiterating 
their earlier recommendation urge upon the Ministry to expedite necessary processes in 
respect of the enactment to ensure timely implementation of the proposed legislative 
reforms. 

Page | 4 
 
 
Nalanda University 
(Recommendation No. 21) 
  
8.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
 The Committee acknowledge the Government of India’s commitment to reviving 
the ancient seat of learning through the establishment of Nalanda University under the 
Nalanda University Act, 2010. Despite significant budgetary allocations and the 
completion of the state-of-the-art Net-Zero sustainable green campus spanning 455 
acres, the Committee are concerned to note that the University’s establishment has 
been marred by delays and operational challenges. Although the construction has 
progressed and the campus was inaugurated in June 2024, delays caused by logistical 
bottlenecks, the COVID-19 pandemic related disruptions, and a lack of skilled 
manpower have resulted in significant time overruns. 
 Despite its mandate under the East Asia Summit framework to be a 
collaborative global enterprise, the Committee find that financial support from member 
states and other international donors has been sporadic and insufficient. The 
Committee recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs, in concert with the Ministry 
of Education and the Nalanda University Governing Board, should establish a more 
rigorous framework of oversight to expedite the resolution of pending tasks. Diplomatic 
channels must be strategically leveraged to secure greater financial and institutional 
support from East Asia Summit member states and other international partners, 
commensurate with the University’s global mandate. The Committee may also be kept 
informed about the progress made in operationalization of Nalanda University on a 
regular basis. 
  
 
9.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
                         
“The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) and the Nalanda University continue to 
take necessary steps to implement the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendations 

Page | 5 
 
for overcoming challenges in the establishment of Nalanda University. On the 
establishment of a rigorous oversight framework to address delays and 
operational challenges, it is submitted that the University has several 
institutional mechanisms, as per the Act and relevant Statutes, including the 
Building and Works Committee, the Finance Committee, the Executive 
Committee, and the Academic Council that conduct regular reviews to oversee 
progress in infrastructure development, faculty recruitment, academic program 
expansion, and research initiatives. The delays in the project have been 
significantly minimized, and the construction work of the University is now in its 
final stages. To leverage diplomatic channels for greater financial and 
institutional support, the Nalanda University is in regular contact with various 
universities of East Asia Summit (EAS) member states, including Japan, South 
Korea, ASEAN nations, and Australia. Bilateral meetings with ambassadors and 
diplomats are conducted to foster partnerships, financial contributions, and 
collaborative academic programs. The University has hosted campus visits by 
many diplomats of EAS Countries to enhance visibility and understanding. 
Memoranda of Understanding (MoUs) have been signed with key stakeholders 
to formalize institutional collaborations. As on date there are 18 participating 
countries, including India who have signed MoU with the Nalanda University. 
These 18 Participating Countries are Australia, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Brunei 
Darussalam, Cambodia, China, India, Indonesia, Laos, Mauritius, Myanmar, 
New Zealand, Portugal, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Thailand, and 
Vietnam. Apart from this, bilateral and multilateral MoUs are in place with 
various other countries and universities/institutions. As part of the Ministry’s 
efforts to strengthen international engagement, the External Affairs Minister 
extended Ministry’s invitations to diplomats from all Heads of Missions and 
senior diplomats from the 18 participating countries to attended the inauguration 
of the new Net Zero Campus of Nalanda University by the Hon’ble Prime 
Minister on 19 June, 2025.” 
  
10. Concerned about the constant delays and operational challenges being faced in 
the establishment of Nalanda University, the Committee had recommended that the 
Ministry of External Affairs, in concert with the Ministry of Education and the Nalanda 
University Governing Board, establish a more rigorous framework of oversight to 
expedite the resolution of pending tasks. The Committee had further recommended that 
diplomatic channels be strategically leveraged to secure greater financial and 
institutional support from East Asia Summit member states and other international 
partners, commensurate with the University’s global mandate. In response the Ministry 

Page | 6 
 
have submitted that the University has several institutional mechanisms as per the Act 
and relevant Statutes, that conduct regular reviews to oversee the progress in 
infrastructure development, faculty recruitment, academic programme  expansion, and 
research initiatives whereby the delays in the project are significantly minimized, and the 
construction work of the University is now in its final stages. The Ministry have further 
cited the various steps taken by them to leverage diplomatic channels for greater 
financial and institutional support. Considering the fact that the Nalanda University is an 
institution of national importance, the Committee, while being appreciative of the efforts 
taken by the Ministry to address the concerns raised by them, feel that there is a need to 
fast track the action so that the global reputation associated with this great institution is 
restored. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to coordinate with the Ministry of 
Education and the Nalanda University Administration and make concerted efforts to 
smooth over the bureaucratic hurdles  for  timely completion of the project. 
 
Aid to African Countries 
 (Recommendation No. 31) 
  
11.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under:  
  
 After a careful scrutiny of the budgetary allocation under the Head ‘Aid to African 
countries’, the Committee observe that the allocation has remained constant at Rs. 250 
crore during the last two fiscal years. However, in the current fiscal, the allocation has 
been reduced to Rs. 200 crore from Rs 250 crore in 2023-24. The basis for reduction 
under this Head is understood to have stemmed from completion of e-VBAB Network 
Project by the end of 2024. The Ministry’s assertion that Africa is a key foreign policy 
priority and our engagement has been intensifying, albeit the budgetary allocation 
speaks otherwise. It is observed that India’s partnership with the African countries is 

Page | 7 
 
based on four pillars- development  partnership, defence and maritime security, trade 
and investment and people to people ties. The three India Africa Forum Summits (IAFS- 
I, II and III) in 2008, 2011 and 2015 have further reinforced development partnership 
with the country. The Ministry has also stated that initiatives in the field of health, 
education, digital infrastructure` and capacity building have been well received and 
appreciated by the partner countries. The Committee feel that given the imminent 
convening of the fourth India Africa Forum Summit in 2025, there is an urgent need to 
intensify our diplomatic presence in the region and strongly advocate a substantial 
enhancement in allocation under this Head to strengthen bilateral and multilateral 
engagements with African countries. The Ministry should also take all requisite steps, 
including seeking enhanced allocation and effective utilization of funds, for the 
expeditious implementation of our diverse ongoing projects in Africa.  
 
12.            The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
 “The budgetary allocation is being sought after assessing funds utilization during 
the previous years and based on activities proposed to be undertaken. 
Currently, the major expenditure incurred under the budget head “Aid to African 
Countries” is for the implementation of “India-Africa Maitri Scholarship Scheme” 
and other bilateral projects. Approximately 1000 slots are utilized at an 
estimated expenditure of Rs. 120.00 Cr. annually under the scholarship scheme. 
All the other projects undertaken (on bilateral basis) including Quick Impact 
Projects (QIPs) have been completed in the FY 2024-25.  Engagement with 
Africa is priority for India. In order to enhance our diplomatic presence in African 
continent, India has opened 18 new missions. After opening of the 18 new 
Missions in Africa, India has resident Missions in 47 out of 54 African countries.  
  The IAFS-IV Summit is expected to be held in the CFY 2025-26. The 
expenditure for IAFS-IV will be incurred only after agreement of African Union 
for hosting of IAFS-IV. In consultation with African Union, this Ministry is 
exploring various options to hold the IAFS-IV at the earliest. The Ministry will 
continue to vigorously follow up and review the implementation of projects 
announced during IAFS-I, IAFS-II and IAFS-III. The following projects were 
completed in the FY 2024-25: 
  • Establishment of Entrepreneurship Development Centre (EDC) in 
Rwanda; 
• Establishment of India-Africa Regional Materials Testing Laboratory 
(RMTL) in Uganda; 
• Upgradation of Indo-Zimbabwe Technology Centre in Zimbabwe;  

Page | 8 
 
• Quick Impact Project (QIP) “Establishment of a Modern Gymnasium And 
Enhancement of Current Library at Command and Staff College, Duluti 
(Tanzania); 
• Quick Impact Project (QIP)  “Restoration of Roof of Masuku Government 
Primary School, Bulawayo, Zimbabwe and 
• Supply of 01 unit of Advanced TelecobaltBhabhatron-II and Simulator 
IMAGIN and associated components to Malawi (Ongoing).  
 
13.      Having observed the reduction in allocation under ‘Aid to African Countries’ and 
with a view to intensifying  India’s diplomatic presence in Africa, especially in the wake 
of the imminent  fourth India Africa Forum Summit in 2025, the Committee had strongly 
advocated a substantial enhancement in the allocation under this Head.  The Ministry in 
its action taken reply has submitted that the budgetary allocation is sought after 
assessing the fund utilization during the previous years and the activities proposed to 
be undertaken. They have further submitted that engagement with Africa is a priority and 
follow up and review of the implementation of projects announced during IAFS-I, IAFS-II 
and IAFS-III shall be vigorously followed up. While appreciating the timely completion of 
various projects in the region, the Committee, however, note that the Ministry is silent on 
Committee’s recommendation to seek substantial enhancement for allocation under the 
Head- ‘Aid to African Countries’. The drooping allocation under this Head is a cause of 
concern especially in the light of India’s attempts to enhance its footprints in African 
countries. In the considered opinion of the Committee, the budgetary allocation should 
be reflective of the importance India attaches to this Region. The Committee, therefore, 
reiterate their earlier recommendation and again desire that the Ministry actively look 
into providing adequate fiscal space and significance to Africa in our development 
cooperation. 

Page | 9 
 
 
Review of Ongoing Projects in African Countries 
(Recommendation No. 32) 
  
14.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
 “It is observed that several commitments have been made during the three India 
Africa Forum Summits in 2008, 2011 and 2015 including capacity building, 
infrastructure development, digital initiatives such as e-VidyaBharati and e-
ArogyaBharati Network Project (e-VBAB) for tele-education and tele-medicine. The 
Committee note that  22 African countries have so far joined the e-VBAB - project which 
was approved in 2015 to provide quality education/ medical services through web 
portals to the students/ doctors/paramedical staff in Africa. The Ministry has also 
informed that the progress in various projects under India Africa Summits is reviewed 
regularly in consultation with concerned Ministries and relevant stakeholders including 
African Union. Moreover, Research & Information Systems for Developing Countries 
(RIS) has agreed to carry out mid-term evaluation of e-VBAB Network Project on a pro-
bono basis.  The Committee are concerned at the delay in project implementation and 
organization of India Africa Forum Summit which has been attributed to delay in 
deciding the location by host countries, internal conflicts and civil unrest. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should review all ongoing projects in 
the African region on priority and based on such an evaluation, frame modalities for 
future progress in coordination with the partner countries.  
 
 
15.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
“The Ministry has taken note of the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee. 
The e-VBAB Network project was launched on 7 October 2019 as part of the 
commitment made by the Prime Minister during the Third India-Africa Forum 
Summit (IAFS-III) to offer 50,000 scholarships to African students, out of which 
15,000 to be offered through online education in UG/PG/Diploma Programmes. 
The e-VBAB Project is a technological up-gradation and extension of the earlier 

Page | 10 
 
Pan Africa e-Network Project (PAeNP) implemented between 2009-2017. 
Twenty-two (22) African countries joined the project and 27 Indian Universities 
are offering more than 300 online UG/PG/Diploma/Certificate programmes in 
various disciplines to African students under the project. Research & Information 
Systems for Developing Countries (RIS) was entrusted to carry out the mid-term 
evaluation of e-VBAB Network Project on a pro-bono basis.”  
 
16.      During the examination of the Demand for Grants of the Ministry, the Committee 
had been informed that the Research & Information Systems for Developing Countries 
(RIS) had agreed to carry out mid-term evaluation of e-ArogyaBharati Network Project (e-
VBAB)  on a pro-bono basis. Concerned about the delays in the projects implementation, 
the Committee had recommended that the Ministry review all ongoing projects in the 
African region on priority and based on such an evaluation, frame modalities for future 
progress in coordination with the partner countries. The Committee are not happy with 
the reply furnished by the Ministry which seems to be a rehashing of the details already 
submitted to the Committee during the examination of the Demands for Grants. No 
concrete action appears to have been taken in the matter and the project seems to be in 
a limbo. The Committee are of the firm view that e-VBAB project is a key initiative 
showcasing India's commitment to development and capacity building in Africa. Delays 
to the project would erode this positive image and diminish India's influence in the 
region. The Committee, therefore, desire that the Ministry take immediate steps to get 
the programme evaluated on an urgent basis to identify areas for improvement and 
thereafter take appropriate corrective actions. The Committee also desire that they be 
kept apprised of the progress in the matter. 
 
 
 
 

Page | 11 
 
Comprehensive Policy on Diaspora Engagement   
(Recommendation No. 37) 
  
17.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
 
 With over 32 million persons of Indian origin (PIOs) and non-resident Indians 
(NRIs) spread across the globe, the Committee are of the considered opinion that 
Diaspora represents a powerful network capable of advancing India’s cultural, 
economic, and strategic interests. Through their economic might, strategic engagement 
and cultural outreach the Indian Diaspora contributes significantly to India’s 
developmental agenda and soft power projection.  It is discerned that the Ministry is 
exploring new initiatives and ways for active involvement of Diaspora in enhancing 
India’s outreach and influence.  The Committee emphasizes that the Indian Diaspora is 
a unique and valuable asset that can significantly enhance India’s global influence. The 
potential of diaspora academia and scientists to contribute to India’s educational, 
scientific and technological capacities and investment by the diaspora community in 
Indian startups and innovation also needs to be  harnessed. For leveraging the full 
potential of the Indian Diaspora as an instrument of soft power and fostering economic, 
scientific and technological development in the country, the Ministry of External Affairs 
should adopt a proactive approach and formulate a comprehensive Diaspora 
Engagement Policy in consultation with other line Ministries such as Ministry of Culture, 
Commerce, etc.  
 
18.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
 
“Ministry has a diaspora engagement policy framework in place, which is 
characterized under the rubric of 4Cs - Care, Connect, Celebrate& Contribute. 
The Indian diaspora is incredibly diverse, spanning across various countries, 
cultures, and socio-economic backgrounds. Such diversity makes it difficult to 
formulate a single, tight and unique policy for the Indian diaspora all across the 
globe. If such a policy is indeed attempted to be formulated, Ministry would then 
not be able to address the unique needs and aspirations of the diverse sections 
of the Indian diaspora spread across the world. Therefore, Ministry’s policies 
pertaining to the Indian diaspora have evolved with time on the basis of 

Page | 12 
 
feedback received from the latter. Ministry has also tried to update its diaspora 
engagement schemes based on suggestions from Indian Missions/ Posts 
abroad from time to time and also those from other line Ministries, as and when 
required. Ministry has also endeavoured to maintain an ‘All-of-Government 
approach’ while engaging with the Indian Diaspora by regularly incorporating 
suggestions of the wings of the Government that are involved in promoting 
different aspects of their work under their charge amongst the Indian Diaspora 
overseas. This Ministry constantly consults, collaborates and supports other 
Ministries of the Government of India, such as the Ministry of Women and Child 
Development, Ministry of Labour& Employment, Ministry of Health & Family 
Welfare, Ministry of Law and Justice and Ministry of Skills Development and 
Entrepreneurship, etc., as well as the State governments, while designing and 
implementing schemes and programmes for the welfare and engagement of the 
Indian diaspora. This approach has proved to be very effective.”  
 
19.      With a view to leveraging the full potential of the Indian Diaspora as an 
instrument of soft power and fostering economic, scientific and technological 
development in the country, the Committee had recommended that the Ministry of 
External Affairs should adopt a proactive approach and formulate a comprehensive 
Diaspora Engagement Policy in consultation with other line Ministries. The Ministry in 
their action taken reply have submitted that the diversity of Indian diaspora makes it 
difficult to formulate a single, tight and unique policy for the Indian diaspora   and if 
such a policy is formulated, Ministry would not be able to address the unique needs and 
aspirations of the diverse sections of the Indian diaspora spread across the world. The 
Committee feel that while diversity within a diaspora can present challenges in 
formulating a single diaspora policy, it does not inherently make it impossible. Instead, 
diverse populations within a diaspora can be seen as a source of strength, offering a 
wider range of skills, experiences, and perspectives that can be leveraged for 
development and other initiatives. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier 
recommendation and urge the Ministry to bring out a policy document on Indian 

Page | 13 
 
Diaspora, taking into account its diversity, in tune with their aspirations to serve as a 
guiding principle for deeper and wider engagement with the Diaspora community 
 
Strategic Foreign Policy Doctrine Document 
(Recommendation No. 47) 
  
20.      The Committee in their report had observed/recommended as under: 
  
 While the PP&R Division has undertaken commendable work in foreign policy 
planning, the Committee note the absence of a formalized long-term strategic doctrine. 
The Ministry is encouraged to develop a comprehensive Strategic Foreign Policy 
Doctrine Document to provide a cohesive and long-term vision for India’s diplomacy. 
Several countries, such as the United States, Japan, Germany, United Kingdom as well 
as the European Union, have successfully implemented such documents to guide their 
foreign policy. By adopting a similar approach, India can enhance its capacity to 
navigate global challenges and maintain its leadership role on international platform. 
MEA should initiate consultations with relevant stakeholders, including experts, 
diplomats, policymakers and parliamentary bodies to explore the feasibility and scope of 
developing a grand strategy document for India’s foreign policy. The Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard.  
 
21.      The Ministry in its Action Taken Reply has stated as under: 
  
 “While there is no single overarching and formalized strategic document delineating a 
roadmap for India’s foreign policy apparatus, the underlying principles of India’s foreign 
policy are long established and enduring. The Ministry continually assesses and refines 
its diplomatic stance and policies in response to evolving global challenges. India’s 
positions on relevant issues and its interests, in the context of these principles, have 
been articulated through various platforms. 
  These principles include safeguarding India’s sovereignty and security, 
protecting and promoting India’s national interests, enabling India’s domestic economic 
transformation, ensuring peaceful, secure and stable regional and global environment 
that is conducive to India’s growth and development and building influence in global 
forums through bilateral, multilateral and regional efforts. This pragmatic and outcome-

Page | 14 
 
oriented foreign policy orientation has revitalized India’s traditional ties, re-energized 
strategic, commercial, and economic relations with new partners and re-connected India 
with its Diaspora abroad. It has provided a foundation for dealing with the new and fast-
changing realities of the world.  
  
22. The Committee have, over the years, in various reports, urged the Ministry to 
bring out a strategic document delineating a roadmap for India’s foreign policy. The 
Committee, noting the absence of a formalized long-term strategic doctrine had urged 
the Ministry yet again to develop a comprehensive Strategic Foreign Policy Doctrine 
Document to provide a cohesive and long-term vision for India’s diplomacy. In the action 
taken reply, the Ministry has submitted that while there is no single overarching and 
formalized strategic document, the underlying principles of India’s foreign policy are 
long established and enduring. The Ministry has maintained that India’s positions on 
relevant issues and its interests, in the context of these principles, have been articulated 
through various platforms and this pragmatic and outcome-oriented foreign policy 
orientation has revitalized India’s traditional ties, re-energized strategic, commercial, and 
economic relations with new partners and re-connected India with its Diaspora abroad 
as also provided a foundation for dealing with the new and fast-changing realities of the 
world. The Committee are, however, of the opinion that a formalized strategic doctrine 
for India's foreign policy could contribute to strategic clarity and permit greater 
coherence in foreign policy actions. Without a clearly defined doctrine, long term goals 
of India's foreign policy may not be well understood by other nations particularly our 
neighbours. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their recommendation and urge MEA to 
initiate consultations with relevant stakeholders to explore the feasibility and scope of 
developing a grand strategy document for India’s foreign policy. 
 
  

Page | 15 
 
CHAPTER-II 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED Y THE 
GOVERNMENT 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.1) 
 
An outlay of Rs. 22154.67 crore has been provisioned for the Ministry of External Affairs 
during BE 2024-25, which is 23 % higher vis-a-vis BE 2023-24. The Ministry has informed 
that the enhancement in allocation was to cater to RBI mandated provisioning 
requirements for India’s Line of Credit (LoC) to various countries. The Foreign Secretary 
during the Committee’s deliberations has submitted that the LoC provisioning and 
notional expenditure of Rs. 4383.40 crore represent an accounting exercise and not a 
productive expenditure. Without the notional expenditure of Rs. 4383.40 crore, the 
productive allocation for MEA during BE 2024-25 is Rs. 17,771 crore only. Upon scrutiny 
of MEA’s budget during the past ten years, it is observed that the percentage share of 
MEA’s budget allocation to the GOI budget has hovered below 1%. Even though the 
inadequacy of funds is clearly evident, the Ministry, in written replies, have asserted that 
the allocated budget reflect a fair evaluation of our current international obligations, 
predicted spending growth and realistic assessment of our requirements.  
 
Despite their repeated recommendations and India’s rising global profile, the 
Committee note that the allocation being made to MEA over the years has remained sub-
optimal. The Committee emphasize the need to reflect the demands of India’s dynamic 
foreign policy environment in the MEA’s budget. A robust financial commitment is not 
only a requisite for fulfilling India’s aspirations as a global leader but also a strategic 
investment in safeguarding our national interests and contributing to a stable, multipolar 
world order. The Committee, therefore, strongly recommend a phased increase of at 
least 20% annually in the MEA budget over the next five years to address resource 
deficits and alignment with long-term goals. The Ministry of External Affairs should 
ensure that the imperative of adequate funding is communicated firmly and rationally to 
the Ministry of Finance during the upcoming budget cycle. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has been following the Hon’ble Committee’s advice to take up with the Ministry of 
Finance, the requirement of optimum allocation of funds. The Committee has recommended a 
phased increase of at least 20% annually in the Ministry’s budget over the next five years. In an 
effort towards this target, sustained engagement with the Ministry of Finance has resulted in an 
increased budgetary allocation to the Ministry for BE 2025-26 of Rs. 20516.61Cr. There is an 
increase of Rs. 2744.91 Cr i.e. 15.45% from productive BE 2024-25 i.e. BE 2024-25 minus 
LOC provisioning. The Ministry continues to engage with the Ministry of Finance at all levels to 
emphasize the importance of providing adequate budgetary allocations so that there is no 
shortage of funds for the Ministry in the pursuit of India’s international commitments. 

Page | 16 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 2) 
 
Observing disparities between Budget Estimates (BEs) and Revised Estimates (REs) 
over the years, the Committee have been recommending that adequate and timely 
financial allocation is essential for the functioning of the Ministry of External Affairs.  
India’s growing stature on global arena requires consistent and predictable investments 
in diplomatic, economic and cultural engagements. Budgetary instability and 
fluctuations undermine India’s credibility as a partner in bilateral and multilateral 
initiatives. Notwithstanding this fact, the trend of BE-RE differential persists. The 
Committee lay stress on the need for consistent and predictable financial allocations to 
MEA and recommend that the BE-RE differentials be minimized and key areas be 
protected from budgetary cuts. Further, MEA should work with the Ministry of Finance to 
create a dedicated contingency reserve fund for emergency, diplomatic or humanitarian 
situations. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry continually engages with the Ministry of Finance at all levels to emphasize the 
importance of providing adequate budgetary allocations and consistent and predictable 
financial allocations to MEA with minimal BE-RE differentials. Budgetary demand and allocation 
is a dynamic exercise aided by regular assessment of Ministry’s expectation of expenditure 
progress in a financial year. Instruments of re-appropriation of budget, Supplementary demands 
etc., allow re-prioritisation, and re-allocation of funds for full and efficient allocation of budgetary 
resources. The Ministry's Quarterly Budget Management Meetings aid in analysis of 
expenditure utilization and assessment of budget resources and the useful repurposing of 
budgetary distribution as per Ministry’s international commitments. 
During FY 2024-25, the Ministry received an augmentation of Rs 3122.56 Cr in the first 
Supplementary and additional Rs 300 Cr in the second Supplementary. In FY 2024-25, Aid to 
Disaster Relief budget was augmented to Rs 63.3 Cr against the initial BE allocation of Rs 10 
Cr. Further, BE allocation for FY 2025-26 under Aid to Disaster Relief has been kept at Rs 64 
Cr.  
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 3) 
 
In pursuance of the Committee’s recommendation over the years, Research and 
Information System for Developing Countries (RIS) has carried out an inter-Ministerial as 
well as cross-country comparison of budgetary allocation for foreign affairs of different 
countries. The findings of the Report titled ‘Analysis of Trends of MEA Budgetary 
Allocation’ are revealing and reinforce the necessity for substantive budgetary support 
to MEA to meet its expanding responsibilities and advance India’s global aspirations 
effectively. A granular analysis of the cross-country comparative budgetary allocations 
show that many of our global counterparts allocate higher budget to foreign affairs 
ministries, enabling more robust and extensive global outreach.  
The Committee underscores the growing importance of the Ministry of External 
Affairs in addressing India’s multifaceted global engagements, including diplomacy, 

Page | 17 
 
trade, security, cultural exchange and developmental partnerships. The Ministry is 
strongly urged to use this comparative empirical data on budgetary allocations to 
foreign affairs ministries to highlight the need for enhanced resources. A compelling 
case supported by cross-country statistics should be made to the Ministry of Finance so 
that MEA is well- equipped to navigate the dynamic global landscape. The Committee 
would like to be apprised of the response of the Ministry of Finance in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry put forward a compelling case to the Ministry of Finance at the FY 2024-25 RE 
allocation stage. As a result, Ministry received an augmentation of Rs 3122.56 in the first 
Supplementary and additional Rs 300 Cr in the second Supplementary. Sustained engagement 
with the Ministry of Finance has resulted in an increased budgetary allocation to the Ministry for 
BE 2025-26 of Rs. 20516.61Cr. There is an increase of Rs. 2744.91 Cr i.e. 15.45% from 
productive BE 2024-25 i.e. BE 2024-25 minus LOC provisioning. Ministry accords utmost 
priority to effective budgetary allocation and resource prioritization. The Ministry continues to 
hold extensive discussions with Ministry of Finance at all stages of the budgetary cycle to 
convince and impress upon the need for judicious allocation of funds, within the overall 
constraints of Government finances.  
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 4) 
 
In addition to cross-country comparison, RIS Report titled ‘Analysis of Trends of MEA 
Budgetary Allocation’ contains data on inter-ministerial budgetary allocation across the GOI. 
With a ranking of 18th, MEA has been categorized as a Ministry with middle-sized allocation of 
resources amongst sample Ministries/Departments. The Committee note that the reason for 
higher allocation to a Ministry is determined by its potential for asset creation. The Committee 
are of the considered opinion that MEA is underrepresented in resource allocation. The MEA 
operates at the intersection of multiple sectors such as trade, technology, education, defence, 
culture and so on. Hence, enhanced budgetary allocation to MEA can amplify India’s ability to 
coordinate inter-Ministerial efforts and strengthen international partnerships. Recognizing that 
MEA plays a pivotal role in advancing India’s interests globally, the Committee recommend that 
the Ministry should leverage this statistics on inter-ministerial budgetary allocation across the 
GOI to make a strong case for increased funding in BE 2025-26. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In line with the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendations, Ministry made a strong case for increased 
funding to the Ministry of Finance for the FY 2025-26. As a result, Ministry has received BE 2025-26 of 
Rs. 20516.61 Cr, which is an increase of Rs. 2744.91 Cr i.e. 15.45% from productive BE 2024-25 i.e. 
BE 2024-25 minus LOC provisioning. Further, the Ministry had also received an augmentation of Rs 
3122.56 in the first Supplementary and additional Rs 300 Cr in the second Supplementary for FY 2024-
25. 
 
 

Page | 18 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 5) 
 
The Committee is aware that the budget classifications of MEA are in terms of Revenue 
and Capital heads and Scheme and Non Scheme heads. While the Scheme section 
constitutes the Ministry’s Central Sector Schemes i.e. towards development partnership 
with other countries, the Non scheme section on the other hand, caters to establishment 
costs, assistance to autonomous institutions, passport, emigration, welfare of Diaspora, 
international cooperation, etc. Out of the total budgetary allocation to MEA during 2024-
25, Rs. 5667.56 and Rs. 16487.11 crores are allocated under Scheme and Non scheme 
sections, respectively. While both the heads are important and funding should be 
enhanced in both, the Committee have continuously maintained that in light of its global 
implication, the Scheme section should be kept immune from any budgetary cuts.  The 
Committee, however, observe that the percentage share under the Scheme section has 
reduced from 42 % in 2021-22, 39 % in 2022-23, 32 % in 2023-24 to 26 % in 2024-25. The 
justification put forth by the Ministry for this downward trend is unconvincing. 
Development partnerships being central to fostering goodwill, strengthening bilateral 
ties and enhancing global standing as a reliable and responsible partner, the Committee 
strongly recommend that the Scheme section of MEA should be appropriately funded 
and under no circumstance be subjected to budgetary cuts during resource allocation or 
fiscal rationalization exercises. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has noted the advice of Hon’ble Standing Committee regarding budgetary 
allocation to the Scheme section of MEA. Ministry’s scheme commitments have ranged 
between 32-43% of the Ministry’s overall budget for the last few years, reflecting steadfast 
prioritization of our development partnership with international partners. Ministry received an 
overall enhancement of Rs 3422.53 Cr in the Supplementary Demand for grants in FY 2024-25 
out of which Rs 1714.45 Cr (increase of 30.25% from BE 2024-25) was fully utilized under the 
Scheme section. For BE 2025-26, the allocation towards the Ministry’s schemes is Rs. 6750 
crore, comprising 33% of overall budget. This is an increase of 19.10% (Rs. 1082 crore) over 
the previous year’s allocation of Rs. 5667 crore, which is in alignment with foreign policy 
objectives as well as the Committee’s recommendation to aim for 20% annual increase in 
budget. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 6) 
 
Upon a careful scrutiny of the budget documents and replies furnished by the Ministry, 
the Committee observe a smooth and balanced pace of expenditure during each quarter 
of the Financial Year 2023-24.  The expenditure pattern of MEA during the past three 
years has been 88.58%, 98.47% and 99.65%. The Committee note that in order to ensure 
optimum utilization of budgetary resources, expenditure is closely and regularly 
monitored by the Financial Advisor in consultation with Divisional Heads, including 
through quarterly budget management and expenditure review meetings. The Ministry 
has also submitted that the regular submission of data under Estimated Committed 

Page | 19 
 
Liabilities (ECL) in Ministry of Finance Portal has further streamlined the utilization 
pattern.  It is satisfying to note that the plethora of initiatives and mechanisms has 
resulted in effective budgetary utilization during the past three years. While 
acknowledging the prudent and optimum utilization pattern of MEA for BE 2023-24, the 
Committee urge the Ministry to continue its focused approach towards sharper 
monitoring and expenditure management through its review meetings.  The Ministry 
should also make use of its budgetary utilization pattern effectively to make a 
convincing case for enhanced budgetary allocation during RE 2024-25 as well as BE 
2025-26.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has made full efforts to ensure optimum utilization of the available budgetary allocation 
evenly throughout the year. Budgetary demand and allocation is a dynamic exercise aided by 
regular assessment of Ministry’s expectation of expenditure progress in a financial year. 
Instruments of re-appropriation of budget, Supplementary demands etc., allow re-prioritization, 
and re-allocation of funds for full and efficient allocation of budgetary resources. The Ministry 
continues to strive for more rigorous budget planning, sharper monitoring and expenditure 
management through its regular quarterly budget review meetings. The Ministry's Quarterly 
Budget Management Meetings aid in analysis of expenditure utilization and assessment of 
budget resources and the useful repurposing of budgetary distribution as per Ministry’s 
international commitments.  
 
Over the past decade, the Ministry’s budget utilization, apart from the Covid year of 2021-22, 
has consistently crossed 95%. Most recently, for FY 2022-23 Ministry utilization was 98.30%;  
for FY 2023-24, utilization was 99.59% and in FY 2024-25, Ministry budget utilization was 
99.84%. 
 
The Ministry has been following the suggestion of the Hon’ble Committee to make use of 
budgetary utilization pattern effectively and to make a convincing case to Ministry of Finance for 
enhanced budgetary allocation. Sustained engagement with the Ministry of Finance has 
resulted in increased budgetary allocation to Ministry for BE 2025-26 of Rs. 20516.61Cr 
(increase of Rs. 2744.91 Cr i.e. 15.45% from productive BE 2024-25 i.e. BE 2024-25 minus 
LOC provisioning). Further, Ministry has received an augmentation of Rs 3122.56 in the first 
Supplementary and additional Rs 300 Cr in the second Supplementary for FY 2024-25. 
 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 7) 
 
The persistent under-staffing and gap between the sanctioned and actual cadre strength 
in the Ministry of External Affairs has been a source of significant concern. Against the 
sanctioned strength of 8697, the actual working strength of MEA is 7630. The Committee 
observe that vacancies in the Ministry are filled through a combination of direct 
recruitment through the Civil Services Examination conducted by UPSC, examinations 
conducted by SSC and promotion from feeder cadres as per extant Rules. The 

Page | 20 
 
Committee note that the Ministry has taken proactive steps, such as placing increased 
indents with the UPSC and SSC; implementing the 5th Cadre Review (2023-2027); 
reinforcing technical capacity by taking officers with domain expertise on deputation 
from Line Ministries and Departments of Governments and engaging Consultants with 
expertise in various fields. 
Given India’s expanding diplomatic footprint and its engagement in critical global 
issues, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should work closely with Union 
Public Service Commission (UPSC) and Staff Selection Commission (SSC) to streamline 
recruitment cycles and reduce the time lag between the creation of posts and their 
fulfillment. Filling up critical vacancies in Group A, B and C posts, both at Headquarters 
and in Missions abroad should be prioritized. Further, the Ministry should continue to 
create cadre/ induct expertise from other Ministries, academia, think tanks and the 
private sector, as needed, to supplement its human resource with relevant domain 
expertise. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been duly noted. The Ministry is 
currently implementing the Fifth Cadre Review, which is expected to be implemented by 2027. 
The sanctioned strength of the Ministry has also been increased since inputs were previously 
sent for the Fourth Committee on External Affairs Report. As of 01 February 2025, the current 
sanctioned strength of the Ministry stands at 9034, which previously stood at 8697. Out of this, 
53.38 percent are located in Missions and Posts abroad. These positions span various cadres 
within the Ministry, such as the Indian Foreign Service (IFS), IFS General Cadre, Branch B, 
Stenographers Cadre, Interpreters Cadre, Legal and Treaties Cadre. Missions/Posts abroad 
also consist of a local cadre strength of 3119.  
 
Ministry of External Affairs also takes officers with specialized skills from other Departments/ 
Ministries on deputation. The Ministry also engages consultants/experts with relevant skillsets 
in key areas of functioning of the Ministry such as counter terrorism, project management, 
bilateral and multilateral diplomacy, international law, consular and disarmament related work.  
 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 8) 
 
The Committee are happy to note that the number of women recruited into the Indian 
Foreign Service (IFS) is steadily growing and in the recent IFS batch women constituted 
around 40%. At present, 15 female officers are serving as Heads of Missions abroad. 
However, the under-representation of women in senior leadership roles, especially in 
key posts or in high-profile capital missions is noticeable. Though the percentage of 
women recruits have increased over the years, the structural and cultural barriers, if any, 
in ensuring equal opportunities for women’s advancement and leadership need to be 
addressed. Since the Committee feel that prioritizing women in diplomacy can 
strengthen India's soft power and better reflect the values and strengths of a modern 
India on the world stage, they desire for proactive measures towards this end. 

Page | 21 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Committee have been duly noted. Induction of women IFS 
Officers has also significantly increased in the last 14 years. In the 2010 batch, women 
representation was 24%, which increased to 39.39% for the 2024 batch.   
 
Further, there is significant representation of women in senior leadership roles. Currently, IFS 
officers from batches 1988 to 2005 are eligible to head Missions/Posts abroad or become Head 
of Department in Ministry HQ. In the batch of IFS officers from 1988 to 2005, there are total 203 
IFS Officers serving in the Ministry either at HQs or Mission/Posts abroad. Among the 203 
officers in 1988-2005 batches there are 33 women IFS Officers. Among them, 23 women IFS 
officers are either serving as Heads of Mission as Ambassador/High Commissioner or as JS 
(Joint Secretary) at the HQs. Other women officers are also heading important offices in MEA 
Headquarters or other Ministries on deputation. MEA will continue to encourage more gender 
equality and equal opportunities for women’s advancement and leadership.  
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 9) 
 
The Committee note that the SushmaSwaraj Institute of Foreign Service (SSIFS) is 
providing comprehensive training to Indian Foreign Service (IFS) officers, non-
diplomatic staff, and foreign diplomats. The range of programmes, such as the Mid-
Career Training Programme (MCTP), Professional Course for Foreign Diplomats (PCFD), 
and specialized courses like IMAS and IVFRT, reflects a commitment to enhancing both 
functional and domain-specific expertise. The Ministry has taken efforts to align training 
with the National Standards for Civil Service Training Institutions (NSCSTI) and have 
partnered with global institutions and organizations such as the Lee Kuan Yew School of 
Public Policy, the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, IAEA and UN bodies. The 
practice of collecting and analyzing feedback from trainees is also followed. While 
appreciating the initiatives taken and efforts made by the Ministry, the Committee find 
scope for further improvement in ensuring that MEA personnel are well-equipped to 
meet evolving global challenges and operational demands and urge the SSIFS to 
accelerate the digitization of training delivery and integration with advanced 
technologies such as e-learning platforms, virtual simulations and artificial intelligence 
to make training more efficient, transparent and accessible. The global collaborations 
should focus on exchanging best practices, designing innovative training modules and 
organizing joint capacity-building initiatives. The Committee also desire that the Ministry 
should institutionalize a mechanism to periodically review and adapt training content 
based on feedback to address emerging needs and improve the learning experience. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As per the National Standards for Civil Service Training Institutions (NSCSTI) recommended by 
Capacity Building Commission (CBC), SSIFS has aligned all its activities in the framework of 
eight pillars. This specifically required a special effort in the pillar of digitalization and training 

Page | 22 
 
delivery where SSIFS had for the first time launched a Learning Management Software (LMS) 
Platform through a protected part on its website, which allows the training since January 2025 
to become paperless, efficient, transparent, and therefore more effective. This learning platform 
allows online conduct of quizzes and exams, sharing of reference materials, and submission of 
assignments, all digitally. Assessment process has also become realtime and trainees could 
now see their assessments on weekly basis, thereby giving them continuous information & 
motivation in the areas where efforts are needed to improve further. SSIFS will use this platform 
to introduce new pedagogical methods using technology to make learning processes more 
efficient and smarter, including using AI tools.  The results of Officer Trainees learning curve in 
just two months of 2025 after launch of LMS have shown marked improvements in their use of 
digital tools to improving on time management and in presenting their thoughts and ideas in 
more captivating manner to the audience. 
 
Another new thing that SSIFS has introduced in its training methods and learning assessment 
for Indian officers, has been the competencies based framework, which involves focusing on 
Behavioural, Functional, and Domain specific competencies. This is now incorporated in 
already functional Learning Management platform. 
 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 10) 
 
The Committee note that the increased allocation for ‘Embassies and Missions’ in the 
Revised Estimates (RE) 2023-24 and Budget Estimates (BE) 2024-25 is primarily due to 
the operationalization of new Missions and Posts and inflationary pressures. The 
Committee also take note of the criteria for establishing new Missions, focusing on 
economic partnerships, strategic cooperation, diaspora engagement and multilateral 
diplomacy. The Committee acknowledge the establishment of new Embassies in Tirana 
(Albania), La Paz (Bolivia), Tbilisi (Georgia), Riga (Latvia), Dili (Timor Leste), and 
Libreville (Gabon), as well as new Consulates in Brisbane (Australia), Marseille (France), 
Barcelona (Spain) and Auckland (New Zealand). The Committee have also been informed 
about ongoing efforts to operationalize Missions in other strategic locations such as 
Fukuoka (Japan), Kazan (Russia) and Yekaterinburg (Russia) and future plans for 
opening five Missions in Europe and Latin America and Caribbean regions.   
The Committee further note that India currently lacks resident Missions in 42 
countries. While acknowledging the challenges involved in establishing new Missions, 
the Committee recommend accelerating efforts to bridge these gaps, particularly in 
countries where India has significant economic or strategic interests or a large Diaspora 
presence. The Committee note that the Ministry is leveraging concurrent accreditation 
arrangements effectively in countries where resident Missions have not been 
operationalized. Despite the Ministry’s assurance that the allocated funds are adequate 
to account for inflationary pressures and currency fluctuations, the Committee urge that 
the Ministry is be prepared for addressing any unforeseen shortfalls promptly through 
supplementary grants to ensure uninterrupted functioning of Embassies and Missions. 
 
 

Page | 23 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of External Affairs from time to time formulates proposals for opening of resident 
Missions in countries where there are no Indian Missions. The objective of India’s foreign policy 
is to build a conducive environment for India's growth and development through partnerships 
with friendly countries. India’s Missions and Posts across the world serve as conduits of its 
relations with partner countries. The decision to open new Indian Missions is to expand India’s 
footprint in various regions and broaden international support for its interests.  
In 2024, 10 new Missions and Posts have been operationalized. As on 01 Feb 2025, there are 
41 countries where India does not have resident Missions. Ministry is working to operationalize 
more Missions in countries where India currently does not possess a diplomatic Mission.   
 
Approval has been received for operationalizing five new Missions in Europe and, Latin 
America and Caribbean region. Additionally, new Consulates are also being opened by the 
Ministry in view of India’s increasing diplomatic engagement. New Consulates have been 
operationalized in Belfast (UK), Manchester (UK) and Fukuoka (Japan). TheConsulates in Los 
Angeles (USA), Boston (USA), Kazan (Russia) and Yekaterinburg (Russia)are expected to be 
operationalized in FY 2025-26. 
 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 11) 
 
The Committee recognize the importance of an effective monitoring mechanism to 
ensure the optimal performance of Indian Missions and Posts abroad. It is observed 
that Performance Evaluation and Monitoring System (PEMS) which was established in 
2016, has been revamped in 2021 to make the evaluation of Mission/Posts more 
comprehensive. While noting the improvement in performance scores across Missions 
and Posts, the Committee find that certain areas still require consistent compliance, 
such as updating web pages, maintaining verified social media accounts and adhering 
to communication guidelines. 
Acknowledging the efforts of the Ministry towards making the PEMS interface 
more user-friendly, the Committee recommend that periodic feedback surveys from 
Missions and Posts should be conducted to identify scope for further improvements in 
the portal’s functionality and reduce time spent on submissions. To encourage higher 
performance, the Committee also recommend instituting a system of incentives for 
Missions/Posts that consistently achieve high scores in PEMS evaluations. This can 
include recognition, additional resource allocation or capacity-building opportunities for 
staff. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
With reference to the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee contained, it is submitted that 
Mission/Posts routinely raise their queries/concerns pertaining to functioning of PEMS portal 
and PEMS questionnaire. The queries/concerns are promptly addressed and are kept in 
consideration during periodic revamping of the PEMS portal to ensure continuous improvement 

Page | 24 
 
and enhance user experience. The questionnaire for PEMS is also revised every year to keep it 
relevant to the functionality of Missions/Posts and to address the queries/concerns of 
Missions/Posts related to applicability and scope of questions.   
 
A circular message is sent to all Missions/Posts after completion of PEMS evaluation, providing 
a brief overview of the outcomes of evaluation. The circular also highlights the list of 10 top 
performing Missions/Posts based on their PEMS score. This, in addition to recognizing the top 
scorers for their commendable performance, sets a benchmark for other Missions/Posts and 
encourages them to improve their performance in future. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 12) 
 
In view of recent developments, the Committee feel that that the security of Indian 
Missions and Posts abroad is paramount for ensuring the safety of personnel, the 
protection of sensitive information and the continuity of diplomatic functions. The 
Ministry has informed that safety and security of our Missions/Posts is continuously 
reviewed. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should conduct a 
comprehensive security assessment of all Missions/Posts taking into account the 
geopolitical situation, potential threats and vulnerabilities in host countries. Adequate 
resources should also be allocated for protection of physical and digital infrastructure of 
our Missions. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry places high importance to the safety of personnel and security of Missions/Posts.  
The security situation varies from country to country and the threat scenario are dynamic in 
nature. The Ministry in consultation with security agencies and feedback from Missions/Posts 
categorizes Missions/Posts abroad on the basis of type and magnitude of security threats. This 
exercise is carried out at regular intervals and forms the basis for allotment of security 
resources, tailoring different training and briefing modules, etc. While safety and security of 
Missions/Posts is primarily the responsibility of the host governments as per the Vienna 
Convention of Diplomatic Relations, the Ministry coordinates with Missions/Posts to put in 
required physical security/access control measures, etc.  Any threat to Diplomatic 
establishments is immediately taken up by Indian Missions/Consulates with the concerned 
authorities of the host governments for taking pre-emptive steps as well as for providing 
security.  Host governments and its authorities are also requested to undertake appropriate 
action as per their national laws and international obligations.   The Ministry is pro-actively 
working with Missions/Posts to put adequate measures in place. 
 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 13) 
 
The Committee note that India’s Missions and Posts abroad operate with a sanctioned 
strength of 5721 India-based posts and 2976 local posts as of March 2024. In light of the 
increasing responsibilities of Missions and the growing scope of India’s foreign policy 

Page | 25 
 
objective, the Ministry should ensure that all sanctioned positions are filled promptly to 
avoid any disruption in diplomatic functions. The Committee also desire that vacancies 
be reviewed and filled on a priority basis through expedited recruitment processes in 
collaboration with the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) and Staff Selection 
Commission (SSC). Highlighting the importance of local staff in supporting Missions’ 
operational efficiency, the Committee urge the Ministry to allocate adequate resources 
for retaining skilled local staff, including competitive remuneration and benefits to 
attract and retain talent in host countries. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Committee have been duly noted. The Ministry regularly reviews 
the requirement of manpower at various levels in Embassies and Consulates abroad and takes 
appropriate action, including recruitment of additional Officers and Staff, through placement of 
requisite indents with the Union Public Service Commission (UPSC) and the Staff Selection 
Commission (SSC), respectively. Keeping in mind the requirements of Ministry, and to fill up the 
vacancies on a priority basis, Ministry has increased our indent with the UPSC and SSC.  Since 
2014, 374 officers have joined the Indian Foreign Service by direct recruitment through the Civil 
Services Examination. For the year 2024 and 2025, 110 vacancies have been indented to 
UPSC. Ministry will also work towards creation of more posts and filling them in a time-bound 
manner to ensure that Indian Missions and Posts abroad as well Headquarters are sufficiently 
staffed. Ministry is also reinforcing its technical capacity by taking officers with domain expertise 
on deputation from Line Ministries and Departments of Government as well as specialized Civil 
Services such as Railways, Forest, Customs, Revenue, Economic Service, Civil Accounts 
Service, Central Police Organizations, Ordinance Factory Service, Central Secretariat Service 
and from Armed Forces etc. Ministry is also engaging Consultants as subject matter experts or 
Knowledge Partners, including experienced retired government officials as well as from the 
open market. Consultants are also engaged by the Ministry for bringing in specific skillsets, 
which are necessary in key areas of functioning of the Ministry.  
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 14) 
 
The Committee acknowledge the significant strides made by the Ministry of External 
Affairs in enhancing passport services through the expansion of the Passport 
SevaProgramme, including the establishment of 93 Passport SevaKendras (PSKs) and 
434 Post Office Passport SevaKendras (POPSKs) in collaboration with the Department of 
Posts. The integration of all 193 Indian Missions/Posts abroad into the Passport Seva 
Portal is commendable and reflects   the commitment of the Ministry to streamline and 
digitize passport services globally. The Committee observe that the substantial revenue 
generated from passport-related services, including Rs. 3543.66 crore in passport fees 
during FY 2023-24, highlights the increasing public demand for these services. 
However, the Committee expresses concern over the steep reduction in the 
budgetary allocation for passport and emigration services from Rs. 1792.14 crore at the 
RE 2023-24 stage to Rs. 970.66 crore in BE 2024-25. This reduction appears incongruous 
with the rising demand for passport services, expansion of the Passport 

Page | 26 
 
SevaProgramme and the higher anticipated expenditure on travel document printing, 
freight charges, and service charges for the Passport Seva Project. The Ministry should 
ensure that budgetary provisions for passport services align with the growing demand 
and the significant revenue generated through passport fees. Given the steep decline in 
BE 2024-25, it is imperative that adequate funds be allocated at the Supplementary or 
Revised Estimate stage to address anticipated shortfalls. To further enhance the 
utilization of passport services, the Committee recommend that MEA should undertake 
widespread awareness campaigns regarding POPSKs, online application processes and 
e-passports. Special focus should be given to remote and underserved regions to 
ensure equitable access to these services. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As observed by the Hon’ble Committee, the funds allocated in BE 2024-25 was Rs. 970.66 Cr 
for Passport & Emigration. More funds were allocated at RE/FE stages. The final Estimates 
were Rs. 1955.75 Cr. The additional funds were mainly provided under service charges head, 
printing and procurement of travel documents and payment to States/UTs for Police incentives. 
With the augmentation of funds, the Ministry was able to make payments to various service 
providers of PSP viz TCS, DoP, ISP Nashik and Police department. 
As regards widespread awareness campaign, the Ministry has published the required 
information related to passport services for the citizens in the PSP website available across 
geography. A 24X7 call centre operating in 13 languages has been made operational for 
providing passport related information to the citizens. To reach to the remotest part of the 
country, Passport SevaKendars (PSKs)/Post Office Passport SevaKendras (POPSKs) have 
been made operational across the country including difficult terrains. The Ministry is also in the 
process of rolling out Mobile VAN for Passport services under PSPV2.0 to cater to remote 
areas. Under each Regional Passport Office (RPO), one mobile VAN has been provisioned 
taking the total to 37 Mobile VAN.  The PSP system is also integrated with more than 5 Lakh 
Common Services Centre (CSCs) of MeitY to bridge the digital divide and for widespread 
coverage of passport services across geography. Time to time awareness campaigns were 
undertaken by respective Regional Passport Offices in their jurisdiction for providing information 
related to passport services, online application etc. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 15) 
 
The Committee note that the expansion of Passport SevaKendras (PSKs) and Post Office 
Passport SevaKendras (POPSKs) has enhanced accessibility for citizens across the 
country. In the opinion of the Committee, the introduction of e-Passports as part of the 
PSP Version 2.0 is a forward-looking initiative aligned with global best practices and the 
“Digital India” mission. The pilot issuance of e-Passports at RPO Nagpur and RPO 
Bhubaneswar with 65,000 e-Passports issued as of October 2024 and the efforts to 
ensure one PSK/POPSK in every Lok Sabha constituency are highly appreciable.   
While recognizing that the issuance of passports as one of the most visible and 
citizen-centric statutory services rendered by the MEA, the Committee discern 
challenges in infrastructure, manpower and the implementation timeline for critical 

Page | 27 
 
advancements such as PSP Version 2.0 and e-Passports which warrant immediate 
attention. The Committee also express concern over the delay in the rollout of PSP V2.0, 
which is now scheduled for April 2025. The Committee, therefore, urge the Ministry to 
closely monitor and ensure strict adherence to the revised timeline by the Service 
Provider, M/s TCS. As regards the pending establishment of POPSKs in 40 
constituencies, the Ministry is urged to focus on inter-departmental coordination and 
periodic reviews to operationalize these POPSKs at the earliest.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Pilot launch of PSP V2.0 started in April 2024 under two Regional Passport Offices (RPOs) 
i.e. RPO Bhubaneswar and RPO Nagpur and PSKs/POPSKs under them. Thereafter, five more 
RPOs (Goa, Jammu, Shimla, Raipur and Amritsar) and PSKs/POPSKs under them were added 
to the Pilot sites for larger coverage and complete flow including load and performance 
evaluation of PSPV2.0. As part of roll out, the Ministry further added 5 RPOs (Jaipur, Chennai, 
Hyderabad, Ranchi and Surat) and PSKs/POPSKs under them to PSPV2.0 and completed 
before 10 March 2025, thus taking the tally to 12 RPOs. Five more RPOs i.e. Ghaziabad, 
Tiruchirappalli, Srinagar, Lucknow and Coimbatore and PSKs/POPSKs under themare 
scheduled to be added to PSPV2.0 by 21 April 2025. 
 
The Ministry is closely monitoring and having continuous review with the Service Provider, M/s. 
TCS to complete the roll-out across PAN India at the earliest and not later than June 25. 
 
It is also submitted that the Ministry is taking due steps and weekly review with the Service 
Provider, M/s. TCS to close the issues being reported from the RPOs migrated to PSPV2.0 and 
making the system error free and seamless. In parallel, the Ministry has also engaged the third-
party audit agency, STQC, Meity, for testing of functional, security and performance of the 
PSPV2.0 application/platform and the observations submitted by STQC are being reviewed and 
Service Provider, M/s. TCS is directed to take corrective measures. 
 
As on date, 446 POPSKs have been set up across the country. There are currently 37 Lok 
Sabha Constituencies without a PSK or POPSK. Opening of POPSK in these LSCs are also in 
process and shall be opened in a phased manner, subject to provision of suitable space by 
DoP. Regular follow-up with DOP is being donefor provision of suitable space for the remaining 
Lok Sabha Constituencies. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 16) 
 
The Committee note that the centralized database, PRIDE has been integrated with the 
Ministry of Home Affairs’ (MHA) systems, such as BOI and NATGRID, which enhances 
inter-agency coordination. The Ministry’s efforts to ensure data confidentiality, integrity 
and availability through a robust Information Security Management System (ISMS) 
Policy, layered security measures and adherence to zero trust principles to address 
evolving cyber-security threats has also been noted. The Committee recommend that the 
Ministry should further strengthen the existing data protection framework by conducting 

Page | 28 
 
periodic audits of the Passport Seva Project’s security infrastructure to proactively 
identify and mitigate vulnerabilities. Additionally, the Committee emphasize the 
importance of raising public awareness about data privacy measures undertaken by the 
Ministry to enhance citizens’ confidence in the system.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has taken the following measures for data protection in the Passport Seva Program: 
 
1. Data Encryption as part of Data Security Measure: Encrypting Personally Identifiable 
Information (PII) both at rest and in transit ensures that unauthorized access to data is 
minimized. 
2. Access Control (RBAC): Implementing strict access controls, such as role-based access 
through PAM, ensures that only authorized personnel can access data as per role, 
additionally video logging is provisioned. 
3. Incident Response Plan: Having a robust plan in place to respond to data breaches or 
unauthorized access incidents. 
4. Data Leak Prevention (DLP) Solutions: Using DLP tools to monitor and prevent 
unauthorized data transfers. 
5. Principle of Least Privilege (POLP): Ensuring that employees have access only to the 
data necessary for their roles that to on the need to know basis. 
6. Continuous Monitoring: 24x7 Monitoring systems for unusual activities or potential 
breaches. 
7. Periodic Audit:The Ministry has engaged STQC, MeitY, as a third party audit agency for 
the audit of entire PSP system and also for annual audit. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 17) 
 
It is noted that with the implementation of the mPassport Police App, the average time 
for Police Verification Reports (PVRs) has been significantly reduced from 45 days to 15 
days nationally. The Committee observes that the app has not been rolled out in 13 
States/UTs. The Committee, therefore, recommends that the MEA, in consultation with 
the Ministry of Home Affairs and State/UT governments, should prioritize the nationwide 
rollout of the app by April 2025, ensuring its adoption across all police stations before 
the launch of PSP Version 2.0 in April 2025.  To facilitate this, the Ministry should 
provide technical and financial support to address IT infrastructure gaps in these 
regions and establish a dedicated task force to monitor progress and address 
implementation challenges. The Committee further recommend the enhancement of 
training and capacity-building programs for police personnel to ensure efficient app 
usage. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
It is mentioned that 25 States/UTs covering more than 9425 Police Stations across the country 
have already launched mPassport Police App. The Ministry and the concerned RPOs are 

Page | 29 
 
coordinating with the States/UTs where mPassport Police App has not yet launched. It is also 
submitted that the Ministry is providing all technical support to States/UTs including the 
application support, training and hand-holding to police personnel (before and after the launch 
of mPassport Police App) through the Service Provider of Passport Seva Program, M/s. TCS. 
Post deployment, all technical support is also provided to State/UTs regarding police 
verification and submission. It may be noted that the roll out of mPassport Police App at 
States/UTs depends on the readiness of IT infrastructure at the concerned State/UT for which 
the Ministry is also providing financial support to each State/UT, per application processed by 
them and for verification and submission of Police Verification Report (PVR) 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 18) 
 
The Committee note with concern the significant gap between the sanctioned strength 
(2737) and actual working strength (1751) of the Central Passport Organization (CPO), 
resulting in a vacancy of 986 posts, including 272 Gazetted and 714 Non-Gazetted posts. 
The shortfall of workforce is further exacerbated by a high attrition rate (over 40%) in key 
direct entry grades such as Junior Passport Assistant (JPA) and Assistant 
Superintendent, primarily due to better career prospects and pay scales elsewhere. 
While the Ministry has made efforts, such as outsourcing staff, expediting promotions 
and hiring on a deputation basis, the Committee observe that these are interim 
measures and stress the need for long-term solutions to address this persistent issue. 
The Committee, therefore,  recommend that the Ministry should expedite recruitment by 
engaging closely with the Staff Selection Commission (SSC) to ensure timely inclusion 
of vacancies in upcoming examinations. They also urge the Ministry to address the root 
causes of attrition by revising pay scales, improving career progression opportunities, 
etc. Additionally, to meet the manpower demands of 440 Post Office Passport 
SevaKendras (POPSKs) and ensure efficient functioning of Passport Offices, the 
Ministry should formulate a comprehensive recruitment and retention strategy.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry is working closely with the Staff Selection Commission (SSC) and has indented 
vacancies for all posts to be filled on direct recruitment basis in Central Passport Organization 
(CPO) viz. 63 posts for Assistant Superintendent (AS); 15 posts for Junior Translation Officer 
(JTO); 07 posts for Stenographer Grade 'D'; 301 for Junior Passport Assistant (JPA) and 61 for 
Office Assistant (OA) for the year 2024. SSC has recently declared the results for these posts 
except for the post of JTO. Posting of the said officials in the Passport Officers will shortly start 
after completion of administrative formalities. As regards the post of JTO, SSC is likely to 
declare results shortly. 
 
As regards attrition, it is stated that though there is adequate career progression in CPO, in as 
much as even the officials appointed in the Level 2 of the cadre were recently appointed in 
grade of Level 12 on promotion basis in the CPO. However, the attrition in the cadre is primarily 
due to better exposure, higher grades and absence of all India transfer liability in other services. 

Page | 30 
 
 
Further, the Ministry is aware of the shortage of officials in the Post Office Passport Seva 
Kendras (POPSK) and proposing to appoint officials from other government services on 
deputation basis to reinforce the existing availability of staff in the cadre. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 19) 
 
The Committee take cognizance that emigration process in India is governed by the 
Emigration Act of 1983, administered by MEA through the Protector General of 
Emigrants (PGE). The Ministry has informed that the Protector General of Emigrants 
(PGE ) oversees the functioning of all Protector of Emigrants (PoE) offices across India. 
As of now there are 14 offices of the Protector of Emigrants (POEs) located at Mumbai, 
Chennai, Delhi, Kolkata, Chandigarh, Hyderabad, Cochin, Thiruvananthapuram, Jaipur, 
Raebareli, Patna, Bengaluru, Guwahati and Ranchi. In order to expand the outreach of 
the PoEs, the Ministry has established additional PoE offices in Patna, Bengaluru and 
Guwahati, which are fully functional. Additional offices are being planned in Tripura, 
Bhubaneswar and Ahmedabad. The Committee desire that establishment of PoE offices 
in States where such offices do not exist currently and additional PoE offices in 
migration hotspots including States like Punjab, Uttar Pradesh, etc. should be expedited 
to ensure better outreach and support for emigrants. Realizing an urgent need for 
spreading awareness about safe migration, the Committee recommend that the Ministry 
should collaborate with local civil society groups, media outlets in the most affected 
regions to ensure that emigrants are fully informed about their rights, processes 
involved and the risks of illegal migration. In addition, the Committee urge that all 
citizens departing India should be given basic information at the immigration counters. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Currently there are 16 Offices of Protector of Emigrants (POE) located at Mumbai, Chennai, 
Delhi, Kolkata, Chandigarh, Hyderabad, Cochin, Thiruvananthapuram, Jaipur, Lucknow, Patna, 
Bengaluru, Guwahati, Ranchi, Bhubaneswar and Agartala. For better coordination with state 
governments in the matters of emigration, Ministry has been exploring the possibility of opening 
of POE offices in those states, where such offices currently do not exist. POE Offices in Odisha, 
Jharkhand and Tripura have been opened recently. The Division is in the process of opening 
POE Offices in Andhra Pradesh, Uttarakhand and Gujarat in near future. As far as opening of 
additional POE Offices in migration hotspot states like Uttar Pradesh and Punjab is concerned, 
the POE Offices in Lucknow and Chandigarh are currently fully functional and catering to the 
need of those states, respectively. Ministry would consider opening of additional POE Offices in 
these states based on the need and demand analysis. 
Ministry issues advisories through eMigrate portal, social media handles and other modes of 
publicity about the perils of fake job rackets and ways to prevent the same. Till February 2025, 
a total of 3,281 unregistered agents in country against whom grievances have been received, 
have been notified on the eMigrate portal. The awareness campaign on safe and legal 
migration through eMigrate portal has been carried out by the Ministry and POEs across the 
country by conducting workshops, trainings, information sessions, digital campaigns for media 

Page | 31 
 
groups, police officials and law enforcement agencies, local administration, aspiring recruiting 
agents, entrepreneurs and general public. During these sessions awareness on emigration 
regulations, schemes beneficial for emigrants like PravasiBharatiyaBimaYojana (PBBY), Pre-
Departure Orientation Training (PDOT), eMigrate portal and various advisories issued by Indian 
Embassies are brought to the notice of all stakeholders.  
 
During the recently organized Recruiting Agents Conclave on 11 March 2025, Hon’ble Minister 
of State for External Affairs Shri KirtiVardhan Singh launched a PravasiBhartiyaSahayata 
Kendra social media channel, which provides information on safe and legal migration on real 
time basis. 
 
The POE Offices also closely work with the State Government officials, and media to raise 
awareness about safe and legal channels of migration. For example, POE Office in Chennai 
made significant effort to raise awareness about safe and legal migration through the 
“PaathuPonga” campaign, during which a walkathon was organized in Chennai in February 
2025. Other POEs are also engaging with the State Government and civil society stakeholders 
within their respective jurisdictions in this regard.  
 
Ministry of External Affairs in collaboration with the Ministry of Skill Development and Entrepre-
neurship (MSDE) is imparting one-day training programme on soft skills, called ‘Pre-Departure 
Orientation and Training (PDOT)’. PDOT programmes, which commenced in 2018, are aimed 
at enhancing the soft skills of Indian migrant workers largely going to the ECR countries, in 
terms of culture, language, tradition and local rules and regulations of the destination country. 
This one day long training also sensitizes migrant workers about pathways to safe and legal 
migration and various government programmes for their welfare and protection. Handbooks for 
migrant workers have also been developed in eight languages i.e. Hindi, English, Bangla, Mal-
ayalam, Tamil, Telugu, Punjabi and Urdu. Presently, these handbooks are distributed to pro-
spective migrant workers attending One-Day PDO Training at all PDOT centres. The Ministry 
launched online PDOT in April 2021 to reach out to prospective emigrants who live far away 
from PDOT centres.  This initiative proved quite useful in delivering training for more and more 
migrants especially during the pandemic when classroom training almost stopped.  
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 23) 
 
The Committee observe that as a key instrument of our foreign policy, the scope and 
magnitude of developmental partnership has expanded from our immediate and 
extended neighbourhood to countries in South East Asia, Africa, Latin America, the 
Caribbean and the Pacific Island. However, the declining trend of budgetary allocation 
under this Head is particularly concerning. Despite repeated emphasis by the Committee 
about the imperative of provisioning adequate and predictable budgetary provisions 
under this Head as it directly hinges on our global standing and image, the Committee 
are surprised to note that the percentage share under this important Head has 
plummeted from 42 per cent in 2021-22, 39 per cent in 2022-23, 32 per cent in 2023-24 to 
25.58 per cent this year. Justifying the reduction, the Ministry submitted that allocations 
for various Aid Heads are done through careful prioritization within available resources 

Page | 32 
 
to ensure that none of our developmental work suffers any setback and all our 
commitments are implemented smoothly and speedily. The Committee find the 
Ministry’s justification untenable as a well-funded development partnership is pivotal to 
furthering bilateral relations and strengthening bonds of friendship, respect and mutual 
trust with partner countries and enhancing India’s global standing. The Committee, 
therefore, strongly recommend a significant increase in allocation for development 
partnerships with a focus towards key regions such as neighbourhood, Africa, South 
East Asia, Indo-Pacific and so on. Accordingly, the Ministry should make budgetary 
demands for 2025-26 putting forth a convincing case before the Ministry of Finance.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry's anticipation of expenditure progress is regularly assessed, which makes 
budgetary demand and allocation a dynamic process. Instruments for re-appropriating money, 
such as Supplementary requests, permit re-prioritization and re-allocation of funds in order to 
allocate budgetary resources fully and effectively. Ministry’s scheme commitments have ranged 
between 32-43% of the Ministry’s overall budget for the last few years, reflecting steadfast 
prioritisation of India’s development partnership with international partners. For BE 2025-26, the 
allocation towards overseas development partnership portfolio is Rs. 6750 crore, comprising 33% 
of our overall budget. This is an increase of about 20% (Rs. 1082 crore) over the previous 
year’s allocation of Rs. 5667 crore, which is in alignment with India’s foreign policy objectives 
as well as the Committee’s recommendation to aim for 20% annual increase in budget. To 
streamline the financial allocation and execution of projects to ensure targeted and impactful 
utilization of resources in the 14 Pacific Island Countries (PICs), a new sub head for Aid to 
Pacific Island Countries has been created in the Detailed Demands for Grants of the Ministry 
for the year 2025-26. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 24) 
 
The Committee note that in order to deal with the unique logistical and practical 
challenges faced in project execution, the Ministry has devised a robust review 
mechanism for handling all aspects of project implementation, including project 
formulation, appraisal, execution, monitoring, review and evaluation. The review 
mechanism exists at multiple levels including a review at the level of Prime Minister 
(through the PRAGATI mechanism) as well as the External Affairs Minister. Accordingly, 
the Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that regular monitoring, impact assessments 
and accountability measures are instituted and strictly followed to achieve the intended 
outcomes. In this regard, the Committee would encourage the Ministry to explore the 
possibility of having a dedicated ‘international aid review and monitoring cell’ tasked 
with overseeing the planning, execution and evaluation of all international aid projects.  
 
 
 
 
 

Page | 33 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In pursuance of the recommendation, anMoU has been signed between IIFCL Project Ltd. (IPL) 
and Ministry of External Affairs on February 21, 2025. This MoU outlines the framework and 
agreement for the establishment of the Project Monitoring Unit (PMU) for implementation of 
Government of India aid projects. This PMU would assist in contract & project monitoring 
including critical paths, advising corrective measures and mitigative actions etc. Additionally, 
institutional mechanisms such as Joint Project Monitoring Committees (JPMC) regularly review 
and monitor all major projects to iron out issues hindering smooth implementation. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 25) 
 
India’s aid programmes have been a visible instrument for furthering people-to-people 
ties, cultural exchanges and fostering strong bilateral ties. Some of the notable projects 
include GyaltsuenJetsun Pema Mother and Child Hospital in Bhutan, construction of 
60,000 houses for internally displaced persons in Sri Lanka, National Police Academy in 
Nepal, Civil Services College in Mauritius and connectivity projects such as Akhaura-
Agartala Rail Link in Bangladesh, integrated check-post at Nepalgunj in Nepal, etc. 
However, the Committee note that despite the enormous impact and importance, these 
projects have limited domestic as well as global visibility.  Recognizing the need to 
prioritize publicity for these projects, the Committee suggest that MEA should 
proactively evolve a set approach to global and domestic promotion through usage of 
digital platforms and social media, engaging Indian diaspora and launching awareness 
campaigns.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has taken several measures to increase visibility of India’s aid programs among 
domestic and global audiences. 
 
MEA’s Performance Smart Board/Dashboard: The MEA’s Performance Smartboard created 
on key target areas, captures all major schemes, programmes and initiatives of the Ministry. 
Information on iconic projects undertaken by Ministry of External Affairs in various countries 
and the Grants and Loans extended as Development Assistance to countries abroad are 
available on the Performance Smart Board. The performance Board has been integrated with 
Ministry’s website for enhanced visibility and easy access. 
 
Media Engagement: External Publicity Division of the Ministry engaged and briefed the local 
and international media on India’s development partnerships abroad. This helped in 
disseminating India’s aid program and also provided a larger context to its efforts.  Capsules 
providing key facts or insights on developmental cooperation with countries, especially during 
Prime Minister’s visits abroad, were designed for electronic media to ensure broader audience 
about India’s aid programs.  

Page | 34 
 
The Ministry organized interactions of visiting foreign media delegations, especially from the 
Global South, with senior officials of Ministry, on India's development partnership initiatives and 
its impact.  
 
Short films, documentaries and videos: The Ministry commissions short films and 
documentaries for dissemination of information among Indian and global audiences about 
India’s development programmes, its approach to the global south and various aspects of 
Indian foreign policy. In the recent past, the External Publicity and Public Diplomacy Division of 
the Ministry commissioned short films on India-BIMSTEC, India & Africa, ‘Nalanda University’, 
‘Restoration of temples in Vat Phou’, ‘Restoration of temples in ASEAN countries’ ‘What MEA 
did’, ‘Forum for India Pacific Islands Cooperation (FIPIC), ‘Marching together- India’s 
Development Co-operation Initiatives’, ‘Operation Dost’, etc., which also covers India’s aid 
programs in these regions. In addition, documentary “India and Global South” highlighting 
India’s developmental partnership with countries of Global South is under process. The 
documentary will cover information on India’s people centric projects and their impacts in more 
than 25 countries in India’s neighbourhood and around the globe. 
 
Ahead of each visit of a foreign leader to India or during President, Vice President or Prime 
Minister’s visit abroad, videos are made for publicity. These contain detailed information and 
visuals of our development assistance and projects. 
 
Commissioning of articles by experts and former Ambassadors:  The 
Ministrycommissioned articles on various themes authored by retired Indian diplomats and 
eminent experts, which were published across the world through Indian Missions/Posts. 
Ministry also requested Ambassadors to regularly write articles on India’s development 
cooperation with other countries.   
 
Social media engagements: The Ministry has strong social media presence with more than 
7.5 million followers on several digital platforms i.e. X, Facebook, Instagram, Whatsapp, 
Youtube, LinkedIn, etc.  External Publicity & Public Diplomacy of the Ministry amplifies 
information related to the progress of aid programs in other countries, through Ministry’s social 
media platforms - X, Facebook, Instagram, and YouTube. The Division also gives due visibility 
to the posts from Indian Missions and Posts by reposting, sharing, retweeting among others. 
The Division amplifies news reports and content, related to India's aid programs, from private 
media, freelancers, influencers, experts on its social media platforms. The Division utilizes 
several modern tools such as infographics, stories, highlights, reels among others to ensure 
larger appeal and visibility of India's programs. In extraordinary situations like HADR 
operations, the Division provides regular updates of efforts by other Government of India 
agencies such as NDRF, Indian Army, Indian Air Force among others. 
 
Familiarization Visits & Influencer Engagements: The Ministry organizes familiarization 
visits of foreign journalists and Social Media Influencers as a part of India’s public diplomacy 
and media outreach efforts. A total of 306 Journalists and Content Creators from 114 countries 
visited India during 2024-25 and were exposed to different facets of Indian foreign policy, 
including visibility of India's aid programs through interactions with senior officials of the 

Page | 35 
 
Ministry. Additionally, interactions with organizations such as CDRI, ISA, IFC-IOR, RIS, FICCI, 
PSUs among others, also provide them an opportunity to gain insights on India's aid and 
developmental assistance to other countries. During and after the visit, participants create 
posts, reels, stories, blogs etc. on social media platforms to share their experiences and 
learnings with their audiences and followers. External Publicity Division remains in continuous 
touch with the alumni of such visits for amplification of specific posts and more visibility of India 
related content, including those related to India's aid programs. 
 
Dissemination of information among regional press: The Ministry regularly disseminated 
information on India's foreign policy initiatives, including aid programs to over 100 
regional/vernacular media outlets in a time bound manner. Besides, the Division also gets 
stories on aid programs written and placed in regional media, with special focus on tier 2 and 
tier 3 cities. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 27) 
 
In view of our unique and time-tested relationship, Bhutan has consistently been the 
largest recipient of India’s aid programmes. India’s aid and assistance programmes in 
Bhutan are currently covered under both Revenue and Capital Heads with Grants 
coming under Revenue, and Loans coming under Capital sections of the budget. In the 
BE 2024-25, an allocation of Rs. 2068.56 crore has been made under this Head, 
reaffirming Bhutan’s importance to India’s foreign policy. The Committee note that India 
is supporting Bhutan in areas such as hydroelectric development (Punatsangchhu-I and 
II), infrastructure connectivity, education, power transmission lines and greenfield 
projects. The Committee recommend that MEA should not only ensure that all ongoing 
projects in Bhutan are completed expeditiously but should also expand cooperation in 
new areas such as renewable energy, health care, space technologies and so on.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The projects in Bhutan are monitored periodically through bilaterally agreed mechanisms so 
that they remain on track and are completed on time. Status update of all the ongoing projects 
in Bhutan are as follows: 
S. No. 
Project Category under 
Development 
Cooperation 
Plan Period 
of Bhutan 
Number of 
Projects 
approved 
till date 
Approved 
amount (in 
INR Crore) Status of the project 
1 
Project Tied Assistance 
(PTA) 
13th FYP 
(2024-2029) 61 4957.9 
Under implementation; 
INR 432 Cr have been 
released till date 
2 
High Impact Community 
Development Projects 
(HICDP)/Small 
13th FYP 
(2024-2029) 283 417.191 
Under implementation; 
INR 375 Cr have been 
released till date 

Page | 36 
 
Development Projects 
(SDP) 
 
 
Sl. No. 
Name of the hydroelectric 
project 
Approved Cost (in INR 
crore) Status of the project 
1Punatsangchhu – I HEP 
9375.575 at December 2013 
Price Level (1stRCE) Under implementation 
2Punatsangchhu – II HEP 
9445.68 (cost to completion as 
vetted by CEA) 
Under implementation. Likely 
to be fully commissioned by 
the end of year 2025. 
 
In the 13th FYP projects, India and Bhutan cooperation has been expanding in new areas like 
renewable energy, healthcare enhancement, space technology, sports and youth, environment 
and climate change. In addition to this, connectivity and trade infrastructure development 
projects are also being actively pursued.  
 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 28) 
 
Under the Head ‘Aid to Nepal’, the budgetary allocation has witnessed a 27 % increase 
from Rs. 550 crore during BE 2023-24 to Rs. 700 crore for BE 2024-25. The increased 
allocation is on account of earthquake reconstruction, supply of defense stores, 
scholarship, HICDPs, SiliguriJhapa pipeline, Nepal Police Academy, Jaynagar-Bardibas 
Rail Link Project, Integrated check posts at Bhairahawa, etc. The Committee are happy 
to note that the Integrated Check Post (ICP) Nepalgunjhas been completed on 31 March 
2024 and handed over to the Government of Nepal. While welcoming the enhanced 
allocation under this Head, the Committee urge the Ministry to ensure that all ongoing 
projects are completed in a time bound manner.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Under the Head ‘Aid to Nepal’, the Government of India is undertaking various development 
projects in Nepal, encompassing education, healthcare, earthquake reconstruction, cross-
border connectivity (including ICPs and railway links), scholarships, and training initiatives. In 
2024, the Integrated Check Post (ICP) at Nepalgunj was completed and handed over to the 
Government of Nepal. Additionally, India gifted 200 kidney dialysis machines to Nepal in 2023, 
and the reconstruction of 71 educational institutions was completed in 2024. Several major 
projects are in advanced stages of completion. These include ICP Bhairahawa and the Nepal 
Police Academy, both scheduled for completion in 2025. Since 2003, India has implemented 
over 570 High Impact Community Development Projects (HICDPs), of which approximately 500 

Page | 37 
 
are complete. Remaining are being executed in coordination with Nepalese implementing 
agencies. The Ministry, through Mission in Nepal, continues to monitor and coordinate closely 
with all stakeholders to ensure timely completion of ongoing projects, proactively addressing 
challenges throughout the project lifecycle. 
 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 29) 
 
The budgetary allocation under the sub-head ‘Aid to Sri Lanka' has increased from Rs 
150.00 crore (BE 2023-24) to Rs. 245.00 crore (BE 2024-25). The increased allocation is 
for meeting the funds requirements for six ongoing projects, namely Indian Housing 
Project (Phase III and IV), SLUDI Project, development of fishing harbor at Point Pedro 
and implementation of three island projects. The Ministry has informed that the GOI has 
successfully completed and handed over Maritime Rescue Coordination Centre, several 
houses under Phase III of Indian Housing Project and few HICDPs in Sri Lanka. Given Sri 
Lanka’s ongoing economic recovery and its importance for maintaining regional 
stability, the Committee are pleased to note the 63.33% increase in allocation under this 
Head. While welcoming the enhanced allocation, the Committee expects that the corpus 
of fund will be utilized appropriately and optimally during the year.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India is a preferred development partner for Sri Lanka. Under our development assistance, 
several projects are being implemented including Phase IV of Indian Housing Project, Sri Lanka 
Unique Digital Identity project, 3-island project and several other projects under various stages 
of implementation. In addition, India is committed to support the projects, which were to be 
implemented under LoC assistance and have now been converted to grant assistance to 
ensure continuity in development partnership. During the State Visit of President of Sri Lanka to 
India in December 2024, India announced extension of grant assistance for rehabilitation of 
Kankesanthurai Port, provision of 22 diesel locomotives to Sri Lankan railways among others. 
Separately, during the Prime Minister’s visit to Sri Lanka, India extended financial assistance for 
development of Thirukoneswaram and SitaEliya temples, Sacred City project in Anuradhapura 
and capacity building program for 700 Sri Lankans per year. With several above-mentioned 
projects being implemented, the allocated budgetary support will be utilized appropriately. 
 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 30) 
 
The Committee note that the budget allocation under the Head ‘Aid to Myanmar’ has 
dropped from Rs 400 crore during BE 2023-24 to Rs. 250 at RE stage and to Rs. 370 
crore during BE 2024-25. This downward revision is due to the slow pace of project 
implementation owing to the ensuing political turmoil and security situation in Myanmar. 
The Committee further note that the progress in our key connectivity projects like the 
Kaladan Multi Modal Transit Transport (KMMTT) and Trilateral Highway in Myanmar have 

Page | 38 
 
been adversely impacted. While the waterway component (Sittwe port) of KKMTT project 
is operational since May 2023, the physical progress of the road component of the 
project is 10 percent. The Committee understand that the slow pace of ongoing projects 
in Myanmar is due to the current political environment, but desire that the Ministry 
should continue diplomatic engagements with all stakeholders for expeditious and 
timely progress of ongoing projects, particularly the Kaladan Multi Modal Transit 
Transport (KMMTT) and India-Myanmar Thailand Trilateral Highway. 
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
While acknowledging the challenges posed by the prevailing political and security situation in 
Myanmar, the Ministry is conscious of the importance of ensuring progress on key infrastructure 
projects like the Kaladan Road project and the India Myanmar Trilateral Highway project. 
Ground-level difficulties are being addressed through coordination with various stakeholders 
involved in implementation of the project; work is continuing in segments where access is 
available. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 33) 
 
The Committee note that the allocations under the sub-head ‘Aid to Afghanistan’ has 
been kept constant for the past two fiscals and the current fiscal at Rs. 200 crore in view 
of the ongoing crisis in Afghanistan. The Committee note that our engagement with 
Afghanistan was primarily focused on providing humanitarian assistance, health/ aid 
material and assistance in the field of education, particularly of women.  The Committee 
further understand that the changed political situation in Afghanistan has adversely 
impacted our developmental partnership with them. However, as a reliable development 
partner for the Afghan people, the Committee desire that the Government should 
continue making persistent efforts to utilize the allocated funds in the best possible 
manner, without diluting our national priorities, particularly relating to empowerment of 
women to the extent feasible. In addition, MEA should coordinate with multilateral 
organizations such as the United Nations and World Food Programme to maximize the 
impact of our humanitarian assistance to the people of Afghanistan. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
India and Afghanistan have a strong relationship based on historical links, cultural relations and 
strong people-to-people ties. Since August 2021, India has sent several shipments of 
humanitarian assistance to the people of Afghanistan including partnership with international/ 
multilateral organizations with a focus on women empowerment. These include:- 
(a)    India supplied COVID Vaccine comprising of 5,00,000 doses for the people of 
Afghanistan 

Page | 39 
 
(b)     In the wake of tragic earthquake that struck Afghanistan on June 22, 2022 causing 
massive destruction and loss of precious lives, the Government of India, as a true first 
responder, dispatched 28 tons of emergency relief assistance for the people of Afghanistan 
(c)    In January 2024, India supplied 40,000 litres of Malathion, a pesticide, to counter locust 
menace in Afghanistan. The supply of Malathion ensured crop protection and food security in 
Afghanistan and other central Asian countries. 
(d)     Since 2021, India has donated more than 300 tons of Medicines and surgical items to 
the people of the Afghanistan. 
(e)    India has also partnered with the UNODC in Afghanistan, to provide assistance for the 
welfare of the Afghan drug-user population, especially women. Under this partnership, India 
supplied 11,000 units of female hygiene kits, baby food, general-use hygiene kits, blankets, 
clothing, footwear, medical aid and 32 tons of social support items. These items are being 
distributed by UNODC’s drug treatment centers across Afghanistan. 
(f)      Supply of Wheat in collaboration with UN and World Food Programme (WFP). Since 
2021, due to the deteriorating humanitarian situation and increasing food insecurity in 
Afghanistan, Government of India sent 50,000 MTs of wheat and other assistance to 
Afghanistan through WFP 
(g) Education and capacity building programmes are an important aspect of India’s 
development partnership with Afghanistan. Since academic year 2023, the ICCR 
has provided online scholarships for 2000 Afghan students through e-VidyaBharti portal in the 
academic. Of these, nearly 580 are girls/women. India continues to offer online scholarships for 
Afghan students in agriculture-related fields, in collaboration with the Afghan National 
Agricultural Science and Technical University (ANASTU).  
(h) India has also extended assistance in terms of 500 units of winter clothing, 650 GI 
tagged Channapatna toys and 1.2 tonnes of stationery kits to Habibia High School, Kabul. 
 
The Ministry has made persistent efforts to utilize the funds allocated under ‘Aid to Afghanistan’ 
budget head to meet the priorities of Afghan people. In these efforts, India has also partnered 
with UN agencies and WFP to maximize the impact of India’s humanitarian assistance. 
 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 34) 
 
Expressing concern over the relatively low prioritization of assistance to Latin American 
countries which stood at Rs 30 crore in BE 2024-25, the Committee feel that India’s aid to 
Latin America is disproportionately low compared to its assistance to other regions 
such as Africa and South Asia. The potential to leverage aid for deepening economic 
and strategic partnerships in Latin America remains underutilized. Recognizing the 
growing strategic importance of the Latin American region for India’s economic, 
political, and diplomatic interests, the Committee highlight the need for enhanced 
budgetary support to deepen India’s engagement in the region. The Committee, 

Page | 40 
 
therefore, recommend a significant increase in budgetary allocation for Latin American 
countries to ensure meaningful engagement through development aid and capacity-
building initiatives. Further, platforms like BRICS, G20, and CELAC should be leveraged 
to enhance India’s strategic influence in the region and strengthen South-South 
cooperation. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
During 2024-25, the budgetary allocation for the Latin American countries increased from Rs 30 
crore to Rs 90 crore, following multiple proposals for HADR support from countries beset with 
natural disasters and because of updated payment schedules in respect of ongoing projects.  
BE 2025-26 (Rs.60 crore) is twice the amount allocated in BE 2024-25 (Rs.30 crore). Enhanced 
allocation is expected at RE stage in 2025-26 considering various commitments, including the 
implementation of announcements made by Hon’ble Prime Minister during the second India-
CARICOM summit in Georgetown in November 2024, for which additional funds of Rs. 200 Cr 
have been requested during FY 2025-26. Scope of development partnership, developmental 
aid and capacity building projects are directly proportional to the capacity of the partner to 
absorb the aid.  The Ministry will accordingly suitably calibrate the funding. 
 
India has emerged as an influential global player and a consistent, balanced and reliable 
partner in the G20. During its Presidency of the G20 in 2023, India seized the opportunity to 
highlight the priorities and concerns of the developing world, including the LAC region and 
emerged as a leader of the Global South. Under its G20 Presidency, India delivered ambitious, 
action-oriented, decisive and inclusive outcomes such as on Accelerating Progress on the 
Sustainable Development Goals, Green Development and LiFE, tripling of Renewable energy 
capacity and doubling energy efficiency globally by 2030, Food Security and Nutrition, role of 
Traditional and Complementary medicine, Women-led Development, Technological 
Transformation and Digital Public Infrastructure, reform of Multilateral Institutions including for 
better, bigger and more effective Multilateral Development Banks.India successfully carried 
forward and cemented the ambition and outcomes from its Presidency to the Brazilian G20 
Presidency in 2024, which was reflected in the G20 Rio de Janeiro Leaders’ Declaration, and 
continues to take forward these priorities, placing it in a unique position as an effective bridge 
and unifying force between the East and the West, and between the developing and developed 
countries. 
 
BRICS has emerged as an important multilateral forum since its inception in 2006. It reflects the 
common concern of its members and seeks to make global debates and leadership more 
representative and inclusive. The Leaders of BRICS countries meet regularly at the BRICS 
Summit, which is held under the rotating chairship of its member countries. While originally 
founded with four members (Brazil, Russia, India and China), it added South Africa in 2010. 
Thereafter, BRICS has expanded to comprise currently of 11 members and 9 partner countries. 
The current members are:Brazil, Russia, India, China, South Africa, Egypt, Ethiopia, Iran, 
Saudi Arabia, UAE and Indonesia. The partner countries are: Belarus, Bolivia, Cuba, 
Kazakhstan, Malaysia, Nigeria, Thailand, Uganda and Uzbekistan. Latin American Countries 

Page | 41 
 
are represented through founding member Brazil and partner countries, Bolivia and Cuba.Brazil 
which is an emerging player in the LAC region has assumed the BRICS Chairship on 1 January 
2025 under the theme ‘Strengthening Global South Cooperation for a more Inclusive and 
Sustainable Governance’. Flagship priorities of the Brazilian Chairship includes (i) Global 
Health Cooperation – Cooperating to mitigate vulnerabilities, (ii) Trade, Investment, and 
Finance (iii) Climate Change – A bridge to COP-30 (iv) AI Governance – Fostering inclusive 
and responsible management of AI (v) Reform of the Peace and Security Multilateral System 
(vi) Institutional Development – Streamlining BRICS structure and functioning. India as a 
founding member of BRICS supports the priorities set by Brazil that promote mutual economic 
development and cooperation. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 35) 
 
The Committee note that the budgetary allocation under the Head ‘Chabahar Port’ has 
remained stagnant at Rs. 100 crore in BE 2023-24, RE 2023-24 and BE 2024-25 as the 
long-term main contract for the development of the Port was under negotiation.On 13 
May 2024,  the long-term main contract for equipping and operating ShahidBeheshti Port 
Terminal, Chabahar was signed between India Ports Global Limited (IPGL) and Ports and 
Maritime Organization (PMO) of Iran with India’s enhanced investment commitment of 
USD 120 million and revised Line of Credit of USD 250 million. The provisions of main 
contract also stipulates that IPGL will remit the full amount of money required for the 
procurement and installation of port equipment to account(s) provided by PMO in UAE 
within one month of agreeing on the prices by the Joint Procurement Committee (JPC) 
of the project. Accordingly, PAI Division of the MEA has proposed Rs. 375 crore in RE 
2024-25 and Rs. 466 crore for BE 2025-26. The Committee realize the potential of the 
Chabahar Port as a more economical and stable route for landlocked Central Asian 
countries of the region to reach India and the global market. While  conscious of the 
challenging environment in which the Ministry is operating given the prevalent 
sanctions, the Committee emphasize the need for expedited completion of the project 
and fulfillment of India’s commitment under the main contract and recommend an 
upward revision of the budgetary allocations and proposals under the Head. The 
Committee also urge the Ministry to work closely with India Ports Global Limited (IPGL) 
and the Ports and Maritime Organisation (PMO) of Iran to finalize and implement the 
procurement of remaining port equipment within a time-bound framework. The Joint 
Procurement Committee may be facilitated to expedite cost approvals and ensure that all 
equipment is delivered and installed by mid-2025.   
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has duly noted the observations of the Hon’ble Committee. The Joint Procurement 
Committee (JPC) in its meeting held in September 2024, finalized the price of two types of port 
equipment. While India is providing funds to Iran for the purchase of equipment, the 
responsibility for procurement of this equipment lies with the Iranian side. India has already 
provided Rs. 450 crore for the procurement of the equipment. 

Page | 42 
 
 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 36) 
 
The Committee observe that during 2024-25 an allocation of Rs. 59.21 crore has been 
earmarked for schemes and programmes aimed at welfare of Indian Diaspora and 
engagement with them.  A series of Schemes and programmes such as Know India 
Programme, Promotion of Cultural Ties with Indian Diaspora, Scholarship Programme 
for Diaspora Children (SPDC), Celebration of PravasiBharatiya Divas, Pre-Departure 
Orientation and Skill Upgradation of Emigrant Worker (PDOT), 
PravasiBharatiyaBimaYojna (PBBY), Legal Assistance to Women facing problems in NRI 
Marriages, Evacuation of Indian due to War/Civil Disturbance and other are being 
implemented by MEA. 
 
Keeping in mind the expanse, magnitude and depth of our Diaspora across the 
globe, the Committee are of the view that that the existing allocations made to various 
schemes and programmes for the welfare of Overseas Indians is arbitrary, unchanged 
and inadequate. While expressing concern over the stagnant allocation to welfare 
schemes for Indian citizens overseas, the Committee desire that additional funds should 
be sought during the next financial year. An increase in budgetary allocation and the 
establishment of a robust, responsive mechanism during crisis will not only enhance 
India’s ability to protect its citizens but also reinforce its global standing as a nation 
committed to the well-being of its people. The Committee further desire to be apprised of 
the outcome of the Joint Working Group constituted to analyze the objectives, working 
and challenges of various programmes/initiatives/schemes for welfare of Indian diaspora 
and the extent of reach and delivery of such schemes, so far. It should be the endeavour 
of the Ministry to conduct continuous review of the performance of its existing 
programmes/schemes so that the reach and impact can be used as leverage for an 
enhanced budgetary allocation.  
 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
This Ministry constantly monitors and evaluates the different welfare and engagement 
programmes for the overseas Indians, and allocates resources based on the evolving needs 
and interests of the diaspora. The allocation of funds to these schemes and programmes has 
steadily grown in the recent years. The Diaspora Engagement Division had sought an 
enhancement in the budget for schemes it operates for engaging with the diaspora in the FY 
2025-26 that added up to 84 crores under the various budgetary heads. The BE 2025-26 for 
various heads operated by DE Division for 2025-26 has been approved for Rs. 77 crore, which 
is a significant increase over the previous years (BE 2024-25 was Rs. 44 crores). Additionally, 
Indian Missions/Posts are encouraged to explore stakeholder partnerships for implementing 
diaspora engagement schemes in their respective countries of accreditation, such as for 
organising events under the Promotion of Cultural Ties with the Diaspora scheme of Ministry. 
Indian Missions/Posts abroad are encouraged to secure private sponsorships, partnership 

Page | 43 
 
stakes with diaspora associations and local authorities in order to promote diaspora-led 
initiatives and the concept of janbhagidaari.  
 
The Joint Working Group (JWG) was constituted under the Chairmanship of Secretary (CPV & 
OIA) and HODs of the erstwhile OIA-I, OIA-II (now Emigration Policy & Welfare and Diaspora 
Engagement Divisions, respectively), CPV, PSP and OE&PGE Divisions as members of the 
Working Group. The Working Group met on 22.12.2021 to carry out a comprehensive review of 
all the existing schemes and programmes, as well as new initiatives undertaken by MEA since 
transition of these Divisions from erstwhile Ministry of Overseas Indian Affairs (MOIA) to MEA. 
The Working Group had recommended inclusion of medical courses under the Scholarship 
Programme for Diaspora Children (SPDC) Scheme of Ministry and provision of 50% reservation 
of seats for women under SPDC. Both these recommendations have been implemented since 
then. It was found that since Secretary(CPV & OIA) chairs weekly meetings with the Heads of 
respective divisions (who are also members of the JWG) under his charge to discuss issues in 
their respective domains and regularly monitors the progress of various schemes, further 
continuation of the Working Group would be redundant. As the purpose of the Working Group 
had been achieved, it was subsequently dissolved.  
 
The Pre-Departure Orientation Training (PDOT) Programme was launched by the Ministry of 
External Affairs in January, 2018 under the PravasiKaushalVikasYojana (PKVY)   with an aim 
at enhancing soft skills of Indian migrant workers largely going to the Gulf and other ECR 
Countries.  Under this programme, the emigrant workers are given free-of-cost one-day 
orientation training to enable them to understand the culture, language, tradition and local rules 
and regulations of the destination country.  The orientation training also help to sensitize the 
migrant workers about pathways to safe and legal migration and various government 
programmes for their welfare, safety and protection such as ICWF, MADAD, PBBY etc. Since 
inception of the PDOT programme, a total of 1,90,362 emigrant workers have been imparted 
training through 41 PDOT Centres as on 28 February  2025.  Proposal to open another 51 new 
P-DOT centres within the next one year is under implementation.   
 
The PDOT training is imparted under two models – 
 
• PDOT Centres operated by National Skill Development Corporation (NSDC) empanelled 
training partners under the PravasiKaushalVikasYojna (PKKY), a joint collaboration under 
anMoU between Ministry of External Affairs and Ministry of Skill Development and 
Entrepreneurship (MSDE) and a grant of Rs. 10 crore was extended by MEA to MSDE. 
 
• The second model is  PDOTCentres managed by State Government agencies. Ministry has 
been granting funds to State Governments to conduct PDOT Training to emigrant workers @ 
Rs. 500/- per candidate for in-person training and Rs. 100 for online training.  
 
The Ministry has been making concerted efforts to expand the PDOT outreach to promote safe, 
legal and orderly migration. Towards this end, Ministry has reached out to all concerned State 
Governments/agencies to send their proposal for allocation of funds to carry out PDOT 
andoperationalise the new PDOT centres approved by the Ministry. In this regard, letters have 

Page | 44 
 
been written to the Chief Secretaries/Principal Secretaries of the concerned States seeking 
their intervention for promotion of PDOT programme and early operationalisation of new PDOT 
Centres in their States. The matter is being followed up directly with the State Governments as 
well as through the PoEs in these States.  Ministry is working in close coordination with all 
relevant stakeholders to expand the P-DOT outreach.   
 
The PravasiBharatiyaBimaYojana (PBBY), a mandatory insurance scheme for Emigration 
Check Required (ECR) category workers going to ECR countries for overseas employment, 
provides an insurance cover of 10 lakh in case of accidental death or permanent disability and 
some other benefits at a nominal insurance premium of Rs. 275/ Rs. 375 for a period of 
two/three years. The Scheme was comprehensively revamped and has become effective from 
August 1, 2017. The scheme now provides for global coverage irrespective of employer and 
location and has facility for online renewal. The revised scheme is simpler and more beneficial 
for emigrant workers and is aimed at ensuring an expeditious settlement of claims. No 
budgetary allocation is provided for the scheme, since it is a user-paid scheme. 
 
The funds under the budget head ‘Evacuation of Indians due to War/Civil Disturbance’are 
being used for safe evacuation of stranded Indian Nationals from foreign countries during crises 
that arise due to conflict/war/civil disturbances. The expenditure under this budget head is by 
definition uncertain and depends upon evolving situations abroad that necessitate evacuations. 
During FY 2024-25, three evacuation operations were conducted, Op. Indravati from Haiti, 
Evacuation from Syria to neighbouring country and evacuation of Indian Embassy personnel 
from Bangladesh to India. Expenditure on Op. Indravati was incurred from Budget head 
‘Evacuation of Indians due to War/Civil Disturbance'.  During FY 2023-24, the allocated fund of 
Rs. 60 Crore was booked upto more than 90%, however, in FY 2024-25 the expenditure could 
be booked upto only 3% out of allocated funds of Rs. 10 crore. For BE 2025-26, Rs. 10 crore 
has been received under the budget head. 
 
Government accords highest priority to the safety, security and well-being of Indian nationals 
abroad. Indian Embassies and Missions keep close watch on the situations especially in the 
war and conflict zones. Through various means viz. advisories, social-medial platforms, 
Government of India caution Indian nationals to avoid unnecessary travel and follow safety 
guidelines issued by local authorities and remain in touch with the Indian Missions. Depending 
on the situation, the Government launches evacuation operations to safely evacuate Indian 
nationals. Government remains in constant touch with its counterparts through diplomatic 
channels for safety and security of Indians during evacuation process. 24x7 Control Rooms are 
operated at headquarters and abroad to facilitate the evacuation process. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 38) 
 
The Committee are aware that women residing overseas often face unique challenges, 
including spousal abandonment, marital disputes, workplace exploitation, human 
trafficking, forced labour etc. These vulnerabilities necessitate a targeted approach to 
ensure the safety, dignity and well-being of Indian women. The Ministry has informed 
that the Indian Community Welfare Fund (ICWF) provides financial and legal assistance 

Page | 45 
 
to Indian women abroad who have been abused, cheated, or abandoned by their foreign 
or NRI/PIO spouse. In addition, One Stop Centre (OCS) scheme under Nirbhaya Fund is 
proposed to be established for safety, security and well being of distressed Indian 
women in countries abroad. The Committee are happy to learn that the Ministry of 
Women and Child Development has provided clearance for  extending the One Stop 
Centre under Nirbhaya Fund and accordingly the Missions/Posts are working out 
budgetary proposals to roll out this scheme. The Committee are hopeful that adequate 
budget would be sought for the Scheme during the upcoming budget session. The 
Committee also urge the Ministry to launch awareness campaigns to educate Indian 
women abroad about their legal rights, local laws and resources available through Indian 
Missions/Posts abroad.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Based on the inputs from the concerned nine Indian Missions/Posts in which the One Stop 
Centres are proposed to be established, this Ministry has proposed an expenditure of Rs. 9.5 
Crores for setting up and operationalization of the One Stop Centres (OSC) of the Government 
of India under the Nibhaya Fund for FY 2025-26. The Centers would be established and 
operationalised in the current financial year as soon as the aforesaid budget is allocated by the 
Department of Economic Affairs from the Nirbhaya Corpus. Meanwhile, Indian Missions/Posts 
abroad continue to conduct open sessions for counselling and educating Indian women abroad 
about their legal rights, local laws and the role that Missions/Posts could play to assist them to 
resolve their problems. All Indian Missions/Posts have also disseminated these measures taken 
by them for the welfare of Indian nationals, particularly, Indian women in distress through their 
official websites and social media for the awareness and education of the Indian diaspora 
abroad. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 39) 
 
The Committee are aware that Autonomous bodies and institutions under the Ministry of 
External Affairs, such as the Indian Council for Cultural Relations (ICCR), Research and 
Information System for Developing Countries (RIS) and Indian Council of World Affairs 
(ICWA), significantly contribute to India’s cultural diplomacy, regional cooperation and 
research capabilities. While the budgetary allocation for this Head has shown 
incremental growth, it remains insufficient to meet the expanding mandates of these 
institutions and would have led to scaling down of critical activities. With India’s 
increasing global engagement, the Committee feel that these institutions require 
additional resources to expand their research, cultural and diplomatic initiatives, 
particularly in strategic regions such as Africa, Southeast Asia and the Indo-Pacific. The 
Committee, therefore, recommend that a significant increase in budgetary allocation 
may be made under ‘Assistance to Autonomous Bodies and Other Institutions’ at both 
Revised Estimates (RE) and Budget Estimates (BE) stages. This would enable these 
entities to expand their initiatives and meet growing international expectations. The 
Ministry should also actively promote partnerships and Public-Private Partnership (PPP) 
models, encouraging autonomous bodies to collaborate with domestic and international 

Page | 46 
 
organizations to leverage additional resources and expertise. Enhanced budgetary 
support, coupled with improved oversight and innovative funding models, will empower 
these entities to deliver more impactful outcomes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee have been duly noted. There has been an 
increase of INR 20 crore in ICCR’s Budget allocation for the current Financial Year 2025-26 
(INR 351.25 crore as against INR 331.25 crore in the last FY). Also, there has been an increase 
in the budget allocations of RIS and ICWA for the current Financial Year 2025-26 (INR 19.51 
crore and INR 15.48 crore as against INR 18 crore and 15.47 crore in last FY).  
 
The increase in ICCR’s budget will enhance the scale and impact of its activities in line with 
India’s rising global profile.  The enhanced outlay will enable ICCR to scale up its following core 
activities: 
 
(i) 21 Scholarship schemes for foreign students 
(ii) Welfare activities for foreign students 
(iii) Alumni Activities and Awards 
(iv) Incoming Cultural Delegations (ICD) 
(v) Outgoing Cultural Delegations (OCD) 
(vi) Festivals abroad 
(vii) Incoming and Outgoing Exhibitions 
(viii) Bust &Statue  installations abroad 
(ix) Conferences & Seminars 
(x) Indian Cultural Centres abroad 
(xi) International Day of Yoga (IDY – 2025) 
(xii) ICCR Chairs abroad 
(xiii) Distinguished Visitors Programmes 
(xiv) Running 38 Indian Cultural Centres 
ICCR is also actively promoting Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) and innovative funding 
models in carrying out the above activities through Indian Embassies/ Consulates/ Indian 
Cultural Centres abroad. For instance: 
i. ICCR has circulated policy guidelines for our Diplomatic Missions abroad to collaborate 
with local authorities, community organizations and diaspora in organizing cultural 
events abroad.  Depending on the quantum of financial contribution by the local entity, 
ICCR is offering specific categories of incentives to them including, scholarships, travel 
grants, and visits to India. 
ii. ICCR is encouraging establishment of new cultural centres in a PPP model on the lines 
of CASA-de-la India in Valladolid (Spain). 
iii. Nearly half of the Teachers of Indian Culture (TICs), teaching Yoga, Indian music, 
dance, languages, etc. abroad, are now local residents of foreign countries who are 
hired on contracts as Local Resource Persons (LRPs)  

Page | 47 
 
ICCR is also improving its oversight mechanisms and innovative funding mechanisms through 
the following initiatives: 
i. Since 2018, ICCR has been administering all its 21 scholarship schemes wholly digitally 
through the Admissions-to-Alumni (A2A) portal. All financial disbursements to 
universities and foreign students studying under the scholarship schemes are now 
made digitally through the GyanSetu portal.   
ii. Since May 2023, ICCR Headquarters and its 9 Zonal Offices in India conduct all their 
activities/ work online through an e-Office system which ensures accountability, 
transparency, adherence to timeline and more digital outreach.   
iii. In November 2023, ICCR set up the Activity Information Management System (AIMS) 
digital portal which enables 24*7 monitoring of the activities, accounts and Budget 
utilization of all ICCR’s Cultural Centres  abroad.  In addition, all our Mission now 
upload their Annual Plan of Action for cultural activities on the AIMS portal in the coming 
FY in advance, enabling ICCR to plan ahead and schedule activities in a transparent 
and consultative process.  It does this through: 
(a) monthly activity report 
(b) monthly receipt/expenditure report 
(c) performance assessment survey based on a 30-point questionnaire 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No.40) 
 
As the principal agency for India’s soft power and cultural diplomacy, the Indian Council 
for Cultural Relations (ICCR) undertakes a wide range of global activities, including 
providing scholarships, promoting Indian languages, organizing exhibitions, instituting 
rewards and hosting performing and visual arts programmes. The Committee note that a 
budgetary provision of Rs. 331.25 crore has been allocated for ICCR in BE 2024-25, 
compared to Rs. 315.21 crore in BE 2023-24. The Ministry has indicated that the 
increased allocation is intended for expanding research/academic activities, expanding 
scope of cultural diplomacy, revision in scholarship rates, cultural hospitality norms, 
etc. On the issue of extra-budgetary resources of ICCR, the Ministry informed that apart 
from a modest fee from local students, ICCR is fully funded by it through Grants–in-Aid. 
Despite the limited allocation, the Committee found that the budget was not fully utilized. 
 
Keeping in view the broad spectrum of activities undertaken by ICCR, the 
Committee feel that the budgetary allocation for ICCR is inadequate. ICCR’s work is a 
cornerstone of India’s cultural diplomacy, contributing to national interests in a highly 
competitive global environment. The Committee desire that the Ministry should examine 
the reasons for the underutilization of the budget and draft a policy which will enable it 
to scale up its operations, enhance India’s soft power and contribute meaningfully to the 
nation’s diplomatic objective. This will require a significant increase in ICCR’s budgetary 
allocation. The Committee, therefore, recommend an increase in  the budgetary 
allocation for ICCR in BE 2025-26 justifying the increasing salience of soft power 
projection of the country and the central role of ICCR in it. Furthermore, ICCR should 

Page | 48 
 
establish a mechanism to improve its pace of expenditure to ensure optimal utilization of 
allocated funds, strengthening its case for higher budgetary demands in the subsequent 
fiscal year, subject to the Ministry providing a satisfactory explanation of its 
underutilization.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 ICCR has set for itself a declared target of Full Utilization of Budget (FUB) since April 
2021.  Since then, ICCR has been striving to achieve the FUB target every year by 
adopting a robust mechanism of monthly monitoring and evaluation of expenditure by 
all spending units and nudging spending units towards FUB. As a result, both the 
utilization level and the spending capacity of ICCR have been increasing over the years, 
with 99.99% utilization of BE 2024-25 of Rs. 331.25 crore  in the last financial year.  
Using these tools, ICCR is confident about FUB in respect of  BE 2025-26 of Rs. 351.25 
crore in the current FY, which will be another milestone in ICCR's history in terms of 
utilization and spending capacity. 
 ICCR is simultaneously expanding its cultural, academic and public outreach activities 
and will accordingly scale up its budgetary projections. For instance, ICCR has 
launched 50 new Quad STEM scholarships and is working on a new DAKSHIN 
scholarship scheme for the global South.  ICCR has also launched an annual global 
dance competition for foreigners and is institutionalized the award of Annapurna 
Certificates to authenticate Indian restaurants abroad.  ICCR also proposed to 
undertake annual theme-based activities to promote specific aspects of Indian culture 
like Buddhism, North-east India, Indian Epics, etc. and conduct 3-4 signature cultural 
events in premier global events and international festivals.  This year, ICCR plans to 
launch a fresh empanelment process to make a panel of Indian performing artists.  
ICCR has also signed MoUs with 25 Indian States and will be sending 75 folk art 
troupes (3 from each State) to perform abroad. 
 ICCR will also organise fresh editions of new foreign visitors programme like the Gen 
Next Democracy Programme (in which 272 young leaders from 77 democracies 
participated), Knowledge India Visitors Programme (where 87 Indologists participated 
from 36 countries) Buddha BhoomiVandanYatra (23 young scholars from 11 countries), 
Hindi VishwaYatra (31 young foreigners excelling in  Hindi), Vaishali Festival of 
Democracy celebrated at Nalanda University,  etc. 
 In order to use digital technologies for culture promotion, ICCR now runs online classes 
in Indian arts, handicrafts and culture for over 4000 learners in 51 countries. ICCR now 
has a digital database of over 500 Indian artists of different genres under its Artist 
Management System (AMS) portal set up in May 2024. 
 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 41) 
 
The Committee are aware that Indian Cultural Centres (ICCs) are principal institutional 
instruments mandated for cultural outreach abroad and projecting India’s cultural 

Page | 49 
 
diplomacy through a wide range of cultural, academic intellectual activities, promoting, 
inter alia, knowledge, information and understanding of various aspects of Indian culture 
including Indian Dance, Music, Yoga, Languages, Food, Festivals, History, Ethos & 
Traditions and contemporary issues. The Indian Council for Cultural Relations works 
with its 38 Indian Cultural Centers (ICCs) abroad and 11 Zonal Offices. The Ministry has 
informed that in honour of renowned Indian poet and author, ICCR will be setting up 
Thiruvalluvar Cultural Centre (TVCC) in a few select locations abroad including 
Singapore, Paris and Jaffna. The Committee would like to be apprised about the 
progress made regarding establishment of the Thiruvalluvar Cultural Centre as well as 
the plans for opening other Cultural Centres. The Committee also desire that ICCR 
should make persistent efforts to empanel artists and performers from the widest 
possible range of Indian languages, dialects, and cultural backgrounds to showcase the 
rich and diverse cultural heritage of India globally and regionally.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Status of establishment of Thiruvalluvar Cultural Centre (TVCC) in Jaffna 
 
 The Cultural Centre in Jaffna was renamed as Thiruvalluvar Cultural Centre in honour 
of the great Tamil poet-philosopher Thiruvalluvar, at a ceremony held on 18 January 
2025.  Minister of Buddhasasana, Religious and cultural Affairs Hon’ble Hiniduma 
Sunil Senevi from Sri Lanka was present on the occasion.  
 
Status of establishment of Thiruvalluvar Cultural Centre in Singapore 
 
 Hon’ble Prime Minister announced the establishment of Thiruvalluvar Cultural Centre 
(TVCC) in Singapore on September 5, 2024.Mission is in the process of 
identifying a suitable property. 
Status of establishment of Cultural Centre in Paris 
 The new cultural centre in Paris was announced by former EAM, Smt. SushmaSwaraj 
on June 2018 and was named as Swami Vivekananda Cultural Centre (SVCC). The 
operationalisation of SVCC is at an advanced stage.  The construction work is 
complete and work on ‘Indianisation’ (incorporating Indian cultural motifs in the 
building), installing of signage, etc. is underway.  The Mission has sought necessary 
approvals from Local Municipal Authorities for starting activities at the Centre. 
Approvals are awaited.  Since the Cultural Centre has already been named formally, 
no change of name is proposed. 
Status of empanelment of artists and performers 
 ICCR follows a defined SoP for empanelment of artists involving expert sub-
committees and feedback from our Missions after the performances. 
 

Page | 50 
 
 Along with digitization, ICCR is looking at innovative ways of including fresh and 
young talent.  This year, ICCR plans to launch a fresh empanelment process to make 
a panel of Indian performing artists. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 42) 
 
The Committee acknowledge the important role of ICCR scholarship programs in 
strengthening India’s cultural and educational diplomacy and promoting goodwill, long-
lasting ties with partner countries and enhancing India’s soft power. The Committee note 
that the Ministry has launched A2A (Admission to Alumni) portal in 2018 to manage 
admissions of foreign students. However, the scholarship slots have not been fully 
utilized due to factors such as lack of awareness, language barrier, mismatched 
academic requirements between Indian Universities and foreign students, etc. The 
Ministry has taken corrective measures like online application mode through A2A portal, 
increasing the number of universities students can apply to, providing airfare to 
students under Atal Bihari Vajpayee General Scholarships Scheme (GSS) and wider 
dissemination through the Missions abroad. While appreciating the streamlining of 
admission and selection process, the Committee notice that limited outreach, 
administrative delays, lack of follow-up with alumni, and inadequate support for scholars 
during their stay in India are some of the barriers to the program’s effectiveness. The 
Committee, therefore, desire that targeted awareness campaigns, leveraging digital 
platforms and collaborating with Missions abroad should be undertaken by ICCR to 
ensure maximum visibility of scholarship opportunities. In addition, a robust global 
alumni network which can serve as a platform for cultural diplomacy, advocacy, and 
strengthening bilateral ties should be established to maintain long-term engagement 
with former scholars. The Committee further desire that the budgetary allocation for 
ICCR scholarships should be enhanced to provide adequate support for scholars and 
accommodate more students from developing and strategically important countries, 
particularly in Africa, Southeast Asia, Latin America and the Indo-Pacific region.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
 ICCR scholarships for foreign nationals are an important tool to encourage them to 
study and appreciate Indian arts, heritage and culture. This is also a way to create 
outreach, a feeling of goodwill and promote India’s influence across the world. 
 The A2A portal (2018) and GyanSetu (2023) have significantly improved transparency 
and efficiency, increasing scholarship slot utilization from 46.53% (2018–19) to 90.76% 
(2024–25).  In 2024-25, 3960 scholarships were offered and 3594 were utilised, 
compared to 2018-19, when 3937 slots were offered and only 1832 slots were utilised.  
 ICCR has launched 12 new cash prizes to be awarded to foreign ICCR scholars to 
recognize and encourage the best social media influencers promoting India (ICCR 
YuvaMitra) and those learning Indian arts and promoting them (ICCR Kala Sadhak). 

Page | 51 
 
 ICCR intends to scale up its publicity campaigns including through its website, social 
media and digital platforms while collaborating more actively with Missions abroad.  
This year, ICCR has expanded its scholarship portfolio a new Quad STEM scholarship 
scheme that offers 50 scholarships to students from the Indo-Pacific region to pursue a 
four-year Bachelor’s Degree in Engineering at 9 select institutes/universities. 
 ICCR is also enhancing its outreach and publicity of its scholarship schemes by sharing 
information with Resident Foreign Diplomatic Missions in Indian and wider publicity 
through its social media handles.   
 With regard to alumni engagement, ICCR launched the A-2-A portal to reconnect with 
its alumni spread all over the world.  As on date, 15290 ICCR scholars are registered on 
the Alumni Portal and ICCR is working on enhancing this to its target figures of 30,000 
ICCR alumni.  
 In order to stay connected with ICCR scholars and leverage them as India’s Cultural 
Ambassadors abroad, ICCR organised the ‘Exit Engagement Evening 2024’ in 8 Indian 
cities for foreign students who were returning to their countries after completion of their 
status. Various GoI Ministries/ Departments also participated in the events and exhorted 
the students to promote Ayurveda, Khadi, Indian Tourism and culture n their own 
countries and worldwide.  
 ICCR is also endeavouring to enhance its support to foreign scholars during their stay in 
India through initiatives like: 
 
a) Stopping the deduction of monthly stipends during ex-India overseas trips by foreign 
scholars, if permission has been obtained. 
b) Shifting the Delhi Zonal office Hqs. to ICCR Hqs. in Azad Bhawan to enable 
smoother interaction with approximately 2000 ICCR scholars. 
c) Conducting surprise inspections of hostel/ food/ living conditions in colleges/ 
universities. 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 43) 
 
The Committee appreciate the important role of the Indian Council of World Affairs 
(ICWA) in promoting informed discourse on international affairs, fostering bilateral and 
multilateral relations, and enhancing India’s global presence through research, 
publications and intellectual exchanges. While the budgetary allocation for ICWA has 
seen an increase in BE 2024-25 to Rs. 15.47 crore , the Committee observe that this 
increase is primarily attributed to salaries and capital expenditures. The Committee note 
the collaborative efforts of ICWA with institutions in countries such as South Korea, 
Poland and Vietnam. The ICWA’s efforts to increase awareness of foreign policy through 
university collaborations and conferences are commendable. To meet the growing 
scope and scale of ICWA’s research, outreach, and policy-related activities, the 
Committee recommend a further enhancement of budgetary allocation of ICWA. The 
Committee desire that ICWA should be scaling up joint research initiatives with other 
countries to foster cross-pollination of ideas and strengthen India’s intellectual 
diplomacy. The Committee also urge ICWA to expand its partnerships with academic 

Page | 52 
 
institutions and think-tanks across India, especially in tier-2 and tier-3 cities, to ensure 
equitable access to its programs. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Esteemed Committee’s recommendation regarding increased budgetary allocation to ICWA is 
deeply appreciated. There has been a consistent rise and steady improvement in the quantum 
and content of ICWA’s activities over the last few years.ICWA has enhanced its joint research 
activities with its international partner institutions through joint publications and contributions in 
each other’s journals and website commentaries. Besides South Korea, Vietnam, and Poland, 
ICWA is coming out with joint publication with its MoU partner in Morocco. It will soon come out 
with a joint publication on Malta.  
 
ICWA has published articles by foreign researchers from Japan, Mongolia, UAE, Belarus, 
Uzbekistan, Madagascar, Seychelles, Maldives, Sri Lanka, Mauritius including from 
International Partner institutions in its Guest column and Special Publications. ICWA’s 
publications programmeis growing; more than 100 books and special publications have been 
published over the last three years. These include works by senior academics, former 
diplomats and upcoming scholars.  
At the National level, ICWA has expanded its partnerships with think tanks and academic 
communities across the country.  Its national MoU partners have increased to 68 at present. It 
has scaled up its outreach activities with universities and think tanks across the country, 
including tier 2 and tier 3 cities, through its foreign policy awareness scheme, internship 
program and Young Scholars Conference.  
 
In the year 2024,  ICWA organized thirty outreach activities  with Universities and colleges in 
Nagpur (Maharashtra), Khalilabad (UP), Patiala (Punjab), Aligarh (UP), Jaipur (Rajasthan), 
Koni, Bilaspur (Chhattisgarh), Barasat, Kolkata (West Bengal), Cuttack (Odisha), Mumbai 
(Maharashtra), Kanpur(UP), Nalanda, Rajgir (Bihar), Gorakhpur (UP), Dharamshala (HP), 
Jhajjar(Haryana), Mathura (UP), Bangalore (Karnataka), Sambalpur (Odisha), Aligarh (U.P), 
Ranchi (Jharkhand), Pilani (Rajasthan), Aizawl (Mizoram), Ballia (U.P), Chandigarh (Punjab), 
Puducherry, New Delhi. These included conferences organized in Hindi. At all these 
conferences, ICWA support and participation received valuable positive feedback.  
 
Apart from national outreach, which is an area of key focus, ICWA is also looking at increasing 
presence of ICWA Research Faculty at international conferences on international relations and 
foreign policy especially those organized/facilitated by Indian Missions abroad. 
 
ICWA has been regularly receiving students for internship from its national partners such as 
Christ University, Bangalore, Pondicherry University, Manipal University, Shiv Nadar University, 
OP Jindal University, RakshaRashtriya University, Gujarat, Delhi University. Similar to last year, 
ICWA is going to host the next Young Scholar Conference on 11 March 2025, which will involve 
early career research scholars from universities and think tanks across the country. 
 

Page | 53 
 
Regular Dialogues are being held with International Partners to exchange perspectives on 
global and regional issues and on prospects for bilateral relations. Some recent ones have 
included Vietnam, Germany, Saudi Arabia, New Zealand and forthcoming ones include Finland, 
Russia, China, Qatar, etc. 
 
Discussions at ICWA have a steady momentum. Some recent panel discussions have included 
on UN Summit of the Future, Crisis of International Liberal Order, China’s Global Initiatives, Sri 
Lanka, Ongoing Crisis in Pakistan, Afghanistan under Taliban 2.0, India and Antarctica and 
those scheduled in the coming weeks include Advancing Sub-Regional Approaches in 
Neighbourhood First, Instability in Bangladesh, Syria, Iran, etc. SCO Centre at ICWA will also 
host the SCO Forum of Think Tanks in the coming months of which India is the Chair for the 
current year. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 44) 
 
The Committee commend the Research and Information System for Developing 
Countries (RIS) for its consistent efforts in providing evidence-based policy research 
and its substantial contribution towards advancing India’s foreign policy objectives. 
Recognizing the increasing complexities of global geopolitics and geoeconomics, the 
Committee underscores the need to further strengthen RIS’s institutional capacity and 
broaden its engagement with national and international stakeholders. The Committee 
note RIS’s role in organizing Track 1.5 and Track 2 dialogues. The University Connect 
Programme is a valuable initiative to engage youth and academia in foreign policy 
discussions. The budgetary allocation for RIS has also been increased from Rs. 16.64 
crore in 2023-24 to Rs. 18.00 crore in 2024-25. While appreciating the increase in 
allocation for RIS, the Committee desire that the Government should continue 
progressive enhancement of  RIS’s financial resources to enable it to expand its 
research capacity and activities, particularly in emerging areas like the Blue Economy, 
climate change and digital transformation, cyber security, artificial intelligence etc. RIS 
should continue its work in promoting regional connectivity through initiatives like the 
India-Middle East-Europe Economic Corridor and ASEAN-India multi-modal connectivity. 
The Committee also urge the MEA to work towards integration of the specialized 
programme of RIS within the Ministry for timely absorption of research outputs into 
policy formulation.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
As part of its intensified evidence-based policy research programme with increased funding 
from the Ministry, RIS organized a large number of meaningful interactions, dialogues, 
meetings, seminars and conferences at the national, regional and international level with the 
participation of Indian, regional and global experts on areas of core interest to the country.  
Officials concerned from the Ministry also actively took part in these interactions and benefited 
from the wide spectrum of views expressed by subject scholars  on issues of interest to the 
government and utilized their inputs in policy formulation in line with India’s foreign policy 

Page | 54 
 
priorities and objectives. The key events organized by RIS between April 2025 till January 2025 
are as follows:  
• Round Table on India-Indonesia Cooperation on Ayush and Jamu Relevance of Sustainable 
BioresourceManagementon  23 January, 2025 
• Sustainable Agriculture and Agro-Ecological Approaches in the Global South on 22 January, 
2025 
• Maritime Knowledge Lecture Series An Inspiring Heritage of Ship Building in India on 14 
January, 2025 
• Trade, Tariff and Trump on 31 December, 2024 
• Seminar on Illicit Financial Flows Package Leveraging G-20 Presidency with the Global South 
on Monday, 30 December, 2024 
• Inequality, Economic Growth and Inclusion on13 December, 2024 
• Strengthening India-Japan Economic Relations Opportunities and Challenges in Context of 
Changing Global Order on 20 November, 2024 
• Eighth Roundtable of ASEAN-India Network of Think-Tanks (AINTT) on 7 November, 2024 
• Global perspectives on the Caribbean Development and Diplomacy on 21 October, 2024 
• Second Indo-Pacific Economic Conclave (IPEC), Kolkata 26-27 September 2024 on 26 
September, 2024 
• Capacity Building Programme on Triangular Cooperationon19 September, 2024 
• DAKSHIN Workshop Digital Technologies in Agriculture for the Global South on 30 August, 
2024 
• Policy Dialogue on 75 Years of India-Indonesia Diplomatic Relationship on 27 August, 2024 
• DAKSHIN Workshop Digital Public Infrastructure and Financial Inclusion on 22 August, 2024 
• DAKSHIN Workshop Telehealth - Transformative Digital Health Solution on 8 August, 2024 
• India-New Zealand Relations Trade Potentials and Prospectson 7 August, 2024 
• Seminar on Infrastructure Spillover and Green Finance on 29 July, 2024 
• South Asia Group on Energy (SAGE) Discussion Meetingon 29 July, 2024 
• GALERI Side Event Transformation Towards Life Economy | Addressing Challenges of 
Inequality and Climate Changeon 17 July, 2024 
• Sixth EAS Conference on Maritime Security Cooperation on 4 July, 2024 
• Regional Workshop on Transforming Cross Border Electricity Trade and Regional Electricity 
Market for an Energy Secure South Asia on 1 July, 2024 
• BIMSTEC Synergies in Agriculture Trade Promoting Regional Growth 25 June, 2024 
• School Education for the Future of Work on 1 June, 2024 
• Interaction with chief Economic Advisor "Future of Work"on 9 May, 2024 
• ERIA-RIS Roundtable Discussion on Current Dynamics of ASEAN-India Economic Relations 
Challenges and Opportunities for Cooperation in Digital Domain on 30 April, 2024 
• Brainstorming Session on Triangular Cooperation New Modality and New Hope on 24 April, 
2024 
• Quad and Indo-US Relations Implications for the Indo-Pacific Region on 10 April, 2024 
• STIP Lecture Connecting the unconnected in 5G and Beyondon 9 April, 2024 
 
In addition, the faculty members of RIS took part in a number of events organized by its 
national, regional and global partner institutions to assimilate fresh ideas and trends on issues 
of key interest  to the country and reflected their new knowledge in following  policy oriented 

Page | 55 
 
research studies and repots which provided valuable inputs to the Ministry  in the formulation of 
its policy postures on issues of critical importance to the country: 
 
• BIMSTEC Synergies in Agricultural Trade: Promoting Regional Growth, RIS, New Delhi, 2024 
• International Conference on Bay of Bengal and India-Japan Economic Relations (Outcome 
Document), RIS, New Delhi, 2024 
• India-Indonesia Partnership: A Renewed Understanding, New Opportunities and Critical Steps 
Ahead, RIS, New Delhi, 2024 
• Exploring Cooperation in Sustainable Agriculture and Value Addition in BIMSTEC Region, 
RIS-IFPRI, New Delhi, 2024 
• Thirty Years of ASEAN-India Relations, Post COVID-19 Recovery: Regional Cooperation 
Agenda for ASEAN-India Partnership, RIS-AIC, New Delhi, 2024 
• Science, Technology and Innovation (STI) for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
Roadmaps for India, RIS, New Delhi, 2023 
• The Grand Success of G20 Bharat Presidency, RIS, New Delhi, 2023 
• G20 University Connect Engaging Young Minds, RIS, New Delhi, 2023 
• Propelling India's Maritime Vision Impact of Government Policies, RIS-CMEC, New Delhi, 
2023 
• Wellbeing, Values and Lifestyles, Towards a New Development Paradigm, RIS, New Delhi, 
2023 
• Investing in Early Years in Human Capital for Future Resilience: For an Inclusive and 
Equitable World, RIS-UNICEF, New Delhi, 2023 
 
During the period under review, RIS Faculty, led by the Director General, also took part in the 
following events to put forward India’s standpoint on their thematic issues,  gather critical and 
new  information and knowledge on issues of profound interest to RIS for its research studies 
and projected them in the publications brought out by RIS and also shared the same with the 
government.  The vital inputs were also widely shared in the media by RIS to advance the core 
trade and economic interests of the country in the backdrop of the evolving global scenario: 
 
• Brainstorming Meeting on “Science, Technology and Innovation as drivers for Viksit Bharat 
@2047 organised by NITI Aayog, 9 April 2024. 
• Second Research School of ICASSSD organised by International Centre for Applied Systems 
Science andSustainable Development (ICASSSD), Delhi School of Economics, 20 April 2024. 
• CII Global Innovation and Intellectual Property Summit on ‘Building the synergy among 
Innovation, IP and Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) for futuristic growth, ’organised by 
CII on 23 April. 
• Global Solutions Summit 2024 organised by the China-West Dialogue in Berlin on 5 May 2024 
• Roundtable at the GSI Summit on ‘Ensuring G20-T20 Climate Action and Sustainable 
Development Continuity’ organized by Council on Energy, Environment and Water (CEEW) in 
Berlin on 6 May 2024. 
• Council for Global Problem-Solving (CGP) Annual Meeting  in Berlin on 7 May 2024 
• Task Force 4 Meeting on Science and Digitalization for a Better Future Digitalisation during 
the T7 Italy Summit on the G7 and the World: Rebuilding Bridges organised jointly with the 

Page | 56 
 
IstitutoAffariInternazionali (IAI) and the Italian Institute for International Political Studies (ISPI), 
in cooperation with LUISS University on 14 May at Rome. 
• Symposium on Strengthening Atmanirbhar: Securing Domestic Industry & Technology on 16 
May 2024, IIT Delhi. 
• Seminar on LDC Graduation in challenging times needs a rethink organsied by OECD 
Development Centre on 21 May 2024, Paris. 
• Future of ODA Workshop organized jointly by Center for Global Development (CGD) and 
AgenceFrançaise du Développement (AFD) on 23 May 2024, Paris. 
• Road to Platinum Jubilee of the Asian-African Conference on “Asia Africa We Want: 
Empowering the Global South by Leveraging the Bandung Spirit” organised by the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs of Indonesia in Jakarta on 6 June 2024 
• Spring Meeting 2024 of Paris Peace Forum (PPF), co-organisedwith the Mohammed VI 
Polytechnic University (UM6P) on 9-10 June at Ben Guerir, Morocco. 
• NDB Seminar on Navigating New Horizons organized by New Development Bank (NDB) on 
11-12 June 2024 in Cairo. 
• Panel discussion on ‘The Changing Dynamics of International Institutions in an Era of Multiple 
Crisis’ on 12 June 2024 in Cairo 
• 42nd Annual Convocation organized by the Mangalore University on 15 June 2024 at 
Mangalore. 
• Annual Management of Social Transformations (MOST) Forum 2024 organized by UNESCO 
in Paris on 17 June 2024. 
• Panel on Envisioning Desirable Futures Across Climate, Digital and Economic Landscape 
organized by UNESCO on 17 June 2024, Paris 
• MOST Programmeorganised by UNESCO on 18 June 2024, Paris 
• BIMSTEC Online Meeting on the Future Directions organisedby BIMSTEC Secretariat with 
Eminent Persons Group (EPG), appointed by the BIMSTEC Secretariat on 25 June 2024 
• Discussion-Meeting of India Chile Joint Study Group, organisedby the Department of 
Commerce, on 23 April 2024, New Delhi. 
• Discussion meeting on Reforming Statistical System in India organised jointly with Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) on 17 June 2024, New Delhi 
• International Conference on BIMSTEC Synergies in Agricultural Trade: Promoting Regional 
Growth along with IFPRI, PRCI and Michigan State University on 25 June 2024, New Delhi  

Page | 57 
 
• Meeting to discuss action plan for improvement of Trade Statistics, organised by Ministry of 
Statistics and Programme Implementation (MoSPI) under the chairpersonship of Secretary on 
FTA Negotiations and Trade Data Gaps on 28 June 2024, New Delhi. 
• One week research methodology and data science course for PhD / PDF scholars in social 
science, organised by IndiraGandhi National Tribal University on 3 April 2024. 
• International conference on ‘The Future of industrialization in Kenya: Path way to 
Industrialization in Bottom-Up Economic Transformation Agenda,organised by KIPRA, 26 June 
2024.  
• Multi-stakeholder convening - “The Rockefeller Foundation “AsiaXchange 2024”organized by 
Rockefeller Foundation on 1 October 2024 at Bangkok. 
• G20 Technical Meeting on Trilateral Cooperation organized by The Brazilian Cooperation 
Agency (ABC) in collaboration with collaboration of Camões – Instituto da Cooperação e da 
Língua, I.P., under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Portugal, and the OECD Development Co-
operation Directorate (DCD), on 7 October 2024 at Lisbon. 
• 8th International Meeting on Triangular Cooperation: Linking Global Processes to Create 
Local Impact organised by Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Portugal and the OECD Development 
Cooperation Directorate (DCD) on 8 October 2024 at Lisbon 
• 3rd Kautilya Economic Conclave “The Indian Era” organized by Institute of Economic Growth  
on 4 October 2024 at New Delhi. 
• BRICS Think-Tank Network for Finance meet  organised by Ministry of Finance of the Russian 
Federation on 9 October 2024 at Moscow. 
• RBI@90 High-Level Conference on “Central Banking at Crossroads”, organised by RBI on 13-
14 October 2024 at New Delhi. 
• 3rd Special Course for Central Asia Countries organisedby MEA on 17 October 2024 at New 
Delhi. 
• 23rd IASSI Annual Conference organised by Institute for Human Development on 26 October 
2024 at Ranchi. 
• Roundtable discussion on “Expectations from G20 Brazil Summit” organised by Vivekananda 
International Foundation on 28 October 2024 at New Delhi. 
• T20 Summit Side Event on ‘Global cooperation on Sustainable Development after the 2024 
election year’ by IDOS, IPEA, T20 Brazil, MGG and PRODIGEES on 13 November 2024. 
• High level workshop in support of G20 Brazil on ‘Innovative Strategies for Disaster Resilience: 
Fortifying Global South Economies Through Dynamic Governance Solutions’, co-organized by 
Brazilian High Studies Institute of the Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, IPEA, ERIA, MIGA-
GSRC, CSIS, RIS, SIIA and NEPAD, on 13 November 2024, Rio. 

Page | 58 
 
• T20 side-event on Launching Soecial G20 edition of journal, G20 Challenges and the Pro-
Tempore Brazilian Presidency’  by IPEA on 13 November 2024 at Rio. 
• Ministerial Roundtable with  global Think Tank community at the Sagarmanthan: The Great 
Oceans Dialogue organised jointly by ORF and Ministry of Ports, Shipping and Waterways on 
18 November 2024, New Delhi. 
• 17th All India Conference of China Studies conference on Understanding China in a Turbulent 
World: Geopolitical Contestation and Cooperation organised by Institute of Chinese Studies, 
New Delhi and MAHE, Manipal on 23 November 2024, Manipal. 
• CPD Journey: Commemorating CPD’s 30th Anniversary organised by the CPD Online  on 1 
December 2024 . 
• International Conference on Deciphering Transversality of Water-Energy-Environment Nexus 
organised by India Water Foundation, 5 December 2024, New Delhi. 
• 8th edition of the Global Boardroom,  Financial Times’ flagship virtual event on 4 December 
2024, New Delhi. 
• 23rd Anniversary of Prabhasakshi on 6 December 2024, New Delhi. 
• 'Anna Chakra', PDS Supply Chain OptimisationTool and SCAN Portal organised by 
Department of Food and Public Distribution on 5 December 2024, New Delhi. 
• Fifteenth South Asia Economic Summit (SAES XV) titled “Unleashing an equitable green 
transformation in South Asia” organised by SAWTEE, 12 December 2024, Kathmandu. 
• Hearing in the framework of the online European Economic and Social Committee opinion on  
EU-India Strategic Partnership, organised by EESC, 12 December 2024.  
• 107th Annual Conference of the Indian Economic Association (IEA) organised by Maharishi 
Markandeshwar University on 21 December 2024 at Ambala, Haryana. 
• Regional Agri-food Trade Dissemination event organised by International Food Policy 
Research Institute (IFPRI) along with CGIAR, Washington and made a presentation on 
Agriculture Trade and Investment in the BIMSTEC Region, at Bangkok, Thailand on 3 October, 
2024. 
• Review meeting to discuss action taken/progress made for improvement of trade statistic 
made discussion presentation and on Trade Data Gaps organised by Ministry of Statistics and 
Programme Implementation (MoSPI), at New Delhi on 7 October 2024. 
• 8th Roundtable of the ASEAN-India Network of Think Tanks (AINTT), jointly organized by the 
ASEAN-India Centre at RIS and the ISEAS-YusofIshak Institute, Singapore on 7 November 
2024. 

Page | 59 
 
• 17th All India Conference of China Studies (AICCS) on Understanding China in a Turbulent 
World: Geopolitical Contestation and Cooperation, I Academy of Higher Education (Institution of 
Eminence) at Manipal, Karnataka on 23 November 2024. 
• RIN Annual Meeting at Bangkok on 27 November 2024. 
• 4th Indo-German Dialogue held in Berlin on 19-20 November 2024. 
• Brainstorming session on Purvodaya states held at NITI Aayogon 12 November 2024. 
• 8th ASEAN-India Network of THINK Tanks (AINTT) Conference held at Singapore on 7-8 
November 2024. 
• BRICS Think Tank Network for Finance Conference held at Moscow on 9 October 2024. 
• Korea-India Forum Northeast Region Development held at New Delhi on 1 October 2024. 
• 4th Indo-German 1.5 Track Strategic Dialogue on 20 November 2024, Berlin, Germany 
• Comprehensive review of India Nepal Treaty of Trade at the Ministry of Commerce on 17 
December 2024. 
• India- Malaysia Trade Conference 2024, held at Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 45) 
 
The Committee acknowledge the crucial role played by the Policy Planning & Research 
Division in shaping and strengthening India’s foreign policy apparatus through strategic 
outreach, policy research and engagement with academia, think-tanks and international 
partners. The Ministry has also undertaken new initiatives such as setting up of  
DAKSHIN, a Global South Centre of Excellence under RIS; Strategic Outreach Fund 
(SOF) to provide budgetary support to Political Wings of Indian Missions for conducting  
strategic outreach activities as well as commissioning short term research projects with 
think-tanks and Niti Shakti, whereby Divisions within the Ministry can identify specific 
research requirements and commission them.The Committee are hopeful that these 
initiatives would scale up the quantum and quality of research and outreach activities 
and provide valuable inputs for foreign policy planning and formulation. The Ministry is 
also urged to fast-track these initiatives with greater transparency in the selection and 
funding of proposals from think tanks, universities and institutes. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Since its launch in June 2024, Strategic Outreach Fund (SOF) initiative has seen enthusiastic 
participation of Missions across Asia, Africa, Europe and Latin America, undertaking a wide 
variety of strategic outreach activities focusing on a number of key areas of interest to India, 
including: India’s foreign policy; strengthening India’s bilateral ties with the respective host 
countries including political, economic, military and technology cooperation; invest cooperation, 
regional connectivity and global supply chains etc. During FY 2024-25, 43 proposalshave been 

Page | 60 
 
granted NOC for incurring an expenditure of Rs. 4.33 crore (approximately) till date. Under the 
Niti Shakti Initiative, the Ministry has commissioned two research studies and a few more 
research proposals are under process. As recommended by the esteemed Committee, the 
Ministry would continue to make efforts to fast track these initiatives. 
 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 46) 
 
The Committee find that the Policy Planning Division’s has taken efforts to expand its 
footprint beyond Delhi through NADI Dialogue and regional seminars, which they find 
quite commendable. To further enhance the reach and effectiveness of such initiatives, 
the Committee urge the Ministry to organize more regional dialogues in Tier-2 and Tier-3 
cities and also ensure greater representation of the North-East region. The Committee 
also desire that policy planning dialogues conducted by the Division with the Foreign 
Offices of countries as well as multilateral policy planning dialogues held with key 
groups like EU, BRICS and QUAD should be institutionalized into annual frameworks 
with a dedicated mechanism for follow-ups and tracking of outcomes for more impactful 
engagements.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
In continuation of its efforts to take the foreign policy outreach initiatives beyond Delhi, the 
Policy Planning & Research Division of the Ministry, in recent years, has undertaken various 
initiatives in Tier-2/Tier-3 cities. Some of them are the India-Japan Intellectual Conclave 
‘Kizuna’ (Agartala, Shillong and Guwahati), International Conference ‘Purvodaya Perspectives’ 
(Bhubaneswar), MaharanaPratap Annual Geopolitics Dialogue (Udaipur, Jaipur), Asian-African 
Treaty Law and Practice Conference (Gandhinagar), Track 1.5 ‘Health Diplomacy Dialogue’ 
(Gandhinagar) and Track 1.5 Kochi Dialogue (Kochi). A list of all strategic outreach initiatives 
undertaken by the Ministry outside Delhi since 2023 may be seen at Annexure I. 
 
With regard to establishment of Policy Planning Dialogues, the Ministry has noted the 
recommendation of the esteemed committee on institutionalizing them into annual frameworks. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 48) 
 
The Committee note that the present staffing of the Policy Planning and Research 
Division comprises of 20 personnel from the Ministry, 08 external consultants and 03 ex-
cadre officers. The Ministry has been utilizing external expertise in the form of subject 
specialist consultants with specialized knowledge in areas such as international law, 
maritime security, outer space, climate change, arctic geopolitics, etc. The Committee 
note that these consultants have enriched the Division’s work by providing in-depth 
research and analysis on a wide range of contemporary and emerging issues, aligning 
with India’s strategic and diplomatic objectives. At present, consultants are engaged on 
a one-year renewable contract basis as per extant guidelines of the Department of 
Expenditure, with no proposal for absorption into the Ministry. While this arrangement 

Page | 61 
 
allows for flexibility, it risks losing valuable institutional knowledge when contracts end. 
In view of this, the Committee desire that various options should be explored to utilize 
the experience and expertise of the Consultants, including that of engaging them in the 
research institutes/think tanks, etc. that the Ministry of External Affairs collaborate with. 
The Ministry should inform the Committee expeditiously of the manner in which it 
contemplates to utilize their expertise and experience. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
At present, the Policy Planning and Research Division of the Ministry has nine (09) personnel 
from the Ministry and eleven (11) external consultants. Within the scope/ambit of extant 
guidelines on engagement of consultants, including those laid down by Department of 
Expenditure, Ministry of Finance, the Ministry is making all possible efforts to utilize the 
expertise of consultants working with Policy Planning & Research Division. 
 
  

Page | 62 
 
CHAPTER-III 
OBSERVATION/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT DESIRE TO 
PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES OF THE GOVERNMENT  
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 22) 
 
Despite its strategic importance as a flagship initiative under the South Asian 
Association for Regional Cooperation (SAARC), slow progress in the establishment and 
operationalization of the South Asian University (SAU) is disappointing. The Committee 
note that the construction of SAU’s permanent campus has been severely delayed, with 
Phase I remaining incomplete and Phase II yet to commence. While Packages I and II 
have been completed, Package III is only 96% complete and Package IV, including 
essential infrastructure such as hostels and sports facilities, remains pending. As per 
the replies furnished by the Ministry, these delays are attributed to land encumbrances, 
forest clearance issues, National Green Tribunal (NGT) bans and disruptions caused by 
the COVID-19 pandemic. It is also observed that India contributes 57.49% to the 
operational budget of SAU, in addition to its overwhelming capital contribution. 
However, other member states have failed to fulfill their assessed contributions, with a 
cumulative outstanding amount of USD 15.80 million as of June 2024.  
While acknowledging the Government of India’s substantial financial contribution 
and continued commitment to SAU, the Committee are of the considered opinion that 
the protracted delays and recurring challenges in the project’s implementation should 
be resolved. SAU is a symbol of regional cooperation and academic excellence 
envisioned under the SAARC framework. The tardy progress and lack of commitment by 
certain member states dilute its strategic significance and undermine India’s substantial 
investment in the project. The Committee desire that all the stakeholders should 
demonstrate the resolve necessary to complete the project without further delay and to 
fulfill the vision of SAU as a premier institution fostering regional integration and 
academic collaboration, while coming to a conclusion about the continued interest of 
foreign countries in contributing to this process. In view of the non-payment of assessed 
contribution by other SAARC countries, the Committee urge the Government to explore 
the option of developing this University on its own by assuming a principal role in 
administrative and academic matters. Those foreign countries who make contributions 
may be assigned an appropriate seat at the advisory or governing board.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Government of India is committed to develop the University premises as envisaged. However, 
the delay in construction is due to frequent NGT bans and court cases because of land 
encumbrances. All efforts are being made to resolve these issues. 
As regards the non-payment of contributions by other SAARC countries, Government of India 
follows up with these countries on a regular basis. However, there is no commitment from the 
member states to pay their pending dues. Only Nepal has recently cleared its dues in February 
2025.Pakistan and Bangladesh have not paid their dues. 

Page | 63 
 
Further, as regards exploring the option of governing the University on its own by India the 
Government of India is bound to follow the Inter-Governmental Agreement on South Asian 
University signed in 2007. As per the Inter-Governmental Agreement, the University is 
governed by a Governing Board, composed of members from all member states, which is the 
supreme decision making body of the University. There is no flexibility to unilaterally alter the 
Governance structure of the University. 
  

Page | 64 
 
CHAPTER- IV 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 20) 
 
Keeping in view the contemporary global migration dynamics and the needs of Indian 
citizens, the Committee has over the years underscored the pressing need for a 
comprehensive legislative overhaul to replace the outdated provisions of the Emigration 
Act 1983. After much delay, the Ministry is seriously considering enacting a new law 
tentatively titled ‘Overseas Mobility (Facilitation and Welfare) Bill, 2024’.  The Ministry 
has further informed the Committee that the proposed draft is under consultation with 
line Ministries and will, thereafter, be put up for public consultations.  The Committee 
desire that it should be consulted on the salient features of the Bill and the enactment of 
a revised act reflecting changed global migration realities should be done in a time 
bound manner i.e. not later than one year. An update about the progress made in this 
regard may be submitted to the Committee within three months. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The proposed ‘Overseas Mobility (Facilitation and Welfare) Bill, 2024 seeks to replace the 
existing  Emigration Act, 1983 with an aim of accessing a global workplace for citizens of India 
by developing a mechanism for safe, legal, orderly and regular mobility for employment and 
stay abroad through processes provided therein and for matters connected therewith or 
incidental thereto. The draft Bill 2024 has been revised in consultations with the relevant 
authorities, the same is under internal consultations. Thereafter, it will be put for public 
consultations for 30 days, which will be followed up, by Inter-Ministerial consultations with the 
relevant line ministries along with the Draft Cabinet Note on the revised draft. The Committee’s 
observations are duly noted.  
 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 21) 
 
The Committee acknowledge the Government of India’s commitment to reviving the 
ancient seat of learning through the establishment of Nalanda University under the 
Nalanda University Act, 2010. Despite significant budgetary allocations and the 
completion of the state-of-the-art Net-Zero sustainable green campus spanning 455 
acres, the Committee are concerned to note that the University’s establishment has been 
marred by delays and operational challenges. Although the construction has progressed 
and the campus was inaugurated in June 2024, delays caused by logistical bottlenecks, 
the COVID-19 pandemic related disruptions, and a lack of skilled manpower have 
resulted in significant time overruns. 

Page | 65 
 
Despite its mandate under the East Asia Summit framework to be a collaborative 
global enterprise, the Committee find that financial support from member states and 
other international donors has been sporadic and insufficient. The Committee 
recommend that the Ministry of External Affairs, in concert with the Ministry of 
Education and the Nalanda University Governing Board, should establish a more 
rigorous framework of oversight to expedite the resolution of pending tasks. Diplomatic 
channels must be strategically leveraged to secure greater financial and institutional 
support from East Asia Summit member states and other international partners, 
commensurate with the University’s global mandate. The Committee may also be kept 
informed about the progress made in operationalization of Nalanda University on a 
regular basis.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry of External Affairs (MEA) and the Nalanda University continue to take necessary 
steps to implement the Hon’ble Committee’s recommendations for overcoming challenges in 
the establishment of Nalanda University. On the establishment of a rigorous oversight 
framework to address delays and operational challenges, it is submitted that the University has 
several institutional mechanisms, as per the Act and relevant Statutes, including the Building 
and Works Committee, the Finance Committee, the Executive Committee, and the Academic 
Council that conduct regular reviews to oversee progress in infrastructure development, faculty 
recruitment, academic program expansion, and research initiatives. The delays in the project 
have been significantly minimized, and the construction work of the University is now in its final 
stages. To leverage diplomatic channels for greater financial and institutional support, the 
Nalanda University is in regular contact with various universities of East Asia Summit (EAS) 
member states, including Japan, South Korea, ASEAN nations, and Australia. Bilateral 
meetings with ambassadors and diplomats are conducted to foster partnerships, financial 
contributions, and collaborative academic programs. The University has hosted campus visits 
by many diplomats of EAS Countries to enhance visibility and understanding. Memoranda of 
Understanding (MoUs) have been signed with key stakeholders to formalize institutional 
collaborations. As on date there are 18 participating countries, including India who have signed 
MoU with the Nalanda University. These 18 Participating Countries are Australia, Bangladesh, 
Bhutan, Brunei Darussalam, Cambodia, China, India, Indonesia, Laos, Mauritius, Myanmar, 
New Zealand, Portugal, Singapore, South Korea, Sri Lanka, Thailand, and Vietnam. Apart from 
this, bilateral and multilateral MoUs are in place with various other countries and 
universities/institutions. As part of the Ministry’s efforts to strengthen international engagement, 
the External Affairs Minister extended Ministry’s invitations to diplomats from all Heads of 
Missions and senior diplomats from the 18 participating countries to attended the inauguration 
of the new Net Zero Campus of Nalanda University by the Hon’ble Prime Minister on 19 June, 
2025. 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 31) 
 
After a careful scrutiny of the budgetary allocation under the Head ‘Aid to African 
countries’, the Committee observe that the allocation has remained constant at Rs. 250 

Page | 66 
 
crore during the last two fiscal years. However, in the current fiscal, the allocation has 
been reduced to Rs. 200 crore from Rs 250 crore in 2023-24. The basis for reduction 
under this Head is understood to have stemmed from completion of e-VBAB Network 
Project by the end of 2024. The Ministry’s assertion that Africa is a key foreign policy 
priority and our engagement has been intensifying, albeit the budgetary allocation 
speaks otherwise. It is observed that India’s partnership with the African countries is 
based on four pillars- development partnership, defence and maritime security, trade 
and investment and people to people ties. The three India Africa Forum Summits (IAFS- I, 
II and III) in 2008, 2011 and 2015 have further reinforced development partnership with 
the country. The Ministry has also stated that initiatives in the field of health, education, 
digital infrastructure` and capacity building have been well received and appreciated by 
the partner countries. The Committee feel that given the imminent convening of the 
fourth India Africa Forum Summit in 2025, there is an urgent need to intensify our 
diplomatic presence in the region and strongly advocate a substantial enhancement in 
allocation under this Head to strengthen bilateral and multilateral engagements with 
African countries. The Ministry should also take all requisite steps, including seeking 
enhanced allocation and effective utilization of funds, for the expeditious 
implementation of our diverse ongoing projects in Africa.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The budgetary allocation is being sought after assessing funds utilization during the previous 
years and based on activities proposed to be undertaken. Currently, the major expenditure 
incurred under the budget head “Aid to African Countries” is for the implementation of “India-
Africa Maitri Scholarship Scheme” and other bilateral projects. Approximately 1000 slots are 
utilized at an estimated expenditure of Rs. 120.00 Cr. annually under the scholarship scheme. 
All the other projects undertaken (on bilateral basis) including Quick Impact Projects (QIPs) 
have been completed in the FY 2024-25.  Engagement with Africa is priority for India. In order 
to enhance our diplomatic presence in African continent, India has opened 18 new missions. 
After opening of the 18 new Missions in Africa, India has resident Missions in 47 out of 54 
African countries.  
 
The IAFS-IV Summit is expected to be held in the CFY 2025-26. The expenditure for IAFS-IV 
will be incurred only after agreement of African Union for hosting of IAFS-IV. In consultation 
with African Union, this Ministry is exploring various options to hold the IAFS-IV at the earliest. 
The Ministry will continue to vigorously follow up and review the implementation of projects 
announced during IAFS-I, IAFS-II and IAFS-III. The following projects were completed in the FY 
2024-25: 
 Establishment of Entrepreneurship Development Centre (EDC) in Rwanda; 
 Establishment of India-Africa Regional Materials Testing Laboratory (RMTL) in Uganda; 
 Upgradation of Indo-Zimbabwe Technology Centre in Zimbabwe;  
 Quick Impact Project (QIP) “Establishment of a Modern Gymnasium And Enhancement 
of Current Library at Command and Staff College, Duluti (Tanzania); 

Page | 67 
 
 Quick Impact Project (QIP)  “Restoration of Roof of Masuku Government Primary 
School, Bulawayo, Zimbabwe and 
 Supply of 01 unit of Advanced TelecobaltBhabhatron-II and Simulator IMAGIN and 
associated components to Malawi (Ongoing). 
 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 32) 
 
It is observed that several commitments have been made during the three India Africa 
Forum Summits in 2008, 2011 and 2015 including capacity building, infrastructure 
development, digital initiatives such as e-VidyaBharati and e-ArogyaBharati Network 
Project (e-VBAB) for tele-education and tele-medicine. The Committee note that   22 
African countries have so far joined the e-VBAB - project which was approved in 2015 to 
provide quality education/ medical services through web portals to the students/ 
doctors/paramedical staff in Africa. The Ministry has also informed that the progress in 
various projects under India Africa Summits is reviewed regularly in consultation with 
concerned Ministries and relevant stakeholders including African Union. Moreover, 
Research & Information Systems for Developing Countries (RIS) has agreed to carry out 
mid-term evaluation of e-VBAB Network Project on a pro-bono basis.  The Committee are 
concerned at the delay in project implementation and organization of India Africa Forum 
Summit which has been attributed to delay in deciding the location by host countries, 
internal conflicts and civil unrest. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the 
Ministry should review all ongoing projects in the African region on priority and based 
on such an evaluation, frame modalities for future progress in coordination with the 
partner countries.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry has taken note of the recommendations of the Hon’ble Committee. The e-VBAB 
Network project was launched on 7 October 2019 as part of the commitment made by the 
Prime Minister during the Third India-Africa Forum Summit (IAFS-III) to offer 50,000 
scholarships to African students, out of which 15,000 to be offered through online education in 
UG/PG/Diploma Programmes. The e-VBAB Project is a technological up-gradation and 
extension of the earlier Pan Africa e-Network Project (PAeNP) implemented between 2009-
2017. Twenty-two (22) African countries joined the project and 27 Indian Universities are 
offering more than 300 online UG/PG/Diploma/Certificate programmes in various disciplines to 
African students under the project. Research & Information Systems for Developing Countries 
(RIS) was entrusted to carry out the mid-term evaluation of e-VBAB Network Project on a pro-
bono basis. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 37) 
 
With over 32 million persons of Indian origin (PIOs) and non-resident Indians (NRIs) 
spread across the globe, the Committee are of the considered opinion that Diaspora 
represents a powerful network capable of advancing India’s cultural, economic, and 

Page | 68 
 
strategic interests. Through their economic might, strategic engagement and cultural 
outreach the Indian Diaspora contributes significantly to India’s developmental agenda 
and soft power projection.  It is discerned that the Ministry is exploring new initiatives 
and ways for active involvement of Diaspora in enhancing India’s outreach and 
influence.  The Committee emphasizes that the Indian Diaspora is a unique and valuable 
asset that can significantly enhance India’s global influence. The potential of diaspora 
academia and scientists to contribute to India’s educational, scientific and 
technological capacities and investment by the diaspora community in Indian startups 
and innovation also needs to be  harnessed. For leveraging the full potential of the 
Indian Diaspora as an instrument of soft power and fostering economic, scientific and 
technological development in the country, the Ministry of External Affairs should adopt 
a proactive approach and formulate a comprehensive Diaspora Engagement Policy in 
consultation with other line Ministries such as Ministry of Culture, Commerce, etc. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
Ministry has a diaspora engagement policy framework in place, which is characterized under 
the rubric of 4Cs - Care, Connect, Celebrate& Contribute. The Indian diaspora is incredibly 
diverse, spanning across various countries, cultures, and socio-economic backgrounds. Such 
diversity makes it difficult to formulate a single, tight and unique policy for the Indian diaspora 
all across the globe. If such a policy is indeed attempted to be formulated, Ministry would then 
not be able to address the unique needs and aspirations of the diverse sections of the Indian 
diaspora spread across the world. Therefore, Ministry’s policies pertaining to the Indian 
diaspora have evolved with time on the basis of feedback received from the latter. Ministry 
has also tried to update its diaspora engagement schemes based on suggestions from Indian 
Missions/ Posts abroad from time to time and also those from other line Ministries, as and 
when required.Ministry has also endeavoured to maintain an ‘All-of-Government approach’ 
while engaging with the Indian Diaspora by regularly incorporating suggestions of the wings 
of the Government that are involved in promoting different aspects of their work under their 
charge amongst the Indian Diaspora overseas. This Ministry constantly consults, collaborates 
and supports other Ministries of the Government of India, such as the Ministry of Women and 
Child Development, Ministry of Labour& Employment, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, 
Ministry of Law and Justice and Ministry of Skills Development and Entrepreneurship, etc., as 
well as the State governments, while designing and implementing schemes and programmes 
for the welfare and engagement of the Indian diaspora. This approach has proved to be very 
effective. 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 47) 
 
While the PP&R Division has undertaken commendable work in foreign policy planning, 
the Committee note the absence of a formalized long-term strategic doctrine. The 
Ministry is encouraged to develop a comprehensive Strategic Foreign Policy Doctrine 
Document to provide a cohesive and long-term vision for India’s diplomacy. Several 
countries, such as the United States, Japan, Germany, United Kingdom as well as the 
European Union, have successfully implemented such documents to guide their foreign 

Page | 69 
 
policy. By adopting a similar approach, India can enhance its capacity to navigate global 
challenges and maintain its leadership role on international platform. MEA should 
initiate consultations with relevant stakeholders, including experts, diplomats, 
policymakers and parliamentary bodies to explore the feasibility and scope of 
developing a grand strategy document for India’s foreign policy. The Committee may be 
apprised of the action taken in this regard. 
 
Reply of the Government 
 
While there is no single overarching and formalized strategic document delineating a roadmap 
for India’s foreign policy apparatus, the underlying principles of India’s foreign policy are long 
established and enduring. The Ministry continually assesses and refines its diplomatic stance 
and policies in response to evolving global challenges. India’s positions on relevant issues and 
its interests, in the context of these principles, have been articulated through various platforms. 
 
These principles include safeguarding India’s sovereignty and security, protecting and 
promoting India’s national interests, enabling India’s domestic economic transformation, 
ensuring peaceful, secure and stable regional and global environment that is conducive to 
India’s growth and development and building influence in global forums through bilateral, 
multilateral and regional efforts. This pragmatic and outcome-oriented foreign policy orientation 
has revitalized India’s traditional ties, re-energized strategic, commercial, and economic 
relations with new partners and re-connected India with its Diaspora abroad. It has provided a 
foundation for dealing with the new and fast-changing realities of the world. 
 
  

Page | 70 
 
CHAPTER-V 
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH FINAL REPLIES OF THE 
GOVERNMENT ARE STILL AWAITED 
 
(Recommendation (Sl. No. 26) 
 
The Committee find that the budgetary allocation under the sub-head ‘Aid to Bangladesh’ 
has come down from Rs. 200 crore in BE 2023-24 to Rs. 120 crore in BE 2024-25. The 
Ministry has stated that the downward trend is due to the completion of large 
infrastructure projects such as India Bangladesh Friendship Pipeline (IBFPL), supply of 
20 BG locos and the ongoing political and security situation in Bangladesh. The 
Committee note that the Akhaura-Agartala Rail project is nearing completion and is 
expected to be handed over in 2024. Considering Bangladesh’s critical importance as a 
neighbouring country and key partner in India’s regional diplomacy, the Committee are 
hopeful that with resumption of normalcy, projects will pick up pace and additional 
funds, if required, be sought at the RE stage.  
 
Reply of the Government 
 
The Ministry is closely monitoring the developments and remains engaged with the interim 
government of Bangladesh. In this context, the Ministry will prioritize and evaluate proposals 
that are found to be strategically important, and desirable in terms of socio-economic impact 
and for generation of goodwill for India.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
NEW DELHI                                      Dr. Shashi Tharoor,                    
07 August, 2025                                                                                              Chairperson,                                 
16 Shravana, 1947 (Saka)                                      Committee on External Affairs 
  

Page | 71 
 
Annexure I (Recommendation No. 46) 
 
[Note: The Track 1.5/2.0 dialogues held in Tier 2/3 cities are mentioned in bold] 
 
Strategic Outreach 
Initiatives 
Think 
Tank/University 
Theme Dates/Venue 
07th Asia Economic 
Dialogue 2023 
Pune International 
Centre 
Asia and the Emerging 
World Order 
Pune/February 2023 
02ndMaharanaPratap 
Annual Geopolitics 
Dialogue 
Usanas Foundation India’s role in the 
changing world order 
Udaipur/March 2023 
3rd India-Japan 
Intellectual Conclave 
2023 
Asian Confluence Northeast India and Bay 
of Bengal in the Indo 
Pacific 
Agartala/April 2023 
9th International 
Relations Conference 
2023 
Symbiosis 
International 
University 
Revisiting Indian 
Strategic Thought and 
Culture 
Pune/November 2023 
01st International 
Conference ‘Purvodaya 
Perspectives’ 2023 
The Energy Forum India’s connectivity 
diplomacy: Purvodaya as 
the regional anchor 
Bhubaneswar/ 
December 2023 
04th India-Japan 
Intellectual Conclave 
‘Kizuna’  2024 
Asian Confluence North-east India, 
Bangladesh and the Bay 
of Bengal in the Indo-
Pacific: The Way Forward 
Shillong/February 2024 
08th Asia Economic 
Dialogue 2024 
Pune International 
Centre 
Geo-economic 
challenges in an era of 
flux 
Pune/Feb-Mar 2024 
Asian African Treaty 
Law Conference 2024 
RashtriyaRaksha 
University 
Asian – African Treaty 
Law and Practice 
Gandhinagar/February 
2024 
03rdMaharanaPratap 
Annual Geopolitics 
Dialogue 2024 
Usanas Foundation Navigating the 
Turbulence, Turmoil and 
Uncertainty: Defining 
India's Role as 
Vishwamitra 
Udaipur/March 2024 
1st Track 1.5 Polar 
Dialogue 2024 
National Institute of 
Advance Studies, 
Bengaluru 
Climate Change, S&T 
and Polar Regions; 
Polar Regions and 
International Frameworks; 
Bengaluru/August 2024 

Page | 72 
 
India and the Polar: The 
Road Ahead; 
Creation of Indo-Arctic 
Network 
India Indonesia Track 
1.5 Dialogue 2024 
Gateway House, 
Mumbai 
Defence, Maritime 
Security, Trade, Energy 
Transition and Cyber 
Security. 
Mumbai/September 
2024 
1st GTS Innovation 
Dialogue 2024 
Carnegie India Tech focused discussions 
on DPI and AI 
Bengaluru/October 
2024 
2nd International 
Conference on 
‘Purvodaya 
Perspectives’ 2024 
The Energy Forum Reclaiming India’s 
Maritime Heritage-
Perspectives, Prospects, 
and Prognosis 
Bhubaneswar/Decembe
r 2024 
1st Track 1.5 Kochi 
Dialogue 2025 
Centre for Public 
Policy Research 
India’s Look West Policy 
in Action: People, 
Prosperity and Progress 
Kochi/January 2025 
1st Health Diplomacy 
Dialogue 2025 
Indian Institute of 
Public Health and 
Governance, 
Gandhinagar 
Navigating Health System 
Challenges: India’s 
Health Diplomacy in 
Global South 
Gandhinagar/January 
2025 
01st Technology 
Dialogue 2025 
IISc, Bengaluru Exploring New Frontiers 
in Technology Diplomacy 
Bengaluru/ January 
2025 
04thMaharanaPratap 
Annual Geopolitics 
Dialogue 2025 
Usanas Foundation Building Tomorrow: 
Shaping the Future 
Jaipur/February 2025 
5th India-Japan 
Intellectual Conclave 
‘Kizuna’ 2025 
Asian Confluence Co-creating Ecosystems 
for change – Technology, 
Education, and Logistics 
Guwahati/February 
2025 
09th Asia Economic 
Dialogue 2025 
Pune International 
Centre 
Economic Resilience and 
Resurgence in an Era of 
Fragmentation 
Pune/February 2025 
 
***** 
  

Page | 73 
 
APPENDIX- I 
 
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIFTH SITTING OF THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON EXTER-
NAL AFFAIRS (2024-25) HELD ON 04 AUGUST, 2025 
  
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room ‘C’ Parliament House    
Annexe, New Delhi. 
Present 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 Dr. Shashi Tharoor, Chairperson 
  
 Lok Sabha 
2   Smt. D. K. Aruna 
3  Shri Vijay Baghel 
4   Shri Mitesh Patel Bakabhai 
5  Shri Deepender Singh Hooda 
6  Shri Navaskani K. 
7  Shri Brijendra Singh Ola 
8  Shri Sanatan Pandey 
9  Dr. Pradeep Kumar Panigrahy 
10  Shri Ravi Shankar Prasad 
11  Smt. Aparajita Sarangi 
12  Shri Arvind Ganpat Sawant 
13  Ms. Praniti Sushilkumar Shinde 
14  Shri Naveen Jindal 
 Rajya Sabha 
15  Dr. John Brittas 
16  Dr. K. Laxman 
17  Ms. Kavita Patidar 
18  Shri A. D. Singh 
19  Shri Ratanjeet Pratap Narain Singh 
20  Dr. Sudhanshu Trivedi 

Page | 74 
 
 
 
SECRETARIAT 
  
1.      Mr. Anjani Kumar                                -          Joint Secretary 
2.      Smt. Reena Gopalakrishnan              -          Director             
3.      Ms. Rachna Saxena                           -          Deputy Secretary 
4.      Ms. Maya Menon                                -          Under Secretary 
        
2.        At the outset, the Chairperson welcomed the Members to the Sitting of the Committee.  
 
3.      The Committee took up for consideration the draft Report on Action Taken by the Gov-
ernment on the Observations/ Recommendations contained in the  Fourth Report of the Com-
mittee on Demands for Grants of the Ministry of External Affairs for the year 2024-25. 
 
4.        The Chairperson invited the Members to offer their suggestions, if any, for incorporation 
in the draft Report. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report with some 
modifications. 
 
5.        The Committee then authorized the Chairperson to present the Report to Parliament.  
 
The Committee then adjourned. 
  
  
 
  

Page | 75 
 
APPENDIX-II 
 (Vide Para 4 of Introduction of Report) 
 
ANALYSIS OF ACTION TAKEN BY THE GOVERNMENT ON THE OBSERVATIONS/ 
RECOMMENDATIONS CONTAINED IN THE FOURTH REPORT OF THE COMMITTEE ON 
EXTERNAL AFFAIRS (18TH LOK SABHA) 
                                           
(i) Total Number of Recommendations             48  
 
(ii)   Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the 
Government. 
  
Recommendation Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 
19, 23, 24, 25, 27, 28, 29, 30, 33, 34, 35, 36, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42, 43, 44, 45, 46 
and 48. 
                                                                  Total-40 
Percentage: 83.3 % 
  
(iii)  Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to 
pursue in view of the Government's replies. 
       
 Recommendation No. 22 
                                                       Total-01 
 Percentage: 2.1 % 
  
(iv)  Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of the 
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and 
require   reiteration. 
  
 Recommendation Nos. 20, 21, 31, 32, 37 and 47 
                                                      Total- 6 
 Percentage: 12.5% 
  
(v)   Observations/Recommendations in respect of which final replies of the 
Government are still awaited. 
  
 Recommendation No. 26 
                                                                                        Total- 01 
Percentage:  2.1 % 