EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND
CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS
 (2000-2001)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
2004-2005
SIXTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
6

SIXTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
EXCESSES OVER VOTED GRANTS AND
CHARGED APPROPRIATIONS
(2000-2001)
[Action Taken on 40th Report of Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ——————————
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ————————————
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)

PAC No. 1754
Price : Rs. 20.00
© 2004 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of  Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of  India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2004-2005)........................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report........................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government..................................................................... 7
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the  Committee  do
not  desire  to  pursue  in  the  light  of  replies  received   from
from  Government........................................................................ 32
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted  by  the  Committee
and which require reiteration .................................................... 38
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies............................. 40
PART-II
Minutes  of  the  sitting  of  Public  Accounts   Committee   held
on 27.10.2004................................................................................ 41
APPENDIX
Conclusions and Recommendations........................................ 43

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
  2. V acant*
  3. Shri Ramesh Bais
  4. Shri Khagen Das
  5. Dr. M. Jagannath
  6. Shri Raghunath Jha
  7. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
  8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
  9. Dr. R. Senthil
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
13. Kunwar Revati Raman Singh
14. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Dr. K. Malaisamy
19. Shri V . Narayanasamy
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
21. Shri Jairam Ramesh
22. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
Secretariat
1. Shri P.D.T. Acharya — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
(iii)
* Shri A.R. Antulay, MP has resigned from the membership of the Committee  w.e.f.  27th August, 2004.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee having been authorised by the
Committee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this Sixth Report on action
taken by Government on the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee
contained in their 40th Report (13th Lok Sabha) on “Excesses over V oted Grants and
Charged Appropriations (2000-2001)”.
2. The Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at their
sitting held on 27 October, 2004. Minutes of the sitting form Part-II  of the Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and have also been reproduced
in a consolidated form in Appendix to the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to them
in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
2 November, 2004 Chairman,
11 Kartika, 1926 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with Action Taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their
Fortieth Report (13th Lok Sabha), on “Excesses over V oted Grants and Charged
Appropriations (2000-2001).
1.2 The Fortieth Report (13th Lok Sabha) which was presented to Lok Sabha on
19 December, 2002 contained ten Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken
Notes have been received in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations from
the concerned Ministries/Departments and these have been broadly categorized as
follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by Government:
Paragraph Nos. 20.1, 20.4, 20.5, 20.7, 20.8, 20.9, 20.10
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from Government:
Paragraph Nos. 20.2., 20.3
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph No. 20.6
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
-NIL-
1.3 The Action Taken Notes furnished by the concerned Ministries/Departments
have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now
deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of the Observations/
Recommendations made by the Committee in their Original Report, which need
reiteration or merit comments.
Excess expenditure despite obtaining Supplementary Grants/Appropriations
(Paragraph No. 20.2)
1.4 While examining the Appropriation Accounts of Union Government for the year
2000-2001 the Committee had observed that an expenditure of Rs. 230.44 crore had
been incurred by various Ministries/Departments in excess of the sanctioned provisions
in nine cases under Seven Grants/Appropriations. It had also been observed that
Grant No. 21-Defence Ordnance Factories alone recorded the highest excess expenditure
of Rs. 229.70 crore. The Committee had pointed out that Grant No. 11-Postal Services
1

2
which has not witnessed any excess expenditure during the last four years, i.e. from
1996-97 to 1999-2000 had suddenly incurred an excess expenditure of Rs. 16.41 lakh
under Revenue Charged (Rs. 6.64 lakh) and Capital Charged (Rs. 9.77 lakh) sections of
the Grant and the Ministry of Railways had incurred an excess expenditure of Rs. 14.36
lakh under three Revenue and two Capital Appropriations. Further, this excess
expenditure occurred despite obtaining Supplementary Grant of Rs. 183.04 lakh in four
out of nine cases of excess registering Grants/Appropriations during the year. The
Committee had also noticed that in the  case of Grant No. 1-Department of Agriculture
and Cooperation and Grant No. 11-Postal Services (Revenue-Charged) the quantum of
excess expenditure incurred is even higher than the Supplementary Grants obtained.
Accordingly, the Committee in para 20.2 of their Original Report had viewed such
cases as clear instances of inefficacious planning, lack of foresight and monitoring on
the part of budget controlling authorities.
1.5 The Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation), in their
reply, have stated as follows:
“The excess expenditure was mainly due to minus provisioning of Rs. 20 crore
under V oted in the Main Demand for Grants of Central Government. The
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation had furnished a provision of
Rs. 155.38 crore under Capital Section (V oted) which was inadvertently printed
as Rs. 135.38 crore in Main Demands for Grants, which is beyond the control of
this Department. Thus, the excess occurred due to minus provisioning”.
1.6 Elaborating the reasons for excess expenditure under Grant No. 11 despite
having Supplementary Grants, the Ministry of Communications & Information
Technology (Department of Posts) have in their Action Taken Note stated as follows:—
“Department of Posts accept that excess expenditure under ‘Charged’ segments
could have been avoided, had the concerned sanctioning authorities before
sanctioning and effecting payment taken into consideration the status of fund
availability. All the concerned authorities have been instructed to ensure that all
payments are made only with due budget provision and not in anticipation.”
1.7 Further, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure), which is a nodal
Ministry to keep watch over the flow of expenditure incurred by all the Ministries/
Departments, have stated in their reply that cases of excess that have taken place
despite having Supplementary Grants, establish that proper care was not taken either
in proper planning of action-plan or in making realistic assessment of funds therefor. In
accordance with the recommendations made by the Public Accounts Committee, they
have, therefore, issued instructions to all the Ministries/ Departments impressing
upon them the need for properly following the existing instructions on realistic
assessment of funds so that effective planning and monitoring could be infused into
budget making exercise.
1.8 The Committee, in their Original Report (13th Lok Sabha), had viewed the
cases of excess expenditure incurred during 2000-2001 despite having
Supplementary Grants as clear instances of inefficacious planning, lack of foresight
and monitoring on the part of budget controlling authorities. The Committee are

3
informed by the Department of Agriculture and Cooperation and the Department of
Posts that excess expenditure, despite obtaining Supplementary Grant in Grant
No. 1-Agriculture & Cooperation, was mainly due to minus provisioning of funds
while in Grant No. 11-Postal  Services, it was due to negligence of the Authorities
administering funds. Such type of errors according to the Committee could have
easily been detected, if, adequate attention had been paid by the Departments concerned
for prompt checking and reconciliation of accounts figures. The Committee feel that
responsibility for these lapses, particularly at the supervisory level, should have been
fixed and appropriate action taken against the erring officials.
The Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure), while agreeing with the view of
the Committee, have stated that in both the cases proper care was not taken either in
proper planning of action-plan or in making realistic assessment of funds therefor.
This resulted in cases of excesses despite having Supplementary Grants. The Ministry
of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure) have, therefore, impressed upon all the Ministries/
Departments the need for properly following the existing instructions for realistic
assessment of funds to infuse effective planning and monitoring into budget making
exercise. The Committee trust that the Ministries/Departments would take suitable
steps promptly to ensure strict observance of those instructions so as to make budgetary
control more realistic and meaningful. In genuine and inevitable cases, where
Supplementary Grants become necessary, an accurate estimate of the required funds
should be made so as to avoid such lapses in future.
Erroneous Surrender of Funds
(Paragraph No. 20.3)
1.9 During the course of scrutiny of the Appropriation Accounts for the year
2000-2001, the Committee were constrained to observe that under Grant No.
1-Department of Agriculture and Cooperation the surrender of funds of Rs. 17.14 crore
was made despite incurring of excess expenditure of Rs. 0.44 crores. Similarly under
Grant No. 21-Defence Ordnance Factories, surrender of Rs. 1.07 crore (Voted) was
made despite having excess expenditure of Rs. 229.70 crore in the voted segment and
no unspent provisions were available for surrender under both the Grants. Noticing
this as an instance of improper implementation of Budget allocations, the Committee
had, in para 20.3 of the Original Report, considered it a sad reflection on the adequacy
of coordination and information accounting system and also a collective failure on the
part of the Programme Division and Budget Controlling Authorities in the respective
Ministries/Departments.
1.10 The Action Taken Notes received in this regard from the concerned Ministries/
Departments are reproduced as below:
Ministry of Defence
“In this regard it is pertinent to mention that unlike other Demands, the gross
provision under the Demand pertaining to Defence Ordnance Factories is arrived at
after deducting value of supplies to army, Navy, Air Force etc. from the total of various
Revenue expenditure heads. Defence Ordnance Factories are manufacturing
organizations. All out efforts to achieve the targeted supplies was made but the excess

4
expenditure under this Grant during the year 2000-2001 was mainly due to shortfall in
issues to Army. The reduction in issues to Army though resulted in excess expenditure
under the Defence Ordnance Factories yet there was less expenditure under Army due
to fewer issues. Hence the excess has not affected the expenditure of Defence Services
as a whole.
Further, during the course of the year certain payments arising out of court judgments
were required to be made. In order to make these payments, an amount of Rs. 1.07
crores was surrendered under Voted portion of Demand No. 21-Defence Ordnance
Factories and Technical Supplementary of an equal amount of Rs. 1.07 crores under
Charged portion was taken at the third and final batch of the Supplementary Demands
for Grants 2000-2001. Thus there was no additional outgo on this account. However,
necessary instructions have been issued to all concerned to monitor the progress of
expenditure in more vigilant/stricter manner apart from projecting the Demands on
factual basis and to the barest minimum depending on the actual requirements/
obligations”.
Ministry of Agriculture
(Department of Agriculture & Cooperation)
“The excess expenditure was mainly due to minus provisioning of Rs. 20 crore
under V oted in the Main Demand for Grants of Central Government. The
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation had furnished a provision of
Rs. 155.38 crore under Capital Section (Voted) and Rs. 34.27 crore under Capital
Section (Charged) which was inadvertently printed as Rs. 135.38 crore under
V oted and Rs. 54.27 crore under Charged in the Main Demands for Grants due to
minus provisioning of Rs. 20 crore. The same has been reflected in the
Appropriation Accounts by Controller General of Accounts to avoid any variance
from the Main Demands for Grants. The Ministry of Finance was approached for
issue of a corrigendum to rectify this error. As final batch of supplementary grant
was over the error could not be rectified. It may be stated that an amount of
 Rs. 1714.45 lakh was surrendered under Capital Section (Voted) on the basis of
provision of Rs. 155.38 crore as per Detailed Demands for Grants. However, as
explained above, there was an excess expenditure of Rs. 43.72 lakhs on the basis
of Main Demands for Grants and Appropriation Accounts”.
1.11 In regard to another case of bad budgeting, the Committee were constrained
to point out that during the year 2000-2001, surrender of funds was made in excess
registering Grant No. 1-Department of Agriculture and Cooperation and Grant No.
21-Defence Ordnance Factories, though no unspent provisions were available for
surrender. They had, therefore, in para 20.3 of their Original Report considered it a
sad reflection on the adequacy of coordination and information accounting system
and also a collective failure on the part of the Programme Division as well as the
Budget Controlling Authorities in the respective Ministries/Department. The
Committee are surprised to find that the surrenders in both the cases were made
without conducting a thorough scrutiny of expenditure incurred or likely to be
incurred by them during the Financial Year. It has also been found that the Ministry
of Agriculture did not approach the Ministry of Finance well in the time for issuing

5
corrigendum to rectify the error of minus provisioning of Rs. 20 crore under the
grant operated by them. The Committee are unable to understand why such an omission
could not be detected prior to the presentation of Supplementary Grants to the House
as there is always a time-lag between the notice of the Ministry of Finance to all the
Ministries/Departments  for submission of requirement for obtaining Supplementary
Grants and the presentation of the same Grants to the House by the Ministry of
Finance. The Committee are inclined to conclude that this is a clear case of delay and
laxity in the financial control exercised at the supervisory level in both the cases, for
which responsibility should be fixed and action taken against those responsible for
the mistakes. The Committee hope that the concerned Ministries would take adequate
care in future to avoid excesses on this account.
Excess expenditure under Grant No. 11-Postal Services
(Paragraph No. 20.6)
1.12 A perusal of the Appropriation Accounts of Postal services during the year
2000-2001 had revealed that under Grant No. 11-Postal Services, there was an overall
excess expenditure of Rs. 16.41 lakh over the sanctioned provision under Revenue-
Charged (Rs. 6.64 lakh) and Capital-Charged (Rs. 9.77 lakh) Sections of the Grant. It
had further revealed that this excess expenditure had occurred despite obtaining a
total Supplementary Grant of Rs. 40.15 lakh under both the sections of the Grant.
Explaining the reasons for excess expenditure under both the sections of this Grant,
the Department of Posts in their explanatory note had informed the Committee that this
was incurred to honour the Court judgment and as the judgment was received at the
fag end of the year, it was not possible to obtain Supplementary Grant. Expressing their
concern over the stock reply of the Department, the Committee in Para 20.6 of the
Original Report had desired to be apprised of the exact date when the Court judgment
was passed and the date when received in the Ministry.
1.13 The Department of Posts, in their reply have inter-alia stated as follows:—
“As recommended by the Committee the cases of excess expenditure have been
examined in detail. It has been found that under Capital segment, though the
judgments were received in time, there was some delay in implementing three
court judgments for a total amount of Rs. 10.10 lakhs and as a result of this, the
concerned authorities could not project their demands timely for obtaining the
supplementary grants or advance from Contingency Fund of India (responsibility
is being fixed for non submission of timely requirement of funds.) This led to an
excess expenditure of Rs. 10 lakhs under the Capital Charged Segment. As far as
Revenue Section is concerned, the expenditure of Rs. 7,20,000 which relates to
the head 07.104-Gratuities (Voted) was wrongly booked under the head 07.101.02-
Arrears paid due to Supreme Court Judgment (Charged). Instructions have been
issued to all concerned to follow the codified provisions strictly.”
1.14 During the course of vetting of the Action Taken Note furnished by the
Department of Posts, the Audit had made the following Observations:—
“Ministry’s argument that there was some delay in implementing the three court
judgments and that as a result the concerned authorities could not project their

6
demands timely for obtaining the supplementary grants or advance from
Contingency Fund of India is not acceptable. The court judgments in the three
cases were received in February, 2000, June, 2000 and October, 2000 and the
Department had sufficient time to request for provision of funds in the routine
manner. In one case, although the judgment was received in the earlier financial
year (February, 2000), Department did not make provision in the revised estimates
for 2000-01.”
1.15 It had come to the notice of the Committee that there was an aggregate excess
expenditure of Rs. 16.41 lakh under two sections Revenue-Charged (Rs. 6.64 lakh)
and Capital-Charged (Rs. 9.77 lakh) under Grant No. 11-Postal Services during the
year 2000-2001. Explaining the reasons for the excess expenditure, the Government
had earlier stated that certain Court judgments were required to be honoured and
excess expenditure had occurred due to receipt of the judgments at the fag end of the
year thus making it impossible to obtain Supplementary Grant. The Committee had,
therefore, desired to be apprised of the exact date when the Court judgment was
passed and the date on which it was received in the Ministry. The Department of Posts
in their Action Taken Note have now informed that the judgments were received in
time but there was some delay in implementing three Court judgments for a total
amount of Rs. 10.10 lakhs and consequently, the concerned authorities could not
project the demands timely for obtaining the supplementary Grants or advance from
Contingency Fund of India, leading to an excess expenditure of Rs. 10 lakhs under
the Capital - Charged Segment. The Committee have been given to understand by
Audit that in one case, although the judgment was received in the earlier Financial
Year i.e. February, 2000, the Department did not make the provision in the revised
estimates for 2000-01. Thus, it is clear that the Department had sufficient time in
respect of all these Court cases to request for provision of funds in the ordinary
course of time. That this was not done is regrettable. They would, therefore, urge the
Ministry to ensure that such instances do not recur.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  THAT  HAVE  BEEN
ACCEPTED  BY  GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Committee note that an expenditure of Rs. 230.45 crore has been incurred in
excess of the sanctioned provision in 9 cases under 7 Grants/Appropriations during
2000-2001. It has been observed that out of 7 excess registering Grants/Appropriations,
the grant No. 21–Defence Ordnance Factories alone recorded the highest excess
expenditure i.e. Rs. 229.70 crore which is 99.67 per cent of the total excess expenditure
incurred by the Union Government during this  period. It has also been observed that
Grant No. 11 – Postal Services which has not witnessed any excess expenditure during
the years 1996-97, 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000 have suddenly incurred an excess
expenditure of Rs.17,26,000 under Revenue-Charged (Rs. 7,14,000) and Capital-Charged
(Rs. 10,12,000) sections of the Grant during 2000-2001. In the case of appropriations
administered by Ministry of Railways an excess expenditure amounting to Rs. 14,35,540
was incurred under three Revenue and two capital appropriations, out of which
Appropriation No. 16-Assets-Acquisition,Construction and Replacement – Capital
along incurred excess expenditure to the tune of Rs. 13,27,548 which is approximately
92% of the whole excess expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Railways during the
year under review. The Committee note that the excess expenditure which had come
down to the extent of Rs. 57.36 crore only during 1999-2000 suddenly rose up to
Rs. 230.45 crore during 2000-2001. The Committee find that excluding the excess
expenditure of the Ministry of Defence, the excess expenditure under other Grants has
come down remarkably. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendations
that with proper budget accounting system and monitoring of expenditure flow and
timely utilization of the enabling provision of seeking supplementary grants, excess
expenditure can surely be avoided.
[Sl. No. 1, Para 20.1 Appendix-V, 40th Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the  Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure)
While  Rule 71 of the General Financial Rules clearly lay down that no expenditure
shall be incurred, which may have the effect of exceeding the total grant or appropriation
authorized by Parliament for a financial year, except after obtaining a supplementary
grant or appropriation, Rule 65(I) thereof places the responsibility of the control of
expenditure against the sanctioned grants on the Departmetns of the Central
Government administratively concerned or the authority on whose behalf a grant or
appropriation as authorized by Parliament, is placed and such an authority shall exercise
control through the  heads of the Departments and other controlling officers, if any,
and Disbursing Officers. Further more,Rules 65(2), 66(2) and 66(3) of the General
Financial Rules along with various Government of India decisions thereunder, have
already laid down effective mechanism and procedure to be followed by the Departments,
7

8
Controlling Officers and Disbursing Officers for exercising proper check on flow of
expenditure on a month to month basis not only in cases where fluctuations are likely
to take place but also in case of non-recurring expenditure. Also, instructions have
been issued by this Ministry from time to time on the basis of the previous
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee whereby a mechanism is required
to be devised by all the Departments to enable them to avoid occurrence of excess.
Even though the amount involved in the excess has come down considerably in the
recent past, as observed by the Public Accounts Committee in Para 16.1 of the Report,
the fact remains that the existing instructions have not been fully complied with by the
Ministries where excess has taken place. Therefore, having regard to the observations
made by the Public Accounts Committee, fresh instructions have been issued to all the
Ministries/Departments impressing upon them the need to exercise check over the
flow of expenditure in accordance with the existing instructions contained in the General
Financial Rules and the instructions issued by this Ministry from time to time. A copy
of the order dated 19th May, 2003 is enclosed.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. Note No. RR/1-45/2002-2003/6 dated
7.4.2003.
[Ministry of Finance Department of Expenditure E. Coord. Branch U.O. No. 12(1)/
E.Coord./2003 dated: 19.5.2003]

No. 12(1)E.Coord./2003
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT  OF  EXPENDITURE
New Delhi, the 19th May, 2003
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
SUBJECT: Avoiding cases of expenditure in excess over voted grants/appropriations
– recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee - 40th Report
(13th Lok Sabha).
The undersigned is directed to invite the attention to the observations made by the
Public Accounts Committee in Para 20.1 of their 40th Report (13th Lok Sabha). While
taking adverse view of the recurrence of excess expenditure over voted grants/charged
appropriations,  despite adequate instructions contained in the General Financial Rules,
the Committee has reiterated their earlier recommendations that with proper budget
accounting system and monitoring of expenditure flow and timely utilization of the
enabling provision of seeking supplementary grants, excess expenditure can surely be
avoided.
2. The occurrence of excess expenditure over the voted grants/charged
appropriations is reflective of  utter lack of financial propriety and systemic disregard
of existing rules and regulations on expenditure management and control. While Rule
71 of the General Financial Rules clearly lays down that no expenditure shall be incurred,
which may have the effect of exceeding the total grant or appropriation authorised by
Parliament, for a financial year, except after obtaining a supplementary grant or
appropriation, Rule 65(1) thereof places the responsibility of the control of expenditure
against the sanctioned grants on the Departments of the Central Government
administratively concerned or the authority on whose behalf a grant or appropriation,
as authorized by Parliament, is placed and such an authority shall exercise control
through the heads of the Departments and other controlling officers, if any, and
Disbursing Officers. Furthermore, the provisions contained in Rules 65(2), 66(2), 66(3)
of the General Financial Rules, along with various Government of India decisions
thereunder clearly lay down the mechanism and procedure to be followed by  all the
Departments,  Controlling Officers, and Disbursing Officers for keeping an effective
check over the flow of expenditure on a monthly basis so as to avoid occurrence of
9

10
excess in case of any grant/appropriation. In this connection, attention is also invited
to the D.O. letter No. 12(1)E. coord./99 dated 17.2.2000 from Secretary (E) addressed to
all Secretaries to the Government of India, impressing upon them the need for devising
a suitable mechanism for ensuing proper check on the flow of expenditure. A detailed
mechanism  was laid down in the subsequent instruction issued by this Department
vide O.M.. No. 12(3)/E.Coord./2000 dated 13.8.2001, whereby a constant and monthly
check is required to be exercised by the Controlling Officers and DDOs under constant
supervision of the concerned Secretaries and the Financial Advisers.
3. The fact that the cases of excess expenditure  over voted grants/charged
appropriations have reoccurred establishes that due regard is not being paid to the
instructions contained  in the General Finacial Rules as well as instructions issued by
this Ministry from time to time in this regard.
4. Accordingly, inview of the recommendations made by the Public Accounts
Committee in their aforesaid report, it is reiterated that all the Ministries/Departments
must ensure that the existing  instructions on control of expenditure are fully complied
with so as to avoid cases of excess expenditure.
-Sd-
(USHA MA THUR)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
1. All the Ministries/Departments as per the standard mailing list.
2. All Secretaries to the Government of India.
3. All Financial Advisers.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
Instructions already exist to formulate the Budget Estimates on most realistic basis
and to keep the expenditure under constant review by monitoring it regularly in an
effective manner so as to conform to the allocations made and ensure that neither there
is any excess nor large scale savings over the sanctioned budgetary provisions.
However, inorder to avoid recurrence of any excess in future, the observations
contained in 30th Report of the PAC (13th Lok Sabha) that the estimates should be
formulated after proper scrutiny & careful assessment keeping in view all relevant
factors and it should also be carefully monitored in an effective manner so as to avoid
any excess over Voted Grant/Cherged Appropriations by scrupulously following the
provisions contained in the relevant rules have been circulated to all the estimating
authorities for strict compliance vide MoD (Fin) ID No. 10(1)(B-I/2002 dated 22.11.2002
(copy enclosed).
[Ministry of  Defence File No. 10(11)/B-2002,  dated 10.04.2003]

MINISTRY OF DEFENCE  (FINANCE)
BUDGET-I
SUBJECT: Realistic budget assessment, effective monitoring of the flow of expenditure
and effective budgetary control to avoid excess over the Voted Grants and
Charged Appropriation - 30th Report of the P AC (13th Lok Sabha)
A copy each of two OMs received from Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) bearing same No. 12(1)E.Coord./2002, both dated 27.9.2002, on the above
subject, pertaining to the observations/recommendations made by the Public Accounts
Committee in their 30th report, 13th Lok Sabha,relating to Excess Expenditure over the
V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations(1999-2000) is enclosed.
2. It may be seen therefrom that the Committee has viewed with serious concern the
cases of excess expenditure even in those grants/appropriations where supplementary
provisions had been obtained reflecting the inability of the Ministries/Departments to
assess actual requirement of funds at the fag end of the year. It has also been mentioned
therein that the Contingency Fund of India is meant only to  cover unforeseen
expenditure and not to meet the known liabilities that arise in the course of year. They
have, therefore, recommended that a realistic assessment of funds required for various
expenditure at different stages in a financial year after appropriate scrutiny at various
levels should be made, taking in to account all relevant factors and  by scrupulously
following provisions contained in the relevant rules. The Committee taking adverse
note of occurrence of excess and in order to avoid any excess over V oted Grants/
Charged Appropriations have recommended  for a careful & effective monitoring of
flow of expenditure.
3. In this regard the Ministry of Finance have also invited attention to the instructions
issued by them earlier, on the subject, which were circulated to all concerned under
this Ministry’s ID Note No. 10(3)/B-I/2000 dt. 22.3.2000 and 10(2)/B-I/2001 dt. 20.12.2001.
4. It is requested that the recommendations of the PAC may be communicated
to all concerned for informations/strict  compliance to avoid any excess in future.
-Sd-
(A.K. CHOPRA)
Addl. FA (A) & JS
All Joint Secretaries/All Addl.FAs/IFAs,
Addl. DGFP, DNP, D Fin P, DGOF,
CCR&D(R), DGQA, DGNC, DG Mil Farms,
DGAQA, ATVP, Dte. of Standardisation
MoD (Fin) ID No. 10(1)B-I/2002 dated 22.11.2002.
Copy to: (1) CGDA
(2)  Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure.
(3)  Addl. FA (V) in respect of MO and Bordr Roads.
11

No. 12(1)E.Coord./2003
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
New Delhi, the 27th September, 2002
OFFICE   MEMORANDUM
SUBJECT: Realistic budget assessment – cases where Supplementary Grant is taken
not to result in excess expenditure – resort to Contingency Fund –
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee in the 30th Report
(13th Lok Sabha) regarding excessess over voted/charged
appropriations.
The undersigned is directed to invite the attention to the recommendations made
by the Public Accounts Committee in Para 7.1.3 and 7.2.1 of their 30th Report (13th Lok
Sabha) where the Committee has viewed with serious concern the cases of excess
expenditure even in those grants/appropriations where supplementary provisions had
been obtained. The Report  has also mentioned that the Contingency Fund is meant
only  to cover unforeseen expenditure and not to meet the known liabilities that arise
in the course of the year. The committee has further mentioned that this constitutes a
telling reflection on the approach of the Ministries/Departments and their inability to
assess the actual requirement of funds even at the fag end of the financial year and
has, therefore, recommended that the progress of expenditure should be clearly
monitored to ensure smooth flow of expenditure within the provisions sanctioned by
Parliament and to ensure that liabilities are anticipated and taken into account at
appropriate stages of budget formulation including Addl./Supplementary Demands.
2. It is needless to mention that making a realistic assessment of funds required for
various expenditure at various stages in a financial year is the basic cornerstone of the
budget formulation and estimation. Detailed guidelines have already been provided
for in  Rule 53 of the General Financial Rules read with the provisions contained in the
Appendix-3 thereof relating to expenditure estimates on both plan and non-plan sides
and as per these instructions, estimations should be made only after appropriate
scrutiny at various levels and as such there should not normally be any occasion for
expenditure going inexcess of such estimation. Adequate provisions also exist under
Rule 73 read with provisions contained in Appendix-6 of the General Financial Rules
relating to circumstances under which Supplementary Grants may be raised and in
cases where Supplementary Grants are taken, the occurrence of excesses reveals lack
of proper scrutiny and assessment of expenditure.
12

13
3. So far as the advances from the Contingency Fund is concerned, provisions
contained in the Sub-Rule 1, 2 & 3 of the Rule 74 of the General Financial Rules clearly
provide for circumstances under which such advances be made, if there is no sufficient
time for Supplementary Demand and, therefore, if the expenditure as envisaged is able
to be met by the Supplementary Grant, there should be no occasion for advances from
the Contingency Fund.
4. The instances brought out by the Public Accounts Committee clearly indicate
that Budget estimations were not made after proper scrutiny, as required under the
existing provisions and, therefore, having regard to the recommendations made by the
Public Accounts Committee, all the Ministries/Departments are advised that expenditure
estimate should be made after proper scrutiny and after careful assessment of all
releant factors by scrupulously following the provisions contained in the General
Financial Rules and recourse to the advances from the Contingency Fund should not
be made where the purpose could be served by Supplementary Grants. Further, in
order to avoid any excesses over voted/charged appropriations, careful monitoring of
expenditure should be made as per the provisions contained in the General Financial
Rules and this Ministry’s O.M. No. 12(3)/E.Coord./2000 dated 13.8.2001.
Sd/-
(USHA MA THUR)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
1. All the Ministries/Departments as per the standard mailing list.
2. All Secretaries to the Government of India.
3. All Financial Advisers.

No. 12(1)/E. Coord./2002
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
*****
New Delhi, the 27th September, 2002
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
SUBJECT: Effective monitoring of the flow of expenditure and effective budgetary
Control to avoid excess over voted grants/charged appropriations —
30th Report of the Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha).
The undersigned is directed to invite attention to the recommendations made by
the Public Accounts Committee in Paras 7.1.1 and 7.2.3 of their 30th Report (13th Lok
Sabha) regarding excesses over voted grants and charged appropriations (1999-2000)
and to say that taking adverse note of occurrence of excess over voted grants/charged
appropriations, the Committee has recommended for an effective monitoring of the
flow of expenditure as also for sustained efforts for effective budgetary control to wipe
out the excesses of such cases.
2. In this connection, attention is invited to the provisions contained in Rules 65 &
66 of the General Financial Rules along with the Government of India decisions
thereunder providing for a detailed procedure for effective monitoring and control of
expenditure as also to the provisions contained in the D.O. letter no.  12(1)/E.Coord./99
dated 17.2.2002  from Secretary (E) addressed to all Secretaries to the Government of
India and to the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure’s O.M. No. 12(3)/
E.Coord/2000 dated 13.8.2001, where instructions have been issued to put in place an
effective mechanism for exercising monthly review of flow of expenditure so as to
avoid cases of excess. These instructions would, no doubt, have been followed and
effective steps taken for control of expenditure. If the steps envisaged therein are
followed, there should be no occasion for excess expenditure.
3. All the Ministries/Departments are, therefore, advised to follow the instructions
mentioned above and to ensure that no case of excess takes place in respect of any of
the grants under their control.
Sd/-
(USHA  MATHUR)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
1. All the Ministries/Departments as per the standard mailing list.
2. All Secretaries to the Government of India.
3. All Financial Advisers.
14

15
Action Taken by the Department  of Posts
Department of Posts agree with the recommendation of the Committee, and has
taken all possible steps to avoid the excess expenditure over Sanctioned grants. Suitable
instructions have been issued to Circles and PAOs to avoid recurrence of such lapses
in future.
[Deptt. of Posts No. 20-5/2003 BGT (PA) Dated April 28, 2003]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee in regard to avoidance of
excess expenditure have been noted. Out of the total excess expenditure of Rs. 23045.00
lakhs for the Government of India, the excess by Ministry of Railways has been
Rs. 14.36 lakhs, which is 0.06% of the total excess of Government of India, and can be
considered as minor.
This has been seen and vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. 10RA III/2-1/2002
dated 14-5-2003.
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2002-BC-PAC/XIII/40  dated 12-6-2003]
Recommendation
The Committee are unhappy to note delay in submission of explanatory notes by
the Department of Posts and Department of Agriculture and Cooperation during
2000-2001.The Committee note that in pursuance of their recommendation made in
their 23rd Report (13th Lok Sabha), the Controller General of Accounts has prescribed
a procedure which require Ministries/Departments to furnish explanatory notes
alongwith the Appropriation Accounts to the Public Accounts Committee well in time.
The Committee hope that the explanatory notes on excess expenditure be made
available to the Public Accounts Committee alongwith the Appropriation Accounts
failing which they would consider it a cogent enough ground to send for the
Departmental head for their oral examination.
[Sl. No. 4 Appendix-V Para No. 20.4 of Fortieth Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure)
The observations of the Committee have been brought to the notice of all the
Ministries/Departments for strict  compliance and follow up vide O.M. No. 1/40/2003-
MC dated 18.03.2002—(Annexure). Besides, immediately on receipt of information in
respect of grants/appropriations involving excess expenditure or savings of Rs. 100
crores and above, instructions are issued to all concerned to furnish explanatory notes
relating to these so that these notes are simultaneously made available to Public
Accounts Committee alongwith the Appropriation Accounts. Thereafter the submission
of explanatory notes is pursued with the concerned Ministries/Departments by way of
periodical reminders to concerned Financial advisers/Secretary through demi-official
letters from Additional Controller General of Accounts, Controller General of Accounts.
This has been vetted by audit vide their U.O. No. RR/1-49/2002-03/158 dated 6.05.03
[Ministry of Finance (Expenditure) O.M. No. 1/40/2003-MC dated 22.05.03]

No. 1/40/2003-MC
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
(MONITORING CELL)
Room No. 29, B-Wing, Second Floor,
Loknayak Bhavan, Khan Market,
New Delhi-110003, the 18th March 2003
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
SUBJECT : Action Taken on the recommendations contained in the Fortieth Report
of the Public Accounts Committee (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on “Excesses
Over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2000-2001)”.
The undersigned is directed to refer to Public Accounts Committee’s
recommendations contained in Para 20.4 of its 40th Report (13th Lok Sabha) on the
subject noted above, the contents of which are reproduced below:
“The Committee are unhappy to note delay  in submission of explanatory noted
by the Department of Posts and Department of Agriculture and Cooperation
during 2000-2001. The Committee note that in pursuance of their recommenda-
tion made in  their 23rd Report (13th Lok Sabha), the Controller General of
Accounts  has prescribed a procedure which require Ministries/Departments to
furnish explanatory notes alongwith the Appropriation Accounts to the Public
Accounts Committee well in time. The Committee hope that the explanatory
notes on excess expenditure be made available to the Public Accounts
Committee alongwith the Appropriation Accounts failing which they would
consider it a cogent enough ground to send for the Departmental head for their
oral  examination.”
All the Ministries/Departments are  requested to note the recommendation for
strict compliance so that now and hereinafter the explanatory notes on excess
expenditure as mentioned above as well as the explanatory notes on savings of Rs. 100
crores and above are invariably made available to the Public Accounts Committee
alongwith Appropriation Accounts to avoid a situation whereby Public Accounts
MOST IMMEDIATE
PAC RECOMMENDATIONS
Annexure
16

17
Committee may have to take adverse note of the delay and may even have to resort to
measures like sending for Departmental head for oral examination.
Sd/-
(T.S. NEGI)
UNDER SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
TELE: 24626829
1. Financial Advisers/Joint Secretaries (Finance) of all the Ministries/Departments
of the GoI.
2. Copy  forwarded for information and necessary action to all the Ministries/
Departments  to GoI.
3. Financial Commissioner, Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) New Delhi.
4. Member (Finance) Deptt. of Telecom/Posts, Sanchar/Dak Bhavan, New Delhi.
5. CCA, Deptt. of Atomic Energy, Bombay
6. CCA, Deptt. of Space, Bangalore
7. Copy forwarded for information to:
Shri B.S. Dahiya, US  (PAC), Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi.
Action Taken by the Department of Agriculture & Cooperation
The Explanatory Note for excess was forwarded to audit in October, 2001. At the
instance of audit Revised Explanatory Note and further revised Explanatory Note was
prepared and sent to audit. Thus in this process the Explanatory Note was vetted by
Audit on 25th Feb.,2003.
It has always been our endeavour to take prompt action in submission of explanatory
notes on excess as well as savings as per the recommendations of Public Accounts
Committee. The advice of the Committee has been noted for compliance.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation) O.M. No. 1-2/
2003-Budget dated 5th Aug., 2003]
Action taken by the Department of Posts
Recommendation of the Committee has been noted for further guidance.
[Deptt. of Posts No. 20-5/2003 BGT (PA) Dated April 28, 2003]
Recommendation
The Committee note that against  the sanctioned provision of Rs. 580.20 crore
under Grant No. 21—Defence Ordnance Factories, the Ministry of Defence incurred
expenditure of Rs. 809.90 crore resulting in an unrecovered excess of Rs. 229.70 crore.

18
The Ministry in their explanatory note have stated that the excess of Rs. 229.70 crore
was the net effect of total excess of Rs. 3.93 crore, shortfall in supply to services of
Rs. 313.22 crore, total savings of Rs.86.38 crore and surrender of Rs. 1.07 crore  under
various sub-heads of the Grants. The Committee have observed that no supplementary
provisions were obtained under this Section of the Grant in order to avoid excess
expenditure. The reasons explained by the Ministry lead the Committee to an obvious
conclusion that the Ministry of Defence have, at no stage, been able  to precisely
anticipate, assess and provide for the funds actually required by them under the
various heads of Grant. The excess has occurred mainly under the Heads “106 —
Renewal and Replacement” (Rs. 3.93 crore) due to Payments made to DGS & D against
supply of machineries under Rate Contract and “ 901-904—Reduct Recoveries”
(Rs. 313.22 crore) due to shortfall in issues to Army in respect of ammunition and
vehicles. It has also been observed  that excess expenditure of Rs. 68,658 was also
incurred during the year 1999-2000 under this Grant. As usual the Ministry have informed
that in order to avoid recurrence of any excess in future, the observations contained in
para 8 of the 14th Report of the PAC (13th Lok Sabha) has been circulated to all the
estimating authorities for information and strict compliance. The Committee are
optimistic that the Ministry of Defence would ensure strict observance of the existing
instructions so as to avoid excess expenditure.
[Sl. No. 5 of Appendix-V, Para 20.5 of 40th Report of PAC 2002-2003 (13th Lok
Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
Instructions  already exist to formulate the Budget Estimates on most realistic basis
and to keep the expenditure under constant review by monitoring it regularly in an
effective manner so as to conform to the allocations made and ensure that neither there
is any excess not large scale savings over the sanctioned budgetary provisions.
However, in order to avoid recurrence of  any excess in future, the observations
contained in 30th Report of the PAC (13th Lok Sabha) that the estimates should be
formulated after proper scrutiny & careful assessment keeping in view all relevant
factors and it should also be  carefully monitored in an effective manner so as to avoid
any excess over Voted Grant/Charged Appropriations by scrupulously following the
provisions contained in the relevant rules have been circulated to all the estimating
authorities for  strict compliance vide MoD (Fin) ID No. 10(1)/B-I/2002 dated 22.11.2002
(copy enclosed).
[Ministry of Defence File No. 10(11)/B-I/2002 - dated 10-04-2003]

MINISTRY  OF  DEFENCE  (FINANCE)
BUDGET-I
SUBJECT : Realistic budget assessment, effective monitoring of the flow of expenditure
and effective budgetary control to avoid excess over the V oted Grants
and Charged Appropriation — 30th Report of the P AC
(13th Lok Sabha).
A copy each of two OMs received from Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) bearing same No. 12(1)/E. Coord./2002, both dated 27.9.2002, on the above
subject, pertaining to the observations/recommendations made by the Public Accounts
Committee in their 30th Report, 13th Lok Sabha, relating to Excess Expenditure over the
V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations (1999-2000) is enclosed.
2. It may be seen therefrom that the Committee has viewed with serious concern the
cases of excess expenditure even in those grants/appropriations where supplementary
provisions had been obtained reflecting the inability of the Ministries/Departments to
assess actual requirement of funds at the fag end of the year. It has also been mentioned
therein that the Contingency Fund of India is meant only to cover unforeseen
expenditure and not to meet the known liabilities that arise in the course of year. They
have, therefore, recommended that a realistic assessment of funds required for various
expenditure at different stages in a financial year after appropriate scrutiny at various
levels should be made, taking into account all relevant factors and by scrupulously
following provisions contained in the relevant rules. The Committee taking adverse
note of occurrence of excess and in order to avoid any excess over V oted Grants/
Charged Appropriations have recommended for a careful & effective monitoring of
flow of expenditure.
3. In this regard the Ministry of Finance have also invited attention to the instructions
issued by them earlier, on the subject, which were circulated to all concerned under
this Ministry’s ID note No. 10(3)/B-I/2000 dt. 22/3/2000 and 10(2)/B-I/2001 dt 20/12/
2001.
4. It is requested that the recommendations of the PAC may be communicated to all
concerned for information/strict compliance to avoid any excess in future.
Sd-
(A.K. CHOPRA)
Addl. FA (A) & JS
All Joint Secretaries/All Addl. FAs/IFAs,
Addl. DGFP, DNP, D. Fin. P , DGOF,
CCR & D(R), DGQA, DGNCC, DG Mil Farms,
DGAQA, ATVP, Dte. of  Standardisation
MoD (Fin.) ID No. 10(1)/B-I/2002 dated 22.11.2002
Copy to : (1) CGDA.
(2) Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure.
(3) Addl. FA (V) in respect of MO and Border Roads.
19

No. 12(1)/E. Coord./2002
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
*****
New Delhi, the 27th September, 2002
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
SUBJECT: Realistic budget assessment—cases where Supplementary Grant is
taken not to result in excess expenditure—resort to Contingency Fund-
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee in the
30th Report (13th Lok Sabha) regarding excesses over voted/charged
appropriations.
The undersigned is directed to invite the attention to the recommendations made
by the Public Accounts Committee in Paras 7.1.3 and 7.2.1 of their 30th Report (13th
Lok Sabha) where the Committee has viewed with serious concern the cases of excess
expenditure even in those grants/appropriations where supplementary provisions had
been obtained. The Report has also mentioned that the Contingency Fund is meant
only to cover unforeseen expenditure and not to meet the known liabilities that arise in
the course of the year. The Committee has further mentioned that this constitutes a
telling reflection on the approach of the Ministries/Departments and their inability to
assess the actual requirement of funds even at the fag end of the financial year and
has, therefore, recommended that the progress of expenditure should be clearly
monitored to ensure smooth flow of expenditure within the provisions sanctioned by
Parliament and to ensure that liabilities are anticipated and taken into account at
appropriate stages of budget formulation including Addl./Supplementary Demands.
2. It is needless to mention that making a realistic assessment of funds required for
various expenditure at various stages in a financial year is the basic cornerstone of the
budget formulation and estimation. Detailed guidelines have already been provided
for in Rule 53 of the General Financial Rules read with provisions contained in the
Appendix-3 thereof relating to expenditure  estimates on both plan and non-plan sides
and as per these instructions, estimations should be made only after appropriate
scrutiny at various levels and as such there should not normally be any occasion for
expenditure going in excess of such estimation. Adequate provisions also exist under
Rule 73 read with provisions contained in Appendix-6 of the General Financial Rules
relating to circumstances under which Supplementary Grants may be raised and in
20

21
cases where Supplemetnary Grants are taken, the occurrence of excesses reveals lack
of proper scrutiny and assessment of expenditure.
3. So far as the advances from the Contingency Fund is concerned, provisions
contined in the Sub-Rule 1, 2 & 3 of the Rule 74 of the General Financial Rules clearly
provide for circumstances under which such advances be made, if there is no sufficient
time for Supplementary Demand and, therefore, if the expenditure as envisaged is able
to be met by the Supplementary Grant,  there should be no occasion for advances from
the Contingency Fund.
4. The instances brought out by the Public Accounts Committee clearly indicate
that Budget estimations were not made after proper scrutiny, as required under the
existing provisions and, therefore, having regard to the recommendations made by the
Public Accounts Committee, all the Ministries/Departments are advised that expenditure
estimate should be made after proper scrutiny and after careful assessment of all
relevant factors by scrupulously following the provisions contined in the General
Financial Rules and recourse to the advances from the Contingency Fund should not
be made where the purpose could be served by Supplementary  Grants. Further, in
order to avoid any excesses over voted/charged appropriations, careful monitoring of
expenditure should be made as per the provisions contained in the General Financial
Rules and this Ministry’s O.M. No. 12(3)/E.Coord./2000 dated 13.8.2001.
Sd/-
(USHA  MATHUR)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
1. All the Ministries/Departments as  per the standard mailing list.
2. All Secretaries to the Government of India.
3. All Financial Advisers.

No. 12(1)/E. Coord./2002
GOVERNMENT  OF  INDIA
DEPARTMENT  OF  EXPENDITURE
MINISTRY  OF  FINANCE
New Delhi, the 27th September, 2002
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
SUBJECT: Effective monitoring of the flow of expenditure and effective budgetary
Control to avoid excess over voted grants/charged appropriations—
30th Report of the Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha).
The undersigned is directed to invite attention to the recommendations made by
the Public Accounts Committee in Paras 7.1.1 and 7.2.3 of their 30th Report
(13th Lok Sabha) regarding excesses over voted grants and charged appropriations
(1999-2000) and to say that taking adverse note of occurrence of excess over voted
grants/charged appropriations, the Committee had recommended for an effective
monitoring of the flow of expenditure as also for sustained for effective budgetary
control to wipe out the excesses of such cases.
2. In this connection, attention is invited to the provisions contained in Rules 65 &
66 of the General Financial Rules along with the Government of India decisions
thereunder providing for a detailed procedure for effective monitoring and control of
expenditure as also to the provisions contained in the D.O. letter No. 12(1)/E.Coord./99
dated 17.2.2002 from Secretary(E) addressed to all Secretaries to the Government of
India and to the Ministry of Finance, Department of Expenditure’s O.M. No. 12(3)/
E.Coord./2000 dated 13.8.2001, where instructions have been issued to put in place an
effective mechanism for exercising monthly review of flow of expenditure so as to
avoid cases of excess. These instructions would, no doubt, have been followed and
effective steps taken for control of expenditure. If the steps envisaged therein are
followed, there should be no occasion for excess expenditure.
3. All the Ministries/Departments are, therefore, advised to follow the instructions
mentioned above and to ensure that no case of excess takes places in respect of any of
the grants under their control.
Sd/-
(USHA  MATHUR)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
1.  All the Ministries/Departments as per the standard mailing list.
2.  All Secretaries to the Government of India.
3.  All Financial Advisers.
22

23
Recommendation
The scrutiny of the Appropriation Accounts (Railways), by the Committee reveals
that out of 16 V oted Grants and 12 Charged Appropriations operated by Ministry of
Railways (Railway Board), excess expenditure aggregating Rs. 0.14 crore has occurred
under three Revenue and two Capital appropriations during 2000-01. The Appropriation
No. 16—Assets—Acquisition, Construction and Replacement—Capital along incurred
excess expenditure to the tune of Rs. 13,27,548 which is approximately 92% of the
whole excess expenditure incurred by the Ministry of Railways during 2000-01. The
Committee’s examination has further revealed that excess expenditure of Rs. 33,182
and Rs. 28,664 was incurred unauthorisedly under Appropriation Nos. 7—Repairs and
Maintenance of Plant and Equipments and 16—Assets—Acquistion, Construction
and Replacement—Open line works Revenue respectively. Similarly, excess expenditure
has persistently occurred during 1996-2001 in respect of Appropriation No. 3—Working
Expenses—General Superintendence and Services. An analysis of the reasons for
excess expenditure over authorized allocations furnished by the Ministry indicates
that defective estimation of monetary requirements, lack of proper and timely review
and monitoring of the flow of expenditure and avoidable misclassification have
contributed to excesses. Though the overall excess expenditure in the Railways has
come down progressively, the Committee would like to reiterate the need for more
greater accuracy in estimation of monetary requirements and better budgetary control
so as to avoid excess expenditure.
[Sl. No. 7 Appendix V Para 20.7 of 40th Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
The concern of the Committee in controlling the incidence of excess expenditure
has been noted. It has been the endeavour of the Ministry of Railways to avoid
occurrences of the excess expenditure to the extent possible. The Committee has also
appreciated this effort, as they too have observed that the incidence of exces expenditure
in the Railways has come down progressively. While due care is taken to formulate the
Budget/Supplementary proposals as accurately as possible, the Committee may agree
that sometimes, the exact requirement for satisfying such Court decress becomes
difficult to forecast, resulting in such excesses. The concern of the  Committee regarding
unauthroized expenditure under Appropriation Nos. 7 & 16— OLWR have been noted.
The Ministry of Railways will, however, continue its efforts to improve upon the
estimations so as to minimize, if not eliminate, the incidences of  excess.
This has been seen and vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. 39 RA-III/2-1/2002
dated 8.5.2003.
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2002-BC-PAC/XIII/40 dated 12.06.2003]
Recommendation
Another instance of bad budgeting is revealed in the operation of Appropriation
No. 16—Assets—Acquisition, Construction and Replacement—Capital under which

24
excess expenditure requiring regularisation works out to Rs. 13,27,548. What is more
regrettable is the fact that supplementary Appropriation of Rs. 141,04,000 sanctioned
for satisfying court decrees proved inadequate leading to excess expenditure on account
of decretal payments. The Committee while deploring such a casual approach, are of
the considered view that excess expenditure incurred after seeking supplementary
provision was wholly unwarranted and avoidable.
[Sl. No. 8,  Appendix V ,  Para 20.8 of 40th Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of  Railways
The concern expressed by the Committee has been noted. While due care is taken
to formulate the Budget proposals as accurately as possible, the Committee may agree
that sometimes, the exact incidence of satisfying such Court decress becomes difficult
to forecast, resulting in such excesses. It has been the endeavour of the Ministry of
Railways to avoid occurences of the excess expenditure to the extent possible and the
Ministry will continue to do so, so as to avoid occurence of such incidences.
This has been see and vetted by Audit  vide their U.O. No. 39 RA-III/2-1/2002
dated 8.5.2003.
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2002-BC-PAC/XIII/40 dated 12.06.2003]
Recommendation
The Committee note that there was a misclassification of Rs. 3,10,410/- under
Appropriation No 16—Assets, Acquisition, Construction and Replacement—Capital
on account of expenditure relating to charged Appropriation having been wrongly
booked as voted. In their action taken notes on the 30th Report of the Committee
(13th Lok Sabha), the Ministry of Railways have assured that the recommendation of
PAC regarding misclassification of expenditure have been noted. The Committee also
note that pursuant to their earlier recommendations, the measures suggested by the
special study conducted by the Railways in this behalf, have been communicated as
instructions to the General Manager of the Railways. While appreciating the efforts
made by the Ministry of Railways to prevent misclassification of expenditure, the
Committee hope that with the strict implementation of the proposed measures the
Ministry of Railways would be able to overcome the problem of misclassification of
expenditure in future.
[Sl. No. 9, Appendix V , Para 20.9 of 40th Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of  Railways
Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee in regard to misclassifaction
of expenditure have been noted. It is and shall remain the endeavour of the Ministry of
Railways to curb misclassifications. Towards achievement of this objective, further
instruction/guidelines as may be found necessary shall be issued and results monitored.

25
This has been seen and vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. 6-RAIII/2-1/2002
dated 8.4.2003.
[Ministry of Railways O.M. No. 2002-BC-PAC/XIII/40, dated 12.6.2003]
Recommendation
Subject to the observations made in the preceding paragraphs, the Committee
recommend that the expenditure referred to in Paragraph 8.1 of this Report be regularized
in the manner prescribed in Article 115(1)(b) of Constitution of India.
[Paragraph 20.10 of Fortieth Report of P AC (Thirteenth Lok Sabha), Excesses
over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2000-2001)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of  Finance (Deptt. of Economic Affairs)
As recommended by the Public Accounts Committee, the Demands for Excess
Grants for Expenditure of the Central Government (excluding Railways) relating to
2000-2001 were submitted to Parliament in the Budget Session, 2003. The Parliament
has passed the Excess Demands for Grants. Necessary Appropriation Bill for regularizing
the money drawn in excess of the amounts authorized by the Parliament for the year
2000-2001, has also been passed and the corresponding Act published in the Gazettre
of India (Extra-ordinary) Part II, Section I, dated 28.03.2003 as Act  No. 28 of 2003, after
obtaining assent of the President. In view of this, the excess amount drawn in 2000-
2001 stands regularized. Action taken in this regard is, therefore, completed.
This Note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. DGACR/RR/1-2/2003-04/
326, dated 27.5.2003.
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division) O.M.
No. F.4. (28)-B (SD)/2002, dated 28.05.2003]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
The excess note, duty vetted by Audit to regularise the excess of Rs. 22970 lakh
(Rs. 229,69,86,853) under Grant No. 21—Defence Ordnance Factories during the year
2000-2001 has already been furnished to the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Expenditure (Monitoring Cell) on 21.3.2002 (copy enclosed) for onward transmission
to PAC as required under Article 115 (1) (b) of the Constitution of India.
[Ministry of Defence, File No, 10(11)/B-I/2002, dated 10.04.2003)]

No.17(1)/B-I/2002
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
(FINANCE/BUDGET)
New Delhi, 21st March, 2002.
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
SUBJECT: Explanatory Note for the Public Accounts Committee for regularisation
of excess under Revenue Section (Voted) in the Grant No. 21— Defence
Ordnance Factories, as disclosed in Union Government Appropriation
Accounts for (Defene Services) 2000-01.
The undersigned is directed to forward herewith 40 copies of English version of
explanatory note in respect of Excess occurred under 
Revenue Section (Voted) in the
Grant No. 21 — Defence Ordnance Factories during the financial year 2001-01, duly
vetted by D.G.A.D.S.
2. Hindi version will follow.
Sd/-
(Rakesh Bhatnagar)
Asstt. Financial Adviser (Budget-I)
Shri T.S. Negi, US
Ministry of Finance, Deptt. of Expenditure,
(Monitoring Cell), Room No. 29, Second Floor,
Lok Nayak Bhawan, Khan Market, New Delhi.
Copy with enclosure to:—
1. DGADS   —2 Copies
2. C&AG     —2 Copies
3. CGDA      —2 Copies
4. Bud.-II      — 2 Copies
MOST IMMEDIATE
26

GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
(FINANCE/BUDGET)
EXCESS  NOTE
Note for Public Accounts Committee for Regularisation of Excess Expenditure in
Respect of Excess Occurred under Revenue Section (Voted) of Grant No. 21—Defence
Ordnance Factories, As Disclosed in the Union Government Apporpriation Accounts
(Defence Services) for 2000-2001.
GRANT NO. 21— DEFENCE  ORDNANCE  FACTORIES
REVENUE  SECTION  (VOTED)
(Rupees in lakhs)
Original Grant : Rs. 58020
Supplementary Grant : NIL
Total Grant : Rs. 58020
Actual Expenditure : Rs. 80990
Excess : Rs. 22970
(Rs. 229,69,86,853)
Surrender during the year : Rs. 107
2. Under Revenue Section (Voted) of Grant No. 21—Defence Ordnance Factories for
2000-2001 the total provision was Rs. 580,20,00 thousands. Against this, an expenditure
of Rs. 809,89,87 thousands was incurred resulting in an excess of Rs. 229,69,87
thousands (Rs. 229,69,86,853).
3. The excess of Rs. 229,69,87 thousands was the net effect of total excesses of
 Rs. 3,92,72 thousands, shortfall in supply to Services of Rs. 313,21,85 thousands, total
savings of Rs. 86,37,70 thousands and surrender of Rs. 1,07,00 thousands under various
sub-heads of the Grant. The sub-heads under which excesses of Rs. 5 lakhs and above
occurred, the reasons therefore are explained below:—
MAJOR HEAD- 2079
(Rupees in lakhs)
(i) Minor Head - 106
Original Grant : Rs. 25000
Supplementary Grant : NIL
Reappropriation : (-)Rs. 5000
Total Grant : Rs. 20000
Actual Expenditure : Rs. 20393
Excess : Rs. 393
27

28
The excess of Rs. 393 lakh was due to payments made to DGS&D against supply of
machinaries under Rate Contract.
(ii) Minor Head-901—904
“(Deduct—Recoveries)”
(Rupees in lakhs)
Original Grant : (-)Rs. 539117
Supplementary Grant : NIL
Reappropriation : (-)Rs. 13122
Total Grant : (-)Rs. 552239
Actual Expenditure : (-)Rs. 520917
Excess : Rs. 31322
The excess of Rs. 31322 lakh was mainly due to shortfall in issues to Army in respect of
Ammunition and Vehicles.
4. In order to avoid recurrence of any excess in future, the observations contained
in Para-8 of the Fourteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha)
have been circulated to all the estimating authorities for information and strict
compliance vide MoD (Fin) ID No. 10(3)B-I/2000 dated 11.7.2001 (copy enclosed).
5. In the circumstances explained above, the excess of Rs. 229,69,86,853/- may
kindly be recommended for regularisation by the Parliament under Article-115(1) (b) of
the Constitution.
6. This note has been vetted by DGADS vide their U.O. No. 423/AA-131/2000-2001/
BC/ATN, dated 21.3.2002.
Sd/-
(A.K. CHOPRA)
Addl. FA.&JS
File No. 17(I)/ B-I/2002

MINISTRY  OF  DEFENCE  (FIN)
(BUDGET)
SUBJECT: Action taken on Para 8 of the Fourteenth Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (13th Lok Sabha) on action taken on the recommendations
contained in the First Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(12th Lok Sabha) on “Excess over Voted Grants and Charged
Appropriation (1996-97)”
Reference is invited to this Division’s ID No. 10(3)/B.I/2000, dated 22.3.2000. The
instructions stressed the need for devising the suitable mechanism, appropriate to the
particular requirements of each of the Departments with a view to ensure that a proper
check is exercised on the flow of expenditure under every grant on regular basis by
taking concrete measures to ensure that the budget and accounting information system
are put up on proper footing and timely corrective action is taken to obtain requirement
of funds from the Parliament so that no expenditure is incurred in excess of authorised
limits.
2. It was emphasised that all the Budget estimating/expending authorities should
monitor the progress of the expenditure in more vigilant manner by following the
canons of financial propriety more rigidly. Accordingly, it was requested that to follow
the instructions issued on the subject more scrupulously and further instructions may
be issued by Service H.Qrs./Departments to lower formations to eliminate the instances
of large savings/excesses over voted grants.
3. The Deptt. of Exp. vide their O.M. No.12(1) E.Coord./2001. dated 31.5.2001 (copy
enclosed) have again pointed out that the Public Accounts Committee in their latest
Report, vide Para 8 of the 14th Report (13th Lok Sabha) has reiterated the need for
constant review and monitoring of instructions issued by the Min. of  Fin., so as to
reduce excess expenditure to the barest minimum. It has also been requested to make
a constant review and monitoring on a monthly basis on the flow of expenditure and
ensure that occurrence of excess expenditure over voted grants and charged
appropriation does not take place.
In view of the above, it is requested that monthly review  may be done till November
and fortnightly /weekly thereafter by monitoring the expenditure by the Service
H.Qrs./Departments and further Instructions may be issued to lower formations by the
Service H.Qrs/Deptts. In this behalf so as to avoid any excess expenditure.
Sd/-
(A.K. CHOPRA)
ADDL. FA(A) & JS
All JSs/All Addl, FAs/IFAs,Addl., DGFP, DNP,
D. Fin. P. DGOF, CCR&D, DGQA, DGNCC,
DG MII Farms, DGAQA, ATVP, Dte. of Standardisation
MoD(Fin.) ID No., 10(3) /B.1/2000 dated 11.7.2001
29

No. 12(1)/E.Coord./2001
GOVERNMENT  OF  INDIA
MINISTRY  OF  FINANCE
DEPARTMENT  OF  EXPENDITURE
E. COORD.  BRANCH
New Delhi, the 31st May, 2001
OFFICE   MEMORANDUM
SUBJECT: Action taken on Para 8 of the Fourteenth Report of the Public Accounts
Committee (13th Lok Sabha) on action taken on the recommendations
contained in the First Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(12th Lok Sabha) on “Excess over  Voted Grants and Charged
Appropriations (1996-97).
The undersigned is directed to invite attention to the correspondence resting with
the D.O. letter No. 12(1) E. Coord./99 dated 17.2.2000 from Secretary(E) addressed to all
the Secretaries to the Government of India relating to the need for devising a suitable
mechanism to exercise a check on occurrence of excess expenditure over voted grants/
appropriations.
2. While referring to the recommendation made by the Public Accounts Committee
in para  48 of their First Report (12th Lok Sabha), Secretary(E) in para 4 of  his above
mentioned letter dated 17.2.2000 had mentioned that there was an imperative need for
devising a suitable mechanism, appropriate to the particular requirements of each of
the Departments with a view to ensuring that an appropriate check is exercised on the
flow of expenditure under every grant on a regular basis. It was further laid down
therein that steps may be taken to put in place such a mechanism in consultation with
the concerned Financial Advisers to that  immediate and right steps are taken to avoid
excess expenditure and the concerned Financial  Adviser should review the flow of
expenditure every month and shall keep the concerned Secretaries informed so that
necessary corrective action would be taken immediately.
3. The Public Accounts Committee in their latest Report, vide para 8 of the
14th Report (13th Lok Sabha), while taking note of the above action, suggested by
Secretary(E), has reiterated the need for constant review and monitoring of instructions
issued by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure), so as to reduce excess
expenditure to the barest minimum.
30

31
4. The mechanism, as required to be devised in pursance of para 4 of the above
mentioned Secretary(E)’s letter, dated 17.2.2000 would no doubt have been devised in
all the Ministries/Departments. All the Ministries/Departments are, therefore, requested
to make a constant review and monitoring on a monthly basis on the flow of expenditure
and ensure that occurrence of excess expenditure over voted grants and charged
appropriations does not take place.
(USHA  MATHUR)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India
1. All the Ministries/Departments of the Government of India
2. All Secretaries to the Government of India
3. All Financial Advisers (by name)
Action Taken by the Department  of Posts
The excess expenditure has since been regularised by the Ministry of Finance
centrally vide No. F.4 (28)-B (SD)/2002 dated, 28th March, 2003.
[Deptt. of Posts. No. 20-5/2003 BGT (PA), Dated April 28, 2003]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Railways
As recommended by the Committee, the excess expenditure incurred during
2000-01 has since been regularised in the Budget Session of Parliament, 2003.
This has been seen and vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. 29 RA-III/2-1/2002,
dated 8.5.2003
[Ministry of Railways, O.M. No. 2002-BC-PAC/XIII/40, dated 12.06.2003]

CHAPTER  III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Committee also observe that excess expenditure during 2000-2001 had occurred
even after obtaining Supplementary Grants of Rs. 182.19 thousands in 4 out of 9 cases
of excess registering grants/appropriations. In the case of Grant No. 1 — Department
of Agriculture and Cooperation and Grant No. 11— Postal Services (Revenue —Charged)
surprisingly, the excess expenditure  incurred is even higher than the supplementary
Grants obtained. This should so happen, despite clear stipulation in the Financial
Rules that no expenditure should be incurred which might have the effect of exceeding
the total grants or appropriation authorized by Parliament by law for a financial year
except after obtaining a supplementary grant or appropriation or an advance from the
Contingency Fund, is a matter of greater anxiety and concern. The Committee view
such cases as clear instances of inefficacious planning, lack of foresight and monitoring
on the part of budget controlling authorities.
[Sl. No. 2, Para 20.2 Appendix-V, 40th Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of  Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure)
Rule 53 of the General Financial Rules along with Appendix-3 thereof lays down
adequate procedure for proper assessment of expenditure in each unit of appropriation.
Further, Rules 54 & 55 of the General Financial Rules lay down the need for scrutiny by
the Heads of the Departments and also by the concerned authorities in the Ministries/
Departments. These Rules adequately put emphasis not only on the need for realistic
assessment of funds at the stage of estimation, but also for proper scrutiny in the
Ministries/Departments and as such the fact that cases of excess has taken place
despite supplementary grants, establishes that proper care was not taken either in
proper planning of action-plan or in making realistic assessment of funds therefor.
Therefore, having regard to the recommendations made by the Public Accounts
Committee, instructions have been issued by the Ministries/Departments impressing
upon them the need for properly following the existing instructions on realistic
assessment of funds so that effective planning and monitoring could be infused into
budget making exercise. A copy of these instructions dated 19th May, 2003 is enclosed.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. Note No. RR/1-46/2002-03/8 dated
7.4.2003
[Ministry of Finance Department of Expenditure E.Coord. Branch U.O. No. 12(1)/
E.Coord./2003, dated 19th May, 2003.]
32

No. 12(1)E. Coord./2003
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
New Delhi, the 19th May, 2003
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
SUBJECT: Realistic and effective assessment of funds/Budget Estimates-
Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee — 40th Report
(13th Lok Sabha). Excesses over Voted Grants and Charged
Appropriations (2000-2001)
The undersigned is directed to invite the attention to the observations made by the
Public Accounts Committee in Para 20.2. of their their 40th Report (13th Lok Sabha).
While taking adverse note of the occurrence of excess expenditure over voted grants/
charged appropriations, even after Supplementary Grants, the Committee has viewed
such cases as clear instances of inefficacious planning, lack of foresight and monitoring
on the part of budget controlling authorities.
2. Realistic assessment of funds with proper planning of Plans and Programmes to
which these funds are to be appropriated is at the very core of budget making to
ensure effective utilization of scarce resources. The General Financial Rules in Rule 53,
54 & 55 emphasize this cardinal principle inasmuch as these Rules provide for detailed
procedure for making realistic assessment of funds and also for proper scrutiny of
estimates made by the concerned authorities. If these procedures are followed properly
and proper scrutiny made by the concerned authorities, estimations made may neither
fall short nor run into excess. However, as highlighted by the Public Accounts Committee
Occurrence of excesses  in expenditure despite Supplementary Grants in certain cases,
clearly establishes that proper care and attention was not paid by the authorities
concerned for making realisic assessment of funds.
3. Accordingly, in view of the recommendations made by the Public Accounts
Committee, all the Ministries/Departments are advised that due care and attention be
paid to the existing instructions contained in the General Financial Rules to make
realistic assessment of funds not only at the BE stage, but also at the stage of
Supplementary Grants so that the occurrence of excess could be fully avoided.
(USHA  MATHUR)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
1. All the Ministries/Departments as per the standard mailing list
2. All Secretaries to the Government of India
3. All Financial Advisers
33

34
Action Taken by the Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation
During 2000-2001 there was an Excess expenditure of Rs. 43.72 lakhs under Grants
No. 1—Department of Agriculture and Cooperation (Capital Section) (Voted).  The
original grant of Rs. 13538.00 lakhs was augmented to Rs. 13539.00 lakhs by obtaining
a token Supplementary Grant of Rs. 1.00 lakh. The actual expenditure was, however,
Rs. 13582.72 lakhs resulting an excess of Rs. 43.72 lakhs.
The excess expenditure was mainly due to minus provisioning of Rs. 20 crore under
V oted in the Main Demand for Grants of Central Government. The Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation had furnished a provision of Rs. 155.38 crore under
Capital Section (Voted) which was inadvertently printed as Rs. 135.38 crore in Main
Demands for Grants, which is beyond the  control of this Department. Thus, the excess
occurred due to minus provisioning.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation)
O.M. No. 1-2/2003-Budget dated 5th Aug., 2003]
Action Taken by the Deptt. of Posts
Department of Posts accept that excess expenditure under ‘Charged’ segments
could have been avoided, had the concerned sanctioning authorities before sanctioning
and effecting payment taken into consideration the status of fund availability. All the
concerned authorities have been instructed to ensure that all payments are made only
with due budget provision and not in anticipation.
DDG(PAF)
[Deptt. of Posts No. 20-5/2003 BGT (PA), Dated April 28, 2003]
Recommendation
 Another instance of bad budgeting is revealed in the surrender of funds. Although
the General Financial Rules (GFR) clearly stipulate that the portion of a grant or
appropriation not utilized by the spending departments has to be communicated to the
Ministry of Finance for its reallocation elsewhere. The Committee are constrained to
observe that during 2000-2001 in excess registering Grant No. 1- Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation and Grant No. 21 - Defence Ordnance Factories, surrender
of funds was made though no unspent provision were available for surrender. The
Committee consider it a sad reflection on the adequacy of coordination and information
accounting system and also a collective failure on the part of programme division and
Budget controlling authorities in the respective Ministries/Departments.
[Sl. No. 1 Appendix -V - Para 20.3 of 40th Report of Public Accounts
Committee (2002-03) (13th Lok Sabha)]

35
Action Taken by the Deptt. of Agriculture & Cooperation
The excess expenditure was mainly due to minus provisioning of Rs. 20 crore under
V oted in the Main Demand for Grants of Central Government. The Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation had furnished a provision of Rs. 155.38 crore under
Capital Section (Voted) and Rs. 34.27 crore under Capital Section (Charged) which was
inadvertently printed as Rs. 135.38 crore under Voted and Rs. 54.27 crore under Charged
in the Main Demands for Grants due to minus provisioning of Rs. 20 crore. The under
charged in the Main Demands for Grants due to minus provisioning of Rs. 20 crore.
The same has been reflected in the Appropriation Accounts by Controller General of
Accounts to avoid any variance from the main Demands for Grants. The Ministry of
Finance was approached for issue of a corigendum to rectify this error. As final batch
of supplementary grant was over the error could not be rectified. It may be stated that
an amount of Rs. 1714.45 lakh was surrendered under Capital Section (Voted) on the
basis of provision of Rs. 155.38 crore as per Detailed Demands for Grants. However, as
explained above, there was excess expenditure of Rs. 43.72 lakhs on the basis of Main
Demands for Grants and Appropriation Accounts. The excess expenditure occurred
was, thus, due to minus provisioning.
[Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agricultural & Cooperation)
O.M. No. 1-2/2003-Budget dated 5th Aug., 2003]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
In this regard it is pertinent to mention that unlike other Demands, the gross provision
under the Demand pertaining to Defence Ordnance Factories is arrived at after deducting
value of supplies to Army, Navy, Air Force etc. from the total of various Revenue
expenditure heads. Defence Ordnance Factories are manufacturing organisations. All
out efforts to achieve the targeted supplies was made but the excess expenditure
under this Grant during the year 2000-2001 was mainly due to shortfall in issues to
Army. The reduction in issues to Army though resulted in excess expenditure under
the  Defence Ordnance Factories yet there was less expenditure under Army due to
fewer issues. Hence the excess has not affected the expenditure of Defence Services
as a whole.
Further, during the course of the year certain payments arising out of court
judgements were required to be made. In order to make these payments an amount of
Rs. 1.07 crores was surrendered under V oted portion of Demand No. 21 - Defence
Ordnance Factories and technical Supplementary of an equal amount of Rs. 1.07 crores
under charged portion was taken at the third and final batch of the Supplementary
Demands for Grants 2000-2001. Thus there was no additional outgo on this account.
However, necessary instructions have been issued vide MoD (Finance) I.D. No.
10(1)/B-I/2002 dated 18.12.2002 (copy enclosed) to all concerned to monitor the progress
of expenditure in more vigilant/stricter manner apart from projecting the Demands on
factual basis and to the barest minimum depending on the actual requirements/
obligations.
[Ministry of Defence File No. 10(11)/B-I/2002, dated 10.04.2003]

MINISTRY  OF  DEFENCE  (FINANCE/BUDGET)
SUBJECT: Formulation of Budget Estimates on realistic basis and monitoring of
Defence Expenditure in order to avoid large scale savings.
Instructions have been issued from time to time highlighting the importance of
formulating the budget estimates on most realistic basis and the necessity to keep the
expenditure under constant review in order to conform it to the allocations eventually
made. In order to avoid any saving/excess, the demands should be factual, barest
minimum depending on the actual requirement/obligations. Supplementary demands,
whenever projected should be in rare, emergent and inescapable cases which should
be restricted and confined to the genuine and unforeseen expenditure that could not
be envisaged at the time of preparation of annual budget or to meet the requirement,
decision or developments which have taken place after the approval of the budget i.e.
post budget decisions and not for continuing schemes/programmes. The progress of
expenditure should be constantly monitored in order to ensure that it is contained
within the sanctioned budgetary provisions.
There has been certain refinement in the projections of requirement and actual
expenditure vis-a-vis allocations but gaps still exist which are required to be plugged
to the maximum possible. It is, therefore, once again emphasized that further remedial
steps should be taken to eliminate instances of excess/savings, if any.
2. The Standing Committee on Defence while examining the Demands for Grants of
the Ministry of Defence for the  year 2002-2003 vide their Sixteenth Report have
viewed seriously about the unspent funds and have recommended that the amount
allotted should be fully utilized for the purchase of new weapon systems, modernization
& upgradation of the existing system so as to ensure that no surrender of funds is
made. Further, the C&AG in their audit report No. 7 of 2002 have also commented
adversely on the overall unspent provision during the last five years which indicates
poor financial management as the amount of surrender has increased manifold during
the previous years.
3. In the above circumstances, it is once again emphasized that the instructions
issued on the subject should be followed more scrupulously and the progress of
expenditure should also be monitored constantly in a more vigilant/stricter manner in
order to achieve the objectives. Service HQrs/Deptts. are also requested to issue
MOST IMMEDIATE
36

37
necessary instructions in this regard to all the budget controlling authorities under
their administrative control to eliminate the instances of large scale savings.
Sd/-
(A.K. CHOPRA)
 Addl. FA(S) & JS
All Joint Secretaries/All Addl. FAs/IFAs
Addl. DGFP, DNP, D Fin P, DGOF,
CCR & DR, DGQA, DGNCC, DG Mil Farms,
DGQA, ATVP, Dte. of Standardisation
[MoD (Fin) ID No. 10(1)/B.I/2002 dated 18.12.2002]
Copy to:— AS (S), AS (T)
Copy for information to:—
SO to Def. Secretary
PPS to Secretary (Def/Fin)

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH REPLIES OF GOVERNMENT
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE
REITERATION
Recommendation
In the course of their examination of Appropriation Accounts (Postal Services) for
2000-2001, the Committee found that there was an overall expenditure of Rs. 17,26,000
over the sanctioned provision under Revenue—Charged (Rs.7,14,000  and Capital
Charged (Rs. 10,12,000) sections of Grant No. 11— Postal Services. They also found
that this excess expenditure had occurred despite obtaining a total supplementary
grant of Rs.40,15,000 under both the sections of the Grant. On scrutiny of the explanatory
note furnished by the Department of Post, the Committee find that excess expenditure
under both the Sections of Grant was incurred to honour the Court judgement. The
Committee do not accept the stock reply of the Department that the excess expenditure
occurred  due to receipt of court judgement at the fag end of the year and that it was
not possible to obtain Supplementary Grant. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the exact date when the court judgement was passed and the date when received in
the Ministry.
[Sl..No.6 of Appendix V , Para No. 20.6 of 40th Report of Public Accounts
Committee (13th Lok Sabha)]
ACTION TAKEN BY THE DEPTT. OF POSTS
As recommended by the Committee the cases of excess expenditure have been
examined in detail. It has been found that under Capital Segment, though the Judgments
were received in time, there was some delay in implementing three court judgements
for a total amount of Rs. 10.10 lakhs and as a result of this, the concerned authorities
could not project their demands timely for obtaining the supplementary grants or
advance from Contingency Fund of India (responsibility is being fixed for non-
submission of timely requirement of funds). This led to an excess expenditure of
Rs. 10 lakhs under the Capital Charged Segment. As far as Revenue Section is concerned,
the expenditure of Rs, 7,20,000 which relates to the head 07.104 —Gratuities (V oted)
was wrongly booked under the head 07.101.02 —Arrears paid due to Supreme Court
Judgement (Charged). Instructions have been issued to all concerned to follow the
codified provisions strictly.
Audit Observation
Ministry’s  argument that there was some delay in implementing the three court
judgements and that as a result the concerned authorities could not project their
demands timely for obtaining the supplementary grants or advance from Contingency
38

39
Fund of India is not acceptable. The court judgements in the three cases were received
in February 2000, June 2000 and October 2000 and the Department had sufficient time
to request for provision of funds in the routine manner. In one case, although the
judgement was received in the earlier financial  year (February 2000), department did
not make provision in the revised estimates for 2000-01.
[Deptt. of Posts, No. 20-5/2003 BGT (PA) Dated April 28, 2003]

CHAPTER  V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
2 November, 2004 Chairman,
11 Kartika, 1926 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
40

 PART- II
MINUTES  OF  THE  SEVENTH  SITTING  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2004-2005)  HELD  ON  27  OCTOBER,  2004
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. on 27 October, 2004 in Committee
Room “53”, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra  — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
6. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
7. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
8. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
9. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
12. Shri R.K. Dhawan
13. Dr. K. Malaisamy
14. Shri V . Narayanasamy
15. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
41

42
Officers of the Office of C&AG of India
1. Dr. A.K. Banerjee — Director General of Audit (CR)
2. Smt. Meenakshi Ghosh — Pr. Director
3. Ms. Parama Sen — Director
2. At the out set, the Chairman welcomed the Members to this sitting of the Committee.
The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Reports:—
(i) * * * * * *
(ii) Action Taken on the Recommendations contained in 40th Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha) relating to “Excesses over V oted Grants and Charged
Appropriations (2000-2001)"
3. The Committee adopted the above mentioned draft Reports and authorized the
Chairman to finalise these draft Reports in the light of verbal and consequential changes
arising out of factual verification by audit or otherwise and present the same to the
House.
4 . * * * ***
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/
No. No. Deptt.  Conclusions/Recommendations
12 3 4
1. 1.8 Finance The Committee, in their Original Report (13th Lok
(Deptt. of  Sabha), had viewed the cases of excess expenditure
Expenditure) incurred during 2000-2001 despite having
Supplementary Grants as clear instances of
inefficacious planning, lack of foresight and
monitoring on the part of budget controlling
authorities. The Committee are informed by the
Department of Agriculture and Cooperation and
the Department of Posts that excess expenditure,
despite obtaining Supplementary Grant in Grant
No. 1—Agriculture & Cooperation, was mainly due
to minus provisioning of funds while in Grant
No. 11—Postal  Services, it was due to negligence
of the Authorities administering funds. Such type
of errors according to the Committee could have
easily been detected, if, adequate attention had been
paid by the Departments concerned for prompt
checking and reconciliation of accounts figures.
The Committee feel that responsibility for these
lapses, particularly at the supervisory level, should
have been fixed and appropriate action taken against
the erring officials.
The Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Expenditure),
while agreeing with the view of the Committee, have
stated that in both the cases proper care was not
taken either in proper planning of action-plan or in
making realistic assessment of funds therefor. This
resulted in cases of excesses despite having
Supplementary Grants. The Ministry of Finance
(Deptt. of Expenditure) have, therefore, impressed
upon all the Ministries/Departments the need for
properly following the existing instructions for
realistic assessment of funds to infuse effective
planning and monitoring into budget making
exercise. The Committee trust that the Ministries/
43

44
Departments would take suitable steps promptly
to ensure strict observance of those instructions
so as to make budgetary control more realistic and
meaningful. In genuine and inevitable cases, where
Supplementary Grants become necessary, an
accurate estimate of the required funds should be
made so as to avoid such lapses in future.
2. 1.11 Agriculture In regard to another case of bad budgeting, the
(Deptt. of Agri- Committee were constrained to point out that during
culture and the year 2000-2001, surrender of funds was made in
Cooperation) excess registering Grant No. 1—Department of
Agriculture and Cooperation and Grant No. 21—
Defence Ordnance  Factories, though no unspent
provisions were avilable for surrender. They had,
therefore, in para 20.3 of  their Original Report
considered it a sad reflection on the adequacy of
coordination and information accounting system
and also a collective failure on the part of the
Programme Division as well as the Budget
controlling authorities in  the respective Ministries/
Department. The Committee are surprised to find
that the surrenders in both the cases were made
without conducting a thorough scrutiny of
expenditure incurred or likely to be incurred by them
during the Financial Year. It has also been found
that the Ministry of Agriculture did not approach
the Ministry of Finance well in time for issuing
corrigendum to rectify the error of minus
provisioning of Rs. 20 crore under the grant
operated by them. The Committee are unable to
understand why such an omission could not be
detected prior to the presentation of Supplementary
Grants to the House as there is always a time-lag
between the notice of the Ministry of Finance to all
the Ministries/Departments, for submission of
requirement for obtaining Supplementary Grants
and the presentation of the same Grants to the
House by the Ministry of Finance. The Committee
are inclined to conclude that this is a clear case of
delay and laxity in the financial control exercised at
the supervisory level in both the cases for which
responsibility should be fixed and action taken
against those responsible for the mistakes. The
Committee hope that the concerned Ministries
12 3 4

45
would take adequate care in future to avoid excesses
on this account.
3. 1.15 Posts It had come to the notice of the Committee that
there was an aggregate excess expenditure of
Rs. 16.41 lakh under two sections Revenue—
Charged (Rs. 6.64 lakh) and Capital—Charged
(Rs. 9.77 lakh) under Grant No. 11-Postal Services
during the year 2000-2001. Explaining the reasons
for the excess expenditure, the Government had
earlier stated that certain Court judgments were
required to be honoured and excess expenditure
had occurred due to receipt of the judgments at the
fag end of the year thus making it impossible to
obtain supplementary Grant. The Committee had,
therefore, desired to be apprised of the exact date
when the Court judgment was passed and the date
on which it was received in the Ministry. The
Department of Posts in their Action Taken Note
have now informed that the judgments were
received in time but there was some delay in
implementing three Court judgments for a total
amount of Rs. 10.10 lakhs and consequently, the
concerned authorities could not project the
demands timely for obtaining the Supplementary
Grants or advance from Contingency Fund of India,
leading to an excess expenditure of Rs. 10 lakhs
under the Capital—Charged  Segment. The
Committee have been given to understand by Audit
that in one case, although the Judgment was
received in the earlier Financial year i.e. February,
2000, the Department did not make the provision in
the revised estimates for 2000-01. Thus, it is clear
that the Department had sufficient time in respect
of all these Court cases to request for provision of
funds in the ordinary course of  time. That this was
not done is regrettable. They would, therefore, urge
the Ministry to ensure that such instances do not
recur.
12 3 4
MGIPMRND—2736LS—20-11-2004.