Irregular award of Construction work
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT
(DEPTT. OF HIGHER EDUCATION)
&
UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION.
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2007-2008
SIXTIETH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI.

SIXTIETH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
IRREGULAR AWARD OF CONSTRUCTION WORK
MINISTRY OF HUMAN RESOURCE
DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF HIGHER EDUCATION)
&
UNIVERSITY GRANTS COMMISSION
Presented to Lok Sabha on 30 November , 2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 30 November , 2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka)

PAC No. 1856
Price: Rs. 42.00
© 2007 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIA T
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok  Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi-110002

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2007-2008) ...................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................ (v)
REPORT PART- I Background Analysis .................................................... 1
PART- II Observations and Recommendations ........................... 18
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
held on 11th June, 2007 and 30th July, 2007 ................. 25
II. Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
held on 23rd November, 2007. ....................................... 31
APPENDIX
Para 6.7 of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India for the year ended 31 March, 2006
(No. 3 of  2007), Union Government (Civil—Autonomous
Bodies) relating to "Irregular Award of Construction
Work" ............................................................................. 33

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
14. Shri Kharabela Swain
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Prof. P.J. Kurien
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Sixtieth Report relating to “Irregular Award of Construction Work” on
Paragraph 6.7 of the Report of Comptroller & Auditor General of India for the year
ended 31 March, 2006 (No. 3 of 2007), Union Government (Civil—Autonomous Bodies).
2. The Report of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India for the year ended
31 March, 2006 (No. 3 of 2007), Union Government (Civil—Autonomous Bodies) was
laid on the Table of the House on 14th May, 2007.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Human
Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) University Grants
Commission and Educational Consultants India Limited on the subject at their sittings
held on 11th June, 2007 and 30th July, 2007. The Committee considered and finalised
this Report at their sitting held on 23rd November, 2007. Minutes of the sittings form
Annexures to the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry
of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education), University Grants
Commission and Educational Consultants India Limited for the cooperation extended
by them in furnishing information and tendering evidence before the Committee.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with
the Committee.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
23 November, 2007 Chairman,
2 Agrahayana, 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

REPORT
PART  I
BACK GROUND ANALYSIS
IRREGULAR  AW ARD OF CONSTRUCTION WORK
This Report is based on the Audit review contained in Para 6.7 of the Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 31st March, 2006, No. 3 of
2007, Union Government (Civil—Autonomous Bodies) relating to "Irregular Award
of Construction Work" by the University Grants Commission (UGC).
I. Introductory
2. The University Grants Commission (UGC) is a statutory autonomous body
established by an Act of Parliament in 1956. It is a national body for the coordination,
determination, and maintenance of standards of University education in the country.
UGC's functions are provided in Section 12 of the UGC Act, the relevant portion of
which is reproduced below:
"It shall be the general duty of the Commission to take, in consultation with the
Universities or other bodies concerned, all such steps as it may think fit for the
promotion and co-ordination of University education and for the determination
and maintenance of standards of teaching, examination and research in
Universities, and for the purpose of performing its functions under this Act, the
Commission may perform such other functions as may be prescribed or as may
be deemed necessary by the Commission for advancing the cause of Higher
Education in India or as may be incidental or conducive to the discharge of the
above functions.’’
3. When asked to state as to whether the UGC is a Statutory Body or Autonomous
Body/or both and what powers have been given to them under the name of Statutory
Autonomous Body, the Ministry of HRD (Department of Higher Education) stated:
"UGC is a Statutory, Autonomous Body. Its powers and functions are enumerated
in Sections 12, 12A, 13 and 16-18 of the UGC Act. Except for the provisions of
Sections 2 and 21 & 26, the Commission is autonomous vis-a-vis the Central
Government. However, in financial and administrative matters, the University
Grants Commission is guided, in its functioning, by the rules and regulations of
the Government of India."
4. As regards the rules and regulations adopted by the UGC in its functioning, the
Ministry of HRD (Department of Higher Education) in a note stated as under:
"UGC does not have any financial rules of its own. The UGC has specifically
adopted the provisions of FR/SR for the purpose of their Service Regulations.
In the absence of any other rules, the UGC is expected to mutatis mutandis
1

2
follow the principles of General Financial Rules (GFR), Financial Rules (FR) &
Supplementary Rules (SR). In cases, where a specific authorization is required
from the Ministry or any other authority, the Commission is expected to seek
such authorization."
5. In this regard, the Secretary, Ministry of HRD (Department of Higher Education)
informed the Committee during evidence that UGC has not formally adopted GFR but
they have formally adopted GFR as far as service conditions are concerned. He also
stated that they have since given instructions to UGC to adopt GFR formally in their
Commission meeting so that there is no ambiguity about it.
6. Elaborating further in this regard, he added:
"The Government has not chosen to make any rules despite the lapse of over
50 years. Now, we have suggested that they should follow GFR to the extent
they are applicable to an autonomous organization, and in situations like this
we have a right to give them a direction that for the following you must come for
EFC or for the following you must come for this procedure. We will now be
making that kind of a rule in due course."
II. Audit Paragraph/Findings
7. Audit scrutiny has revealed that the University Grants Commission (UGC) had
in its possession 20 acres of land in the campus of Jawaharlal Nehru University
(JNU). The land was sub-leased by JNU to UGC on no rent basis for construction of
UGC complex in January 1990. Audit has observed that UGC irregularly awarded
consultancy work to Educational Consultants India Limited (Ed. CIL) in
December 2002 for construction of UGC complex (formal agreement was signed in
May 2003) without obtaining administrative and financial sanctions from the Ministry
of Human Resource Development and 'No Objection' Certificate from the Ministry of
Urban Development resulting in additional liability of Rs. 6.45 crore (including service
tax of Rs. 59.75 lakh) on account of consultancy charges. Audit has further pointed
out that UGC also irregularly paid interest free mobilisation advance of Rs. four crore
to Ed. CIL, resulting in undue benefit to the firm. The work of construction of the
complex on the land allotted in 1990 is yet to commence despite release of mobilization
advance in September, 2003.
8. Audit scrutiny of the subject has brought out the following shortcomings in the
contract awarded to Ed. CIL by UGC:
• UGC allotted the work to Ed. CIL without obtaining the formal administrative
and financial approval. Subsequently, in July, 2003 UGC had requested the
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education)
to accord administrative and financial sanctions. However, formal administrative
and financial sanctions have not yet been accorded by the Ministry
(November 2006).
• The work was awarded to Ed. CIL without obtaining 'no objection certificate
from the Ministry of Urban Development as required under GFRs for not getting
the work executed through CPWD.

3
• UGC incurred additional liability of Rs. 6.45 crore on account of consultancy
charges (including service tax of Rs. 59.75 lakh) payable to Ed. CIL over and
above the project cost.
• UGC had released (September 2003) Rs. four crore as interest free mobilisation
advance. This was irregular since according to paragraph 32.7 of CPWD Manual,
the amount of mobilization advance can be paid at a simple interest of 10 per
cent per annum subject to a maximum of 10 per cent of the estimated cost or
Rs. one crore whichever is less. In this case, UGC not only exceeded the limit of
Rs. one crore but even the 10 per cent interest clause was not incorporated in
the agreement which resulted in undue benefit to Ed. CIL which worked out to
Rs. one crore upto March, 2006.
• Clause 3.10 of the agreement provided that if the project got extended beyond
the time frame specified in the agreement for reasons beyond the control of
Ed.CIL, UGC shall pay Rs. 0.40 lakh per month for the extended period of Ed.CIL
towards maintenance of its site establishment. There was, however, no clause
in the agreement to protect the interest of UGC in the event of delays attributable
to Ed. CIL.
• According to clause 6.2 of the agreement, UGC was required to pay service tax
of Rs. 59.75 lakh (10.2 per cent on estimated cost) on consultancy charges
payable to Ed. CIL which was also irregular as according to provision contained
in Finance Act, 1994, service tax is not leviable on construction of government
building which are not used for commercial purposes.
• As per agreement the work was to be completed by November, 2005. But even
after 37 months since award of work, only the master plan, preliminary drawings
and designs had been prepared and certain approval of the local bodies such as
DDA, Airport Authority of India and Delhi Fire Service etc. had been obtained.
9. The Committee have dealt  with the Audit findings and observations and the
position explained by the Ministry of HRD (Department of Higher Education),
University Grants Commission and Ed. CIL, in the succeeding Paragraphs.
III. Non-obtaining of formal administrative and financial sanctions from the
Ministry of HRD
10. Audit scrutiny disclosed that UGC was required to obtain administative and
financial approval for the construction of the complex from the Ministry as the Ministry
had not delegated these powers to UGC. UGC allotted the work to Ed. CIL without
obtaining the formal administrative and financial approval. Subsequently, in
July 2003, UGC had requested the Ministry to accord administrative and financial
sanctions. In response to this request, the Ministry communicated that it had no
objection to award this project to Ed. CIL subject to observance of relevant norms
and rules. However, formal administrative and financial sanctions have not yet been
accorded by the Ministry.
11. To a query as to why the administrative and financial sanctions were not
obtained by UGC from the Ministry of Human Resource Development in this case

4
despite existence of clear provisions to this effect, the UGC in a written note replied as
under:
"The UGC had requested the MHRD on 1st July, 2003 to accord administative
and financial sanctions for the said project. In response to the Commission's
request, the Ministry of HRD communicated on 2nd July, 2003 that it had no
objection to award this project to Ed. CIL subject to observance of all prescribed
norms and rules by the UGC. The 'no objection' may kindly be viewed in the
context of the powers available to the Commission to expend from its Fund,
under Section 16(3) of the UGC Act for the functions covered under Section 12(j).
Thus even though no prior clearance of the Government was required, the
Commission approached the Central Government for  administrative and financial
approval and the Government gave its ‘No objection’ thereto’’.
12. In this regard, the Ministry of HRD added:
'It was on receipt of a specific demand from Ed. CIL on 3rd June, 2003 that UGC
sought financial and administrative approval of the Ministry of HRD to release
Rs. 4.00 crore to Ed. CIL. The Ministry conveyed its no objection to award the
project to Ed. CIL on 2nd July, 2003, subject to observance of all prescribed
norms and rules by UGC. However, on an observation of the Internal Audit of
the UGC that the UGC's regulations do not provide for construction of new
campus and, therefore, it would be necessary for the Ministry of Human Resource
Development either to delegate these powers to Commission or issue a necessary
approval for the construction of UGC Complex at an approximate cost of
Rs. 30 crore, for which a provision was available in the Xth Plan of UGC, the
matter was taken up again by the Commission in its meeting held on 22nd
August, 2003. The Commission gave its approval.
It was on the strength of the above approval that UGC released an amount of
Rs. 4.00 crore to Ed. CIL on 18th September, 2003 and informed the Ministry
accordingly. The Ministry of Human Resource Development however, issued a
letter to UGC on 4.12.2003 pointing out that (a) for a project of Rs. 30 crore,
competence to sanction lies with no authority lower than EFC and (b) prescribed
norms do not seem to have been observed before award of work to Ed. CIL. The
letter accordingly requested that the matter be placed again before the
Commission in its next meeting, for fresh consideration."
13. On being asked as to whether the matter was placed again before the
Commission and what was their decision in this regard, the UGC in a written  note
stated as under:
"The matter was not placed again before the Commission. Although, the
Commission is of the opinion that it is competent in regard to the approval of
the project and award of work. In respect of the observation of the CAG , UGC
has written on 12.02.2007 to the Ministry to accord the said approval and allow
incurring of expenditure towards payment to Ed. CIL for construction of UGC's
proposed campus."

5
14. The Committee further desired to know as to whether the matter regarding
award of consultancy work to Ed. CIL has been examined in the Ministry. In response,
the Ministry stated as under:
"On receipt of the findings of the C&AG , the matter has been examined in the
Ministry. The Ministry is of the opinion that the Ed. CIL is a PSU under the
Ministry of  Human Resource Development and consultancy work for
universities and academic institutions is within its mandate and the Ministry
has conveyed its 'No Objection' to the award of work by the UGC to Ed. CIL.
However, UGC has been requested to furnish the details of estimates, scope
and coverage of the project and the justification thereof.’’
I V . Non-Obtaining of 'No Objection' certificate from Ministry of Urban
Development
15. According to Audit the work was awarded to Ed.CIL without obtaining 'No
Objection Certificate' from the Ministry of Urban Development as required under
GFRs for not getting the work executed through CPWD. The Committee desired to
know the reasons for not obtaining 'No Objection' certificate from the Ministry of
Urban Development. In a note submitted to the Committee, the Ministry informed:
"The work in question was initially awarded to CPWD and was later withdrawn
from them. Secondly, Ed.CIL is a public undertaking of the Ministry itself.
Thirdly, the exact provision of the GFR to the effect that NOC is necessary for
Statutory Autonomous Bodies also, has not been quoted in the C&AG's Report.
The provisions of GFR seem to relates to works undertaken by a Ministry or
Department and not autonomous organizations. The present work even if,
assigned to CPWD would come under the category of 'Deposit Works' to which
the provisions of GFR would not apply.’’
16. In reply to a related query, the UGC admitted that they were not aware of this
provision of seeking 'No Objection' from the Ministry of Urban Development.
17. In this regard, the Secretary,  Ministry of HRD (Department of Higher Education)
assured the Committee during evidence that once GFRs are adopted, then it will
become obligatory on the part of UGC to follow that process.
V . Award of Construction Work : Transfer from CPWD to Ed. CIL
18. In a note submitted to the Committee, the Ministry of HRD (Department of
Higher Education) have informed that prior to the award of work to Ed. CIL, the UGC
awarded the construction work to the CPWD in April, 1991 at a total cost of Rs. 11.20
crore and a sum of Rs. 10.00 lakh was given to CPWD as initial deposit in May 1992.
UGC did not approve the lay out plan prepared by the CPWD, through an outside
Architect, and therefore, terminated the contract in June 1993, after paying Rs. 2.33
lakh for the services rendered. Subsequently, in December, 1993, UGC constituted a
Committee of Experts, which short-listed four Architects. The Architects did not
respond to UGC's request to intimate the terms and conditions about fees for
consultancy and supervision. Thereafter, in December, 1996 UGC took up the matter
which School of Planning and  Architecture (SPA) for developing architectural design

6
of the complex. However, since UGC could not provide the details about building
by-laws from the authority issuing the letter of allotment of the said land, the design
could not be finalized till 2002. UGC approached Ed. CIL in October, 2002 to undertake
the project on turn key basis. A formal agreement was signed between UGC and
Ed. CIL in May 2003.
19. When asked about the rationale behind awarding the work to Ed. CIL in place
of CPWD, the UGC in a written note submitted to the Committee stated that the work
was awarded to Ed. CIL, keeping in mind the fact that Ed. CIL is a  Public Undertaking
under the Ministry of HRD, with a hope that there would be good coordination and
the work will be done in a time-bound manner with proper quality.
20. Replying to a query about the justification for  not awarding the work to
CPWD, the representative of the Ministry of HRD stated during evidence:
"Being an Autonomous body it is not compulsory on the UGC to award its
construction work to the CPWD, as it is in the case of Government Departments.
That compulsion does not apply to the UGC. The UGC, of course, can if it so
wishes, give its work to CPWD, as it did  in fact in the begining.’’
21. The Committee desired to know as to what extent the UGC was to be benefited
by awarding the work to Ed. CIL in place of CPWD, the Ed. CIL in a note stated as
follows:
"CPWD is Government of India Department, under the Ministry of Urban
Development (MUD) while Ed. CIL is a 'Mini Ratna' Public Sector Enterprise
(PSE) under the Ministry of Human Resource Development (MHRD).
(a) Ed. CIL's capabilities span the entire spectrum of setting up of Institutional
Buildings in Education Sector right from concept to commissioning on a
turn-key basis and the Company specialize in the implementation of
Institutional Buildings as project management consultant, whereas CPWD
undertake works of all nature such as general buildings, warehouses,
hospitals, residences, roads, etc.
(b) Ed. CIL provides a dedicated and qualified project team for each project.
This team is competent of taking site decisions on the spot. This ensure
quick and responsive decision making for controlling time and cost over-
runs.
Ed. CIL also closely liasions with all the specialized agencies (civil,
electrical, HV AC, Lifts, site development, etc.) involved in the project
which facilitate co-ordination between various engineering disciplines.
On the other hand, CPWD has its own hierarchical set up which is involved
in the decision-making for all projects. Only in case of important and time-
bound works, CPWD provides a dedicated project team.
(c) Ed. CIL and UGC both being  sister organizations under the umbrella of
MHRD have a common interest to oversee the successful implementation
of the project. Senior management of both the organizations have always

7
easy accessibility to each other and are responsive to resolve the
hindrances, if any, cropping up in the assignment, whereas CPWD being
a separate organization with its own gigantic size and hierarchy, mutual
accessibility to each other is more difficult.
(d) Ed. CIL keeps Client organization informed of the project developments
and takes clearances at various vital/critical stages from the Client. As
such, the Client is kept abreast of the status of the work and any difficulties
or bottlenecks arising out of any reasons are resolved amicably and quickly."
22.  Ed. CIL have further elaborated the comparative advantages accruing  to the
client organisation, namely UGC as under:
No. In case, work was undertaken by In case, work is undertaken
CPWD by Ed. CIL
(i) For works undertaken for autonomous A  mobilization advance of
bodies financed entirely from Govern- Rs. 4.00 crore only i.e. equivalent
ment funds (like UGC), CPWD seeks to 6.49% of the estimated cost of
funds equivalent to 33.33% of the work had only been provided by
estimated cost of the work as a deposit UGC for assignment.
in advance.
The UGC would have had to pay Rs. 20.55
crore to CPWD as mobilization advance
 in case  the work was awarded to CPWD.
(As per CPWD's Works-Manual 2003,
Clause 3.5.2 & 3.5.3.) & Ed. CIL both.
(ii) CPWD & Ed. CIL both pay a mobiliza- However in case of Ed. CIL, the
tion advance to the construction interest so accrued on the
agency generally by charging a simple mobilization advance is recovered
interest @ 10% per annum simple from the construction agency's
interest. bill and is credited to the UGC's
accounts ( and not retained by
Ed. CIL).
As per CPWD's Works Manual 2003,
there is no mention about the treatment
to be given to the interest earned by
CPWD out of the advance paid to the
construction agency.
(iii) CPWD retains the initial deposit of In case of Ed. CIL, all the
33.33% of the estimated cost obtained expenditure incurred at pre-
as the 1st instalment till the last and construc tion stage is made
raises monthly bill @ 100% for the from the initial advance
expenses incurred by them. provided b y  the  UGC.
As such, the expenditures
(As per CPWD's Works-Manual 2003, incurred for  survey work, geo-

8
Clause 3.5.2) technical investigations,
publications of press notice for
inviting Construction Agencies for
pre-qualification process, fees of
the statutory authorities,
documentation of bids, etc. is
adjusted from this Advance.
Further at construction stage,
Ed. CIL adjusts the advance @ 10%
of the value of each running
account, bill as per the terms and
conditions of the Agreement
between UGC and Ed. CIL.
(iv) In case of CPWD, when delays are In case of Ed. CIL, when delays are
experienced by them in obtaining funds experienced to obtain funds from
from the Client organization and there is sister organizations, Ed. CIL at
a requirement to incurre expenditure out critical stages has funded the
of the 33.33% reserve to keep the works project from its internal resources
going, the matter is brought to the notice so that the project does not suffer
of  Superintending  Engineer/Chief and the work is not held up.
Engineer promptly for taking up the
matter with the Client Department.
Further, in case of CPWD, no expenditure This practice enhance the comfort
 is incurred by them, on Deposit Works  level  of the Client organization and
out of CPWD grants. ensure the timely completion of the
(As per CPWD Manual-2003 Clause projects.
3.5.3).
VI. Objectives and Functions of Ed. CIL
23. The main objectives pursued by the Company since its incorporation in 1981
are as follows (as per the Company's Memorandum  Articles of Association).
(e) To offer educational consultancy service to a number of agencies such as
Governments and educational institutions of developing countries, funding
organizations like the World Bank/Asian Development Bank, international
agencies like the UNESCO and ESCAP as well as to the Government of India
in the conext of its technical assistance/economic co-operation programmes.
Education in this context covers the entire spectrum of general as well as
professional educational and training.
(f) To undertake surveys of educational requirements and to prepare feasibility/
evaluation reports of educational projects/programmes.
No. In case, work was undertaken by In case, work is undertaken
CPWD by Ed. CIL

9
(g) To plan and establish educational Institutions/programmes on turn-key basis.
(h) To prepare detailed project reports for establishment of educational
institutions/programmes and to advise on specifications of inputs such as
buildings, equipment, faculty and other staff.
(i) To advise on and to undertake development of curricula, teaching aids,
evaluation systems, educational technologies and learning resource centres.
(j) To develop organizational structures for educational administration and
management.
(k) To assess manpower requirements and to prepare inventory of jobs and skill
profiles of occupations.
(l) To undertake organization of continuing educational programmes, short term
training seminars/workshops, etc.
(m) To undertake preparation and publication of suitable teaching materials, books
and guides.
(n) To undertake studies and research on specific educational problems and
manpower planning.
(o) To foster and maintain close liaison and cooperation with various national,
international and foreign aid giving agencies with a view to identify availability
of resources to implement specific educational programmes/projects.
(p) To undertake training of foreign and local students at the institutions in our
country, both generally as well as in the context of technical assistance/
economic cooperation programmes, and provide manpower in the educational
field to client countries.
(q) To provide experts and expertise in the educational field to clients.
(r) To assist in the recruitment/secondment of experts, teaching faculty and
technical manpower on behalf of agencies both at home and abroad including
international agencies.
(s) To establish and promote any societies. Trusts and Associations or other
non-profit making bodies to undertake such activities which are directly or
indirectly connected with the activities in which the Company is engaged and
to become a Member of, act as or appoint trustees, governors, agents or
delegates to control, manage, superintend or otherwise assist such societies,
trusts and associations or bodies.
VII. Pattern of funding of the Project
24. When enquired about the pattern of funding of the project awarded to Ed. CIL,
the Ministry in a written note submitted as under:
"Ed. CIL was to charge 9.50 per cent of actual project cost as consultancy
charges and Service Tax @ 10.2 per cent on Ed. CIL's margin. UGC also agreed
to pay mobilization advance of 30% of the initial project cost/budget cost. The
preliminary estimate of the project was worked out as Rs. 68.11 crore and sum of

10
Rs. 4.00 crore was paid by the UGC as the mobilization advance to Ed. CIL in
September, 2003. The Ed. CIL sought this amount to initiate the process of
conducting survey and selection of an architect for the project. Prior to the
award of work to Ed. CIL, the UGC awarded the construction work to the CPWD
in April, 1991 at a total cost of Rs. 11.20 crore and a sum of Rs. 10.00 lakh was
given to CPWD as initial deposit in May, 1992. UGC did not approve the lay out
plan, pre-plan prepared by the CPWD, through an outside Architect, and
therefore, terminated the contract in June, 1993, after paying Rs. 2.33 lakh for
the services rendered. UGC approached Ed. CIL in October, 2002 to undertake
the project on turn key basis. A formal agreement was signed between UGC and
Ed. CIL in May 2003. A sum of  Rs. 4.00 crore was paid by the UGC as the
mobilization advance to Ed. CIL in September, 2003.
The Ed. CIL sought this amount to initiate the process of conducting survey
and selection of an architect for the project. It was on receipt of a specific
demand from Ed. CIL on 3rd June, 2003 that UGC sought financial and
administrative approval of the Ministry of HRD to release Rs. 4.00 crore to
Ed. CIL. The Ministry conveyed its no-objection to award the project to Ed.
CIL on 2nd July, 2003, subject to observance of all prescribed norms and rules
by UGC. However, on an observation of the Internal Audit of the UGC that the
UGC's regulations do not provide for construction of new campus and,
therefore, it would be necessary for the Ministry of Human Resource
Development either to delegate these powers to Commission or issue a
necessary approval for the construction of UGC Complex at an approximate
cost of Rs. 30.00 crore, for which a provision was available in the Xth Plan of
UGC, the matter was taken up again by the Commission in its meeting held on
22nd August, 2003."
25. Regarding basis adopted by the UGC to ensure the reasonableness of rate of
consultancy charges, i.e. 9.5 per cent, while entering into agreement with Ed. CIL, the
Ministry informed:
"It was mutually decided by the Chairman, UGC and the CMD, Ed. CIL and
approved by the Commission. This rate of consultancy charges is in keeping
with the standard rate of  9.5%  to 11% levied by Ed. CIL, from its clients
including autonomous organizations fully funded by the Central Government."
VIII. Irregular release of Mobilisation Advance
26. Audit review highlighted that UGC had released (September, 2003) Rs. four
crore as  interest free mobilisation advance. This was irregular since according to
paragraph 32.7 of CPWD Manual, the amount of mobilization advance can be paid at
a simple interest of 10 per cent per annum subject to a maximum of 10 per cent of the
estimated cost or Rs. one crore whichever is less. In this case, UGC not only exceeded
to limit of Rs. one crore but even the 10 per cent interest clause was not incorporated
in the agreement which resulted in undue benefit to Ed. CIL which worked out to
Rs. one crore upto March, 2006.

11
27. While submitting justification for interest free mobilization advance of Rs. 4.00
crore paid to Ed. CIL as against the admissibility of Rs. one crore under the CPWD
manual, the Ministry in their post-evidence replies stated:
"While it is true that the grant of mobilization advance for executing capital
intensive works under Section 32.7 of the CPWD Manual V ol. II for similar
works is to be limited to a maximum of 10% of the estimated cost or Rs. 1.00
crore, whichever is less, it is submitted that the said Section is applicable to
mobilization advance to the contractors. Since Ed. CIL was, as per the agreement
not a contractor of the UGC, but was required to provide agency function,
similar to the CPWD for 'Deposit Works', Section 3.5.2 of the CPWD works
Manual are applicable in the case of Ed. CIL. According to Section 3.5.2, in
cases of deposit works of autonomous bodies financed entirely from
Government funds, 33 
1/3% of the estimated cost of the work is got deposited as
advance. In view of this the advance of Rs. 4.00 crore is much lower than the
33 
1/3% of the estimated cost."
28. In this connection, explaining the role of Ed. CIL in the construction of this
project, the representative of the Ministry of HRD during evidence deposed that the
Ed. CIL has not been assigned this work in the capacity of the contractor, but in the
capacity of the project management consultant and as per the CPWD Manual, the
ceiling of Rs. 1 crore as mobilization advance applies to the contractors not to the
project management consultants.
29. When the Committee desired to know, whether the Ministry/UGC has fixed any
responsibility for hasty release of mobilization advance without provision of interest,
the UGC informed that the release of interest free mobilization advance was made as
per the provision of agreement. Therefore, the question of fixing the responsibility
does not arise. Even with the CPWD, the Commission would have been required to
release interest free advance of a much higher amount.
IX. Additional Liability on Account of Consultancy Charges
30. Audit scrutiny disclose that since CPWD does not recover departmental charges
for executing the work of autonomous bodies fully funded by the Central Government,
UGC incurred additional liability of Rs. 6.45 crore on account of consultancy charges
(including service tax of Rs. 59.75 lakh) payable to Ed. CIL over and above the project cost.
31. On being asked whether the UGC has investigated the reasons for lapse in
creating the additional liability of Rs. 6.45 crore on account of consultancy charges
(including service tax of Rs. 59.75 lakh) dut to its preference of Ed. CIL over CPWD,
the UGC informed that no such investigation has been carried out by the UGC.
32. The Committee desired to know as to whether the reasons or inclusion of
clause regarding payment of Service Tax while UGC complex was exempt from it have
been investigated, the UGC in a written note stated as under:
"The service tax is payable by Ed. CIL on the consultancy charges recoverable
from the UGC, for being deposited in turn with the Central Government. Ed. CIL
is not exempt from Service tax in respect of consultancy fee charged by it on its
services for cliens including the UGC."

12
33. The Committee were informed that in the light of the CAG's observation, UGC
has been advised by the Ministry to go carefully and examine the extra liability of
Rs. 6.45 crore as a result of the agreement executed with Ed. CIL and also look into the
agreement to take action suitably for amending agreement with the Ed. CIL.
34. When asked as to whether suitable amendment has since been  made in the
agreement with Ed. CIL, the UGC informed the Committee as under:
"The agreement was signed on dated 8th May, 2003 for a period of
44 months. UGC and Ed. CIL are reviewing the contract agreement in terms of
Clause 5.3.6 of Agreement. It is expected that in the revised agreement after the
review, the interests of the UGC would be further  protected."
X. Delay in project completion
35. According to Audit, as per agreement, the work was to be completed by
November, 2005. But even after 37 months since award of work, only the master plan,
preliminary drawings and designs had   been prepared and certain approvals of the
local bodies such as  DDA, Airport  Authority of India and Delhi Fire  Service etc.  had
been obtained.
36. The Committee desired to know as to how much time   stipulated in the contract
to complete the period, the UGC in their  written information stated as under:
"The time stipulated in agreement to complete the buildings under the project
was a maximum of 30 months from the date of award  of the contract to the
construction  agency. It may be added that the total project period  as per the
agreement is maximum of 38 months with Ed. CIL services continuing for
44 months during the validity of the agreement period.’’
37. While  responding to the  Committee's query as to why the UGC authorities
have been unable to persuade Ed. CIL to start construction work, the UGC submitted:
"While the Ed. CIL  has been making all efforts to start the work, it could not do
so for want of Statutory clearances from various bodies such as, Delhi
Development Authority (DDA), Delhi Urban Arts  Commission (DUAC), Delhi
Metro Rail Corporation (DMRC), Airport Authority of India (AAI) and Delhi
Fire Service, apart from the necessary  environment clearance. The  statutory
clearances from the  DUAC and final approval from DDA are awaited. The
process of obtaining  requisite  clearances from the Delhi Pollution  Control
Board and the Ministry of Environment and Forest are being initiated  by Ed.
CIL."
38. Apprising the Committee about the process of getting statutory approvals
which are required before any construction activity, the representative of Ed. CIL
stated during evidence:
"For the DDA in principle approval, we finally after making the master plan and
getting clearances, we applied on 3.8.2004 and we received the in principle
clearance on 3.3.2005. Then the other authority from which we needed clearance

13
was the Airport Authority of India to which we applied with all the paper work
and we got the clearance on 25.1.2005. Then comes the Delhi Metro Railway.
We have applied on 21.12.2004 and we got the clearance on 7.4.2005. Then after
getting the in principle approval from DDA, we had to apply to the Delhi Fire
Services on 3.3.2005. We got the clearance from the Delhi Fire Services on 1.6.2006.
Then we applied to the Delhi Urban Arts Commission, soon after getting the in
principle approval from DDA on 3.3.2005. The clearance from Delhi Urban Arts
Commission is still awaited. We have had two rounds. They had observation
round and we have replied to them. Then they had another round of observation.
We have again replied them. Now we are expecting to get back the clearance
shortly. Meanwhile we have to also get environmental clearance. We have started
the process for that and that is also under way. Once we get the DUAC approval,
then we have to go back to the DDA for the final approval."
39. In this regard, the Secretary, HRD informed the Committee during evidence that
the primary responsibility for getting those clearances, as per the agreement, was
with UGC because as the main owner of the building they have to apply for those
things but ofcourse, Ed.CIL was to actively associate and help them in getting those
clearances.
40. When asked about the exact time when the clearances from Delhi Urban Arts
Commission and Delhi Development Authority will be obtained, the Ed.CIL in their
note submitted that the DUAC's clearances are expected by September, 2007, after
which DDA's (final) approval shall be expected by November, 2007.
41. While admitting that there has been some delays and dereliction of duty here
and there, the Secretary, Ministry of HRD (Department of Higher Education) during
evidence further assured the Committee that they will do their best and see that there
will be no further delay on the plan of action which has been made, by which the
building should be in position by December, 2009.
XI. Lacunae in the Contract
42. Audit Paragraph highlighted that clause 3.10 of the agreement provided that if
the project got extended beyond the time frame specified in the agreement for reasons
beyond the control of Ed.CIL, UGC shall pay Rs. 0.40 lakh per month for the extended
period to Ed. CIL towards maintenance of its site establishment. There was, however,
no clause in the agreement to protect the interest of UGC in the event of delays
attributable to Ed.CIL.
43. The Committee desired to know as to what remedy existed in the contract for
such delays and what action has been taken to get the contract enforced. In response,
the UGC in their written information stated as under:
"Although there is no clause for levying any penalty on the Ed.CIL by the
UGC, Clause 5.3.6 of the Contract Agreement provides for reivew of mobilization
advance on acccount of the pace of works, the revision being worked out
mutually by the UGC and Ed. CIL. Interests of UGC and Ed.CIL would be
protected vis-a-vis the construction agencies through a standard  clause for

14
Liquidated Damages in the Agreement to be entered into between the agency
to be given the contract and Ed.CIL. The agreement was initially for a period of
44 months and is being reviewed, providing for the interests of UGC."
44. It has been observed from the Audit Paragraph  that the UGC had an agreement
with the Ed. CIL that UGC will pay Rs. 40,000 per month for the extended period to
Ed.CIL towards its maintenance. In this regard, the Committee sought to know as to
whether any agreement  was  made  that if Ed. CIL could not complete the work  in time
it would have to pay fine. The Secretary, Ministry of HRD during evidence deposed
under:
"The reappraisal arrangement in the earlier agreement, there was only a penalty
of Rs. 40,000 being paid by UGC for the delays which may occur because of
UGC's action. But now a reappraisal clause is also being built in where Ed. CIL
will also  have to pay at the  same rate of Rs. 40,000 a month if the  delay is on
account of them. This would protect  the interest of UGC and the Government
in that sense."
45. When asked that in view of inordinate delay in starting the construction of the
project, whether the Ministry has taken any steps to get the mobilization advance
refunded alongwith interest earned by Ed. CIL, the  Ministry in their Post-evidence
information replied as under:
"The matter regarding the refund of interest on advance provided by UGC on
26-09-2003 was amicably resolved between the UGC and Ed. CIL  during the
course of a meeting with Secretary, Department  of  Higher Education, where Ed.
CIL agreed to reduce its consultancy charges from 9.5% to a suitable level and
further agreeing to reciprocal  penalty  provision of Rs. 40,000 per month subject
to a maximum of Rs. 5.00 lakh, for delays in completion of project as attributable
to Ed. CIL."
XII. Time  schedule for the project
46. The Committee sought to know as to how much more time will Ed. CIL require
to complete the project, the Ed.CIL in their post-evidence  note submitted to the
Committee stated:
"Ed.CIL has planned the time schedule  for start of construction activities at
site as follows:
Sl. No.    Activity Event/Date/Duration
12 3
(i) UGC's approval to the ‘Preliminary Cost Estimate’ 20-02-2007
(ii) Preparation of 'Pre-qualification Application Document 21-02- 2007 to
Booklet' 17-04-2007
(iii) Submission of' ‘Pre-qualification Application 18-04-2007
Document Booklet’ to UGC for their concurrence
(iv) Prepare  'Evaluation Criteria’ and ‘Score Scheme’ 20-04- 2007 to
25-05-2007

15
(v) Design & issuance of 'Press Notice' inviting 20-05- 2007 to
construction agencies for Pre-qualification 29-05-2007
(vi) Issuance of Pre-qualification ‘Pre-qualification Application 30-05- 2007 to
Document Booklet’ to the prospective construction agencies. 29-06-2007
(vii) Opening 'Pre-qualification  Application Document Booklet' 02-07-2007
(viii) Analysis & evaluation of construction  agencies 03-07- 2007 to
qualification 10-08-2007
(ix) Preparation & submission of 'Pre-qualification Analysis 11-08- 2007 to
Report' to UGC 16-08-2007
(x) Approval of 'Pre-qualification Analysis Report' from UGC 23-08-2007
(xi) Bid documentation 01-05- 2007 to
30-08-2007
(xii) T endering 01-09- 2007 to
25-09-2007
(xiii) Evaluation  of tenders 26-09- 2007 to
30-10-2007
(xiv) Receipt of all the mandatory statutory clearances by UGC* 15-11-2007
(Tentative)
(xv) Contract Award 15-11- 2007 to
10-12-2007
(Tentative)
(xvi) Commencement of Construction activities 25-12-2007
(Tentative)
*UGC, as the Owner, has to seek the clearances to the 'Building Plans' from all the statutory
authorities. The approval of 'Building Plans' is a critical activity at this stage & the commencement
of construction activities shall depend on the clearances.
47. As regards the time by which the project will be completed, the Secretary
Ministry of HRD (Department of Higher Education) informed the Committee during
evidence:—
"With the plan of approvals, that is from the Delhi Urban Arts Commission and
DDA and the environemental clearance would be available with us before the
end of November and by that time we feel that the work would be awarded and
as per the programme drawn up, by December, 2009 we are hopeful and confident
that this work can be completed."
XIII. Cost-escalation
48. On being asked about the original estimate of the project, the Committee were
informed that it was worked out as Rs. 68.11 crore. In this regard the Secretary,
Ministry of HRD (Department of Higher Education) also informed during eivdence
that it was very low. The detailed estimates were not prepared.
12 3

16
49. The Committee sought to know about the cost-ascalation of the project. The
UGC have appraised the Committee as below:—
"The estimated escalation of cost shall be 19.8%* over the estimated cost due
to delay in sanction of Preliminary Cost Estimate by UGC (total delay: 30 months).
The same has been apprised to UGC vide Ed. CIL's letter dated 07.02.2007."
50. In this regard, UGC also informed the Committee that as on February, 2007, the
escalation was 19.8% amount to Rs. 13.50 crore. Ed. CIL has been requested to inform
the extent of escalation as at present.
51. On this issue, during evidence, the Secretary Ministry of HRD (Department of
Higher Education) has further added as follows:—
"It would be around 19.75 crore because of increase of rates of various items.
The actual estimated construction cost was Rs. 61.65 crore and on that the cost
of escalation etc. would be of the order of Rs. 17.83 crore and Ed. CIL's
consultancy charges will go up a little bit and there would be increase in the
service tax and total it would come to about 87.85 crore."
XIV . Present status of the project
52. Further, when asked to furnish the current status of the project, the Ministry of
HRD (Department of Higher Education) have appraised the Committee as below:—
(i) Ed. CIL have completed the process of analysis & evaluation of construction
agencies' qualifications. Out of the sixteen applications received within the
stipulated period against the press notice inviting firms/contractors to apply
for pre-qualification process, nine firms/contractors have been recommended
to be shortisted for issuance of tender documents. A detailed pre-qualification
analysis report has been submitted by Ed. CIL for the UGC's approval.
(ii) The tender documents comprising as many as five volumes, are at an advance
stage of finalisation.
(iii) The 'parking plans' have been modified in accordance with the provisions of
the latest 'Delhi Master Plan-2021' as per directions of the Delhi Urban Arts
Commission (DUAC). The proforma of 'planning permission' and 'landscape
& parking plan' duly signed by the Secretary, UGC and the Registrar, JNU was
handed over to Ed. CIL on 14-09-2007, so as to get the permission of the Delhi
Urban Arts Commission/Delhi Development Authority.
(iv) Action for environmental clearances is under way with Delhi Pollution Control
Committee and the Ministry of Environmental & Forests respectively for
approvals.
(v) At this stage, obtaining clearances to the 'Building Plans' from the statutory
authorities especially from DUAC &DDA has become the most critical activity.
UGC has been requested to expedite statutory clearances from the above said
authorities, so that clearances from DUAC can be got at the earliest.
*The additonal cost implication on the construction cost due to change of Cost Index between
the date of submission of the 'Preliminary Cost Estimate' (11.08.2004) & its approval by UGC
(20.02.2007) in Rs. 13.50 crore (approximately).

17
(vi) As regards signing of the revised Agreement between the UGC and Ed. CIL, a
draft of the Agreement is under preparation by the UGC in consultation with
Ed. CIL.
XV . Absence of Monitoring  Mechanism
53. As regards  the monitoring mechanism available in the UGC to implement the
contracts in time and how did the above mechanism fail in getting the work done as
per schedule, the UGC in their written submission stated as under:—
"The work relating to construction of new Office Complex is a new one time
activity. UGC does not have its own engineering or construction wing. The
Commission had appointed a monitoring Committee to periodically review the
progress of the  work. The delay has been due to reasons beyond the control or
either the Ed. CIL or the UGC".

PART   II
OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
54. The University Grants Commission (UGC) is a statutory Autonomous body
established under the University Grants Commission Act, 1956. As per the UGC
Act, it shall be the general  duty of the Commission to take, in consultation with  the
Universities or other bodies concerned, all such steps as it may think fit for the
promotion and co-ordination of University education and for the determination and
maintenance of standards of teaching, examination and research in universities.
The Commission may perform such other functions as may be prescribed  or as may
be deemed necessary by the Commission for advancing the cause of Higher Education
in India as may be incidental or conducive to the discharge of the above functions.
[Sl. No. 1]
55. The  Committee's examination of the Audit Paragraph relating to 'Irregular
award of Construction work' has brought out that Jawaharlal Nehru University sub-
leased 20 acres of land in JNU campus to UGC on no rent basis for construction of
UGC complex in January 1990. The UGC awarded the consultancy work for the
construction of UGC complex to Educational Consultants India Limited (Ed. CIL) in
May, 2003, without obtaining administrative and financial sanctions from the Ministry
of Human Resource Development and ‘No Objection Certificate’ from the Ministry
of Urban Development as required under General Financial Rules for not getting the
work through CPWD, resulting in  extra liability of Rs. 6.45 crore UGC also
irregularly paid interest free mobilization advance of Rs. 4 crore to Ed. CIL. Even
after lapse of 37 months  from signing of the agreement, the construction is yet to
commence.
[Sl. No. 2]
56. During the course of examination of the subject, the Committee have come
across several instances of irregularities in the contract awarded to Ed. CIL. Some
of the major deficiencies noticed in the contract are as  follows :—
(i) UGC had not  obtained  formal administrative and   financial sanctions from
the Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher
Education);
(ii) they had also not obtained 'No Objection Certificate' from Ministry of Urban
Development as required  under General  Financial Rules  for  not getting
the work exacuted through CPWD;
(iii)  additional  liability of Rs. 6.45 crore had been incurred by the UGC on
account of consultancy charges (including service tax of Rs. 59.75 lakh )
payable to Ed. CIL over and above the project cost;
18

19
(iv) UGC had irregularly released (September 2003 ) Rs. 4 crore as interest free
mobilization advance to Ed. CIL;
(v) there was no clause in the agreement to protect the interest of UGC in the
event of delays attributable to Ed. CIL;
(vi) payment of service  tax of Rs. 59.75 lakh (10.2 per cent on estimated cost) on
consultancy charges payable to Ed. CIL was also irregular as according to provision
contained in Finance Act 1994, Service tax is not leviable on construction of
Govt. buildings which are not used for commercial purposes; and
(vii) as per agreement the work was to be completed by November 2005. But even
after lapse of 37 months from signing of the agreement with Ed. CIL, the
construction is yet to commence.
The Committee have dealt with these deficiencies in detail in the succeeding
Paragraphs.
[Sl. No. 3]
57. The Committee  note that initially, the construction project was awarded  to
CPWD in April 1991 but due to the preparation of lay-out plan by an outside architect,
which was not acceptable to the UGC, the contract was terminated in June1993.
Subsequently, the UGC constituted a Committee of Experts in December, 1996. The
four architects short listed by them did not intimate  the terms and conditions about
fees for consultancy and supervision. Thereafter, the UGC took up  the matter with
School of Planning and Architecture (SPA) for developing architectural design of
the complex which could not be finalized till 2002. In October, 2002, the  UGC
approached Ed. CIL to  undertake the project on turn-key basis. A formal agreement
was signed between UGC and Ed. CIL in May, 2003. The sequence of events thus
clearly shows that the selection process of the construction agency was characterized
by confusion and delay which has finally resulted in the project still remaining
pending. The Committee strongly recommend that the Ministry of Human Resource
Development should  enquire into the reasons for such an unacceptable delay in the
undertaking and completion of the  project and  apprise them about the credible
steps taken to avoid such slippages in decision-making in the Ministry/UGC.
[Sl. No. 4]
58. The Committee have been informed that being statutory Autonomous Body, it
is not compulsory for the UGC to award its construction work to CPWD, as  it is in
the case of  Government Departments. However, the  UGC have failed to furnish
convincing explanation as to what promoted them to opt for Ed. CIL  rather than the
CPWD. While  observing that the project for construction of UGC complex was
plagued with abnormal delays, the Committee feel that if the work had been executed
through CPWD, which was earlier awarded the contract in April, 1991, it could have
been possibly completed by them earlier, because being a Government of India
organization, the CPWD provides a dedicated project team in case of important and
time bound projects. The Committee find in their examination that no attempt was
made by the UGC to identify the financial benefits that would have been received in
case the work was awarded to CPWD; proper exercise was also not undertaken to
verify the technical capabilities of both the agencies; further measures were not

20
taken to ensure that the requisite time schedule for completion of the project would
be met either by the CPWD or Ed. CIL. The Committee thus cannot but come to an
inescapable conclusion that the selection of a particular agency was almost pre-
determined in the instant case. In the light of the ham-handed manner in which the
contract has been handled, the Committee while expressing their displeasure in the
matter, recommend that UGC should at least now evolve a policy to restrict allotment
of work to those agencies which not only have a track record of being genuine
contractors but are also found adhering to the terms and conditions of the contract,
including timely completion of the project.
[Sl. No. 5]
59. The Committee have further been informed that UGC had entrusted the task
to Ed. CIL with the hope that there would be good coordination between them and the
work will be done in a time bound manner with proper quality. Taking into account
that Ed. CIL had badly delayed the project (the original target year being 2003), the
Committee can only conclude that this project has been symptomatic of bad planning
and total absence of functional coordination between the UGC & Ed. CIL. The
Committee would now like the Ministry of Human Resource Development to take
concrete initiatives to oversee the project and to maintain coordination between the
Ministry and the UGC on the one hand and the UGC & Ed. CIL on the other in order
to ensure speedy completion of the project with proper enforcement of terms and
conditions of the contract and for dealing with the problems arising therefrom.
[Sl. No. 6]
60. The Committee further note that UGC had released (September, 2003) Rs.
four crore as interest free mobilization advance to Ed. CIL. The Committee find
this an irregular payment, since as per the CPWD Manual, the amount of
mobilization advance could be paid at a simple interest of 10 per cent per annum,
subject to a maximum of 10 per cent of the estimated cost or Rs. one core, whichever
is less. In the instant case, the UGC not only exceeded the limit of Rs. one crore,
but even the 10 per cent interest clause was also not incorporated in the contract
which resulted in giving undue benefit to Ed. CIL. The UGC have tried to argue
their case that the said provision was applicable only to mobilization advance to the
contractors and since Ed. CIL was not a contractor of the UGC but was required to
provide agency function similar to the CPWD for 'Deposit Works', the said
provision of  the CPWD Works Manual was not applicable to them. UGC has thus
contended that alternately, the provision which stipulates that in case of deposit
works of autonomous bodies financed entirely from Govt. funds, 33 
1/3% of the
estimated cost of the work is to be deposited as advance was applicable in their
case. Considering the fact that the Ed. CIL had failed to execute and complete the
work despite 37 months of the award of contract to them UGC's plea on the legality
and reasonableness of the mobilization advance paid to Ed. CIL appears to be
meaningless and rather infructuous. The cost overrun of the project with  a low
initial estimate entailing huge cost escalation (almost 20%), resulting out of the
excessive delay, clearly defeat the arguments put forth by UGC in this regard. The
Committee would like to know from the UGC as to whether they had ever monitored
the utilization of the mobilization advance by Ed. CIL, particularly when Ed. CIL

21
was simply unable to make any progress with the project and was not able to secure
even basic approvals before construction could commence. The Committee may
also be apprised about the reasons for not securing the refund of the advance
extended to Ed. CIL inspite of lack of any progress by Ed. CIL in the commencement
of the project.
As regards the mandate and capability of Ed. CIL in the construction of similar
projects, the Committee have been informed that Ed. CIL has diversified into
construction activities and have the requisite capability to execute such projects.
However, considering the fact that Ed. CIL could not secure even basic approvals
from agencies and could not commence construction even after a long period of
37 months  or so, the case of Ed. CIL, as a construction agency/contractor as distinct
from a project consultant seems to be on slippery ground. In such an obvious scenario,
the Committee are constrained to recommend that the Ministry of HRD should re-
appraise the role and mandate of Ed. CIL to undertake work as a construction agency
in addition to their original mandate as a pure project consultant.
[Sl. No.  7]
61. Another disquieting aspect observed by the Committee is that UGC had
incurred an additional liability of Rs. 6.45 crore on account of consultancy charges
(including service tax of Rs. 59.75 lakh) payable to Ed. CIL over and above the project
cost. The Committee are constrained to point out that instead of initiating steps to
undertake a comparative cost analysis of both the agencies in question, namely
CPWD and Ed. CIL, the UGC in a rather unusual manner incurred an additional
liability of  Rs. 6.45 crore on account of consultancy charges, which could have been
avoided. Surprisingly, they ignored the claims of CPWD while awarding the contract,
despite it being a specialized agency already involved in many similar projects. This
undoubtedly, could not only have saved them from incurring extra expenditure but
could have also got their project executed  well in time. The Committee thus can only
conclude that the UGC displayed an unwarranted hurry in the matter without taking
into account the ground realities. They have now initiated some steps to salvage
their losses and have tried to redeem themselves, only after the subject was taken up
by the Committee for detailed examination. The Committee have now been informed
that UGC and Ed. CIL are reviewing their contract. The Committee hope that the
UGC will provide adequate safeguards in the Agreement to project their interest.
They would like to be apprised about the specific safegaurds being incorporated in
the contract by UGC.
[Sl. No. 8]
62. The Committee are constrained to point out that UGC allotted the work to Ed.
CIL without obtaining the formal administration and financial approvals from the
Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of Higher Education). The
UGC had also not obtained 'No Objection Certificate' from the Ministry of Urban
Development as is required under the General Financial Rules (GFRs) for not getting
the work done through CPWD.
As regards obtaining of formal administrative and financial approvals,
contradictory views have been expressed on the issue, the Ministry of HRD
had advised the UGC vide their letter dated 4 December, 2003 that for a project of

22
Rs. 30 crore, the competence to sanction lies with no authority lower than the
Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC) of the Ministry and that prescribed norms do
not seem to have been observed before award of work to Ed. CIL. The UGC was also
asked to place the matter again before the Commission for fresh consideration,
which the UGC did not do. Instead, they proceeded with the contract and thought it fit
to approach the Ministry as late as February, 2007 for formal post-facto approval for
incurring of expenditure towards payment already made to Ed. CIL. This however,
ran contrary to the UGC's earlier stand that they were well within their powers  to
sanction the work to Ed. CIL and no formal or administrative sanction of the Ministry
was required for the project. In response to the subsequent reference by the UGC,
the Ministry asked the UGC for providing further details regarding estimates,
scope and coverage of the project and the justification thereof, which again did not
serve any purpose as Ed. CIL was already in the midst of executing the contract. The
Committee believe that the Ministry and the UGC's position in the matter is
contradictory and rather confounding. The Committee would require further
clarification in this regard from the Ministry.
[Sl. No. 9]
63. In this connection, the Committee regret to note that post July, 2003, the
Ministry did not make any efforts to review the project with UGC. The Committee
are of the opinion that had the Ministry assumed responsibility and taken necessary
steps to review the progrees with UGC during the intervening period from July,
2003 to February, 2007, the project could well have been completed earlier. The
Committee would expect the Ministry to be alive and alert to progress of important
projects such as that of UGC, notwithstanding the autonomy accorded to the
institution. The Ministry's overall responsibility cannot diminish as the nodal agency
under whose aegis autonomous bodies like the UGC function.
Further, as regards non-obtaining of 'No Objection Certificate' from Ministry of
Urban Development for not awarding the cantract to CPWD, the UGC have replied
that as the provisions of General Financial Rules (GFRs) relate to works undertaken
by the Ministry/Department and not to autonomous organizations, the present work
even if assigned to CPWD would have come under the category of 'Deposit works' to
which the provisions of GFRs would not have applied. The Committee are of the
opinion that in the absence of any financial rules adopted by the UGC through a
resolution, the Government should have ensured the applicability of the GFRs in
letter and spirit. A selective adoption of the GFRs for the functioning of UGC is
inexplicable. It is only after the Committee have taken up the subject for examination,
the Ministry of HRD also took up the matter and issued instructions to UGC to
formally adopt the GFRs to remove the ambiguity. The Committee cannot but deprecate
the lackadaisical approach displayed both by the Ministry as well as UGC to such an
important administrative aspect of their functioning. The Committee desire that 'no
objection' of the Ministry of Urban Development  as required by GFRs be first
obtained by UGC/Ministry of HRD for the instant case and thereafter, UGC may
adopt its own Rules or the General Financial Rules of Government of India as they
deem fit.
[Sl. No. 10]

23
64. The Committee noticed that as per agreement, the work was to be completed
by November, 2005. But even after a lapse of 37 months since the awarding of work,
only the master plan, preliminary drawings and designs have been prepared and
certain approvals of local bodies in the process of being obtained. The Committee
have been informed that the project could not be started for want of statutory
clearances from various bodies like the DDA and Delhi Urban Arts Commission
(DUAC). The Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource Development during evidence
informed the Committee that as per the agreement, the primary responsibility for
getting those clearances rested with UGC. On the causes that contributed to delay,
the Committee only find that these are the normal reasons to which delays in
execution of all Government works are attributed and these should have been
anticipated. The Committee find it difficult to appreciate as to how and why these
factors were not taken into account at the time of planning the project and before
prescribing targets for completion of the project. These delays could have been
avoided by better anticipation, coordination and effective monitoring by UGC. The
Committee expect UGC to streamline their administrative mechanism and improve
their procedures/efficiency.
[Sl. No. 11]
65. Y et another instance confirming lack of financial prudence on the part of the
UGC relates to the payment of Rs. 40,000 per month for the extended period given to
Ed. CIL towards maintenance of its site establishment. What is of concern to the
Committee is the fact that there was no clause in the agreement to protect the
interest of UGC in the event of delays attributable on the part of Ed. CIL, although a
similar clause was incorporated to protect Ed. CIL. Such a conscious omission in the
contract detrimental to the interest  of UGC, in the opinion of the Committee, amounts
to showing undue favour to Ed. CIL. The Ministry have also failed to furnish any
explanation for non-enforcement of the contract provisions to safeguard the interest
of UGC. However, Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource Development stated during
evidence that a reappraisal clause is now being inserted, wherein Ed. CIL would also
have to pay Rs. 40,000 per month, if the delay is on their part. Further, as regards the
steps being taken to refund the mobilization advance alongwith interest (in view of
the inordinate delay in starting the construction of the project), the Committee have
been informed that this matter has been amicably resolved between the UGC and
Ed. CIL, wherein Ed. CIL has agreed to reduce its consultancy charges from 9.5% to
a suitable level and to introduce reciprocal penalty provision for delays in completion
of project. Had the UGC taken such a protective measure earlier, abnormal delay in
completion of the project could have been avoided, saving thereby precious resources
of the UGC. While taking a serious view of this act of omission by UGC, the Committee
trust that the Ministry/UGC would learn the right lesson from this lapse. Adequate
care should henceforth be taken to protect Government Interest while concluding
contracts of similar nature.
[Sl. No. 12]
66. Furnishing the details of the cost of the construction project at the time of
initiation and the cost at present, the UGC informed the Committee that as on
February, 2007, the escalation was 19.8% amounting to Rs. 13.50 crore and that

24
Ed. CIL has been asked to compute and inform the extent of additional cost escalation.
The Committee note with much concern that ineffective project management and the
excessive delay in execution and completion of the project by Ed. CIL has entailed a
huge financial burden on the UGC. While expressing their anguish over the ineptitude
of the concerned authorities in the matter, the Committee desire that the Ministry/
UGC should take urgent measures to complete the project within the revised time
frame in order to contain further cost escalation of the project. The Committee
would like to be informed of the actual cost escalation in this case. The Committee
would also expect the UGC and the Ministry to take up the matter of cost escalation
with Ed. CIL, and impose suitable penalties on them.
[Sl. No. 13]
67. As regards the present status of the project, the Committee have been informed
that the Ed. CIL have stated to have initiated some remedial measures such as:—
(i) Ed. CIL have completed the process of analysis and evaluation of construction
agencies qualifications;
(ii) the parking plans have been modified in accordance with the provisions of
the latest 'Delhi Master Plan-2021';
(iii) action for environmental clearances is under way with DPCC and Ministry
of Environment and Forests; and
(iv) UGC has been requested to expedite clearances from DUAC & DDA and a
draft of the revised Agreement between UGC and Ed. CIL is under preparation.
The Committee, while taking note of the belated steps being taken to accomplish
the project, emphasise that an efficient and effective monitoring mechanism at the
level of both the Ministry and the UGC to oversee the implementation of the project
as also the proposed revised agreement with Ed. CIL is the need of the hour. The
Committee would await the Ministry's response on the follow up measures taken by
them and the results achieved therefrom.
[Sl. No. 14]
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
23 November, 2007 Chairman,
2 Agrahayana 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

ANNEXURE-I
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2007-2008) HELD ON 11TH JUNE, 2007
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1700 hrs. on 11th June, 2007 in Committee
Room 'B', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri R. L. Jalappa
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Brajesh Pathak
6. Shri K. S. Rao
7. Shri Kharabela Swain
8. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
9. Prof. P. J. Kurien
10. Shri Janardhana Poojary
11. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
3. Shri M. K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1.  Shri B. K. Chattopadhyay — ADAI (RC)
2. Shri A. K. Thakur — DG (CR)
3. Shri Nand Kishore — Pr. Director (AB)
25

26
Representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of
Higher Education) & University Grants Commission (UGC)
1. Shri K. M. Acharya — Additional Secretary
2.  Shri S. K. Ray — Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser
3. Prof. Sukhadeo Thorat — Chairman, UGC
4. Prof. Moolchand Sharma — V ice-Chairman
5. Ms. Anju Banerjee — Chairman & Managing Director (Ed.
CIL)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to
the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman informed the Members that the sitting has
been convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Human
Resource Development (Department of Higher Education) and University Grants
Commission on Para Nos. 6.7 & 6.8 of the Report of C&AG of India for the year ended
March, 2006, Union Government (Civil - Autonomous Bodies), No. 3 of 2007 relating
to "University Grants Commission (i) Irregular award of construction work; and
(ii) injudicious release of grants" respectively. Thereafter, the Officers of the C&AG of
India briefed the Committee on the important points arising out of the audit paragraphs.
3. Then, the representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Development
(Department of Higher Education) and University Grants Commission were called in.
The Chairman read out the contents of the Direction 58 by the Speaker regarding
secret nature of the proceedings of the Committee.
4. Since the Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of
Higher Education) was unable to attend the sitting, for which prior permission of
Hon'ble Chairman was obtained, the Additional Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource
Development (Department of Higher Education) and the Chairman, University Grants
Commission after introducing their colleagues to the Committee made a brief
presentation on the points arising out of Audit paras. The witnessess also replied to
the queries raised by the Members. The CMD, Educational Consultants of India Ltd.,
also explained the position about the role of their organization on the audit findings
and the queries of the Members thereupon. As the witnesses could not give satisfactory
replies to certain queries raised by the Members, the Committee decided to hold
another meeting on the subject, after considering the written replies of the Ministry.
The Hon'ble Chairman also directed the Ministry to furnish the information as desired
by the Members in writing at the earliest particularly in regard to:—
(i) Reasons for taking project back from CPWD;
(ii) Permission of the M/o HRD to award the work to Ed. CIL;
(iii) Reasons fro delay in implementation of project;
(iv) Agreement/contract with Ed. CIL-safeguarding intrests of UGC;
(v) Advance of Rs. 4 crore to Ed. CIL and its utilization;
(vi) Renewal of agreement with Ed. CIL;

27
(vii) Capacity of Ed. CIL to take up construction projects;
(viii) Rationality in giving advance money to Universities without sanctioning the
schemes/projects.
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2007-2008) HELD ON 30TH JULY, 2007
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1730 hrs. on 30th July, 2007 in Committee
Room ‘E’, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Raghunath Jha
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri K.S. Rao
5. Shri Mohan Singh
6. Shri Kharabela Swain
7.  Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Prof. P.J. Kurien
9. Shri Janardhana Poojary
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay —  Joint secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri B.K. Chattopadhyay — ADAI (RC)
2. Shri A.K. Thakur — DG (CR)
3. Shri Nand Kishore — Pr. Director (AB)
28

29
Representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department of
Higher Education). University Grants Commission (UGC) and Educational
Consultants India Limited
1. Shri R.P. Agrawal — Secretary (Higher Education)
2. Shri Sunil Kumar — Joint Secretary (Higher Education)
3. Shri S.K. Ray — Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser
4. Prof. Sukhadeo Thorat — Chairman, UGC
5. Dr. T.R. Kem — Secretary, UGC
6. Dr. R.K. Chauhan — Additional Secretary & Financial
Adviser, UGC
7. Ms. Anju Banerjee — Chairman & Managing Director
(Ed. CIL)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members of the Committee,
Audit Officers and representatives of the Ministry of Human Resource Development
(Department of Higher Education). University Grants Commission (UGC) and
Educational Consultants India Limited (Ed. CIL) to the sitting of the Committee. The
Chairman informed that the sitting of the Committee has been convened to resume
further evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Human resource
Development (Department of Higher Education), UGC and Ed. CIL on the issues
arising out of Paras 6.7 & 6.8 of C&AG's Report No. 3 of 2007 Union Government (Civil
- Autonomous Bodies), relating to "Irregular award of construction work" and
"Injudicious release of grants" , which had remained inconclusive on 11th June,
2007. The Chairman read out the contents of the Direction 58 by the Speaker regarding
secret nature of the proceedings of the Committee.
3. The Chairman further observed that the Officials could not satisfy with their
replies on the various points arising out of Audit paragraphs and the queries made by
the Members during the earlier evidence on the subject. Certain key issues remained
to be resolved, such as the competence of the UGC to enter into a contract with Ed.
CIL in preference to CPWD, terms of agreement with Ed. CIL and their proposed
modification with adequate safeguards, inordinate delay in the execution of the project
and the inability of the UGC in ensuring timely completion of the project. He desired
a firm assurance from the Ministry, UGC as well as the Ed. CIL on the exact time period
by which the UGC building project will be eventually completed. He also desired to
know about the quantum of cost escalation that has occurred due to the delay and the
total estimated project cost which UGC will now have to bear.
4. Thereafter, the Secretary, Ministry of Human Resource Development (Department
of Higher Education), after introducing his colleagues to the Committee, briefly
explained the points raised by the Chairman. Subsequently, the Members of the
Committee sought clarifications on the points arising out of the Audit Paragraphs and
the Post-evidence Information furnished by the Ministry. The Secretary (Department
of Higher Education) assured the Committee that the project will be completed by

30
December, 2009. To certain queries, for which the witnesses' replies were not readily
available, the Chairman directed the representatives of the Ministry to furnish the
requisite information at the earliest. The points on which clarification was sought are
as under:—
(i) problems faced in early finalization of project;
(ii) details regarding original estimated construction cost in 1991 and the estimated
cost as of today;
(iii) details regarding cost escalation;
(iv) renewal of agreement with Ed. CIL and Inclusion of penalty and liquidated
damages clause to safeguard the interests of UGC;
(v) applicability of the General Financial Rules (GFRs) to UGC vis-à-vis framing of
specific rules for UGC as stipulated in UGC Act; and
(vi) steps taken to obtain clearance for construction of UGC Building from Delhi
Urban Arts Commission (DUAC), Delhi Development Authority (DDA) and
other agencies.
5.  A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE-II
PART II
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2007-2008) HELD ON 23rd NOVEMBER, 2007
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. on 23rd November, 2007 in
Room  No. 51 (Chairman's Chamber), First Floor, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Brajesh Pathak
7.  Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri V . Narayanasamy
9. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
Representative of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Shri Nand Kishore — Pr. Director of Audit (AB)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to
the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and
adoption the following draft Reports:—
(i)  Draft Report on Para 6.7 of C&AG's Report No. 3 of 2007, Union  Government
[Civil — Autonomous Bodies] relating to "Irregular Award of Construction
Work";
31

32
(ii) draft Report on Paras 1.1 to 1.11 of Chapter 1 of C&AG's Report No. 5 of 2006,
Union Government (Railways) relating to "Project Management practices in
Gauge Conversion and New Line Projects"; and
(iii) draft Action Taken Report on the 31st Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) on
"Excesses Over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2004-2005)".
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted these draft Reports without
any amendments/modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalize and present
the same to Parliament in the light of factual verification, if any, done by the Audit.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
Audit paragraph 6.7 of Report No. 3 of 2007 of C&AG of India for the year ended
March, 2006 Union Government (Civil-Autonomous Bodies) relating to
"Irregular Award of Construction Work".
The University Grants Commission Irregularly awarded consultancy work to
Educational Consultants India Limited without obtaining administrative and
financial sanctions from the Ministry of Human Resource Development and No
Objection Certificate from the Ministry of Urban Development resulting in extra
liability of  Rs. 6.45 crore. UGC also irregularly paid interest free mobilisation
advance of  Rs. four crore to Ed. CIL. Even after lapse of 37 months from signing of
agreement, the construction was yet to commence as of June 2006.
The University Grants Commission (UGC) had in its possession 20 acre of land in
the campus of Jawaharlal Nehru University (JNU). The land was sub-leased by JNU
to UGC on no rent basis for construction of UGC complex in January 1990. UGC
allotted the work of construction to Educational Consultant  India Limited  (Ed. CIL)
in December 2002 on project management basis. Formal agreement was signed in
May, 2003. According to the agreement, Ed. CIL was to be paid 9.5 percent of the
actual project cost as consultancy charges and also service tax on Ed.CIL's margin.
As per the preliminary estimate, the project cost was Rs. 68.11 crore and the
construction was to be completed in 24 to 30 months. Audit scrutiny (November 2004
and October 2005) brought out the following:—
* UGC was required to obtain administrative and financial approval for the
construction of the complex from the Ministry as the Ministry had not
delegated these powers to UGC. UGC allotted the work to Ed.CIL without
obtaining the formal administrative and financial approval. Subsequently, in
July 2003 UGC had requested the Ministry to accord administrative and
financial sanctions. In response to this request, the Ministry communicated
that it had no objection to award this project to Ed. CIL subject to observance
of relevant norms and rules. However, formal administrative and financial
sanctions have not yet been accorded by the Ministry (November 2006).
* The work was awarded to Ed. CIL without obtaining 'no objection certificate'
from the Ministry of Urban Development as required under GFRs for not
getting the work executed through CPWD.
* Since CPWD does not recover departmental charges for executing the work of
autonomous bodies fully funded by the Central Government, UGC incurred
additional liability of Rs. 6.45 crore on  account of consultancy charges
(including service tax of Rs. 59.75 lakh) payable to Ed.CIL over and above the
project cost.
33

34
* UGC had released (September 2003) Rs. four crore as interest free mobilization
advance. This was irregular since according to paragraph 32.7 of CPWD
Manual, the amount of mobilization advance can be paid at a simple interest
of 10 per cent per annum subject to a miximum of 10 per cent of the estimated
cost or Rs. One crore whichever is less. In this case, UGC not only exceeded
the limit of Rs. One crore but even the 10 per cent interest clause was not
incorporated in the agreement which resulated in undue benefit to Ed. CIL
which worked out to Rs. One crore upto march 2006.
* Clause 3.10 of the agreement provided that if the project got extended beyond
the time frame specified in the agreement for reasons beyond the control of
Ed.CIL, UGC shall pay Rs. 0.40 lakh per month for the extended period to
Ed.CIL towards maintenance of its site establishment. There was, however,
no clause in the agreement to protect the interest of UGC in the event of
delays attributable to Ed.CIL.
* According to clause 6.2 of the agreement, UGC was required to pay service
tax of Rs. 59.75 lakh (10.2 per cent on estimated cost) on consultancy charges
payable to Ed.CIL which was also irregular as according to provision contained
in Finance Act 1994, service tax is not leviable on construction of government
buildings which are not used for commercial purposes.
* As per agreement the work was to be completed by November 2005. But even
after 37 months since award of work, only the master plan, preliminary drawings
and designs had been prepared and certain approvals of the local bodies
such as DDA, Airport Authority of India and Delhi Fire Service etc. had been
obtained.
Thus, UGC irregularly awarded the work of construction of Ed.CIL resulting in
additional liability of Rs. 6.45 crore (including service tax of  Rs. 59.75 lakh) on account
of consultancy charges. Besides, irregular release of interest-free mobilization advance
of Rs. four crore to Ed.CIL resulted in undue benefit to the firm. The work of
construction of the complex on the land allotted in 1990 was not commenced as of
June 2006 i.e. even after lapse of more than three years since signing of agreement
despite release of mobilization advance in September 2003.
In response to audit observation, UGC stated (June 2006) that although UGC was
aware that the construction was to be carried out by CPWD but keeping in view that
UGC and Ed.CIL were organizations under the Ministry of Human Resource
Development, it had decided to allot the work to Ed.CIL for better coordination as
UGC did not have the technical man-power. It added that advance of  Rs. four crore
was given to Ed.CIL for appointing an architect and getting the master plan and
technical design prepared. The reply is not tenable as the organizations getting
construction work done through CPWD do not need to have their own technical
manpower. The fact that Ed.CIL is yet to commence construction (November 2006)
work defies the assumption of better coordination.
The matter was referred to the Ministry in July 2006; their reply was awaited as of
December 2006.