SIXTEENTH  REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 10-8-2005.
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 12-8-2005.
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
August, 2005/Sravana, 1927(Saka)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
PROCUREMENT AND UTILIZATION OF PLANT
AND EQUIPMENT IN DRDO
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
(DEFENCE RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT
ORGANISATION)
SERVER 3\1750LS RAW TEXT/1750LS.P65

PAC No. 1779
© 2005 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok
Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.
Price: Rs. 24.00
SERVER 3\1750LS RAW TEXT/1750LS.P65

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2005-2006) ........................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... (v)
REPORT.............................................................................................................. 1
APPENDIX-I Paragraph 5.1 of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India for the year ended 31 March, 2002 (No. 6 of
2004) Union Government (Defence Services—Army and
Ordnance Factories) relating  to Procurement and Utilisation
of plant and equipment in DRDO ......................................... 27
A
PPENDIX-II Statement of Observations and Recommendations ............. 40
PART - II
Minutes of the sittings of Public Accounts Committee
(2004-2005) held on 19.1.2005 and (2005-2006) held on
15.7.2005............................................................................... 49
SERVER 3\1750LS RAW TEXT/1750LS.P65
(i)

COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Dr. R. Senthil
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
13. Kunwar Revati Raman Singh
14. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Dr. K. Malaisamy
19. Shri V . Narayanasamy
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
21. Shri Jairam Ramesh
22. Prof. R.B.S V arma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri John Joseph — Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
(iii)
SERVER 3\1750LS RAW TEXT/1750LS.P65

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee having been authorised by the
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this 16th Report relating to
"Procurement and Utilisation of Plant and Equipment in DRDO" on Paragraph 5.1 of
the Report of Comptroller & Auditor General (C&AG) of India for the year ended
31 March 2003, (No. 6 of 2004), Union Government (Defence Services—Army &
Ordnance Factories).
2. The Report of the C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March 2003 (No. 6 of
2004), Union Government (Defence Services—Army and Ordnance Factories) was
laid on the Table of the House on 13 July 2004.
3. The Committee took the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence (Defence Research and Development Organisation) on the subject at their
sitting held on 19 January, 2005. The Committee considered and finalised this Report
at their sitting held on 15 July, 2005. Minutes of the sittings form Part II of the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type  in the body of the
Report and have been produced in a consolidated form at the end of the Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry
of Defence (Defence Research and Development Organisation) for the cooperation
extended by them in furnishing information and tendering evidence before the
Committee.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
20 July, 2005 Chairman,
29 Sravana, 1927 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee
SERVER 3\1750LS RAW TEXT/1750LS.P65

REPORT
Introductory
The Defence Research and   Development Organisation (DRDO) provides
scientific and technical support to the Armed Forces through design and development
of new and sophisticated equipment to meet operational requirements. A significant
objective of DRDO is the establishment of capability for indigenous production of
equipment which, hitherto, were imported i.e. self-reliance in defence requirements.
The mandate of DRDO is accomplished through a network of 50 laboratories/
establishments. The activities of DRDO are oraganised through specific projects  of
the following types:—
(a) Staff projects taken up at the instance of the Services against specific
qualitative requirements.
(b) Competence building projects undertaken for building up expertise in specific
disciplines.
Audit Paragraph
2. This Report is based on Paragraph 5.1 of the Report of Comptroller & Auditor
General (C&AG) of India for the year ended 31 March 2003, (No. 6 of 2004), Union
Government (Defence Services — Army & Ordnance Factories) relating to "Procurement
and Utilisation of   Plant and Equipment in DRDO".  A review was conducted  by Audit
on the procurement and utilisation of imported and indigenous plant and equipment,
procured during the period from 1997-98 to 2001-02. All cases of equipment costing Rs.
5 lakh and above were studied in Audit. Fifteen Research  & Development (R&D)
laboratories/establishments out of 50 were selected by Audit for review. The specific
objectives of the Audit review were:—
(a) to  examine whether the procurement of plant and equipment by DRDO
establishments was justified;
(b)to analyse the process of procurement and see whether it was conducted
effectively and efficiently with respect to cost and time; and
(c) to assess the efficiency of utilization of plant and equipment procured.
Budget and Expenditure
3. The following table depicts the budget allotment and actual expenditure of
SERVER 3\1750LS RAW TEXT/1750LS.P65

2
DRDO during the period from 1997-98 to 2003-2004:—
(Rs. in crore)
Y ear Total Total Budget Actual
Budget expenditure allocation for expenditure
Allocation purchase of on purchase
Material* of material*
only only
1997-98 1683.00 1958.22 486.83 561.81
1998-99 2476.80 2299.61 1000.32 994.17
1999-00 2780.00 2833.47 1190.00 1254.04
2000-01 3101.75 3355.81 1304.24 1548.06
2001-02 3518.34 3127.97 1607.33 1395.53
2002-03 3-79.49 3006.28 1291.63 1220.73
2003-04 3457.97 3440.66 1457.62 1451.53
 (*) Material includes stores, plant and equipment.
4. Budgetary allocations and actual expenditure on material in respect of the
fifteen Laboratories and establishments selected for Audit review for the five years
from 1997-98 to 2001-02 were as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
Sl.  Name of Laboratories/Establishments Total Budget Expenditure
No. budget allotment for on purchase
allotment purchase of material
of material
12 3 4 5
1. Defence Research and Development 200.95 70.22 70.04
Laboratory, Hyderabad (DRDL)
2. Search Centre Imarat, Hyderabad (RCI) 145.46 84.55 84.32
3. High Energy Material Research 123.01 34.75 20.52
Laboratory, Pune (HEMRL)
4. Armament Research and Development 174.18 84.82 76.43
Establishment,  Pune  (ARDE)
5. Terminal Ballistic Research Laboratory, 82.02 38.40 38.23
Chandigarh (TBRL)
6. Combat Vehicle Research and Development 171.65 67.51 65.18
Establishment, Avadi (CVRDE)
7. Defence Electronics and Research 318.02 199.35 188.78
 Laboratory, Hyderabad (DLRL)
8. Defence Metallurgical Research 146.00 57.43 56.63
Laboratory, Hyderabad (DMRL)
9. Research and Development Establishment 96.73 44.20 42.53
(Engineers), Pune [RDE(E)]

3
10. Vehicle Research Development 81.21 34.63 34.22
Establishment, Ahmednagar (VRDE)
11. Solid State Physics Laboratory, Delhi (SSPL)101.94 47.75 44.41
12. Institute of Nuclear Medicine and 40.70 19.79 19.20
Allied Sciences, Delhi (INMAS)
13. Laser Science and Technology 103.93 70.03 60.49
Center, Delhi (LASTEC)
14. Integrated Test Range, Balasore (ITR) 120.62 81.01 79.49
15. Proof and Experimental Establishment, 71.85 17.48 19.46
Balasore (PXE)
Total 1978.27 951.92 898.93
It would be seen form the above Table that DRDO establishments spent
45.44 per cent of their budget on purchase of stores, plant and equipment.
Procurement Planning
5. According to the Audit Paragraph, 8 equipment costing Rs. 1.75 crore required
for specific projects undertaken by 5 laboratories/establishments (ARDE, DMRL, VRDE,
HEMRL and SSPL) were received either after the closure of the  Project or  at the fag
end of the Project. The details are illustrated in the following Table:—
Sl. Name of Equipment Cost Closure Equipment Remarks
No. Lab/Estt. of Project installed on
1. ARDE Piezo d 33, dhgh Rs 14.65 lakh December December -
Measuring 2001 2001
system
2. DMRL  High temperature Rs 12 lakh December August 1999 -
Air Furnace 1999
3. DMRL Electric Shell Rs 10 lakh December June 2002 PDC(*)
Pre-heating 2002 Extended to 2004.
Furnace Not used up to
February 2003
4. DMRL Plate leveling Rs 9.33 lakh November July 2002 Used only for
Machine 2002 7-1/2 hours since
its installation.
5. VRDE Data Acquisition Rs 6.80 lakh December December -
Products 1998 1999
6. HEMRL HOT compaction Rs 15.50 lakh September September Used only for
Machine 2002 2002 18-1/2 hours
7. DMRL Optical Rs. 6.04 lakh January June 1999 Used only for
Microscope 2000 7 hours 15
minutes
8. SSPL Plasma Enhanced Rs. 1.11 crore September August Used for only
Chemical Vapour 2002 2002 1 month in the
Deposition System Project.
(*) PDC—Probable date of completion
12 3 4 5

4
6. The Committee enquired the reasons for delay in receipt/installation of these
8 equipment. The Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence Research &
Development) in the written information furnished to the Committee stated that the
general reasons for delay in receipt/installation of these 8 equipment were re-floating
of tenders, technical clarifications, imposed embargo for exporting equipments to DRDO
etc.
7. To  a query as to how the projects were completed without these equipment,
the Ministry stated that all the  8 equipment are either measuring instruments or
furnaces, which are of general nature and are being utilized for ongoing  programmes
in the Laboratories. When asked further whether the Projects were delayed because of
the delay in  receipt of  equipment, the Ministry stated that none of the Projects was
delayed due to any delay in receipt of  equipment.
8.  Considering that most of the equipment were installed towards the end of the
Project and could not be substantially used for the specific purpose, the Committee
desired to  know the prospects of utilization of the equipment. According to the
Ministry, technical activities do not stop in the Laboratories with the closure of  a
particular project. The equipment have been used in subsequent projects. The Ministry
have also furnished details of the Projects where these equipment were subsequently
put to use.
9. The Committee enquired as to what specific steps have been taken to remove
deficiencies in the system of procurement planning and procurement action with a
view  to ensuring that equipment projected for particular project is received in time and
utilized for the specific purpose. The Ministry in their written information submitted
that instructions have been  issued in this regard to all Laboratories (Appendix A &  B).
According to them, action has also been taken for amendment in the Purchase
Management Procedure so that yearly report for any deficiency shall be reported to
Headquarter with reasons thereof. The Committee have also been informed that
development of Integrated Material Management Software (IMMS) by the Laboratories
of DRDO will help in considerably  reducing time for procurement. While furnishing
the status of implementation of IMMS, the Ministry stated that the same is likely to be
completed by August, 2005.
Procurement Process
A.  Failure to  adopt open tendering
10. According to the Audit Paragraph, the Purchase Management Procedure of
DRDO, issued  in July 2000, stipulated that in general, open/global tenders should be
invited to generate as much competition as possible. However, if warranted by the
situation, other modes of tendering viz. limited, single and proprietary, could  also be
used in accordance with the prescribed procedure. Audit observed that out of 30 cases
in five laboratories involving purchase of equipment costing Rs. 10.17 crore, there
were only four open tenders. In 17 cases, purchases were made on the grounds of
urgency of requirement. Out of 5 cases processed as urgent in the years 2001 and 2002
i.e. after issue of Purchase Management Procedure by DRDO, only two orders were
placed within 12 months and three were placed after 13 to 21 months of raising of

5
demands. In 12 other cases  considered urgent, for which  orders were  placed up to the
year 2000, the time gap between the raising of demand and actual ordering ranged from
5 to 11 months in  8 cases and over 12 months in four cases.
11. The Committee desired to know the system in vogue for procurement of
equipment through different modes of tendering.  In this connection, the Ministry
stated as follow:—
"Open tendering is followed for item where the limited tendering, irrespective of
its estimated value, has not resulted in creation of expected competition and
best offer. Global tendering is resorted to, for item of foreign origin, where
competition from more than one same different countries is envisaged. Limited
tendering is chosen for the cases whose source of supply are definitely known
and are limited, for reasons of security and in Public  interest, when requirement
of stores is urgent and the desired delivery schedule cannot be met if open
tenders are invited. Lab Directors may decide any mode of tendering within their
delegated powers to be adopted for each Purchase based on the basis of technical
complexity of the item and known source of supply etc. Beyond Director's power,
cases of item other than projects are being sent to HQ DRDO for  Equipment
Procurement Committee (EPC) approval."
12. When limited tender was resorted to on grounds of urgency, the Committee
questioned the procurement action of the concerned Laboratories that let to delays
ranging even up to 21 months in some cases for placing the supply orders after raising
of demands. The Ministry, in a written note, explained the reasons for delay as follows:—
"Procurement in DRDO is usually in the context of research & development.
Items are usually not available off-the-shelf. Therefore the process of finalizing
technical specifications needs extensive interactions with the vendors. This can
sometimes take more time than anticipated. Limited Tendering is chosen not
only for urgency but for security reasons too and also when sources of supply
are definitely known. Some of the limited tenders were from DRDL. Hyderabad,
that is in the entity list of embargo. Also the cases where internal lead-time taken
by Lab is more than one year, such cases are to be approved again by the
Equipment Procurement Committee (EPC) at HQrs in which Integrated Finance is
also a member. HQrs. Committee examines such cases critically."
13. To a specific query by the Committee during evidence as to how the Ministry
justify not adopting open tenders on grounds of urgency when there were substantial
delays not only in raising of demands but also actual placement of order, the Secretary,
DRDO submitted:—
"I agree that there could have been lapses on our part or on the part of our
scientists in resorting to limited tenders. Some of the things I have gone through
and found that procedurally they are not correct. There is no need to say urgency.
Urgency would have been in one or two cases but not in all the cases. We do
resort to it, if there is a confidence that there is somebody who has tacit
knowledge of that generic thing which can be added to in building such equipment.
By that we can have some means of ascertaining and saying that you resort to

6
limited tenders. Today, we have, in the DRDO, a Procurement Procedure, 2003,
which has been modified as Procurement Procedure, 2004, wherein we have very
strongly advocated for open tenders. Wherever the machine or capital equipment
is of a generic nature, and where there is a valid reason, we look for limited
tenders. There are procedures, how these limited tenders should get the
acceptance of the competent authority through the Equipment Procurement
Committee and through other Technical Committees. The Committee sit in
judgement before clearing this as a limited tender or as a proprietary article. So,
I can say that processes of procurement have since been legislated, and have a
little more clarity. In future, scientists can follow this. So, to that extent, this is a
lapse. I admit that."
14. The Committee enquired the time frame stipulated for placement of orders
after demands are raised by the User Laboratories. The Ministry stated that no specific
time frame had been fixed for placement of supply orders.
15. The Committee desired to know the mechanism in place to monitor the cases
of procurement on grounds of urgency. The Ministry stated that User group in the
Laboratory and Material Management group monitor the cases of procurement on
grounds of urgency. According to them, Material   management software to be
implemented in all DRDO Laboratories will further improve the monitoring system.
Long Internal Lead Time
16. According to the Audit paragraph, the Purchase Management Procedure
prescribed a normal time limit of 12 months for different activities involved in purchase,
i.e. from the date of demand from the user department to the date of placement of
supply order. A test check  of 50 cases in 4 laboratories by Audit revealed that in
22 cases, supply orders were placed after 12 months from the date of demand from the
user.
17. On being asked to explain the reasons for the delay in placement of orders in
respect of the cases pointed out by Audit, where the prescribed time limit was not
adhered to, the Ministry in a note submitted that as these equipment were to be
specially developed to cater to DRDO requirement it took time to reach to desired
specifications after series of discussions with vendors.
18. When asked by the Committee about the steps taken subsequently to obviate
recurrence of delay in procurement action by the concerned authorities in different
Laboratories/establishments, the Ministry, in a note furnished subsequently have
stated that Integrated Managment  Software & DRONA Transaction System (Intra Net
connecting all DRDO Labs. & Headquarters) are expected to reduce the time for
placement of orders.
Long External Lead Time
19. Audit review has brought out that the suppliers failed to adhere to the time
schedule for delivery of equipment. According to Audit, in 65 cases, items were received
after delays upto one year. In 9 cases, items were received with delays of more than one
year and ranging upto three years. One case was stated to be outstanding beyond five

7
years. The total amount to be recovered by way of liquidated damages in 36 cases was
Rs. 67.58 lakh. However, liquidated damages amounting to Rs. 0.46 lakh was recovered
only in one case. In the remaining 35 cases, an amount of Rs. 67.12 lakh leviable was
waived by the Directors of the laboratories/establishments.
20. When enquired about the basis on which the Directors of the concerned
Laboratories/establishments took a decision to waive liquidated damange to the  tune
of Rs. 67.12 lakh, the Ministry, in a note, stated that a decision to waive Liquidated
damages was taken as developmental delays were not attributable to suppliers due to
changes in drawings/specifications.
Delay in installation of equipment
21. Audit Paragraph has brought out 6 cases involving abnormal delay in
installation of  equipment costing Rs. 13.78 crore, after receipt of those from the suppliers.
According to Audit, the suppliers were responsible for the delay. Further, the time-
frame for installation of the equipment by the suppliers had not been laid down in the
contracts. Other reasons for non-installation/commissioning of the equipment were:
delay in calibration, receipt of equipment in damaged condition, delay  in repair or
replacement of the damaged parts by the supplier and delay in completion of civil
works before the receipt of the equipment. Four of these cases are dealt with in detail
in the succeeding paragraphs.
A. Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory (DMRL)
22. According to the Audit Paragraph, Electric Furnace Chamber costing Rs.
13.70 lakh, which was received in January 2002 by DMR, was not installed till March
2003. The Committee desired to know whether the furnace was defective and if so, how
was it cleared in the pre-despatch inspection at the firm's premises. The Ministry, in a
written note, explained as follows:—
"The electrical furnace was not defective. Due to severe shortage of power
supply at their premises at Kolkata, the full performance of the equipment could
not be tested for attaining of the specified temperature. Since the furnace was
designed to operate at a maximum power of 120 KW as per the specification and
as  the vendor offered to demonstrate full performance at DMRL, the same was
agreed by the inspection team and the clearance for dispatch was given."
23. In the vetting comments Audit stated that the electric furnace chamber was
procured from a firm, which  reportedly did not have the facilities to test it. The firm was
paid 65% payment without  demonstrating its performance which was in violation of
the terms of the contract. The furnace after installation in DMRL failed to attain the
desired temperature of 1200°C, causing delay in its; commissioning.
24. In response to the Audit observation, the Ministry in a note have explained
that the equipment could not be tested for its full capability because of severe power
problems in Das Nagar, Post Bultikuri, Howrah where the works of M/s WJ Alcock
Company Pvt. Ltd, was located. This was stated to be confirmed by the DMRL
representatives, who went to the site for inspection. The inspection at the firm's premises
was cleared only after checking all the functional aspects as per specifications. The

8
vendor demonstrated the full capability of the furnace on 15.5.2003. According to the
Ministry, the furnace  has been working satisfactorily, since its commissioning, reaching
the maximum temperature of 1200° C in the specified time.
B. Combat Vehicle Research and Development Establishment (CVRDE)
25. An equipment namely 200 KW Dynamometer costing Rs. 36.75 lakh, which
was received in June 1989 by CVRDE, was installed in August 2002 i.e. after a delay of
13 years. Explaining the reasons for delay in installation of the Dynamometer, the
Ministry have stated that the equipment was received in June 1989 in a damaged
condition. The item was sent to the supplier during February/March 1991 after protracted
negotiation with the firm and DGS&D for repairing by the firm. The equipment was
received back after rectification during  January 1998. The Indian  agent then took up
the installation work. During the installation in September 2000, it was found that one
item named Switch Mode Power Supply (SMPS) was defected and the replacement
was received during November 2001. According to the Ministry, in the meantime the
Indian agent insisted for the payment of the agency commission, which was not
released. The agency of the Indian agent was also terminated. The expertise available
with the establishment was used to complete the installation.
26. The Committee enquired whether pre-despatch inspection clause was there
in the contract. The Ministry, in a note furnished subsequently to the Committee have
stated that the procurement of equipment was done through DGS&D contract on Free
on Board (FOB) basis and in the said contract there is no pre-despatch inspection
clause. However, the supplier was responsible for the completeness of the equipment
and efficient working of the same at the site and the equipment was covered under
warranty/guarantee clause.
27. When asked about the relevant clause in this contract to deal with stores
received in damaged condition, the Ministry have explained in a note that the delivery
was FOB. As such,  the supplier was not responsible for transit insurance. The contract
in fact, stipulated that DRDO could, if it so desired, insure the equipment against
damage in transit. The practice in DRDO is that any goods or equipment whose value
is less than Rs. 2.5 crore is not insured against transit damages. The cost of this
equipment was Rs. 36 lakhs, and hence transit insurance was not taken.
28. In a letter (Appendix 'C') written to Chairman, PAC subsequent to oral evidence
on the subject. Scientific Adviser to Raksha Mantri and Secretary. DRDO assured the
Committee that the Department would ensure that unjustifiable delays that took place
in case of Dynamometer do not recur. It was further stated that the purchase
management manual was being amended to provide for annual reports from all
Laboratories  in respect of cases in which the delay in delivery, installation and utilization
is greater than one year.
C. Defence Research and Development Laboratory (DRDL)
29. In case of DRDL, an equipment namely 3D CNC Co-ordinate measuring
Machine costing Rs. 4.63 crore, which was received in September 2002, was not installed
till March, 2003. Explaining the reasons for delay and status of its installation, the

Server 3\Report 2004\564LS Raw Text\564ls
9
Ministry have submitted in a note, as follows:—
"The 3D Co-ordinate Measuring Machine was delivered in September 2002. It
was found after receipt of the consignment at DRDL that 10 packages out  of 17
packages of the consignment were in damaged condition possibly due to
improper handling during transit. Due to the partial damage of some components,
the machine could not be installed after delivery of the machine. The survey was
conducted by surveyor of Insurance Company. Based on the survey report, the
specialist Engineer from the original manufacturers (CMA France) was invited to
assess the extent of damage and possible course  of action for installation. The
specialist engineer during his visit in November 2002 recommended that some of
the components are to be replaced and then only the machine can be installed
based upon the specialist engineer's recommendation for the list of damaged
components, a supply order  was placed on CMA France during March 2003 for
supply of the items. The replacement components arrived at DRDL in September
2003. The French team of installation engineers commenced the installation
during October 2003 and the installation of the machine was completed
successfully during January, 2004. The machine has been working satisfactorily
from then onwards."
30.  The Committee enquired about the total cost of the replacement equipment
obtained from the Original Equipment Manufacturer on account of damage in transit.
According to the Ministry, the total cost incurred in this regard was Euro 88875. On
being asked further whether the expenditure was borne by the supplier or the
Laboratory concerned, the Ministry in a post-evidence note stated that DRDL met the
expenditure. According to the Ministry after completion of installation, final insurance
claim was made on 18 February, 2004 for a similar amount. The claim has been made to
United India Insurance Company at New Delhi. DRDL was in correspondence with the
Insurance Company and according to the Ministry, the claim is likely to be settled
soon.
Under-utilisation of Equipment
31. According to Audit Paragraph, four equipment namely Flip Chip Alignor
Bonder (Machine), Frequency Response Analyser. Tracking Doppler Radar System
DR-6700 and V oltas Omega Crane (25 Tonne) costing Rs. 5.60 crore were under-utilised
or remained unutilized for two to four years due to delay in repair and upgradation in
respect of SSPL, RCI, PXE and CVRDE.
32. The Committee enquired the reasons for the long delay in repair of these
equipment. The Ministry in a note stated that repair of direct import equipment take
time as the firms are not ready to give Bank Guarantee for equipment and it is risky to
send the equipment for repair due to Commerce Control Laws.
33. The  Committee desired to know the system in place for monitoring the
performance of equipment installed in the DRDO laboratories. According to the Ministry,
the present system of monitoring the performance of equipment is to enter into Annual
Maintenance Contract (AMC) with the firm or his representative. Provision or spares
for critical component are stated to be kept in stock.
34. To a query as to how equipment are pending for such a long time for repair/
upgradation despite existence of AMC with the firm and provision of spares for critical

10
components, the Minsitry in a post-evidence note explained:—
"Annual Maintenance Contracts are entered for equipment available within the
country. For direct import items, AMC is incurred if the supplier has a service
center in India. Warranty clauses is normally mentioned in supply order and at
times the complete equipment is required to be sent to the OEM premises for
repair when  such repairs are not possible in India."
35. When asked  about availability of expertise with the DRDO Labs. to carry out
repair of these equipment, the Ministry have stated that no expertise is available for
repair of equipments under direct import.
36. The Committee specifically desired to know the extent to which the performance
of the concerned Laboratories was affected due to long delay in repair of these
equipment. The Ministry, in a note have submitted that Lab performance was affected
to some extent due to delay in repair of the equipment. However, allotment methods
were being used to overcome the problem.
37. In response to vetting comments by Audit regarding corrective action taken
to obviate long delay in repair of machine, the Ministry in a note have inter-alia stated
that DRDO HQrs. have already taken corrective action for plugging loopholes in the
area of stores management with issue of Store Management Guidelines - 2004 (SMG-
2004) in April 2004. The SMG-2004 covers the entire gamut of store management from
receipt and inspection, taking on ledger charge, inventory control, warehousing
transport and despatch, stock taking and disposal of obsolete stores.
38. In a related query regarding utilization of equipment during evidence, Secretary,
DRDO explained as follows:—
"As far as under utilization of specific equipment is concerned, 'yes', that has
occurred. It does not happen in every equipment but it does happen in a few
equipment. It is mainly because either the design content of what we  want to do
is changed or that particular machines are usable only for a specific purpose and
that purpose has ceased to exist. So, there is a problem of that kind. Our job is so
unique that sometimes just for even one item/operation we need to buy that
particular piece of equipment. But today, with improved infrastructure in the
industrial environment, we are trying to have a mechanism to see, how the jobs
can be outsourced. But then outsourcing also is not very easy. It again calls for
some specialized activity within that generic band. But whenever there is a
minimum volume consistent with usage of such equipment and the facility in
industry is available, we are trying to outsource. In this way we are trying to take
care of the investment towards equipment that is likely to be used on a continuous
basis or on a relevant percentage basis."
Equipment lying unutilised
39. According to the Audit Paragraph, four equipment namely Cryogenic Gas
Charging Plant, Weighing and sorting machine, Automatic Weather and Picture
Transmission Systems and Plessy Radar System valued at Rs. 3.21 crore were lying
unused/unserviceable/surplus in two Laboratories viz. DMRL and ITR. Details of
some of these equipment are narrated in the following paragraphs:—
A. Cryogenic Gas Charging Plant
40. According to Audit, DMRL in April 1992 purchased a Cryogenic Gas Charging
Plant at a cost of Rs 25  lakh for conversion of liquid argon into gas. The cryogenic

11
plant could not generate the required purity of argon without a complementary
purification plant expected to cost Rs 60 lakh, even  though the equipment procured
was custom-designed. The equipment was lying unutilized with DMRL as of February
2003 and was awaiting  disposal having been declared surplus.
41. The Committee enquired about the reasons for non-performance of the Plant.
The Committee also desired to know whether the contract with the supplier incorporated
a clause relating to performance guarantee and, if so, whether the same was invoked.
The   Ministry, in a note have submitted as follows:—
"The Plant was accepted after conducting performance test at DMRL by boosting.
Low Pressure Argon gas due to shortage of required purity liquid Argon. Since
the supplier performed his obligation, no action was taken except imposing LD
for delay in supply of equipment. No Bank Guarantee was taken from the firm
being a Govt. undertaking."
42. On being asked whether the contract provided for pre-despatch inspection
of the plant, it was stated by the Ministry that the pre-despatch inspection was carried
out by the vendor at his works in presence of DMRL Scientists as per the contract and
the firm successfully demonstrated the filing of empty cylinders to the rated pressure
using liquid nitrogen.
43. In their vetting comment, Audit pointed out that if, pre-despatched inspection
was carried out in firm's premises and performance test was conducted at DMRL, how
and why the plant failed to generate the required purity argon, the Ministry in a note
have explained as under:—
"Pre-despatch inspection was carried out at firm's premises in the presence of
DMRL Scientists. The firm successfully demonstrated the filing of empty
cylinders to rated pressure, using liquid nitrogen in lieu of liquid argon (which
was not available). This is an acceptable norm due to similarity in the properties
of both the gases. Performance tests were also carried out at DMRL for boosting
low-pressure argon gas to high pressure, mainly due to non-availability of liquid
argon of the required purity. It may please be noted that plant can only generate
argon gas from liquid argon to rated pressures and only the purity of liquid
argon governs the purity of argon gas."
44. Explaining the background for the decision to dispose of the plant, the
Ministry have stated that since the plant could not be utilized for several years due to
non-availability of high purity liquid argon and since high purity argon gas in cylinders
was abundantly available locally, the equipment was declared surplus and disposal
action was initiated.
 45. In the vetting comment, Audit mentioned that if high purity argon gas in
cylinders was abundantly available as stated by the Ministry, why this plant was
procured, the position was explained by the Ministry in a note as under:—
"Due to severe shortage of high purity argon gas at the time of procurement of
the equipment and following an assurance from M/s Bhoruka Gas suppliers that
they would supply liquid argon in large containers, DMRL procured the cryogenic

12
gas charging stations in 1992 from M/s IBP & Co. Ltd, Nasik. However,
M/s. Bhoruka could not meet the requirements of liquid argon. Hence this
equipment could not be used for the purpose for which it was intended. However,
this equipment is being used for boosting up the pressure of left over argon gas
in cylinders to high pressures. In the last five years there has been a considerable
improvement in the availability of High purity Argon gas. This was brought to
the notice of Audit and it was suggested that DMRL should explore the possibility
of disposing this equipment. IBP & CO Ltd., Nasik was approached to buy the
equipment back. IBP expressed its inability on the ground that they had wound
up this department. Keeping this in view, the item was declared as surplus and
action is being taken for disposal as per normal procedure."
46. Giving the status of disposal of this plant, the Ministry stated that tendering
action had taken place thrice for the purpose. The offer received were stated to be
much below the RGP. According to the Ministry, a Board of officer was being convened
to refix the Reserved Guide Price (RGP) and tendering action will follow soon.
B.  Automatic Weather and Picture Transmission System
47. According to Audit paragraph, ITR procured two systems viz. Automatic
Weather System and Automatic Picture Transmission System at a cost of Rs 34.16 lakh
(90 per cent payment) from a private firm in June, 1988 and February, 1989 respectively.
The firm failed to instal the systems and the equipment remained idle. ITR filed two
cases with the National Consumer Forum, New Delhi, in January 1995 against the
supplier. The Forum, in its final verdict given on 22 October 2002 directed the supplier
to supply new systems of latest specification within six months from the date of issue
of the order. The firm had not supplied the new equipment till November 2003.
48. The Committee desired the Ministry to furnish a note indicating chronological
sequence of events of the case including the latest position about receipt of equipment
from the defaulter firm. The sequence of events of the case as furnished by the Ministry
read as follows:
- "The firm was ordered by the National Consumer Disputes Redressal
Commission, New Delhi 22nd October 2002 to replace the defective equipment
with a new latest state-of art equipment within 6 months from the date of
order i.e. by 30th April, 2003.
- The firm could not supply the equipment as per the order of the National
Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, New Delhi. Hence, the firm
approached the Honourable Commission for extension of the period to execute
the order. As per the request of the firm, this due date was extended by the
Hon'ble Commission up to 30th October 2003.
- On 8th April 2003 the firm invited ITR rep. for finalisation of ATP documents
and asked for Customs Duty Exemption Certificate.
- Accordingly the ATP was finalized in August 2003 and Customs Duty
Expemption Certificates were issued to the firm on 12th September 2003.
- As the firm failed to comply with the order of the Honourable Commission
within the extended time period the firm was reminded by this establishment

13
on 22nd December 2003 about the expiry of the extension period and enquired
about the status of delivery.
- In response to our enquiry the firm intimated this establishment that they had
procured the equipment and the equipment were being tested by the firm
before despatch. At the same time the firm requested this establishment to
depute ITR Representative to Delhi for pre-dispatch inspection in February
2004.
- But the firm actually sent their formal request for final inspection of the
Consignment on 2nd April 2004  vide their letter 520-ESD-ITR/2 dated 2nd
April, 2004.
- Accordingly, our representative visited the firm during 20-21 April, 2004 and
found the equipment produced suitable for Government use and acceptable.
After the inspection as per ATP the firm promised to dispatch the equipment
by 3rd-4th week of May 2004.
- ITR sent formal letter of acceptance of the equipment vide our letter No. ITR/
IMMD/ Anika/Court Case/2004/Met dated 6th May 2004 and requested the
firm to dispatch the equipment as promised and get them installed on site.
- Again the firm failed to supply the equipment as promised. Hence, this
establishment sent a reminder on 4 June 2004 to expedite the supply of
equipment. In response to this reminder, the firm  informed ITR on 19th June
2004 that the equipment would be despatched in the first week of July 2004.
- Again the firm failed to comply with their commitment. Hence, reminders were
sent to the firm on 16th July 2004 & 30 July 2004 ITR and enquired about the
status of dispatch.
-  On 31st July 2004 the firm intimated ITR that due to flood in Bihar, they were
not able to supply but promised to supply at the earliest. Again the firm
informed ITR, Chandipur on 2nd September 2004 that they would supply the
stores within 10-15 days i.e. by 17th September 2004 but yet again the firm
failed to deliver the item."
49. The Committee have been informed that legal action was initiated by the
Establishment against the firm to get the equipment at the earliest. Enumerating the
action taken in this regard, the Ministry stated in a post-evidence note as follows:—
"The Establishment (ITR) has served legal notices to the firm after consultation
with Government Advocate Shri S.S. Sabharwal on 27 January 2005. The firm
vide their letter dated 11th February, 2005 has confirmed that the items will be
delivered by 15 February, 2005. The firm despatched few items through courier
which were received at ITR on 15 February, 2005. The firm informed that the
Company representative will bring rest of the items personally and also told that
the equipment will be installed by 1st March, 2005. Till date, firm has not reported
for installation. Again they have been requested to install the system latest by
7th March, 2005, failing which legal proceeding will be initiated."

14
50. During evidence, the Committee desired the Ministry to ensure that defaulting
firms should not be considered for procurement of equipment in future. In the backdrop
of the case involving the procurement of Automatic weather and picture transmission
systems, the Committee also desired to be assured that the Ministry will not deal with
any firm in future against whom they had gone either to the Court or Consumer Forum.
In a letter written to the Chairman, the Secretary DRDO inter-alia stated:
"At present the DRDO notified procurement procedure provides for de-
registration of firms whose performance is found to be unsatisfactory. Such
firms do not receive invitations to bid in respect of limited tenders. Even where
such firms send bids against open tenders, they are disqualified by the technical
evaluation committees. As regards blacklisting, DRDO presently follows the
Government of India. Directorate General of Supply & Disposal procedure. Within
the next three months, DRDO proposes to put up the list of de-registered firms
on its public website. DRDO does not and will not deal with any firm that has
failed to deliver and against whom DRDO has filed a case in any court of law
including consumer forums."
Delay in disposal of surplus/obsolete equipments
51. According to Audit, there were delays in disposal of surplus equipment at
CVRDE. Two machines costing Rs. 13.13 lakh became obsolete/beyond economical
repair in 1990/1992 but were not disposed till January 2003. At DRDL, nine cases of
delay in disposal of unwanted equipment each with book value of Rs. 5 lakh and
above, were noticed. The laboratory took more than 3 to 8 years for their disposal. At
DMRL, there were 8 such equipment costing Rs 2.5 crore. The Laboratory did not
dispose off 5 equipment till March 2003 with book value of Rs. 2.03 crore which were
declared surplus during the period 1998-2001.
52. The Committee enquired the reasons for the long delay of 3 to 12 years in
disposing surplus equipment by the DRDO Laboratories. According to the Ministry,
since the quoted price of the equipment were much lower than the Reserved Guiding
Price (RGP) fixed by the Committee that included CD/(R&D) and Headquarters
representative, there was delay in disposal leading to repeated tendering.
53. The Committee have been informed that there is a system of monitoring
utilization and disposal of machines. The Commitee then enquired as to how such long
delays occurred in disposal of surplus/obsolete equipment despite existence of a
monitoring system. The Ministry, in a note have clarified that if the highest bid is less
than 50% of the RGP fixed, there is no option except to re-float after re-fixing the RGP
as per the present rules.
54. As regards prescribed procedure for disposal of surplus/obsolete equipment
in DRDO Laboratories/Establishments, the Committee have been informed that a revised
procedure was issued by the Ministry of Defence in March 2003, which superseded
the earlier order issued in this regard in October 1985.
55. In regard to delay in disposal of machines/equipments, the Secretary, DRDO
during evidence submitted as follows:—
"There is a Committee that gives as assessed value of the equipment, but the
point is that because of the very nature of these equipment unless there is an

15
identical user, it is not perceived as a useful equipment by the so-called
prospective purchaser of the second hand equipment. Therefore, we are not
getting any remunerative acceptance of the kind of price that we are asking for
these equipment. The only dispensation that I would request the Government is
that we should be allowed to dispose of the equipment at whatever price the
purchasers agree upon. I am saying this because these are specific equipment
and there has to be another maker to make the same shell core type of thing and
the purchaser has to find it useful to perceive a value for that equipment.
Otherwise, it is more like to scrap for them, and if it is to be put to some other use,
then they do not agree to our assessed value of the equipment. This is the
problem, which we have faced in respect of those small equipment being put up
for auction or sale."
56. He further stated:—
"We are trying to work out a scheme where technical institutions engineering
colleges, and IIT institutions can take some of these equipment to educate the
students. We are planning to give it to those institutions, and we are already
working out a policy for doing it."
57. In view of abnormal delays as pointed out by Audit in the aforesaid cases in
disposal of equipment, the Committee enquired whether DRDO proposed any further
revision in the extant procedure to ensure early disposal of item. The Ministry in a note
have stated that certain amendments have been made in the Procedure of Purchase
Management issued in 2003 with effect from 24 February, 2005 and also letters have
been issued simultaneously to Directors of all Labs/Establishments for compliance of
corrective action as a follow-up to Audit observation. Copies of amendments made in
Purchase Management-2003 and Letters to Directors (all Labs/ Establishments) are
reproduced at Appendices A & B.
58. In his letter written to the Chairman subsequent to evidence, the Secretary
DRDO inter-alia stated:—
" For disposal of old, unserviceable and surplus machines, DRDO has notified a
procedure in 1993. This procedure is considered to be adequate. A drive is
proposed to be launched with immediate effect to implement the procedure and
ensure the minimization of stores of this nature."
Absence of an effective computer based Information Management System (IMS)
59. According to the Audit Paragraph, the material management policy of DRDO
envisages implementation of a Computer based information system to ensure most
effective research and development. DRDO intimated Audit in December 2003 that the
development of integrated material management system-software was in progress.
When enquired about the status of development of integrated material management
system software in DRDO, the Ministry in a note have stated that supply order for
implementation of Integrated Material Management Software and required hardware
has been placed. Installation of Hardware will commence from Middle of March 2005.
According to them, implementation plan is likely to be completed by August, 2005.

16
Observations/Recommendations
60. The Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO) provides
scientific and technical support to the Armed Forces through design and development
of new and sophisticated equipment to meet operational requirements. A significant
objective of DRDO is the establishment of capability for indigenous production of
equipment with a view to attaining self-reliance in defence requirements. The mandate
of DRDO is accomplished through a network of 50 laboratories/establishments whose
activities are organized through specific projects. The Audit paragraph in question
seeks a review of procurement and utilization of imported and indigenous plant and
equipment by 15 Research & Development (R&D) laboratories/establishments
procured during the period from 1997-98 to 2001-02. The Committee note that DRDO
establishments spent more than 45 per cent of their budget on purchase of stores,
plant and equipment. The facts brought out in the Audit paragraph and subsequent
examination by the Committee reveal that procurement planning of material by DRDO
and its utilization leave a lot to be desired.
61. The Committee note that eight equipment costing Rs. 1.75 crore required
for specific projects undertaken by five laboratories/establishments (ARDE, DMRL,
VRDE, HEMRL and SSPL) were received either after the closure of the Project or at
the fag end of the Project. The Ministry have attributed the reasons for delay in
receipt/installation of these equipments to re-floating of tenders, seeking technical
clarifications, embargo imposed for exporting equipment to DRDO etc. According to
them, none of the Projects was delayed due to delay in receipt of these equipment. As
regards utilization of the equipment, which could not be substantially used for the
specific purpose, the Committee have been informed that these were used in subsequent
projects. In order to ensure timely procurement of requisite equipments and their
effective utilisation for the intended purpose, the Ministry have stated that Purchase
Management Procedure was suitably amended and instructions have accordingly
been issued to all concerned laboratories/establishments for strict compliance of the
amended Procedure including regular reporting by them to the DRDO Headquarters.
The Ministry further added that with the commissioning of Integrated Material
Management Software by the laboratories of DRDO, expectedly by August 2005, lead
time for procurement of equipment will be curtailed substantially thereby helping in
their timely acquisition. The Committee however, regret to observe that DRDO was
largely responsible for delay in receipt/installation of the equipment in question.
What has caused concern to the Committee is the fact that equipment could not be put
to use in the specific projects as envisaged in the procurement planning. It is altogether
a different proposition that those equipments were utilized in subsequent projects.
The Committee take note of the steps taken by the Ministry to plug deficiencies in the
system of procurement planning and desire that an institutional machanism should
be put in place to monitor implementation of revised procedure by field formations
with a view to strengthening procurement system.
62. The Committee find that besides deficient procurement planning, the
procurement process in DRDO is also afflicted by serious procedural shortcomings.
The Purchase Management Procedure of DRDO, issued in July 2000, stipulated that
open/global tenders should be invited to generate as much competition as possible.

17
However, to the contrary, 17 out of 30 cases in respect of five laboratories, limited
tenders were resorted to on grounds of urgency for effecting purchases. What is
further disturbing to note is the fact that out of 5 cases processed as urgent, three
orders were placed after 13 to 21 months of raising of demands. In 12 other cases, the
time gap between the raising of demand and actual ordering ranged from 5 to 11
months in 8 cases and over 12 months in four cases. In the opinion of the Committee,
the grounds of urgency to justify limited tendering thus become questionable in such
cases. According to the Ministry, limited tendering is chosen for cases whose source
of supply are definitely known and are limited, for reasons of security and public
interest, when requirement of stores is urgent and the desired delivery schedule can
not be met if open tenders are invited. The Committee are aware of the unique nature
of some of the stores required in the context of research & development including the
aspect of security and public interest and render full credence to their procurement
through the mode of limited tendering. But the criticality of the matter lies in the fact
that the desired delivery schedule could not be adhered to in almost all the reviewed
cases, for which general procedure of open tendering was waived. The Secretary,
DRDO was however, very candid in admitting that resorting to limited tender on
grounds of urgency in such a large number of cases was not procedurally justified
and could lead to some lapses. The Committee have been informed that with the
amendment effected in the procurement procedure in DRDO, the processes of
procurement have been specified with better clarity that would help reduce margin of
error on the part of operating units. While appreciating the efforts made by DRDO in
right earnest, the Committee desire that in future cases of procurement under urgent
circumstances should be critically analysed and closely monitored so as to ensure
that delegated power is not misused and objective of procurement is fully achieved.
The Committee would like to be furnished a status report about the procurement
made under limited tendering consequent to issuance of Procurement Procedure-
2004.
63. The Committee note that the Purchase Management Procedure prescribed
a normal time limit of 12 months for different activities in purchase. The Committee
however, observe that in 22 out of 50 cases of procurement in respect of four
laboratories, the prescribed time limit was not adhered to. The Ministry took the
stand that as these equipments were to be specifically developed for DRDO need, it
took time to reach to desired specifications. The Committee have been further informed
that with the commissioning and implementation of Integrated Management Software,
such delays in placement of order are expected to be curbed. The Committee recommend
that this deficiency should be addressed in tune with the amended Procurement
Procedure so as to reduce the internal lead time to the barest minimum.
64. Another disquieting aspect noticed by the Committee relates to failure of
suppliers to adhere to the prescribed time schedule for delivery of equipment. The
Committee find that as against Rs. 67.58 lakh to be recovered by way of liquidated
damages in 36 cases on account of delayed delivery, liquidated damages amounting to
Rs. 0.46 lakh was recovered only in one case. Surprisingly, in the remaining 35
cases, an amount of Rs. 67.12 lakh leviable was waived by the Directors of the
concerned laboratories/establishments. The Ministry have merely stated that decision

18
was taken to waive the liquidated damages as developmental delays were not attributable
to suppliers. Taking strong exception to the decision taken in the matter, which led to
apparent loss of revenue to Government, the Committee recommend that these cases
be reviewed by DRDO with a view to ascertain the bona fide of the decision taken
retrospectively. Also the Ministry should place before the Committee the outcome of
the review and action taken thereon within a period of three months of the presentation
of this Report.
65. The Committee observe that there were abnormal delays ranging upto 13
years in installation of six machines valuing Rs. 13.78 crore in four laboratories/
establishments namely, DMRL, CVRDE, DRDL and TBRL.  A detailed review of some
of the cases revealed that the suppliers were responsible for the delays and no time
frame for installation of the equipment had either been laid down in the contracts.
Other reasons for the delay in installation/commissioning of the equipment were,
damaged condition of the equipment received, delay in repair or replacement of the
damaged parts by the suppliers etc. The Committee deplore in particular, the delay of
13 years in installation of one equipment namely 200 KW dynamometer at CVRDE.
The Committee cannot but conclude that these cases have brought into sharp focus
the inept handling of procurement contract and poor monitoring on the part of DRDO.
The Secretary, DRDO however, assured the Committee that every effort would be
made by the Ministry to ensure that such unjustifiable delays do not recur. Since
delay in installation of equipment contributes to delay in execution of time-bound
projects, the Committee recommend that DRDO should address these lacunae with
immediate effect.
66. The Committee's examination further revealed that there was under-
utilisation of four equipment valuing Rs. 5.60 crore due to delay in repair/upgradation
in respect of four laboratories namely, SSPL, RCI, PXE and CVRDE. The Committee
have been given to understand that repair of direct import equipment take time as the
firms are not ready to give bank guarantee for equipment and it is risky to send the
equipment for repair due to Commerce Control Laws. The provision of Annual
Maintenance contract in case  of direct import equipment is also limited to the
availability of service center of the Original Equipment Manufacturer in the country.
The Committee do appreicate the impediments faced by DRDO in this regard, but
they are equally concerned about fall in performance of concerned laboratories due to
delay in repair/upgradation of requisite equipment. The Committee desire that as far
as repair/upgradation of indigenous equipment are concerned, Store Management
Guidelines issued in 2004 be implemented and monitored so that laboratory
performance is not affected, at least on this count.
67. The Committee find that four equipments valued at Rs. 3.21 crore were
lying unused/unserviceable/surplus in two laboratories viz: DMRL  and ITR. The
Committee examined in detail two cases relating to procurement of Cryogenic Gas
Charging Plant and Automatic Weather and Picture Transmission System.
68. The Cryogenic Gas Charging Plant which was purhcased in 1992 by DMRL
at a cost of Rs. 25 lakh for conversion of liquid argon into gas failed to generate the
required purity of argon, even though the procurement was custom-designed. The

19
equipment was lying unutilized till February, 2003 and was awaiting disposal, having
been declared surplus.The Committee note that the performance of the plant was
demonstrated at the firm's premises by using a substitute gas i.e. liquid nitrogen in
lieu of liquid argon, which was stated to be not available. The DMRL scientists however
accepted the performance status of the plant. But what is intriguing to find is the fact
that plant subsequently failed to perform for several years due to non-availability of
high purity Liquid argon. It is evident that DMRL scientists faltered in accepting the
performance demonstration of the plant with a substitute gas rather than with the
liquid argon of the required purity. Furthermore the Committee are extremely unhappy
to note that the plant has been declared surplus later on and decision was taken to
dispose of the same. Considering the highly unprofessional attitude of the DMRL
scientists, as exhibited in the instant case, that led to idling of investment to the tune
of Rs. 25 lakh, the Commtitee recommend that the matter be looked into by DRDO
with a view of taking appropriate administrative action. The Committee should be
apprised of the action taken in the matter within a period of three months.
69. In the other case, Integrated Test Range (ITR) procured two systems viz
Automatic Weather System and Automatic Picture Transmission System at a cost of
Rs. 34.16 lakh from a private firm in June 1988 and February, 1989 respectively
which remained idle because the firm to instal the system. The Committee  note that
the matter was taken up by  ITR with the National Consumer Forum, which gave the
verdict in favour of the laboratory in October, 2002 and directed the supplier to supply
new system of latest specification by April, 2003. The firm however did not supply the
equipment despite the verdict by the National Consumer Forum. The matter was
subsequently followed up with the firm and when the firm failed to instal the equipment,
legal action was initiated by ITR. The Committee desire that the matter should be
vigorously pursued for expeditious installation of the equipment or realizing adequate
compensation for the same.
70. In the backdrop of the case involving procurement of Automatic Weather
and Picture Transmission Systems, the Committee recommend that DRDO in future
should refrain from dealing with such firms whose performance is found to be
unsatisfactory and, in particular, those against whom DRDO has filed a case in any
court of law including Consumer Forum. The Ministry should also consider
blacklisting such firms. The Secretary, DRDO in a written communication has assured
the Committee that the firms, whose performance is found to be unsatisfactory, would
be de-registered  and would not receive invitation to bid in respect of either limited/
open tenders. As regards blacklisting, it has been stated that DRDO presently follows
the Government of India, Directorate General of Supply & Disposal procedure. The
Secretary, DRDO has also assured the Committee that DRDO does not and will deal
with any firm that has failed to deliver and against whom DRDO has filed a case in any
court of law including consumer forums. The Committee desire that the Ministry
should stand committed to adhere to the assurance made in principle.
71. The Committee are constrained to point out that there were delays ranging
from 3 to 12 years in disposal of surplus/obsolete machines costing about Rs. 4.71
crore in 3 laboratories namely CVRDE, DRDL and DMRL. The Committee have been

20
given to understand that long delays occurred in disposal of surplus/absolete equipment
because the quoted price of the equipment were much lower than the assessed value of
the equipment i.e. the Reserved Guiding Price (RGP) fixed by the designated
Committee. According to the Ministry, if the highest bid is less than 50% of the RGP
fixed, there is no option except to re-float after refixing the RGP as per the present
rules. The Committee do appreciate the problems faced by DRDO in this regard. In
the face of the fact that equipment could not be sold even at reasonable price, the
Committee desire that DRDO should work out a scheme, as suggested by Secretary,
DRDO, where technical institutions, engineering  colleges and IIT institutions can
take some of these equipments for imparting training. In the opinion of the Committee,
this is a judicious proposition for salvaging the best out of a surplus/obsolete equipment
rather than striving for disposing those at a throw-away price. The Committee
recommend that the Ministry should come out with a policy to give effect to the
proposal at the earliest.
72. The Committee note that Material Management Policy of DRDO envisages
implementation of a computer based information system to ensure most effective
research and development. The Committee have been informed that such a system
will be placed by August, 2005. Since Ministry claimed that with the commissioning
of information management system, the procurement system in DRDO and other
allied arena would be streamlines, the  Committee desire that efforts should be made
to fructify the project within the stipulated period.
73. To sum up, since a substantial portion of the DRDO budget is spent on
purchase of materials, a fool proof procurement planning and effective utilisation of
plant and equipment needs to be ensured at laboratories/establishments level to derive
maximum value for money. Since availability of equipment is critical for the completion
of projects, this would also ensure timely completion of projects with the projected
costs. The Committee feel that identification of surplus item and their disposal has to
be made a regular and time-bound exercise to realize optimum sale value. Moreover,
machines remaining idle for want of repairs need to be renewed on a regular basis
and immediate action taken for their early repairs. Further, creation of a central data
base of prospective suppliers that is accessible to all the laboratories/establishments
need to be made a prioritised task for avoiding delays in location of reliable supplies.
The role of DRDO as a progressively evolving organization rendering invaluable
service for achievement of self-reliance in the Defence sector, has always been
applauded by the Committee. With the present global scenario and prevailing security
situation, the role of DRDO assumes greater importance. The Parliament is generous
in granting huge sums of money for Research & Development activities. At the same
time it expects that value for taxpayers money is achieved and accountability to
expenditure is ensured. The Committee, therefore, urge upon DRDO to look into the
observations and recommendations made in this report in the right perspective.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
20 July, 2005 Chairman,
29 Sravana, 1927 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX-A
DMM/PP/0000203/P3
xxx xxx xxx
xxx xxx xxx
xxx xxx xxx
7.46: PROGRESS REPORT ON PROCUREMENT, UTILISATION OF STORES
AND DISPOSAL OF OBSOLETE STORES
A significant portion of the DRDO Budget is spent on purchase of materials,
more effective procurement planning and efficient utilization of plant and equipment
needs to be ensured at Lab/Estt level to derive the value for money. Since availability
of equipment is critical for completion of the project, this would also ensure timely
completion of the projects within the projected cost. The time frame for installation of
the  equipment has to be laid down by supplier as per Lab/Estt requirement and
requires to be strictly monitored. All the civil work wherever applicable to be completed
before receipt of the Equipment. Identification of surplus/obsolete items and their
disposal needs a thorough attention and has to made a regular and time bound exercise
to realize optimum sale value. In this connection this HQ policy letter No. DPRM/
CPO.89501/D(R&D) dated 02 March 1993 also refers. Machines remaining idle for want
of repairs/upgradation need to be reviewed on a regular basis and immediate action
taken for their early repairs.
7.46.1.  Annual Report  All Labs/Estts would forward a yearly report at closing
of the financial year covering details of aspects in which more than one year is taken
on following accounts:
(a) Delay in installation of machines after receipt in the Labs/Estts.
(b) Under utilisation of equipment due to delay in repair/servicing/upgradation
etc.
(c) Equipment lying unused.
(d) Delay in disposal of surplus/obsolete equipment after being recommended
for disposal.
(e) Internal lead time is too high i.e. where more than one year is taken from
demand initiation for procurement of stores and issues of supply order.
7.46.2. Receipts of Machines/Equipment at the fag end of the projects
Procurement/receipt of equipment after closure or  at the fag end of the project
and its non-utilisation for the intended project defects the very purpose of the
procurement. No such unjustified procurement should be done in anticipation that
such items would be used for ongoing/future projects.
21

22
Annual Report: A list of machines/equipment being procured for specific projects
but received either after closure of the project or at the fag end of the project (just 3
months ahead of PDC) should be compiled along with the reasons for such instances
and be forwarded to DMM/DRDO HQrs at the closure of every financial year.
 It is requested that in principle approval may kindly be accorded for incorporating
the above-mentioned changes in PM-2003. Formal amendment letter to PM-2003 will
be put up after accord of in principle approval.
Sd/-
(Jagdeep)
Dy Dir (MM)
24 Feb, 2005
Tele: 23013076
Dir. (MM)
CC R&D(R) &DS
DS(R&D)
Addl. FA (S) & JS.
Secretary(Defence R &D)

APPENDIX-B
v)Z&'kkldh; ua-
DO No.: DMM/PP/0000403/M
Hkkjr ljdkj] j{kk ea=ky;
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA, MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
j{kk vuqla/kku ,oa fodkl laxBu
DEFENCE RESEARCH & DEVELOPMENT ORGANISATION
lkexzh izcU/k funs'kky;
DIRECTORATE OF MATERIALS MANAGEMENT
dejk ua- 237] ^ch* foax] lsuk Hkou] ubZ fnYyh &110 011
Room No. 237, 'B' WING, SENA BHA VAN, NEW DELHI-110 011
nwjHkk"k@Tele :3014835
QSDl@Fax :3014835
fnukad@Date 24 February, 2005
To
The Directors
(All Labs./Estts.)
SUBJECT: Compliance of Corrective action: Draft Audit Para: "Procurement
and Utilisation of Plant and Equipment in DRDO".
1. Further to this office letter No. DMM/PP/0000403/M dated 20 Oct., 03.
2. Test Audit team visited 15 Labs of DRDO and noticed certain procurement
deviations. In Draft Audit Para report of C&AG which has gone upto oral evidence in
which Secretary (R&D) appeared before Parliamentary Committee, the following
observations were made:
(a) Abnormal delay in installation of machines.
(b) Under utilization of Equipment due to delay in repair/servicing/upgradation.
(c) Equipment lying unused
(d) Machines required for specific projects were received either after closure/
fag end of the project.
(e) Delay in disposal of surplus/obsolete equipments.
(f) Internal Lead Time too high.
23

24
3. A very serious view has been taken about the above observations. The
following suggestions are made for compliance of all concerned:—
(a) Since almost half of the DRDO Budget is spent on purchase of materials,
more effective procurement planning and efficient utilization of plant and equipment
needs to be ensured at Lab level to derive the value for money. Since availability of
equipment is critical for completion of the project, this would also ensure timely
completion of the projects within the projected cost.
(b)The time frame for installation of the equipment has to be laid down by
supplier as per lab requirement and requires to be strictly monitored. All the civil works
wherever applicable to be completed before receipt of the Equipment.
(c) Identification of surplus/obsolete items and their disposal needs a thorough
attention and has to made a regular and time-bound exercise to realize optimum sale
value. In this connection this HQ Policy letter No., DPRM/CPO/89501/D(R&D)
dated 02 March 1993 also refers.
(d) Machines remaining idle for want of repairs/upgradation need to be reviewed
on a regular basis and immediate action taken for their early repairs.
5. Further procurement/receipt of equipment after closure or at the fag end of
the project and its non-utilisation for the intended project defeats the very purpose of
the procurement. No such unjustified procrurement should be done in anticipation
that such items would be used for ongoing/future projects.
Keeping above in view, all Labs are advised to comply to the laid down
purchase procedure alongwith above suggestions to avoid any deviations/objections
by the audit authorities. With effect financial year ending 31 March 05, all labs will
forward a yearly report covering details of aspects in which the delays in delivery,
installation and utilization of Equipment and delay in disposal of surplus/obsolete
equipment is greater than one year, so as to reach this HQrs by 10th of April of next
financial year.
Sd/-
(C.M. Dhawan)
Director (MM)

APPENDIX -C
Tele: 23015763
No. SA/SO/06/2005-254
GOVT. OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
DEPTT. OF DEFENCE R&D
Room No. 137
South Block
New Delhi-110011
21 February, 2005
To
The Honourable Chairman
Public Accounts Committee
Lok Sabha Secretariat
S
UBJECT: Audit paragraph 5.1 of the C&AG Report No. 6 of 2004 relating to
"Procurement and Utilisation of Plant and Equipment in DRDO".
Ref: Meeting of the Public Accounts Committee held on 19th January 2005
1. I am grateful to the Honourable PAC for giving me an opportunity to personally
respond to the questions and comments of the Honourable members on 19th January,
2005. At the end of this meeting the Honourable Chairman, PAC had desired certain
assurances and clarifications, which are contained in the following paragraphs.
2. The DRDO first prepared and notified a procurement procedure manual in
1997. Based on experience of its use as also experience of actual problems encountered
during procurement, this manual has been updated from time to time to imporve the
procedure. The DRDO has also, in April 2004, prepared and circulated guidelines on
the management of inventory after it has been procured......Yet another initiative aimed
at improvement and reform of the system is the ongoing development and
implementation of a computer-based integrated materials management System. this
system is expected to speed up the procurement process and especially help DRDO
keep comprehensive organization-work track of its machinery and other equipment.
3. However, it may be noted that for the purpose of development of sophisticated
weapon systems, DRDO needs to procure machinery and equipment to specifications
that often fall within the ambit of the technology denial regimes of nations from whom
such equipment must necessarily be imported. This is often a major factor leading to
delay.
4. At present the DRDO notified procurement procedure provides for de-
registration of firms whose performance is found to be unsatisfactory. such firms do
not receive invitations to bid in respect of limited tenders. Even where such firms send
25

26
bids against open tenders, they  are disqualified by the technical evaluation committees.
As regards blacklisting, DRDO  presently follows the Government of India, Directorate
General of Supply & Disposal procedure. An extract of the DGS&D blacklisting
procedure is enclosed. Within the next three months, DRDO proposes to put up the list
of de-registered firms on its public website.
5. DRDO does not and will not deal with any firm  that has failed to deliver and
against whom DRDO  has filed a case in any court of law including consumer forums.
6. For disposal of old, unserviceable and surplus machines, DRDO has notified
a procedure in 1993. This procedure is considered to be adequate. A drive is proposed
to be launched with immediate effect to implement the procedure and ensure the
minimization of stores of this nature.
7. In every case of delay in procurement or delay in utilization or non-utilization
or under-utilisation or delay in disposal, efforts have always been made to ascertain all
the facts with a view to see if there has been any lapse on the part of any individual.
8. As regards three cases that were discussed in detail  during the meeting, viz,
authomatic weather stations, induction furnace and dynamometer, I would like to
reasssure the Honourable PAC that we will ensure that unjustifiable delays do not
recur. Accordingly, the purchase management manual is being amended to provide for
annual reports from all labs in respect of cases in which the delay in delivery, installation
and utilization is greater than one year.
9. Litigation associated with non-supply or unsatisfactory supply or performance
can be one of the causes of  delay. An example is the automatic weather station case
wherein the consumer forum took seven years to give a judgement and thereafter
another three years have elapsed but the offending firm has not carried out the
instructions of the consumer forum. The Honourable PAC may like to consider
recommending the grant of powers to the Secretary (Defence Research & Development)
to enable the recovery of DRDO dues as arrears of land revenue. Such powers are
presently delegated to District Magistrates.
10.   I would also like to take this opportunity to propose a visit by the honourable
members of the PAC to some DRDO labs to enable a better understanding of the
functioning of the labs, the nature and scope of projects and programmes and the
associated procurement of machines and equipment.
(M. NATARAJAN)
SA to RM

APPENDIX-I
PARAGRAPH NO. 5.1 OF AUDIT REPORT NO. 6 OF 2004 (DEFENCE SERVICES—
ARMY AND ORDNANCE FACTORIES) RELATING "PROCUREMENT AND
UTILISATION OF PLANT AND EQUIPMENT IN DRDO"
5.1. Procurement and utilisation of plant and equipment in DRDO
5.1.1. Introduction
The Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) provides
scientific and technical support to the Armed Forces through design and development
of new and sophisticated equipment to meet operational requirements. A significant
objective is the establishment of capability for indigenous production of equipment
which, hitherto, were imported i.e. self-reliance in defence requirements. The mandate
of DRDO is accomplished through a network of 50 laboratories/establishments. The
activities of DRDO are organised through specific projects of the following types.
(i) Staff projects taken up at the instance of the Services against specific
qualitative requirements.
(ii) Competence building projects undertaken for building up expertise in specific
disciplines.
5.1.2. Scope of Audit
A review was conducted on the procurement and utilisation of imported and
indigenous plant and equipment, procured during the period from 1997-98 to 2001-02.
All cases of equipment costing of Rs. 5 lakh and above were studied in audit.
Fifteen R&D laboratories/establishments out of 50 were selected for review as
detailed in Annex-I. The functions of the fifteen laboratories and establishments are
given in Annex-II.
5.1.3. Audit Objectives
The Specific objectives of the review were:
(a) to examine whether the procurement of plant and equipment by DRDO
establishments was justified;
(b) to analyse the process of procurement and see whether it was conducted
effectively and efficiently with respect to cost and time, and
(c) to assess the efficiency of utilisation of plant and equipment procured.
27

28
5.1.4. Highlights
Ø There were abnormal delays ranging upto 13 years in installation of six machines
valuing Rs. 13.78 crore in four Laboratories/Establishments.
(Paragraph 5.1.7)
Ø There was under-utilisation of four equipments valuing Rs. 5.60 crore in four
Laboratories.
(Paragraph 5.1.8)
Ø In two Laboratories, there were four equipments valuing Rs. 3.21 crore lying
unutilised.
(Paragraph 5.1.8)
Ø Eight machines valuing Rs. 1.75 crore required for specific projects were received
in five Laboratories either after closure/at the fag end of the project.
(Paragraph 5.1.6)
Ø A Laboratory procured equipment costing Rs. 1.60 crore which were not envisaged
in the project proposal.
(Paragraph 5.1.6)
Ø Non-realisation of cost of Rs. 4.89 crore for the assets installed at Mishra Dhatu
Nigam for over 11 years.
(Paragraph 5.1.9)
5.1.5. Budget and Expenditure
The following table depicts the budget allotment and actual expenditure of  DRDO:
(Rs. in crore)
Y ear Total budget Total Budget Actual
allocation expenditure allocation for expenditure on
purchase of purchase of
material* only material* only
1997-98 1683.00 1958.22 486.83 561.81
1998-99 2476.80 2299.61 1000.32 994.17
1999-00 2780.00 2833.47 1190.00 1254.04
2000-01 3101.75 3355.81 1304.24 1548.06
2001-02 3518.34 3127.97 1607.33 1395.53
(*) Material includes stores, plant and equipment.
Though stores are revenue items, DRDO was accounting for stores, plant and
equipment together as revenue expenditure. Only civil works were treated as capital
items. DRDO stated (December 2003) that a Study Group on Budgetary Reforms had
suggested in 2002 that the capital purchases of plant/equipment were to be classified
distinctly as 'capital' and that the recommendations would be implemented from the
financial year 2004-05.

29
Budgetary allocations and actual expenditure on material in respect of the fifteen
Laboratories and establishments selected for review for the five years from 1997-98 to
2001-02 were as under:—
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Name of Laboratories/Establishments Total Budget Expenditure
No. budget allotment for on purchase
allotment purchase of of material
material
1. Defence Research and Development 200.95 70.22 70.04
 Laboratory, Hyderabad (DRDL)
2. Research Centre Imarat, Hyderabad (RCI) 145.46 84.55 84.32
3. High Energy Materials Research 123.01 34.75 20.52
Laboratory, Pune (HEMRL)
4. Armament Research and Development 174.18 84.82 76.43
Establishment, Pune (ARDE)
5. Terminal Ballistic Research Laboratory, 82.02 38.40 38.23
Chandigarh (TBRL)
6. Combat Vehicle Research and Development 171.65 67.51 65.18
Establishment, Avadi (CVRDE)
7. Defence Electronics and Research 318.02 199.35 188.78
 Laboratroy, Hyderabad (DLRL)
8. Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratroy, 146.00 57.43 56.63
Hyderabad (DMRL)
9. Research and Development Establishment 96.73 44.20 41.53
(Engineers) Pune [RDE(E)]
10. Vehicle Research Development Establish- 81.21 34.63 34.22
ment, Ahmednagar (VRDE)
11. Solid State Physics Laboratory, Delhi 101.94 47.75 44.41
(SSPL)
12. Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied 40.70 19.79 19.20
Scinences, Delhi (INMAS)
13. Laser Science and Technology Center, 103.93 70.03 60.49
Delhi (LASTEC)
14. Integrated Test Range, Balasore (ITR) 120.62 81.01 79.49
15. Proof and Experimental Establishment, 71.85 17.48 19.46
Balasore (PEE)
TOTAL 1978.27 951.92 898.93

30
The details of year-wise budget allotment and actual expenditure on material of
the fifteen laboratories and establishments are given below:
(Rs. in crore)
Y ear Total budget Budget allocation for Actual expenditure Savings
allotment purchase of material on purchase of
material
1997-1998 302.66 150.91 143.08 7.83
1998-1999 348.91 158.59 139.75 18.84
1999-2000 405.03 187.11 179.87 7.24
2000-2001 447.12 214.81 207.38 7.43
2001-2002 474.55 240.50 228.85 11.65
TOTAL:- 1978.27 951.92 898.93 52.99
The DRDO establishments spent 45.44 per cent of their budget on purchase of
stores, plant and equipment.
5.1.6. Procurement Planning
Procurement/receipt of equipment after the closure or at the fag end of the
project
Eight equipment costing Rs. 1.75 crore required for specific were received either
after the closure of the project or at the fag end of the project as illustrated below:—
Sl. Name of Equipment Cost C losure Equipment Remarks
No. Lab/Estt. Of Project installed on
1. ARDE Piezo d 33, dhgh Rs. 14.65 lakh December December -
Measuring 2001 2001
system
2. DMRL  High temperature Rs. 12 lakh December August 1999 -
Air Furnace 1999
3. DMRL Electric Shell Rs. 10 lakh December June 2002 PDC(*)
Pre-heating 2002 Extended to 2004.
Furnace Not used up to
February
2003
4. DMRL Plate leveling Rs. 9.33 lakh November July 2002 Used only for
Machine 2002 7    hours since
its installation.
5. VRDE Data Acquisition Rs. 6.80 lakh December December -
Products 1998 1998
6. HEMRL HOT compaction Rs 15.50 lakh September September Used only for
Machine 2002 2002 18   hours.
7. DMRL Optical Rs. 6.04 lakh January June 1999 Used only for
Microscope 2000 7 hours 15
minutes.
8. SSPL Plasma Enhanced Rs. 1.11 crore September August Used for only
Chemical Vapour 2002 2002 1 month in the
Deposition System Project.
(*) PDC—Probable date of completion
1
2
1
2

31
The delay in receipt of the equipment was due to delay on the part of DRDO in
placement of orders, delay in inspection, delay in completion of civil works by Military
Engineer Services, etc.
Hence equipment worth Rs. 1.75 crore could not be used for intended project/
purpose DRDO stated (December 2003) that they were being used for ongoing projects.
Procurement of equipment not envisaged in the project proposals costing
Rs. 1.60 crore
The project proposal in respect of SSPL Project titled " Development of IR
sensor module for MBT"  envisaged procurement of the following equipment (costing
more than Rs.5 lakh each.)
Sl. No. Name of the Equipment Cost
(Rs. in crore)
1. Turbo Molecular Pump 0.10
2. ION Milling 1.00
3. Mask Alignment 0.70
4. Bonder Programmable 0.50
5. Test Dewar & Dewar 0.18
Total 2.48
Scrutiny of project expenditure revealed that some equipment, not proposed in
the sanctioned project, were procured after incurring a total expenditure of Rs. 1.60
crore mostly through imports.
DRDO stated in December 2003 that at the time of sanction of the project, all
major equipment envisaged were included in the budget.  As the project progressed, a
need was felt for additional equipment not budgeted in the original sanction. SSPL
indicated that procurement and re-appropriation of funds under different heads had
already been approved by the Ministry.
The procurement of additional equipment costing Rs. 1.60 crore which works
out to 39 per cent of the total cost was reflective  incorrect project estimation.
The cases discussed above reflect the need to strengthen procurement planning
since in many instances, equipment was received either towards the end or  after the
closure of the projects.  In some cases project estimation underwent frequent changes
pointing to the need for more realistic project planning.
5.1.7. Procurement Process
Failure to adopt open tendering
The Purchase Management Procedure of DRDO issued in July 2000 stipulated
that in general open/global tenders should be invited to generate as much competition
as possible.   However, if warranted by the situation, other modes of  tendering viz.
limited, single and proprietary could also be used in accordance with the prescribed

32
procedure. Audit observed that out of 30 cases in five laboratories involving purchase
of equipment costing Rs. 10.17 crore there were only four open tenders. In 17 cases
purchase was made on the grounds of urgency of requirement .  Out of 5 cases
processed as urgent in the years 2001 and 2002 i.e. after issue of Purchase Management
Procedure by DRDO only two orders were placed within 12 months and three were
placed after 13 to 21 months of raising of demands.  In 12 other cases considered
urgent, for which orders were placed upto the year 2000, the time gap between the
raising of demand and actual ordering ranged from 5 to 11 months in 8 cases and over
12 months in four cases.  The grounds of urgency to justify limited tendering thus
become questionable in such cases.
Long Internal Lead Time
The Purchase Managment Procedure [ Para 4.4.2 (g) ] prescribed a normal time-
limit of 12 months for different activities involved in purchase, i.e. from the date of
demand from the user department to the date of placement of supply order. A test
check of 50 cases in 4 laboratories revealed that in 22 cases supply orders were placed
after 12 months from the date of demand from the users. In reply these delays were
attributed to reasons like complex specifications, non-availability of competent vendors,
custom-made equipment, etc.
Long External Lead  Time
Audit analysed the extent to which the suppliers were able to adhere to the time
schedule for delivery. A test check of 118 cases in 8 laboratories revealed that in only
43 cases were supplies made in time. In 65 cases, items were received after delays upto
one year. In 9 cases, items were received with delays of more than one year and ranging
upto three years. One case was outstanding beyond  five years. Liquidated damages
were required to be recovered for all demonstrable losses on account of delays. The
total amount to be recovered by way of liquidated damages in 36 cases was Rs. 67.58
lakh. However liquidated damages amounting to Rs. 0.46 lakh was recovered in only
one case. In the remaining 35 cases, an amount of Rs. 67.12 lakh leviable was waived by
the Directors of the laboratories/establishments. DRDO stated (December 2003) that
most of the equipment procured by it was not available off the shelf. There were often
unavoidable delays in supplying custom-built equipment. The liquidated damages
clause was put just as  a deterrent and that imposing it in exceptional circumstances
would be injudicious.
Delay in Installation of Equipments
Delay in installation of equipment after receipt contributes to delay in execution
of time-bound projects. In 20 cases reviewed by audit, there had been delays ranging
from 1 to 13 years in installation of equipment costing Rs. 18.55 crore. The details of six
cases involving equipment costing Rs. 13.78 crore, where there were abnormal delays,

33
are given in the table below:
Sl. Name of Equipment Cost Date of Status as of March
No. Lab./Estt. receipt 2003
1. DMRL V acuum Induction Melting Rs. 1.36 crore April 2000 Installed in April
and Casting Furnace 2002
2. DMRL High Temperature High Rs. 1.08 crore August 2000 Installed in
vacuum Furnace February 2002
3. CVRDE 200 KW Dynamometer Rs. 36.75 lakh June 1989 Installed in August
2002
4. DMRL Electric Furnace Chamber Rs. 13.70 lakh January 2002 Not installed
5. DRDL 3D CNC co-ordinate Rs. 4.63 crore September Not installed
measuring machine 2002
6. TBRL W arm Isostatic Press Rs. 6.20 crore October Installed in January
2002 2003, yet to be
commissioned
In all these cases, the supplier was responsible for the delays. The time-frame for
installation of the equipment by the suppliers had not been laid down in the contracts.
Other reasons for non-installation/commissioning of the equipment were: delay
in calibration, equipment received in damaged condition, delay in repair or replacement
of the damaged parts by the supplier and delay in completion of civil works before the
receipt of the equipment. DRDO stated in December 2003 that the delay was abnormal
in the case of Dynamometer but in other cases it might not be treated as abnormal since
majority of purchases were not off the shelf. They added that out of a total procurement of
Rs. 900 crore approximately the delay in installation took place only for 1.5 per cent of total
expenditure. However, the cases discussed relate to a test check in only six
@ laboratories.
5.1.8. Under Utilisation of Equipment
Under utilisation due to delay in repairs/servicing/upgradation
Test check revealed that equipment costing Rs 5.60 crore were under utilised or
remained unutilised due to delay in repair and upgradation.
Equipment costing Rs 1.67 crore lying under repair for more than 1 year
SSPL procured a Flip Chip Alignor Bonder (machine) at a cost of Rs 1.67 crore in
August 1998. The machine was commissioned in August 1998 for the purpose of
integration of two chips in the focal Plane  Array Project. The expected life of the
machine was 10 years. Since its installation, the machine was put to use for 551 hours
only till October 2001 and was thereafter lying under repairs. The machine was yet to
be repaired (November 2003). DRDO stated (December 2003) that an order had been
placed on 28 November 2003 for its repair and Annual maintenance.
Equipment remaining unutilized for more than 2 years for want of repairs
RCI imported a Frequency Response Analyser at a cost of Rs 15.64 lakh in
October 2000. It remained non-functional till March 2003. When pointed out by Audit
in March 2003, RCI got the equipment rectified in April 2003. Thus the equipment
received in October 2000 remained unutilised for 30 months. DRDO accepted the facts
in December 2003 but had no comments to offer on the case.
@DMRL, CVRDE, DRDL, TBRL, RCI, HEMRL

34
Equipment valuing Rs. 3.50 crore remained unserviceable for want of parts
PXE procured a Tracking Doppler Radar System DR-6700 at a cost of Rs. 3.50
crore in July 1997. The equipment was commissioned in October 1999. The radar was
not functioning after 26 September 2001 because of defects in its accessories. The
defective parts were sent to the supplier firm in July 2002 for warranty repair/replacement
free of cost. DRDO stated (December 2003) that the radar had been repaired by the firm
and received on 19 December 2003.
V oltas OMEGA Crane 25 Tonne remained unutilized for more than four years
due to repair
A Voltas Omega Crane (25 tonne) was purchased in December 1987 by CVRDE at
a cost of Rs. 27.80 lakh with a service life of 15 years. The crane, the only one of its kind,
is essentially required for lifting hull and turret of armoured fighting vehicles. The
crane remained out of order from October 1993 to April 1996 and again since January
2002. Thus, during the last 15 years, the crane was non-functional for more than
4 years due to delay in repair. DRDO replied (December 2003) that future use of the
crane would be decided by a Board of Officers.
Equipment lying unutilised
The following four equipment valued at Rs. 3.21 crore were lying unused/
unserviceable/surplus in two laboratories.
Cryogenic Gas Charging Plant
DMRL in April 1992 purchased a Cryogenic Gas Charging Plant at a cost of
Rs. 25 lakh for conversion of liquid argon into gas. The cryogenic plant could not
generate the required purity of argon without a complementary purification plant
expected to cost Rs. 60 lakh, even though the equipment procured was custom-
designed. The equipment was lying unutilised with DMRL as of February 2003 and
was awaiting disposal, having been declared surplus.
Weighing and sorting machine
DMRL procured a weighing and sorting machine valuing Rs. 25 lakh in June
1994. The machine could not be utilised due to inaccuracies. Thereby, weighing and
sorting of the warhead pre-fragment continued to be done manually. DMRL stated in
February 2003 that the machine was unserviceable and action for its disposal would be
taken.
Automatic weather and picture transmission systems
ITR procured two systems viz. Automatic Weather System and Automatic Picture
Transmission System at a cost of Rs. 34.16 lakh (90 per cent payment) from a private
firm in June 1988 and February 1989 respectively. The firm failed to install the systems
and the equipment  remained idle. ITR filed two cases with the National Consumer
Forum, New Delhi, in January 1995 against the supplier. The Forum, in its final verdict
given on 22 October 2002 directed the supplier to supply new systems of latest
specification within 6 months from the date of issue of the order. The firm had not
supplied the new equipment till date (November 2003).

35
Plessy Radar System
A surveillance radar system was procured against a contract concluded with
Plessy Radar Ltd., UK, in October 1987, at a cost of  £9,47,200.00 (Rs. 2.37 crore). The
radar was commissioned in March 1989.
After rendering service upto February 1995, a few of its sub-systems became
unserviceable and it became non-functional. Initially, the supplier firm did not agree to
repair the system but later agreed to repair it. The firm, however, demanded more than
50 per cent of the cost of the system and the repair was not found economically viable.
Owing to technological advancements in surveillance systems, ITR did not require
this radar any more. DRDO stated in December 2003 that Board of Officers was convened
for declaring the radar as unserviceable and initiating action for disposal.
5.1.9. Other Points of  Interest
Loss due to delay in disposal of surplus/obsolete equipment
There were delays in disposal of surplus equipment at CVRDE. Two machines
costing Rs 13.13 lakh became obsolete/beyond economical repair in 1990/1992 but
were yet to be disposed of (January 2003). At DRDL, nine cases of delay in disposal of
unwanted equipment, each with book value of Rs 5 lakh and above, were noticed. The
laboratory took more than 3 to 8 years for their disposal. At DMRL, there were 8 such
equipments costing Rs. 2.5 crore. The Laboratory was yet to dispose off 5 equipments
(March 2003) with book value of Rs. 2.03 crore which were declared surplus during the
years 1998-2001.
Non-realisation of Rs. 4.89 crore for the plant and machinery installed at
Mishra Dhatu Nigam (MIDHANI) for over 11 years.
Although the role of DRDO is primarily development of technology and its
transfer to a production agency, DMRL entered into a joint venture in June 1988 with
Mishra Dhatu Nigam (MIDHANI), a Public Sector Undertaking for development of a
viable technology for manufacture of welded titanium tubes. Under the agreement,
DMRL would procure and instal all imported and indigenous equipment and provide
all technical and R&D support to MIDHANI to set up the infrastructure in their premises.
MIDHANI after using the facility for two years for commercial production, would exercise
the option to take over the infrastructure at the depreciated value payable to DMRL.
As against the sanctioned amount of Rs. 4.76 crore, actual expenditure on import
of equipment was Rs. 10.60 crore. In April 1991, MIDHANI agreed to finance the
expenditure over and above the amount sanctioned by the Government.
In June 1996, the agreement with MIDHANI was amended whereby the latter
was to exercise its option within two years of trial production and establishment of
technology to take over the facilities and compensate DMRL to the extent of Rs. 4.89
crore in 12 equal annual instalments. MIDHANI, while expressing its willingness in
April 1997 and again in March 1998, to take over the facility, requested DMRL to
consider deferment of the payment schedule for another five years from the date of
takingover and also to consider the depreciation for an additional five years. MIDHANI
had neither taken over the plant nor paid Rs. 4.89 crore to DMRL as of June 2003.

36
Absence of an effective computer based Information Management System (IMS)
The material management policy of DRDO envisages implementation of a
computer-based information management system to ensure cost effective R&D. DRDO
was yet to adopt an integrated material management information system. In its absence,
the laboratories adopt their own information systems which would make their integration
a difficult task at a later date.
DRDO stated in December 2003 that development of integrated material
management system-software was in progress.
5.1.10. Conclusion and Recommendations
(i) Since about 45 per cent of the DRDO's budget is spent on purchase of
material, more effective procurement planning and efficient utilisation of
plant and equipment, needs to be ensured to derive value for money. Since
availability of equipment is critical for the completion of projects, this would
also ensure timely completion of projects within the projected costs.
(ii) Creation of a central database of prospective suppliers that is accessible to
all the labs/estts. needs to be made a prioritised task for avoiding delays in
location of reliable suppliers.
(iii) Identification of surplus items and their disposal has to be made a regular
and time-bound exercise to realise optimum sale value.
(iv) Machines remaining idle for want of repairs need to be reviewed on a regular
basis and  immediate action taken for their early repairs. DRDO agreed with
these recommendations in December 2003.

Report No. 6 of 2004 (Defence Services)
ANNEXURE-I
(Referred to in Para 5.1.2)
List of fifteen laboratories and establishments covered in the Review
(i) Defence Research and Development Laboratory (DRDL)
(ii) Research Centre Imarat (RCI)
(iii) High Energy Materials Research Laboratory (HEMRL)
(iv) Armament Research and Development Establishment (ARDE)
(v) Terminal Ballistic Research Laboratory (TBRL)
(vi) Combat Vehicle Research and Development Establishment (CVRDE)
(vii) Defence Electronics and Research Laboratory (DLRL)
(viii) Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory (DMRL)
(ix) Research and Development Establishment (Engineers) - RDE(E)
(x) Vehicle Research Development Establishment (VRDE)
(xi) Soha State Physics Laboratory (SSPL)
(xii) Institute of Nuclear Medicine and Allied Sciences (INMAS)
(xiii) Laser Science and Technology Center (LASTEC)
(xiv) Integrated Test Range (ITR)
(xv) Proof and Experimental Establishment (PXE)
37

Report No. 6 of 2004 (Defence Services)
ANNEXURE - II
(Referred to in Para 5.1.2)
Functions of the fifteen Laboratories and establishments selected for Review
(i) & (ii) DRDL and RCI have been primarily responsible for the design and
development of missile systems for the three services.
(iii) The HEMRL has been dealing with entire spectrum of military explosives
and high energy materials.
(iv) The ARDE is responsible for developing an R&D base in the field of
conventional armaments.
(v) TBRL provides facilities for basic and applied research in detonics and
blast studies, evolves design data of armament stores and develops all
kinds of warheads and related sub-systems.
(vi) The Primary function of CVRDE is to design, develop and manufacture
prototypes of tracked combat vehicles and to conduct performance evaluation
of these vehicles.
(vii) DLRL is responsible for development of electronic warfare systems covering
both communication and radar and ground electronics system for integrated
guided missile development programme.
(viii) DMRL deals with generation of technologies for defence hardware
production, metallurgical coverage for services and R&D on futuristic
materials.
(ix) RDE(E) is responsible for system engineering, development of mobility
equipments, combat engineering and ground support equipments.
(x) VRDE deals with design, development, modification and evaluation of all
types of general service vehicles, tanks, transporters, cranes, specialist role
vehicles, etc.
(xi) SSPL conducts R&D work in the design and development of solid state
devices, electronic components/sub-systems and semi conducting materials.
(xii) The INMAS conducts research in basic and medical sciences using radio-
isotopes and effects of radiation on human body.
(xiii) The LASTEC conducts research and development of laser sources, material
and techniques, development of solid state laser, gas laser, high power
laser, etc.
38

39
(xiv) ITR is responsible for setting up of test facilities of rockets, missiles and
airborne system for other R&D Laboratories and their performance
evaluation.
(xv) PXE provides test facilities of arms and ammunition produced by various
ordnance factories and newly designed and developed ammunition by R&D
Laboratories in its testing range to evaluate their performance.

APPENDIX-II
STATEMENT OF OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
S.No. Para Ministry/ Observations/Recommendations
No. Deptt.
12 3 4
1. 60 Defence (DRDO) The Defence Research and Development
Organization (DRDO) provides scientific and
technical support to the Armed Forces through design
and development of new and sophisticated
equipment to meet operational requirements. A
significant objective of DRDO is the establishment
of capability for indigenous production of equipment
with a view to attaining self-reliance in defence
requirements. The mandate of DRDO is accomplished
through a network of 50 laboratories/establishments
whose activities are organized through specific
projects. The Audit paragraph in question seeks a
review of procurement and utilization of imported
and indigenous plant and equipment by 15 Research
& Development (R&D) laboratories/establishments
procured during the period from 1997-98 to 2001-02.
The Committee note that DRDO establishments
spent more than 45 per cent of their budget on
purchase of stores, plant and equipment. The facts
brought out in the Audit paragraph and subsequent
examination by the Committee reveal that
procurement planning of material by DRDO and its
utilization leave a lot to be desired.
2. 61 -do- The Committee note that eight equipment costing
Rs. 1.75 crore required for specific projects
undertaken by five laboratories/establishments
(ARDE, DMRL, VRDE, HEMRL and SSPL) were
received either after the closure of the Project or at
the fag end of the Project. The Ministry have
attributed the reasons for delay in receipt/installation
of these equipments to re-floating of tenders, seeking
technical clarifications, embargo imposed for
exporting equipment to DRDO etc. According to
them, none of the Projects was delayed due to delay
40
SERVER 3\1750LS RAW TEXT/1750LS.P65

41
in receipt of these equipments. As regards utilization
of the equipment, which could not be substantially
used for the specific purpose, the Committee have
been informed that these were used in subsequent
projects. In order to ensure timely procurement of
requisite equipments and their effective utilisation
for the intended purpose, the Ministry have stated
that Purchase Management Procedure was suitably
amended and instructions have accordingly been
issued to all concerned laboratories/establishments
for strict compliance of the amended Procedure
including regular reporting by them to the DRDO
Headquarters. The Ministry further added that with
the commissioning of integrated Material
Management Software by the laboratories of DRDO,
expectedly by August,  2005, lead time for
procurement of equipment will be curtailed
substantially thereby helping in their timely
acquisition. The Committee however, regret to
observe that DRDO was largely responsible for delay
in receipt/installation of the equipment in question.
What has caused concern to the Committee is the
fact that equipment could not be put to use in the
specific projects as envisaged in the procurement
planning. It is altogether a different proposition that
those equipments were utilized in subsequent
projects. The Committee take note of the steps taken
by the Ministry to plug deficiencies in the system of
procurement planning and desire that an institutional
mecahnism should be put in place to monitor
implementation of revised procedure by field
formations with a view to strengthening procurement
system.
3. 62 Defence (DRDO) The Committee find that besides deficient
procurement planning, the procurement process in
DRDO is also afflicted by serious procedural
shortcomings. the Purchase Management Procedure
of DRDO, issued in July 2000, stipulated that open/
global tenders should be invited to generate as much
competition as possible. However, to the contrary,
17 out of 30 cases in respect of five laboratories,
limited tenders were resorted to on grounds of
urgency for effecting purchases. What is further
12 3 4

42
disturbing to note is the fact that out of 5 cases
processed as urgent, three orders were placed after
13 to 21 months of raising of demands. In 12 other
cases, the time gap between the raising of demand
and actual ordering ranged from 5 to 11 months in
8 cases and over 12 months in four cases. In the
opinion of the Committee, the grounds of urgency to
justify limited tendering thus become questionable
in such cases. According to the Ministry, limited
tendering is chosen for cases whose source of
supply are definitely known and are limited, for
reasons of security and public interest, when
requirement of stores is urgent and the desired
delivery schedule can not be met if open tenders are
invited. The Committee are aware of the unique nature
of some of the stores required in the context of
research & development including the aspect of
security and public interest and render full credence
to their procurement through the mode of limited
tendering. But the criticality of the matter lies in the
fact that the desired delivery schedule could not be
adhered to in almost all the reviewed cases, for which
general procedure of open tendering was waived.
The Secretary, DRDO was however, very candid in
admitting that resorting to limited tender on grounds
of urgency in such a large number of cases was not
procedurally justified and could lead to some lapses.
The Committee have been informed that with the
amendment effected in the procurement procedure
in DRDO, the processes of procurement have been
specified with better clarity that would help reduce
margin of error on the part of operating units. While
appreciating the efforts made by DRDO in right
earnest, the Committee desire that in future cases of
procurement under urgent circumstances should be
critically analysed and closely monitored so as to
ensure that delegated power is not misused and
objective of procurement is fully achieved. The
Committee would like to be furnished a status report
about the procurement made under limited tendering
consequent to issuance of Procurement Procedure-2004.
4. 63 Defence (DRDO) The Committee note that the Purchase Management
Procedure prescribed a normal time limit of 12 months
for different activities in purchase. The Committee
12 3 4

43
however, observe that in 22 out of 50 cases of
procurement in respect of four laboratories, the
prescribed time limit was not adhered to. The Ministry
took the stand that as these equipments were to be
specifically developed for DRDO need, it took time
to reach to desired specifications. The Committee
have been further informed that with the
commissioning and implementation of Integrated
Management Software, such delays in placement of
order are expected to be curbed. The Committee
recommend that this deficiency should be addressed
in tune with the amended Procurement Procedure so
as to reduce the internal load time to the barest
minimum.
5. 64 Defence (DRDO) Another disquieting aspect noticed by the Committee
relates to failure of suppliers to adhere to the
prescribed time schedule for delivery of equipment.
The Committee find that as against Rs.67.58 lakh to
be recovered by way of liquidated damages in 36
cases on account of delayed deliver, liquidated
damages amounting to Rs.0.46 lakh was recovered
only in one case. Surprisingly, in the remaining 35
cases, an amount of Rs.67.12 lakh leviable was
waived by the Directors of the concerned
laboratories/establishments. The Ministry have
merely stated that decision was taken to waive the
liquidated damages as developmental delays were
not attributable to suppliers. Taking strong exception
to the decision taken in the matter, which led to
apparent loss of revenue to Government, the
Committee recommend that these cases be reviewed
by DRDO with a view to ascertain the bona fide of
the decision taken retrospectively. Also the Ministry
should place before the Committee the outcome of
the review and action taken thereon within a period
of three months of the presentation of this Report.
6 65 -do- The Committee observe that there were abnormal
delays ranging upto 13 years in installation of six
machines valuing Rs. 13.78 crore in four
laboratories/establishments namely, DMRL, CVRDE,
DRDL and TBRL.  A detailed review of some of the
cases revealed that the suppliers were responsible
for the delays and no time frame for installation of
12 3 4

44
the equipment had either been laid down in the
contracts.  Other reasons for the delay in installation/
commissioning of the equipment were, damaged
condition of the equipment received, delay in repair
or replacement of the damaged parts by the suppliers
etc.  The Committee deplore in particular, the delay
of 13 years in installation of one equipment namely
200 KW Dynamometer at CRDE.  The Committee
cannot but conclude that these cases have brought
into sharp focus the inept handling of procurement
contract and poor monitoring on the part of DRDO.
The Secretary DRDO however, assured the
Committee that every effort would be made by the
Ministry to ensure that such unjustifiable delays do
not recur.  Since delay in installation of equipment
contributes to delay in execution of time-bound
projects, the Committee recommend that DRDO
should address these lacunae with immediate effect.
7. 66 Defence (DRDO) The Committee's examination further revealed that
there was under-utilisation of four equipment valuing
Rs.  5.60 crore due to delay in repair/upgradation in
respect of four laboratories namely, SSPL, RCI, PXE
and CVRDE.  The Committee have been given to
understand that repair of direct import equipment
take time as the firms are not ready to give bank
guarantee for equipment and it is risky to send the
equipment for repair due to Commerce Control Laws.
The provision of Annual Maintenance contract in
case of direct import equipment is also limited to the
availability of service centre of the Original Equipment
Manufacturer in the country.  The Committee do
appreciate the impediments faced by DRDO in this
regard, but they are equally concerned about fall in
performance of concerned laboratories due to delay
in repair/upgradation of requisite equipment.  The
Committee desire that as far as repair/upgradation of
indigenous equipment are concerned, Store
Management Guidelines issued in 2004 be
implemented and monitored so that laboratory
performance is not affected, at least on this count.
8. 67 -do- The Committee find that four equipments valued at
Rs.3.21 crore were lying unused/ unserviceable/
surplus in two laboratories viz: DMRL and ITR.  The
12 3 4

45
Committee examined in detail two cases relating to
procurement of Cryogenic Gas Charging Plant and
Automatic Weather and Picture Transmission
System.
9. 68 Defence (DRDO) The Cryogenic Gas Charging Plant which was
purchased in 1992 by DMRL at a cost of Rs.25 lakh
for conversion of liquid argon into gas failed to
generate the required purity of argon, even though
the procurement was custom-designed.  The
equipment was lying unutilized till February,2003 and
was awaiting disposal, having been declared surplus.
The Committee note that the performance of the plant
was demonstrated at the firm's premises by using a
substitute gas i.e. liquid nitrogen in lieu of liquid
argon, which was stated to be not available. The
DMRL scientists however accepted the performance
status of the plant. But what is intriguing to find is
the fact that the plant subsequently failed to perform
for several years due to non-availability of high purity
Liquid argon. It is evident that DMRL scientists
faltered in accepting the performance demonstration
of the plant with a substitute gas rather than with the
liquid argon of the required purity. Furthermore the
Committee are extremely unhappy to note that the
plant has been declared surplus later on and decision
was taken to dispose of the same. Considering the
highly unprofessional attitude of the DMRL
scientists, as exhibited in the instant case, that led to
idling of investment to the tune of Rs. 25 lakh, the
committee recommend that the matter be looked in to
by DRDO with a view to taking appropriate
administrative action. The Committee should be
apprised of the action taken in the matter within a
period of three months.
10. 69 -do- In the other case, Integrated Test Range (ITR)
procured two systems viz Automatic Weather System
and  Automatic Picture Transmission System at a
cost of Rs. 34.16 lakh from a private firm in June, 1988
and February, 1989 respectively which remained idle
because the firm failed to install the system. The
Committee note that the matter was taken up by ITR
with the National Consumer Forum, which gave the
verdict in favour of the laboratory in October, 2002
12 3 4

46
and directed the supplier to supply new system of
latest specification by April, 2003. The firm however
did not supply the equipment despite the verdict by
the National Consumer Forum. The matter was
subsequently followed up with the firm and when
the firm failed to install the equipment, legal action
was initiated by ITR. The Committee desire that the
matter should be vigorously pursued for expeditious
installation of the equipment or realizing adequate
compensation for the same.
11. 70 Defence (DRDO) In the backdrop of the case involving procurement
of Automatic Weather and Picture Transmission
Systems, the Committee recommend that DRDO in
future should refrain from dealing with such firms
whose performance is found to be unsatisfactory
and, in particular, those against whom DRDO has
filed a case in any court of law including Consumer
Forum. The Ministry should also consider
blacklisting such firms. The Secretary DRDO in a
written communication has assured the Committee
that the firms, whose performance is found to be
unsatisfactory, would be de-registered  and would
not receive invitation to bid in respect of either
limited/open tenders. As regards blacklisting, it has
been stated that DRDO presently follows the
Government of India, Directorate General of Supply
& Disposal procedure. The Secretary, DRDO has also
assured the Committee that DRDO does not and will
not deal with any firm that has failed to deliver and
against whom DRDO has filed a case in any court of
law including consumer forums. The Committee desire
that the Ministry should stand committed to adhere
to the assurance made in principle.
12. 71 -do- The Committee are constrained to point out that there
were delays ranging from 3 to 12 years in disposal of
surplus/obsolete machines costing about Rs. 4.71
crore in 3 laboratories namely CVRDE, DRDL and
DMRL. The Committee have been given to
understand that long delays occurred in disposal of
surplus/absolute equipment because the quoted
price of the equipment were much lower than the
assessed value of the equipment  i.e. the Reserved
Guiding Price (RGP) fixed by the designated
12 3 4

47
Committee. According to the Ministry, if the highest
bid is less than 50% of the RGP fixed, there is no
option except to re-float after refixing the RGP as per
the present rules. The Committee do appreciate the
problems faced by DRDO in this regard. In the face
of the fact that equipment could not be sold even at
reasonable price, the Committee desire that DRDO
should work out a scheme, as suggested by Secretary
DRDO, where technical institutions, engineering
colleges and IIT institutions can take some of these
equipment for imparting training. In the opinion of
the Committee, this is judicious proposition for
salvaging the best out of surplus/obsolete equipment
rather than striving for disposing those at a throw-
away price. The  Committee recommend that the
Ministry should come out with a policy to give effect
to the proposal at the earliest.
13. 72 Defence (DRDO) The Committee note that Material Management
Policy of DRDO envisages implementation of a
computer based information system to ensure most
effective research and development. The Committee
have been informed that such a system will be in
place by August, 2005. Since Ministry claimed that
with the commissioning of information  management
system, the procurement system in DRDO and other
allied arena would be streamlined, the Committee
desire that efforts should be made to fructify the
project within the stipulated period.
14. 73 -do- To sum up, since substantial portion of the DRDO
budget is spent on purchases of materials, a fool
proof procurement planning and effective utilisation
of plant and equipment needs to be ensured at
laboratories/establishments level to derive maximum
value for money.  Since availability of equipment is
critical for the completion of projectes, this would
also ensure timely completion of projects within the
projected costs. The Committee feel that
identification of surplus item and their disposal has
to be made a regular  and time-bound exercise to
realize optimum sale value. Moreover, machines
remaining idle for want of repairs need to be renewed
on a regular basis and immediate action taken for
their early repairs.  Further,  creation of a central data
12 3 4

48
base of prospective suppliers that is accessible to all
the laboratories/establishments needs to be made a
prioritised task for avoiding delays in location of
reliable supplies.  The role of DRDO as a
progressively evolving organization rendering
invaluable service for achievement of self-reliance in
the Defence sector, has always been applauded by
the Committee  with the present global scenario and
prevailing security situation, the role of DRDO
assumes greater importance.  The Parliament is
generous in granting huge sums of money  for
Research & Development  activities.  At the same
time it expects that value for taxpayers money is
achieved and accountability to expenditure is
ensured.  The Committee, therefore, urge upon DRDO
to look into the observations and recommendations
made in this report in the right perspective.
12 3 4

PART-II
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005) HELD ON 19TH JANUARY , 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1250 hrs. in Committee Room 'E', Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Dr. R. Senthil
6. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
7. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
8. Kunwar Revati Raman Singh
9. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
 Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
12. Shri Jairam Ramesh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Anusua Basu — ADAI (RC)
2. Shri B.K. Chattopadhyay — Director General of Audit (Defence Services)
3. Shri K. Subramanian — Director (R)
Representatives of the Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Ajay Vikram Singh — Defence S ecretary
2. Dr. M. Natarajan — Secretary (R&D) and Scientific Adviser to
Raksha Mantri
3. Ms. Somi Tandon — Secretary (Defence-Finance)
49

50
4. Dr. A.S. Pillai — Chief Controller of Research & Development (R)
5. Shri Sunil Verma — Addl. Financial Adviser (S)
6. Shri B.K. Anand — Director (Budget-Financial Adviser)
7. Shri C.M. Dhawan — Director Material Management (MM)
8. Shri R.K. Chauhan — Director Planning & Coordination (P&C)
2. At the outset the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to
the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman informed the Members that the sitting has
been convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence
on Paragraph 5.1 of  the Report of C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March 2003,
(No. 6 of 2004), Union Government (Defence Services—Army & Ordnance Factories)
relating to "Procurement and Utilisation of Plant and Equipment in DRDO." Thereafter,
the representatives of the Ministry of Defence were called. The Committee commenced
the oral evidence on the subject. The Members of the Committee sought various
clarifications on the points arising out of Audit Paragraph and Advance Information
which were duly replied by the representatives of Ministry of Defence.
3.  A verbatim record of the proceedings has been kept.
 The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2005-2006) HELD ON 15 JULY , 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1250 hrs. on 15 July, 2005  in Room No.
"139", Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Dr. M. Jagannath
4. Shri Brajesh Pathak
5. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
6. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
7. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
8. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
9. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Shri R.K. Dhawan
12. Dr. K. Malaisamy
13. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
14. Prof. R.B.S. Verma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Officers of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri V .N. Kaul — Comptroller and Auditor General
2. Ms. Mohua Chatterjee — ADAI
3. Smt. Sudha Krishnan — Pr. Director (Direct Taxes)
4. Shri P. Sesh Kumar — Pr. Director (RC)
*** *** ***
2.  At the outset, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee welcomed the members
of the Committee and Audit Officials. The Committee then took up for consideration
51

52
the following two draft reports:—
(i) Draft Report on Paragraph 5.1 of the Report of C&AG of India for the year
ended March, 2003 (Defence Services—Army and Ordnance Factories)
 (No. 6 of 2004) relating to "Procurement and utilisation of plant and
equipment in DRDO".
(ii) *** *** ***
3. The Committee adopted the draft reports without any modifications/
amendments.
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the draft reports in the light
of changes, if any arising out of the factual verification by Audit and present the same
to Parliament.
5.*** *** ***
6.*** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
MGIPMRND—1750LS—22.8.2005.