38
PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF DEPARTMENT OF
AYURVEDA, YOGA & NATUROPATHY, UNANI,
SIDDHA  AND HOMOEOPATHY (AYUSH)
MINISTRY  OF  HEALTH  AND  FAMILY  WELFARE
(DEPARTMENT  OF  AYUSH)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2006-2007
THIRTY–EIGHTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

THIRTY-EIGHTH REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF DEPARTMENT OF
AYURVEDA, YOGA & NATUROPATHY, UNANI,
SIDDHA  AND HOMOEOPATHY (AYUSH)
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
(DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18-12-2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18-12-2006
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)

P.A.C.  No.  1823
Price: Rs. 180.00
© 2006 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

PAGE  N O.
COMPOSITION  OF THE P UBLIC ACCOUNTS C OMMITTEE 2006-2007 .................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION............................................................................................................. (v)
REPORT......................................................................................................................... 1
APPENDIX  I. Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for
the year ended 31 March, 2004, (No. 16 of 2005) Union
Government on “Performance Audit of Department of
AYUSH”............................................................................. 85
A
PPENDIX  II. Statement of Observations/Recommendations…….. ........ 140
PART II
Minutes of the sittings of Public Accounts Committee (2006-2007) held on
13th  June, 2006, 5th and 6th September, 2006  and  15th December, 2006 ..... 168
CONTENTS

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  (2006-2007)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri R.L. Jalappa
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Prof. M. Ramadass
9. Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Mohan Singh
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan Singh ‘Lalan’
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
5. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Thirty-eighth Report relating to “Performance Audit of Department of
Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH)”   on  the
Report of  C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March, 2004 (No. 16 of  2005), Union
Government (Civil – Performance Audit ).
2. The Report of the C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March, 2004
(No. 16 of  2005), Union Government (Civil - Performance Audit) was laid on the Table
of the House on 20th December, 2005.
3. The Committee heard the views of the experts in the fields of Ayurveda, Yoga &
Naturopathy, Unani and Homoeopathy and the representatives of drug companies of
Ayurveda, Unani and Homoeopathy on 12th June and 5th September, 2006 respectively.
The Committee took the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of  Health and
Family Welfare (Department of AYUSH) on the subject at their sitting held on
6th September, 2006. The Committee considered and finalised this Report at their
sitting held on  15th December, 2006. Minutes of the sittings form Part–II of the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and have
also been reproduced in a consolidated form in the Appendix to the Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the experts in the fields of
Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy and the
representatives of drug manufacturers of Ayurveda, Unani and Homoeopathy for
expressing their views and giving suggestions on the subject.  They would also like to
express their thanks to the  officers of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Department of AYUSH) for the cooperation extended by them in furnishing information
and tendering evidence before the Committee.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
15 December, 2006 Chairman,
24  Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

REPORT ON PERFORMANCE AUDIT OF DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH
I. Introductory
Alternatives to allopathic medicine or  traditional medical systems  have always
maintained their popularity worldwide. They are often part of a wider belief system in
an organic unity of the body, mind and nature. They are  considered integral to everyday
practices for  well being.  It is said that these systems of medicine currently serve the
health care needs of the 80 per cent of the population worldwide, despite the spectacular
advances in modern medicines.  India possesses an unmatched heritage represented
by its ancient systems of medicine which are a treasure house of knowledge for both
preventive and curative healthcare.  The positive features of the Indian systems of
medicine, are their diversity, flexibility; accessibility; affordability; broad acceptance
by a section of the general public; comparatively low cost,  low level of technological
input and growing economic value.
2. In India the indigenous forms of medicine are not a single system. They comprise
different components of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani and Siddha systems.
These systems, being embedded in Indian culture well before the advent of allopathic
system of medicines, have continued to be an integral and significant part of our
society. They are officially recognized, codified and well documented.  Scientists all
over the world now look towards the Indian systems along with the German system of
Homoeopathy (AYUSH) for possible answers to certain global health problems that
are life style related, degenerative and psychosomatic in origin and generally considered
incurable. However, its growth and development has been the focus of discussion in
different fora. Some of the prominent contemporary issues relating to it are individualized
and inhibitive behaviours, lesser adaptability, lack of quality parameters, abuse of the
system by unscrupulous practitioners, ad-hoc growth, poor resources and allocation
and neglect of basic research.
II. Organisational Set Up
3. To address the health care delivery services through the Indian System of Medicine
and Homoeopathy, Government of India (GOI) in 1995 established an independent
department of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H) under the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. Thereafter, the Government approved a separate
National Policy on ISM&H in 2002 which, inter-alia, reiterated that Ayurveda, Unani,
Homoeopathy, and Yoga offered a wide range of preventive, promotive and curative
treatments and renamed the Department of ISM&H as the Department of Ayurveda,
Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH) in November 2003.
The Department of AYUSH headed by the Secretary to Government in the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare is the nodal agency for overall direction, coordination,
budgetary control and policy interventions for implementation of the policy.  A Joint
Secretary and four Directors/Deputy Secretaries and a number of Advisors assist the
1

2
Secretary. Out of the 35 States/UTs, 21 States have established a separate Directorate
to coordinate and implement AYUSH related programmes.  As of March 2003, an
infrastructure comprising of 3845 hospitals with 65159 beds, 23630 dispensaries,
6.91 lakh registered practitioners, 439 and 96 under-graduate and post-graduate colleges
with admission capacity of 23555 and 1888 students respectively and 9226 licensed
pharmacies, had been created in the country
4. The major objectives of Department of AYUSH are: (i) to promote good health
and expand the outreach of public health care; (ii) to improve the quality of teachers
and clinicians; (iii) to ensure affordable AYUSH services & drugs which are safe and
efficacious; (iv) to facilitate availability of raw drugs which are authentic and contain
essential components; (v) to integrate AYUSH in health care delivery system and
national programmes ; (vi) to re-orient and prioritize research in AYUSH; (vii) to create
awareness about the strengths of these systems in India and abroad and sensitize
other stakeholders and providers of health; and (viii) to provide full opportunity for
the growth and development of these systems.
III. The National Policy on Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy, 2002
5. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have formulated and approved a
National Policy on Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy in 2002. The salient
features of the policy are as under:—
l Strengthening the standards of medical, nursing and pharmacy education
through strong regulatory control, upgradation of course curricula,
strengthening of infrastructural facilities in AYUSH educational institutes and
setting up of model colleges and centres of excellence;
l  Re-orientation and prioritisation of research activities and areas in ‘AYUSH’
covering clinical trials, pharmacology and toxicology keeping in view the
strength of each system and contemporary relevance;
l Drug standardisation, regulation and enforcement including adherence to good
manufacturing practices (GMPs) and publication of formulations and
pharmacopoeial standards;
l Conservation and sustainable use of medicinal plants including remunerative
farming for ensuring availability of authentic and quality raw drugs with essential
components as required under pharmacopoeial standards;
l Integration of AYUSH with health care delivery systems for optimal use of the
vast infrastructure of hospitals, dispensaries and physicians; and
l Ensuring affordable AYUSH services and safe and efficacious drugs.
IV .  Audit Review
6. Audit conducted a review of the Department of AYUSH for the period 2000-01 to
2004-05 including its subordinate offices and implementing agencies in 29 States and

3
Union Territories. The objectives of the Audit was to assess the —
l efficacy of planning for implementation of various programmes, budgetary
allocation and utilisation of funds;
l results of the efforts of the Union Government/States to strengthen medical
education;
l efficiency and extent of achievement of research activities and dissemination
of research findings for the benefit of educationists, researchers, manufacturers
and common man;
l extent of achievement of drug standardisation and availability of authentic
AYUSH drugs, regulation, enforcement, adherence to Good Manufacturing
Practices (GMPs) and publication of formulations and pharmacopoeial
standards of AYUSH drugs;
l extent of conservation and sustainable supply of medicinal plants for research
work, development of agro-techniques, contractual farming for developing
marketing mechanism; and
l extent of expansion of the outreach of health care under AYUSH and integration
of AYUSH with modern medicines, Health Care Delivery System and National
Health Programmes.
7. Several drawbacks in the working of the Department of AYUSH have been
identified by Audit which inter-alia includes the following—
l Policy pronouncements contained in the National Policy on AYUSH-2002 could
not be effectively implemented due to poor budgetary support, inadequate
monitoring, evaluation and lack of coordination between various implementing
agencies and the Ministry;
l The share of AYUSH in the total health Plan at the Central level was static at
2 per cent during 2000-05 though the policy pronouncement envisaged raising
of  AYUSH share to 10 per cent with designed growth of 5 per cent in every
Five Year Plan;
l The Centrally Sponsored Scheme suffered from absence of an effective system
of transfer of funds to the implementing agencies;
l The Regulatory Councils responsible for prescribing minimum standards had
failed in checking the growth of substandard institutions;
l Most of the 444 colleges of Ayurveda, Unani and Homoeopathy in the country
lacked minimum required faculty, attached hospitals and teaching facilities;
l Research activities were not undertaken under fixed parameters within specified
time period and their results had not been disseminated for the benefit of
educationists, researchers, manufacturers and the common man;
l During the last 25 years, the Councils had obtained patents for only three
Ayurveda drugs and did not contribute concrete research findings in the core
area of family planning/contraceptive measures;

4
l Pharmacopoeial Committees did not finalize standards in respect of any of
the compound formulations in Ayurveda and Unani even after 40 years of
their establishment, though the National Policy-2002 had envisaged
completion of this work by 2005;
l The National Medicinal Plant Board did not have an authentic database on
demand and supply of medicinal plants and failed to monitor and evaluate the
progress of 1077 projects funded by it at a cost of Rs. 62.16 crore during
2001-04;
l  Ministry did not maintain any consolidated record of utilisation of grants
depriving it of an effective monitoring tool;
l None of the 142 colleges whose records Audit test checked, out of total 444
colleges, possessed adequate infrastructural facilities, faculty, attached
hospitals with requisite bed strength and OPD/IPD facilities in accordance
with the norms laid down by the Regulatory Councils;
l There was neither correlation between the drugs standardised, drugs proved
and drugs clinically verified or any systematic approach to standardisation of
drugs;
l  Ministry did not monitor the progress of implementation of the Centrally
Sponsored Scheme of ‘Development of Health Care Facilities in AYUSH’ by
24  States though assistance of Rs. 33.74 crore was released during 2002-05;
l Inordinate delay in completion of 33 projects of development of agro techniques
in respect of 133 medicinal plants and failure to patent and disseminating the
research findings resulted in blockade of funds to the tune of Rs. 5.05 crore.
These issues have been discussed in detail in succeeding paragraphs.
8. With a view to develop a proper prospective on the subject under examination as
well as to have first hand information on the various  problems and constraints faced
by the AYUSH System of Medicine in the country, the Committee heard the views of
the experts in the fields of Ayurveda, Y oga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and
Homoeopathy. The Committee also interacted with the representatives of drug
manufacturing companies of Ayurveda, Unani and Homoeopathy to know the
constraints/problems faced by the AYUSH industry. During their visit to Shimla and
Jaipur in June and September 2006, respectively as a part of their Study Tour Programme,
the Committee held informal discussions with the  representatives of the State
Governments of Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan,  National Institute of Ayurveda,
Jaipur and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of AYUSH).  These
informal discussions helped the Committee in understanding  the subject better and
has enabled the Committee during detailed examination of the subject as well as of
representatives of the Ministry of Health & family Welfare (Department of AYUSH)
with reference to audit observations. The various shortcomings and deficiencies noted
during the interactions and study visits are also discussed in the Report at  the
appropriate place.

5
V . Efficacy of Planning, Budgetary Allocation and Utilisation of Funds
9. Audit scrutiny has revealed that the budget provision for AYUSH during 2000-
05 constituted only two per cent of the total health budget of the Union Government
as against 10 per cent envisaged in the National Policy on Indian Systems of Medicine
and Homoeopathy (ISM&H)-2002. As per the policy, the allocation for AYUSH in the
total health plan at the Central level to 10 per cent was to be increased at the rate of
5 per cent in every Five Year Plan.  However, Government did not allocate the targeted
funds till 2005-06, when Rs. 350 crore was provided for the scheme in the budget. This
meant inadequate support for the achievement of envisaged objectives.
10. When asked about the reasons for insufficient allocation of funds to the
Department of AYUSH during 2000-05, the Ministry in a written note stated as under:—
“There has been an increase in allocation for AYUSH from 2.34 per cent of the
Health budget in 2002-03 to 3.38 per cent in 2006-07.   There has been a ten-
fold increase in allocation to AYUSH as compared to 1997-98 and allocation
has doubled in last three years.  Absorption capacity of States was also a
limiting factor in not allocating the targeted funds for the Department of
AYUSH during 2000-05 as envisaged in the National Policy on Indian System
of Medicines and Homoeopathy.  Health being a State subject, responsibility
devolves on States also to increase allocation for AYUSH.  The department is
also taking steps to increase the budget allocation in the Eleventh Five Year
Plan.”
11. In this regard, the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Department of AYUSH) during evidence deposed as under: —
“We do agree that two per cent is nowhere near the stated 10 per cent.
Although there has been an increase in the last few years, it has gone up to
about 3.3 per cent. That also is negligible.  So, we do agree that this has to be
stepped up.  We face this constraint of absorption capacity also.  That is
because these AYUSH dispensaries, hospitals etc., are all in the State
Government sector.”
12. The witness added:—
“In terms of our own request for the Eleventh Plan, we have made certain
additional projections over and above asking for more funds for the same
type of schemes or the same kind of things which we want to implement. We
are also asking for new type of funding for giving recognition to all the efforts
which are being made in the private sector or the Government sector from
very good institutions in different parts of the country which are doing very
good work in terms of dispensaries, health care, through the Indian systems
of medicine.  So, we are saying that let us recognize them by promoting
public-private partnerships, and asking for fund to support such institutions
and organizations so that they can expand their operations in their own
sphere of excellence.”

6
13. Enumerating the problems arising out of meagre allocation of funds for Department
of AYUSH from the total health budget of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, one
of the experts in the field of Ayurveda during the hearing by the Committee on the
subject stated as under:—
“Due to insufficient budget we are not able to improve the standard of our
education and research work is not done.  Today we find that the 25—30
crore Rupees are being spent per year on the research work started around
thirty years ago.  Even then neither the ‘Ayurveda’ nor common man or the
scientific fraternity has been benefited of that.  It is a big issue that such a
huge amount of taxpayers is spent.  The way research work should have been
undertaken in Ayurveda and Unani system of medicine is not taking place.”
The expert added:—
“Today, Chinese exports have touched the Rs. 30,000 crore mark.  In China,
the State help in this regard is 30 per cent against two per cent in India.  Our
total exports are only to the tune of Rs. 15,000 crore.  We can increase our
exports only through enhanced State assistance, through increasing the
quality of our education and through excellence in research.  The variety of
herbs present in India is unparalleled.  We can  earn a lot through its export.”
14. According to Audit out of Rs. 50.87 crore released to 12 States by the Ministry
during 2000-05, Rs. 30.98 crore (61 per cent) was routed through the States. An amount
of Rs. 19.89 crore (39 per cent) was released directly to the implementing agencies. Out
of the total funds of Rs. 50.87 crore that the Ministry released, Rs. 36.52 crore (72 per
cent) had remained unutilised.  Further Rs. 16.94 crore (55 percent of the total amount
released) was not released timely by the State Governments to the implementing
agencies and the delays ranged upto 36 months. It was noticed that out of the total
amount of Rs. 62.63 crore that the Ministry had released during 2002-04 as much as
Rs. 14.82 crore (24 per cent) were released only in March in the two years, to prevent
lapse of funds.
15. When asked whether the Ministry have analysed the reasons for delay in
release of funds to the implementing agencies by respective State Governments, the
Ministry in a written note replied as under:—
“Department of AYUSH has been giving tentative scheme wise allocation to
States well before the beginning of the next Financial Year……………… State
Governments do not release the funds to the concerned implementing agencies
in time due to lengthy procedure at their end and also some times due to their
budgetary constraints”.
16.  On being enquired about the steps taken to impress upon the States for timely
release of funds to the implementing agencies, the Ministry in a written reply submitted
as under:—
“The matter has been taken up with State Health Secretaries/Chief Secretaries
on a regular basis.  Most of the States have set up an umbrella State Health
Society under NRHM and others are in the process of setting up such

7
Societies.  The Department has also taken concurrence of Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance for release of Department of AYUSH’s
Centrally Sponsored Schemes funds to States through the State Health
Societies for onward release of funds to implementing agencies.   State Health
Societies will be held responsible for monitoring of implementation of schemes.
These arrangements will be operationalized in 2007-08.”
17. As regards the action taken to avoid the delay in releasing of funds to the
implementing agencies, the Ministry in their written note stated as under:—
“The Department is monitoring the utilization of funds regularly and
emphasizing on State Governments  to release funds to implementing agency
in time and furnish utilization certificates in time, failing which second
installment and any other fresh grant is not released. Situation is expected to
improve.  Department has been organizing the meetings of Health Secretaries/
Director of ISM&H and the situation has been reviewed and it was agreed
that all out efforts would be made to release the fund in time by the State
Governments and utilization certificates submitted along with supporting
documents.”
18. The Committee enquired whether the Ministry have set up any monitoring
mechanism to ensure that funds released to the implementing agencies were utilised
for the purpose for which they were given.  In response, the Ministry in a written note
stated as under:—
“In form of prescribed physical progress reports and physical verification of
selected grantees through regular field visits by the officers of the Department,
the Ministry already has a mechanism for ensuring that funds released to the
implementing agencies were utilised for the purpose for which they were
given.  The Department is also getting an independent evaluation done on
the impact of the Centrally Sponsored Scheme.  Further to strengthen the
monitoring mechanism, the Department is computerizing the monitoring of
the schemes and is in the process of developing a software for online
monitoring of the schemes of the Department.”
    19. When the Committee desired to know whether the Ministry have investigated
the reasons for slow pace of utilization of funds by the implementing agencies with a
view to fixing responsibility on the concerned officials, the Ministry in a written note
submitted as under:—
“Inordinate delay in utilization of funds has been mostly in the Centrally
Sponsored Schemes which are implemented by the State Governments. Apart
from sensitizing the concerned State Governments and their officers, and not
releasing further grants, it is not feasible to fix responsibility on States which
are constitutional entities.”
20. During the hearing of the Committee of the experts in the field of AYUSH, one of
the experts in the field of Homoeopathy have alleged that grants to Central Council of
Research in Homoeopathy (CCRH) are mostly released at the fag end of the Financial

8
Year, resulting in non-utilization of grants by the Council.  When the Committee
enquired about the reasons for the release of grants at the fag end of the year, the
Ministry in a written note stated as under:—
“Vast improvement has been achieved in timely release of the funds to CCRH,
other Research Councils of the Department and to States under Central Sector
and Centrally Sponsored Schemes.  Following details of quarter-wise releases
to CCRH during 2004-05 and 2005-06 indicate that release of funds to CCRH
was distributed over all quarters’’.
Statement of Quarterly Grant-in-Aid released by the Department of AYUSH
(Rs. in lakh)
Year 1st Qtr.(upto 2nd Qtr.(upto 3rd Qtr .(upto 4th Qtr.(upto
June) Sept.) Dec.) March)
PLAN NON- PLAN NON- PLAN NON- PLAN NON- T otal
PLAN PLAN PLAN  PLAN
2005-06 200.00 160.00 102.00 80.00 251.00 120.00 166.00 160.00 1239.00
2004-05 183.00 30.00 367.00 163.72 275.00 148.14 85.00 158.14 1410.00
Total 383.00 190.00 469.00 243.72 526.00 268.14 251.00 318.14 2649.00
VI. Strengthening of Medical Education
21. A mechanism for strengthening of medical education was adopted by the Ministry
through Regulatory Councils and National/Apex level institutions Accordingly, the
Ministry set-up two Regulatory Councils namely, the Central Council of Indian Medicine
(CCIM) and the Central Council of Homoeopathy (CCH) as autonomous bodies, under
the Indian Medicine Central Council (IMCC) Act, 1970 and the Homoeopathy Central
Council (HCC) Act, 1973, for advising the Government in matters relating to recognition
and withdrawal of medical qualification, prescribing minimum standards of infrastructure
and manpower to be maintained by medical institutions, undertaking regular inspection
to ensure adherence to the standards, and maintaining Central Registers of Practitioners
and update them from time to time.
22. In 2002-2003 Government brought about amendments to the aforesaid Acts
requiring that prior permission of the Ministry be obtained for opening new colleges,
starting new courses and increasing intake of students.  However, Audit scrutiny  of
records of CCIM and CCH revealed that that as of March 2005, medical qualification
awarded by 69 out of 444 colleges was yet to be recognised. The Councils allowed
these colleges to run various courses from time to time without recognition.  Though
the courses of the concerned universities were not recognised, 6830 students had
already passed out from various colleges of Ayurveda and Unani systems during
1997—2005. Further Audit revealed that Ministry also granted permission to two
Homoeopathy colleges (in Chhattisgarh and Orissa) for continuance of courses in
new sessions during 2003-04 and 2004-05 respectively against the specific advice of
the Regulatory Council, that these colleges lacked adequate infrastructural facilities.

9
23. When asked about the action taken against the colleges running unrecognized
courses, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:—
“According to IMCC (Amendment) Act, 2003, prior permission of Central
Government is mandatory for starting new course in Ayurveda, Unani and
Siddha colleges.  Similarly, according to HCC (Amendment) Act, 2002 prior
permission of Central Government is mandatory for starting new course in
Homoeopathy colleges.  ……… Further, physicians only with recognized
qualifications listed in schedules 2, 3 and 4 of the relevant acts can practice
Ayurveda, Unani and Siddha and Homoeopathy systems of medicine and
they should also be registered with the CCIM, CCH and / or State Boards.
IMCC and HCC Acts provide for punishment for practice by practitioners not
registered by the Central/State Boards.  These provisions have to be enforced
by the State Governments/ State Boards.”
24. The  Ministry have added as under:—
“With the amendment of Indian Medicine Central Council Act, 1970 and
Homoeopathy Central Council Act, 1973 in 2002 and 2003, prior permission of
Central Government has been made mandatory for opening new college and
starting new course.  The list of recognized colleges is on the websites of the
Regulatory Councils and this has been brought to the notice of general
public by advertisements in National/Regional newspapers.  State
Governments have been requested in certain cases to take legal action against
organizations running unrecognized colleges.”
25. When asked about the steps taken by the Ministry for ensuring that the standards
envisaged by CCIM and CCH are maintained by the colleges/institutions, the Ministry
in a written reply stated that regular inspections are carried out by CCIM and CCH and
in case of doubt, the Central Government sends a team of experts.
26. The Committee enquired as to why the Ministry granted permission to two
Homoeopathy colleges in Chhattisgarh and Orissa for continuance of courses during
2003-04 and 2004-05 despite the specific advice of the Regulatory Councils that these
colleges lacked adequate infrastructural facilities.  In response,  the Ministry in a
written reply submitted as under:—
“Since many representations had been received for allowing the Raipur
Homoeopathic College, Raipur which was established in the year 1982 for
running diploma courses and which was upgraded to BHMS course in 1998,
for taking admissions from 2003-04, a central team of experts, consisting of
Adviser (Homoeopathy), Department of AYUSH and Principal, Nehru
Homoeopathic Medical College, New Delhi were deputed to inspect and
assess the infrastructure of the college. They were also advised to inspect
the other college situated in Raipur which was granted permission by CCH
for the year 2003-04. After making an objective assessment of the infrastructure,
the team of experts had recommended to allow admission of 50 students in
the Raipur Homoeopathic Medical College, Raipur and the permission was
granted with the approval of the competent authority i.e. Minister of Health
and Family Welfare. The Orissa Medical College of Homoeopathy and
Research, Sambalpur (A State Govt. Institution) had not been given extension

of  recognition by CCH for the year 2000-01 and 2000—02. However the
college took the admission of the students as the decision of CCH was
communicated to the college only after the admission was over. The
recognition was not granted for the year under reference on the ground that the
college did not fulfill the minimum prescribed norms.  Further the CCH did not
furnish any inspection report.  As such, a Central Team of Officers consisting
of Adviser (Homoeopathy) and Assistant Director, CCRH was deputed for
inspection. The team recommended the grant of ex-post-facto permission for
the year 2000-01 and 2001-02 and for making fresh admission in 2004-05 and
onwards considering the assurance given by the State Government for fulfilling
the deficiencies. The Department of AYUSH had also provided funds under the
Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Development of institution to the institution
for development of the infrastructure. Considering the recommendations of the
team of experts permission was granted with the approval of Hon’ble Minister
of Health and Family Welfare to the college subject to fulfilling the deficiencies
pointed out in the CCH reports.”
Inspection of Ayush Colleges/Institutions by  regulatory Councils
27. A test check of records of 142 (Ayurveda: 58; Unani: 14 and Homoeopathy: 70)
colleges including 35 new colleges, which were inspected by the representatives of
Regulatory Councils during 2000—05, revealed that none of these colleges met the
minimum requirement of infrastructural and teaching facility standards prescribed by
the Councils.   Further, the test-check of records of educational institutes in Andhra
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan,
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal revealed shortage of teaching staff ranging between
19 and 72 per cent, of paramedical and other staff ranging between 13 and 78 per cent
while bed occupancy ranged between 1 and 71 per cent. Audit examination of the
records relating to the number of colleges inspected, colleges permitted to run courses
on the basis of new inspections or on the basis of previous inspections on which the
Councils disallowed permission during 2000-01 to 2004-05 revealed that only 32 to 59
per cent of the Ayurvedic colleges and 23 to 71 per cent of the Homoeopathy colleges
were inspected every year by the Regulatory Councils during 2000—05. Colleges
with persistent deficiencies in infrastructure that were denied permission to run
courses during 2000—05 ranged between 1 and 13 during these years. 61 to 62 per
cent colleges of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy were inspected only once or twice in
the last five years, and no systematic or rational system for inspecting the colleges
had been devised or followed and visits were generally carried out randomly.
28. The Ministry, while agreeing with the Audit observations stated (September
2005) that the Councils would consider the system of inspection of colleges at the
earliest. The Ministry have acknowledged in the Exit Conference held in October 2005
that the inspections made by Regulatory Bodies had been deficient and stated that
strict adherence to prescribed norms was now being ensured while granting recognition
to colleges and that amendments to different laws was being actively considered to
overcome various bottlenecks.
10

11
29. When enquired about the action that have been initiated by the Ministry to
improve the infrastructure and teaching facilities in the 142 colleges that were found to
be lacking minimum infrastructural and teaching facility standards prescribed by the
Councils, the Ministry in a written reply submitted as under:—
“There are 458 Ayurveda, Unani, Siddha & Homoeopathy, Yoga & Naturopathy
(AYUSH) Colleges/ teaching institutions in the country.  It has been observed
that several teaching institutions do not meet the requirements of prescribed
standards.  The onus for creating the required infrastructure and making
provision for teaching faculty etc. in accordance with the prescribed standards
lies with the concerned college management.  However, in order to assist the
colleges to fill the critical gaps, this Department has been implementing
Schemes for assisting the Government/Government aided teaching
institutions. The following components of Centrally Sponsored Scheme
“Development of AYUSH institutions” are being implemented during
10
th Five Year Plan by this Department for upgradation of the standard of
AYUSH education. They are  (i) Development of AYUSH UG Colleges;
(ii)  assistance to PG Medical Education; (iii) re-orientation Training Programme
for AYUSH personnel; (iv) renovation and strengthening of hospital wards
of Govt./ Govt.-aided  teaching hospitals of AYUSH; (v) establishment of
Computer Laboratory in AYUSH colleges; and  (vi) upgradation of academic
institutes to the status of State Model Institute of Ayurved/ Siddha/ Unani/
Homeopathy………..The shortcomings of colleges inspected by the
Regulatory Councils are communicated by them to the University and also to
the college concerned.   Further it is the responsibility of these regulatory
councils to follow up rectification of the deficiencies noted by them with the
concerned colleges and recommend to the Central Government for taking
action against the defaulting colleges which is a continuing process.”
30. When asked to explain the reasons for the deficiencies in the inspections made
by Regulatory Bodies, the Ministry stated in a written note as under:—
“Reasons for the deficiencies in the inspections made by Regulatory Bodies
could be as follows:(i) instead of professionals involved in teaching members
of CCIM and CCH who are mostly practitioners are sent for inspection of
colleges and they in turn sit in judgment on their own Reports as members of
CCIM/CCH; (ii) CCIM and CCH did not follow direction of Ministry to prepare
database of teachers in AYUSH colleges so that at the time of inspection
same teacher may not be produced during inspection by different colleges;
and (iii) many times the inspection reports lack consistency e.g. the existing
infrastructure may not justify the final recommendation.”
31. On being enquired about the efforts made by the Regulatory Councils for
rationalizing the inspection of various colleges, the Ministry in a written reply stated
as under:—
“The CCIM has laid down the minimum standards and requirements for
education in Ayurveda/Unani/Siddha systems of medicine for under-graduate

12
and post-graduate courses.  Besides, the Central Council had also laid down
the Performa to be filled by the visitors at the time of visitation on each and
every point on the minimum standards and requirement and other
infrastructure facilities available at the college.  Further, the Central Council
had also laid down the Performa to be filled by the college and to furnish a
copy of the same as well as to the visitors on each and every point to enable
the visitor to do the physical verification at the time of visitation.  Normally,
new colleges are visited every year for five years and thereafter on every
alternate year.  Very old and well-established colleges are visited after a gap
of every two years or so. The CCH in routine inspects Homoeopathic Medical
Colleges once in three years but in respect of new college granted permission
by the Central Government, inspection is carried out every year.  Also the
Council undertakes inspection of the college as and when a request is received
as per provisions of Section 12 A of Homoeopathy Central Council Act for
increase of seats, starting of new or higher course or for considering a proposal
for new college.  Inspection of colleges/examinations are undertaken as per
provisions of Sections 17 and 18 of HCC Act and also as per Inspectors and
Visitors Regulations.”
32. The Committee desired to know about the steps taken by the Ministry to ensure
autonomy and Independence of the Regulatory Councils for promoting transparency
and accountability, the Ministry in a written note stated as under:—
“………….. that the Department had taken the following steps to ensure
autonomy and Independence of the Regulatory Councils for promoting
transparency and accountability : (i) Department provides all financial and
administrative support to Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM) and
Central Council of Homoeopathy (CCH), (ii) Department has repeatedly advised
CCIM/CCH to depute only qualified and experienced teachers of
unimpeachable integrity for visitations/inspections of AYUSH colleges but
this advice has not been honoured.  CCIM/CCH have been deputing its own
members who do not have teaching experience for carrying out visitations/
inspections.  Qualities of their reports are poor and they are unreliable.
Department has also provided a list of panel of experts from eminent institutions
to CCIM and CCH in February, 2006 for getting the inspections of the colleges
done in a professional manner, but the same has been disregarded by CCIM
and CCH, (iii) Ministry has no powers under the CCIM/HCC Acts to give
directions to the regulatory councils and enforce these directions and
(iv) Keeping in view these constraints IMCC and HCC Amendment Bills, 2005
have been introduced in the Parliament providing for providing fixed tenure
of 5 years for members and for enabling the Central Government to give
directions to the regulatory councils and to enforce these directions in public
interest.  The Reports of the Parliamentary Standing Committee of Health and
Family Welfare Ministry on these bills have been received which are being
examined by the Department of AYUSH with a view to striking the right
balance between ensuring autonomy of the regulatory councils on one hand
and transparency in their functioning on the other.  Central Government

13
would move for consideration of these bills after incorporating requisite official
amendments.”
33. Audit scrutiny of inspections teams constituted by Regulatory Councils revealed
that teams of experts for inspection of colleges included members of the Executive
Committee of these Councils. As these members also took part in the Executive
Committee’s meetings in which inspection reports were considered, there could be a
conflict of interest diluting the regulatory mechanism.
34. When the Committee desired to know the action taken by the Ministry to ensure
avoiding conflict of interests of the members of the Regulatory Council when they are
included in the team of experts constituted by the Councils for inspection of colleges,
the Ministry in a written note submitted as under:—
“The Ministry has prepared a panel of experts for inspection for Ayurveda,
Unani and Siddha and Homoeopathy colleges.  The panel was forwarded to
the respective Councils for constituting inspection team from the panel. These
panels have been largely disregarded by the Council.  Central Government
has no powers under the CCIM/CCH Acts to enforce directions given to
them.  Inspite of repeated advice from the Department. of AYUSH not to
involve CCIM/CCH members in inspections/visitations and depute only
reputed teachers, the Council are not accepting the advice of the Department.
Central Government has no powers under the Acts to enforce its directions.
IMCC and HCC (Amendment) Bills 2005 have been introduced in the Parliament
to address this anomaly.”
35. When asked about the steps taken to amend the laws relating to Regulatory
Bodies, the Ministry in a written note stated as under:—
“The Central Council of Indian Medicine was constituted initially through
nomination of members in the year 1971.  ………..In the IMCC and CCH Acts,
there is no provision for removal of the President, Vice-President, elected
members of the Council and also withdrawal of the membership of a person
nominated to the Council inspite of proven misconduct or failure to carry out
their duties.  Further, as per Section 3(2), any member can hold the Office of
the President/Vice-President for any number of terms. The Department is of
the opinion that the tenure of the members should not exceed five years and
also there should be a provision for the removal of the President, Vice-President
or the members for proven misconducts or failure to discharge their duties.
Sometimes the Councils abuse/exceed their powers and in such situations,
there is a need to issue appropriate directions to the Councils.  Since there is
no provision in the IMCC Act, 1970 and CCH Act, 1973 to give directions to
the Central Councils in public interest, the Central Government is not in a
position to check default or gross abuse of powers by the Councils. The
proposed amendments are very much essential to make the functioning of
CCIM and CCH effective and accountable and to prevent the influence of
vested interests in their decision making.”

36. Audit examination also revealed that the Ministry had constituted a Commission
of Inquiry headed by a retired judge of Delhi High Court in January 2004 to investigate
complaints made by certain individuals and institutions and 52 Parliamentarians against
the functioning of CCH. The terms of reference of the Commission, inter-alia, included
investigation into violations of Section 20(1) of the CCH Act, 1973 in granting recognition
to new colleges and deputing executive Committee members of the Councils, who
participated in the decision making process, for inspection of the colleges. The report
of the Commission was awaited as of March 2005.  Audit also noticed that though
complaints had mentioned involvement of the Vice-President of CCH, he was nominated
by the Council as a Member of the Inquiry Commission.
37. When asked as to how the Vice-President of Central Council of Homoeopathy
(CCH) could be nominated as a member of the Inquiry Committee, when the complaints
mentions of his involvement, the Ministry in a written reply explained as under:—
“………………... The Central Council of Homoeopathy had recommended
the name of its Vice-President, Dr. Ramjee Singh for nomination in the
Commission on behalf of the Central Council of Homoeopathy.  That is why
Dr. Ramjee Singh was nominated as the representative of the Central Council
of Homoeopathy.  The Order for appointment of the Commission was made
vide this Ministry’s letter No.R-14030/06/2002-HD dated 14th January, 2004
and next letter regarding terms and conditions of the services of Ms. Justice
Usha Mehra, Retired Judge of Delhi High Court was issued vide this Ministry’s
letter of even number dated 31st March,2004.  The Commission started its
functioning from the next day  i.e. 1st April,  2004  in the premises of the
Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy, Janak Puri, New Delhi.
Commission submitted its report in June 2005. The Report of the Inquiry
Commission was submitted to Government in the middle of June, 2005.  After
examination of the findings of the Report of Commission of Inquiry, the same
was referred to Central Investigating Agency (CBI) on 11.7.2005. The CBI has
registered cases on 28.9.2005 against the President/Vice President/Secretary,
CCH on the basis of the Enquiry Commission report for irregularities and
corrupt practices.”
VII.  Data Base of AYUSH Practitioners
38. Preparation and maintenance of a database of practitioners of AYUSH was one
of the important functions of the Regulatory bodies. A Central Register containing the
names of persons enrolled on any State Register of Indian medicine or Homoeopathy
and who possessed any of the recognised medical qualifications included in the
respective schedules of the Acts was to be maintained and notified in the Gazette of
India. A practitioner who did not possess a recognised medical qualification and had
been practicing Indian Medicine or Homoeopathy before the commencement of Central
Acts was also eligible for enrollment on the State Register of Indian medicine or
Homoeopathy.
39. While the Central Register of Homoeopathy was required to be maintained in
two parts, Part-I containing the names of practitioners who had a recognised Medical
14

15
qualification in Homoeopathy and Part-II the names of other practitioners, the Central
Register of Indian Medicine was maintained only for qualified practitioners. Against
6.95 lakh AYUSH practitioners (4.93 lakh qualified and 2.02 lakh non-qualified) registered
with the States, as of December 2002, database of only 1.86 lakh practitioners had been
maintained by both the Councils. Out of 28 States and 7 Union Territories (UTs),
records was maintained in only 20 States/UTs
40. The database had not been updated and revised for periods ranging between
 3 and 22 years in respect of 20 States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chandigarh,
Delhi, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Kerala,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Meghalaya, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. Details of practitioners in Arunachal Pradesh, Goa,
Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Sikkim had not been maintained in any of the Central
Registers. Delay in notification of the Central Register deprived the practitioners of the
opportunity to practice in other States or throughout the country.
In September 2005, the Ministry stated (September 2005) that efforts were being
made to update and revise the registers of practitioners on priority.
41. When enquired as to why the database of practitioners of AYUSH was not
updated and revised promptly and regularly, the Ministry clarified in a written note as
under:—
“The CCIM maintains the Central Register of Indian Medicine in 3 Parts as
per the provisions of IMCC Act, 1970.  This Register is based on the State
Register of Indian Medicine maintained by various State Boards / Councils.
Efforts have been made by the Council to update the Central Register.  However,
updated list of practitioners is not been received from some of the State
Boards / Councils in time from some States; Central Government has also
been requesting the State Governments to update the Registers in time and to
hold elections on time.  Hon’ble HFM has also written to the concerned Chief
Ministers in this regard. The CCH has published the Central Register (database)
in 1993, 1996 and in 2003 and another register is with the Government Press,
Nashik for publication in the Gazette.  Maintenance of Central Register is
done on the basis of updated State Registers of Homoeopathy, which are not
furnished in time by the respective State Councils.    Keeping in view the
various difficulties in maintenance of Register of Homoeopathy faced by
CCIM and CCH, a workshop of Registrars of all States’ Councils / Boards of
Homoeopathy as well as representatives of State Governments / UT
Administration would be organized by CCIM/CCH in October, 2006 so that
some solution comes out for removal of bottlenecks.  Hon’ble Health & Family
Welfare Minister has sent a D.O. letter to the concerned Chief Ministers to
ensure timely updation of Register of practitioners by the State Boards and
holding of timely elections.”
VIII. Status of AYUSH Medical Colleges
42. Audit examination revealed that the total number of AYUSH medical colleges
under Ayurveda, Unani and Homoeopathy systems increased by 19 per cent, from 374

16
at the end of March 2001 to 444 at the end of March 2005. While Bihar, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Uttar Pradesh accounted for 62 per cent  of the
total AYUSH medical education institutions, no college had been set up in Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Sikkim.
43. When enquired about the measures that have been taken by the Government to
set up AYUSH Medical Colleges in the North-Eastern regions particularly in the States
of Manipur, Meghalaya, Nagaland and Sikkim which are considered to be a rich store
house of biodiversity, the Ministry in their written note stated as under:—
“There are one Ayurveda and 2 Homoeopathy colleges in Assam and one
Homoeopathic College in Arunachal Pradesh.  Central Government has also a
proposal to set up a North-Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy.
Government of Arunachal Pradesh and NEIGRIMS, Shillong have also
identified land for development of this institution.  The Central Government
may set up an Ayurveda college in Arunachal Pradesh and a Homoeopathy
college in NEIGRIMS Shillong.  The detailed project reports are being
finalized.”
IX. Setting up of All India Institute of Ayurveda
44. The Committee are given to understand that foundation stone was laid for
setting up of All India Institute of Ayurveda way back in 2001. When enquired about
the latest status of the project, the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
“A State-of-the-Art All India Institute of Ayurveda is proposed to be set up at
New Delhi.  Accordingly an E.F.C. Memo was prepared in the light of the
observations made by the Planning Commission as well as IFD earlier. The project
cost was Rs. 325.00 crore.  Delhi Development Authority allotted 4.5 acres of land
near Apollo Hospital at Sarita Vihar, New Delhi and is constructing a boundary
wall around the site. Additional land was also required for setting up the Institute
and accordingly, DDA was requested to allot additional land.  In September 2004,
the DDA allotted approximately 6.00 acres of land at a cost of Rs.13.62 crore for
which payment has been made. The land is being taken over.”
The proposal was considered by the EFC in its meeting held on 3.10.2005. After
discussion, EFC recommended the proposal ‘in-principle’ subject to the following
observations: (i) the proposal should be re-formulated, with a focus on promoting
R&D, safety evaluation and quality standards in AYUSH in Phase I.  Facility for
training of Teachers should also be considered under Phase I,  (ii) synergy should be
established with NIA, Jaipur and duplication of activities avoided.  Capacity of NIA,
Jaipur should also be augmented, (iii) the cost norms, staff requirements and budget
should be recast and clear commitment of funds obtained from Planning Commission,
(iv) upgradation of existing institutes and colleges should be given priority in the
11th Plan, and  (v) the revised proposal may be brought back to EFC in due course. In
pursuance of the above, the detailed project report is being reformulated.”

17
45. Expressing their concern over the slow progress in construction of All India
Institute of Ayurveda, the experts in the field of Ayurveda during the hearing of the
Committee on the subject stated as under:—
“The importance of Ayurveda is increasing all over the world.  People from all
over the world come here for Ayurvedic treatment because it developed here.
They expect quality Ayurvedic hospitals.  There are some hospitals in the
private sector.  We made efforts in this regard.  A decision was taken by
ex-Prime Minister under which 10.5 acres of land was taken back from Apollo
hospital to set up All India Institute of Ayurveda Hospital, for treatment
through Unani, Siddha etc. systems.  The Vice-President of this country laid
the foundation of that hospital.  Along with this our Department purchased
Rs. 15 crores of land and handed it over to the DDA. Even after two years the
construction of the Hospital is yet to begin.  It would be a State-of-the Art
National referral hospital with provision for Panchkarma and Kayakalpa.  It
will house a national Pharmacy PGD Centre and research institutions.  It was
meant to be the biggest referral hospital in the world.  But, due to certain
reasons construction is yet to begin even after two years.  It is a matter of
concern that the Department is doing precious little in this regard.”
X. Development of Infrastructural Facilities in Educational Institutions
46. A Centrally sponsored scheme for development of infrastructure for AYUSH
medical institutions was launched by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in
1990-91 comprising of six components. Audit noticed that out of the total allotment of
grants of Rs. 76.43 crore between 2000-01 and 2004-05 (till December 2004) under the
scheme as much as Rs. 32.80 crore (43 per cent) was released for development of under
graduate colleges and Rs. 26.03 crore (34 per cent) was released for development of
State Model institutes, indicating the priority that the Ministry accorded to the two
areas. The Ministry, however, did not maintain consolidated record of utilisation of
grants, thus adversely affecting monitoring of actual utilization.  Further, the Ministry
did not receive utilisation certificates (UCs) that were mandatory, from the States in
263 cases till February 2005 involving Rs. 28.44 crore representing grants released
during 1997-98 to 2001-02.
47. When enquired about the steps taken by the Ministry for expediting furnishing
of utilisation certificates by the concerned States, the Ministry in a written note stated
as under:—
“Department has been striving hard and persuading States and Grantee
Institutions to submit Utilization Certificates of grants given during 1997-98
to 2001-02.  This matter has been taken up in the meetings with the State
Health Secretaries / Directors of ISM&H.  Further, an exclusive meeting was
held on the 21st July, 2006 on the Centrally Sponsored Scheme “Development
of Institutions”, in which all the representations of State Government and
model colleges were asked to submit pending Utilization Certificates
immediately and their fresh proposals would be considered only after
settlement of Utilization Certificates.  Moreover, letters have been written to
Health Secretaries / Directors of ISM&H asking them to submit the Utilization
Certificates.  This matter has also been taken up during the visit of Nodal

18
Officers of the Department of AYUSH to the States and with the representatives
of State Governments/Colleges visiting the Department.  Grants are not being
given to the defaulting institutions.  Besides, this matter has been pursued
telephonically.  Till date, 135 Utilization Certificates belonging to the period
1997-98 to 2001-02, amounting to Rs. 828.77 lakh have been received, processed
and accepted since March 2005.  Sending of the Utilization Certificates has
improved from the States and Department is maintaining constant pressure for
submitting Utilization Certificates by the defaulting institutions and States.”
XI. Research Activities of Various Research Councils of AYUSH
48. The Central Council for Research in Indian Medicine and Homoeopathy
(CCRIM&H) was established in 1969 to formulate aims and pattern of research on
scientific lines with a view to increasing their popularity and acceptance by enabling
scientific research in different aspects of respective systems through apex research
bodies.  The Council was split in 1978 into four separate Research Councils,  viz.,
Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha (CCRAS), Central Council for
Research in Unani Medicine (CCRUM), Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy
(CCRH) and Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy (CCRYN), to afford
each system maximum opportunity and freedom to develop in consonance with the
fundamentals of the respective systems. Audit examination revealed that Rs. 278.44
crore were allocated to the three Councils (CCRAS, CCRUM and CCRH) between
2000-01 and 2004-05 for undertaking various research activities, clinical trials, family
welfare, reproductive and child health research and tribal health care research
programme. The overall shortage of staff in these Councils ranged between 5 per cent
and 40 per cent.
49. The Ministry stated in September 2005 that the regional units of the Councils
were being run without sufficient number of pharmacists, compounders, technicians
etc. and the Councils were making efforts for filling the vacant posts.
50. The Committee desired to know whether any research was being carried out by
the Department in collaboration with big and reputed hospitals—both public and
private that are well equipped with clinical facilities.  In response, the Ministry submitted
in a written note as under:—
“Thrust areas identified by the Department of AYUSH for research and
development in AYUSH are as follows: (i) improvement and up-gradation of
standards of education,  (ii) Quality Control and Standardization, (iii) Sustained
availability of raw materials, (iv) Research & Development on the efficacy of
the systems, (v) mainstreaming of AYUSH in the National Health Care Delivery
System, (vi) Awareness and Information. A Golden Triangle Partnership
Scheme has been devised as an integrated technology mission for the
development of Ayurveda (in its first phase) using the latest scientific tools
and technology. Under this scheme Deptartment of AYUSH/CCRAS, CSIR &
ICMR are working together to undertake scientific validation and development
of safe, effective and standardized classical Ayurvedic products for the
identified disease conditions and to develop new Ayurvedic and herbal
products effective in disease conditions of national/global importance.

19
Reputed organizations in public and private sector are being associated in
the research work. The thrust areas identified under the GTP research are:
(i) to bring safe, effective and standardized Ayurvedic products for the
identified disease conditions; (ii) to develop new Ayurvedic and plant based
products effective in the disease conditions of national/global importance.
Products should be better than the available products in the market for such
disease conditions; (iii) the product should have IPR potentials to attract
national/multi-national pharmaceutical companies. Following disease
conditions have been taken for research on priority: (i) Urolithiasis; (ii)
benign Prostrate Hypertrophy (BPH); (iii) Joint disorders; (iv) Rasayana
(Rejuvenators/ Immunomodulators) for healthy ageing; (v) Cardiac disorders
(cardio-protective & anti-atherosclerosis);  (vi)  Sleep disorders. Fifty-
three medicinal plants from 19 formulations have been selected from the
six Priority areas of 1st phase for standardization. Quality Control drug/
development under the already finalized six priority disease conditions are
being done by CSIR in collaboration with M/s Nicholas Piramal and M/s
Arya Vaidya Sala (AVS), Kottakal. Eight Bhasmas / Rasa Kalpas (Herbo
mineral preparations) for carrying out chemical analysis, Safety and Toxicity
by CSIR are being manufactured by Maharishi Ayurveda Corporation Ltd.
(Selected as manufacturing Pharma for GTP Herbo mineral formulations
as per survey report and recommendation of two experts). One batch of
Rasa Kalpas (Herbo-mineral preparations) has been sent to IICT, Hyderabad.”
 51. The Ministry have further informed that considering the strength of Ayurveda
and the disease of National/global importance, the following diseases/conditions/
areas have been identified:—
(i) Infective hepatitis,  Alcoholic cirrhosis;
(ii) Management of Madhumeha (Diabetes mellitus;
(iii) Prajanana swasthya (Reproductive health) including Prevention of
complications of Kamala (Liver disorders) Vandhyatwa (infertility) and Garbh
nirodh (Contraception);
(iv) Medoroga obesity & Lipid disorders; leading to Ischaemic Heart Disease,
Cardio-vascular disorders, stroke etc.;
(v) Rasayana Chikitsa (for healthy ageing);
(vi)  Paurusha granthi vriddhi (Benign prostrate enlargement);
(vii) Chinta  Janya Vikara (Management of stress disorders including Hypertension,
Anxiety Neurosis etc.); Manovikara (Psychological disorders such as Mental
retardation);
(viii) Use of Rasayana drugs as an adjuvant therapy to chemotherapy in Cancer
patients and in drug resistant cases of Rajyakshma (Tuberculosis)and also
for improving quality of life in HIV/AIDS patients;
(ix) (Dhatu Kshayaja Vikara)Degenerative disorders;

20
(x) Tamaka Swasa (Bronchial asthma);
(xi) Jalaukavacharana in Gambhira Siragata Rakta Skanda( Leech application in
deep vein thrombosis);
(xii) Pandu (Management of sickle cell anaemia);
(xiii) Project on minimal invasive procedures like agnikarma and leech application;
(xiv)  Kaphaja Adhimantha (Chronic allergic conjunctivitis);
(xv) Shushkakshipaka (Dry eye syndrome).;
(xvi) Kaphaja Adhimantha (Chronic simple glaucoma);
(xvii) Computer vision syndrome;
(xviii) Hriawa Dristi (Simple myopia);
(xix) Arma (Pterigyum);
(xx) Immature Cataract (Linganasa);
(xxi) Asthi Kshaya (Osteoporosis);
(xxii) Ama Vata (Rheumatoid arthritis);
(xxiii)Apasmara (Epilepsy);
(xxiv) Saundarya Vardhaka (Development of Herbal Cosmetics);
(xxv) Guda roga (Ano-rectal diseases);
(xxvi) Pakshawadha   (Hemiplegia);
(xxvii) Seevana karma  (Development of suturing material from human hair);
(xxviii) Vishma Jwara (Malaria);
(xxix)Shleepada (Filariasis);
(xxx) Ashmari (Urolithiasis);
(xxxi) Ardhavabhedaka (Migrain);
(xxxii)Atisara/ Pravahika (Diarrhoea/Dysentery);
(xxxiii)Kitibha (Psoriasis);
(xxxiv)Jeerna Vrikka Shotha (Chronic Nephritis);
(xxxv) Mansa Dhatu Gat Vikara  (Muscular Dystrophy); and
(xxxvi) Jeerna Shroni Guha Shotha(Chronic PID).

21
Details of important collaborative Research projects undertaken by the Department
of AYUSH are given in Annexure - I.
52. When enquired whether the Ministry/Councils periodically review the research
projects with reference to the progress made, expenditure incurred, time spent and
achievement of the desired objectives etc., the Ministry in a written note stated as
under:—
“The research work undertaken by AYUSH Councils is much broader in nature
than narrowly focused R&D work of private companies.  They undertake literary
research/survey of medicinal plants/folklore medicine/drug standardization/
clinical trial.   Many of these activities are of on-going nature.  However, the
Department of AYUSH is constantly monitoring the work of research councils
in addition to review of their work by their Scientific Advisory Committees.
Recently a Review Committee comprising of renowned experts has been
constituted to review the working of the Central Council of Research in Ayurveda
& Siddha.  Expert Review Committees are being constituted for other three
Research Councils also. All the four Research Councils have been directed to
prepare VISION 2015 document based on SWOT analysis with a view to bring
about a sharper focus in their research activities. The AYUSH Research Councils
have done a large body of work on literary research/survey of medicinal plants/
folklore tribal medicine/standardization of drugs/clinical trials and have
published a large number of research papers, monographs which has immensely
helped in teaching/research/propagation of AYUSH in the country. The
Department of AYUSH has constituted Scientific Advisory Committees for the
Research Councils and their major field units for periodic review/Peer Review
of their research work.”
The details of the activities undertaken by the Scientific Advisory Committees of
the Research Councils is given in Annexure - II.
53. The Ministry have also stated that the research activities of the Council are
regularly reviewed by the Committees namely:  (i) the Special Committees on Clinical
Research, Homoeopathic Pathogenetic Trial and Drug Standardization and Scientific
Advisory Committee (SAC) of the Council periodically review the progress research
projects and consider and advise modification(s), if any. SAC also considers
continuation or conclusion of any research study, reviews and approve the research
data for publication;  (ii) The Standing Finance Committee of the Council considers
and approves budgetary proposals for research projects; and (iii) The Department of
AYUSH has recently appointed a Review Committee headed by the Secretary,
Department of AYUSH and has Joint Secretary (AYUSH) and Experts from CSIR, ICMR,
Institute of Pharmaceutical Science and Homoeopathy as members. The terms of the
Review Committee include identification of priority areas of research and also review
the progress of the research studies.
54. The Committee desired to know whether Government propose to introduce
“Intellectual Audit” in respect of the various research programmes/activities carried

22
out by the various AYUSH regulatory Councils and research institutes/hospitals run
by the Department of AYUSH.  In response, the Ministry stated as under:—
“Yes.  The Government of India, Ministry of Health & F.W., Department of
AYUSH have already set up a Review Committee under the Chairmanship of
Dr. Nityanand, Former Director,
 Central Drug Research Institute, Lucknow for
an intellectual audit of CCRAS/CCRUM. It is not possible to carry out any
audit of Regulatory Councils, viz, CCIM/CCH as the Central Government at
present has no powers to give them any directions and enforce them except
constituting an enquiry commission which was done in case of CCH.”
Drug Research
55. Drug standardisation was a pre-requisite for manufacture of quality drugs and
involved evolving standards of single and compound drugs (for both Ayurvedic and
Unani medicines) and mother tinctures (for homoeopathic medicines) in order to
establish various qualitative characteristics of drugs.  Audit examination revealed that
76, 68 and 16 per cent of single and compound drugs standardised under Ayurveda,
Unani and Homoeopathy systems respectively had been documented in the form of
monographs as of March 2005. The progress in this regard after 1999 was insignificant,
as 11 monographs of homoeopathic drugs had been published only in 2004-05. Further,
the Ministry did not find the standards for single drugs developed by CCRAS suitable
for inclusion in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India due to large variations in the
data and absence of Standard Operating Procedures. The standards published by the
Research Councils on the basis of research conducted from time to time did not also
conform to the quality and standards prescribed by Government’s Pharmacopoeia
Committees. The Ministry did not effectively guide, monitor and coordinate the work
of its Research Councils, which continued with their work regardless of its acceptance
by Pharmacopoeia Committees.
In September, 2005, the Ministry have stated that standards have not been published
by CCRUM  as these require further modification.
56. Audit has pointed out that Ministry did not effectively guide, monitor and
coordinate the work of its Research Councils, which continued with their work regardless
of its acceptance by the Pharmacopoeia Committees. When asked about the remedial
measures taken by the Department of AYUSH in this regard, Ministry in a written reply
stated as under:
“Department of AYUSH has been reviewing the progress of pharmacopoeial
work regularly.  It was felt that AYUSH Research Councils should be involved
more closely with this work and accordingly CCRAS has been declared as the
Secretariat of Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee.  Similar action has been
taken in respect of CCRUM and Unani Pharmacopoeia.
CCRAS
 Secretariat assistance for Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee (APC) &
Siddha Pharmacopoeia Committee (SPC) is being provided by CCRAS.  Adviser
(Ayurveda) of Department of AYUSH & Director, CCRAS are Vice-Chairman

23
and Member Secretary of APC.  They are working very closely and all the
work on Quality Standards and Pharmacopoeial Standards of CCRAS is also
monitored by APC.  CCRAS has been directed to concentrate on development
of SOPs/Pharmacopoeial standards for publication in Ayurvedic
Pharmacopoeia.  This will avoid duplication of work and proper coordination
of the scientific work carried out on drug standardization by CCRAS will be
monitored and approved by the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee headed
by a renowned scientist.
CCRUM
 There has been a constant mechanism for review of work by the Scientific
Advisory Committee and Governing Body.  Apart from this, the work is being
reviewed by different Committees.  The work carried out by the Council
particularly in the field of Drug Standardization was endorsed by the Scientific
Advisory Committee  and the then Pharmacopoeial Committee.  It was only
very recently, that the UPC realized that some additional parameters have to
be added in the case of single drugs and CCRUM has complied with those
directions of UPC.  For standards of compound formulations, development of
SOPs was considered as a pre-requisite.  It is, therefore, not true that the
Council continued work regardless of its acceptance by the Pharmacopoeia
Committees. It is a fact that  whatever work in the field of Drug Standardization
has been carried out has been done in the Council with the guidance of the
then Pharmacopoeia Committee(s).   CCRUM is being designated as the
Secretariat of Unani Pharmacopoeia Committee.
CCRH
All research proposals are considered by a Scientific Advisory Committee
(SAC) nominated by the President of the Governing Body of the Council.
This Committee comprises of Experts drawn from amongst Researchers,
Teachers and Clinicians in the field of Homoeopathy.  SAC is assisted by
Special Committees on Clinical Research, Drug Standardization and
Homoeopathic Pathogenetic Trial (Drug Proving). These Committees comprise
of Experts in Homoeopathy and allied disciplines. The Department of AYUSH
has appointed a Review Committee headed by the Secretary, Department of
AYUSH and has Joint Secretary (AYUSH) and Experts from CSIR, ICMR,
Institute of Pharmaceutical Science and Homoeopathy as members. The terms
of the Review Committee include identification of priority areas of research
and also review the progress of the research studies.   An Expert Review
Committee is also being constituted to review the work done by CCRH in last
3 years. So far as conforming to the quality and standards prescribed by the
Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia Committees is concerned, it is clarified that
before the establishment of Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia Laboratory (HPL)
in 1975, the Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia Committee (HPC) considered the
standards of drugs worked out by the Council and included them in the
Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeia of India (HPI). Although HPL is now engaged
in laying down standards of drugs used in Homoeopathy, yet the standards

24
worked out by the Council continue to be considered by HPC for inclusion in
HPI. It is, therefore, evident that standards worked out by the Council are
qualitative and accepted by HPC.”
57. When asked to state the reasons for the low percentage of documentation in the
form of Monographs of drugs standardized under Ayurveda, Unani and Homoeopathy
Systems, the Ministry informed the Committee as under:
“Unlike allopathy and homoeopathy the entire work of drug standardization
and pharmacopoeial standards on Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani systems had
to be started from scratch within the country.  Previously only one
Pharmacopoeial Laboratory of Indian Medicines, Ghaziabad was doing the
work to develop Pharmacopoeial monographs describing the Quality standards
of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani (ASU) drugs.  Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeial
Laboratory, Ghaziabad is doing the work for Homoeopathic drugs.  For
Ayurvedic drug standardization, there is no international scientific support.
Therefore, the scientific work on the plants and mineral drugs was started
from very scratch.  Tools, technology and expert manpower was also lacking
for standardization of Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani drugs.    In spite of these
constraints, 418 monographs on single Ayurvedic drugs have been produced
and published in 5 Volumes of Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India. In the last
3-4 years, 16 eminent laboratories have been associated in standardization
work on multiple ingredient Compound formulations. The standardization
work requires development of Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs),
Pharmacopoeial Quality Standards and Shelf-life studies etc.  We have received
scientific data on 144 compound formulations out of which about 100 will be
published in the year, 2006.  Two labs of CCRAS at Chennai and Kolkata have
also been allocated 50 compound drugs under APC Scheme.  It is proposed
that with the help of these 18 laboratories the work of laying down
pharmacopoeial standards for 100 compound Ayurveda drugs would be done
every year and standards of 400–500 most widely used compound formulations
would be completed in 4 – 5 years.  As far as the Unani System of Medicine is
concerned, the CCRUM has been able to publish monographs on standards
for 250 single and 350 compound formulations.  Monographs published by
the CCRH include data pertaining to standardization, drug proving and clinical
verification studies independent of each other. While standardization studies
can be completed in prescribed time limit, studies involving human subjects
are dependent on many factors, including ecological and climatic changes,
geographical diversity and food habits. Any medical research, therefore, takes
2-5 years and some time more before it is completed. It also takes time to
analyze and compile voluminous data generated during the study. It has to be
approved by the Special Committee and the Scientific Advisory Committee
for publication. As such, actual research and publication of findings does not
usually keep pace with each other. The number of monographs published
does not include scientific papers published by the Council. In addition to
the Monographs, which contain results of Drug Standardization studies,
Drug Proving and/or Clinical V erification studies, the Council has also

25
published results of Standardization studies of 36 drugs in its Quarterly
Bulletin between 1980 and 2005, for the benefit of the profession. Results of
the clinical studies are usually published in form of papers in scientific journals
and official reports. The number of papers published on clinical studies has
not been highlighted in the report. The Council has published 45 scientific
papers on Clinical Research, 25 papers on Clinical Verification and 52 reports
on Drug Proving so far in its Quarterly Bulletin, National and International
Journals. Besides, the Council has also published 25 priced publications, 11
non-priced publications for the benefit of the professionals and 39 informative
Handouts for lay public.”
Drug proving and Clinical verification of  Homoeopathic Drugs
58. Unlike conventional medicines, where animal experimentation formed the basis
of evolution of drug pathogenesis, homoeopathic medicines were proved on healthy
human volunteers.  Drug standardisation was followed by proving the drug and finally
by clinical verification. Audit examination revealed that out of 122 drugs standardised,
64 were proved and 75 were clinically verified. There was no correlation between the
drugs standardised, drugs proved and drugs clinically verified. Forty-four drugs were
taken up for proving and 47 for clinical verification without having been standardised.
Further, 45 drugs were taken up for clinical verification without proving.
59. According to Audit, there was, therefore, an unsystematic approach to drug
proving and clinical verification. The Ministry did not ensure that only those drugs
which had been standardised by the Council were taken up for proving and clinical
verification, which was the course of action supported by the special committee on
clinical research of the Council in its report of February 2003. WHO guidelines also
reiterated that only standardised drugs should be taken up for proving and clinical
verification.
60. When asked whether the Ministry have conducted any investigation in the
cases where homoeopathic drugs have been taken up for proving and clinical verification
without having been standardized and how the Ministry ensure that only the
standardized drugs are taken up for proving and clinical verification, as prescribed in
the WHO Guidelines, the Ministry in a written note stated as under:—
“WHO has issued guidelines for basic drug research for new drugs whose
clinical action and toxic effects are not known. WHO Guidelines for
Methodologies on Research and Evaluation of Traditional Medicine do not
refer to homoeopathic Drug Proving and Clinical Verification. Draft Report on
Homoeopathy prepared by WHO is yet to be made public for reference.
WHO’s   ‘General guidelines for methodologies on research and evaluation
of traditional medicine’ (WHO/EDM/TRM/2000.1). Draft Guidelines
encompass even those homoeopathic medicines which have been used
traditionally and are included in contemporary homoeopathic literature. Here
it may be mentioned that homoeopathic proving and clinical verification
conducted by the Council are with medicines serially diluted using a technique

26
traditionally used since the time of Hahnemann, that they do not produce any
toxic effect. Further the proving and clinical verification of those drugs are
conducted that have one or more references in available homoeopathic
literature Moreover, the Council had undertaken proving and clinical
verification of those drugs which were approved for such studies by the
Scientific Advisory Committee of the Council. The traditional guidelines for
preparation of homoeopathic medicines (as referred to in WHO Guidelines)
were followed and their therapeutic application was based on the symptoms
produced by the drug on healthy human beings as has been done traditionally
since 1796. It may be seen that the Council has not violated any of the
Guidelines prescribed by WHO. It may be appreciated that the Council is a
research Organization and to experiment is its mandate. The Council
endeavours to make discoveries, but if it does not experiment, it would not be
possible to make new discoveries. The Department of AYUSH has recently
appointed a Review Committee headed by the Secretary, Department of AYUSH
and has Joint Secretary (AYUSH) and Experts from CSIR, ICMR, Institute of
Pharmaceutical Science and Homoeopathy as members. The terms of the
Review Committee include identification of priority areas of research and also
review the progress of the research studies. The Committee had its first
meeting on June 6, 2006.   An Expert Committee is also being constituted to
review the work of CCRH in the last 3 years.”
61. When asked to specify the reasons for lack of correlation between the drugs
standardized, drugs proved and drugs clinically verified, the Ministry explained in a
written reply as under:—
“Drug Standardization, Drug Proving & Clinical Verification are three
independent programmes of the Council.  But, Drug Standardization and
Drug Proving programmes were taken up in 1969 whereas Clinical Verification
programmes were taken up after ten years, i.e. in 1979. Drug Standardization
studies can be carried out on 5-8 drugs simultaneously and completed in
6-9 months. Short Proving of drugs can be done within 6 months whereas
Long Proving take about one year. Clinical Verification studies take 2-5 years.
After the completion of studies, 6 months—1 year time is required for data
compilation and another six months—1 year for approval of Experts/Special
Committees/Scientific Advisory Committee and publication of data. Therefore,
three programmes cannot keep pace with one another.”
Clinical Research
62. Clinical research facilitates assessment of therapeutic utility of a drug in specific
disease conditions and was expected to aid in establishing economically cheap and
effective remedies for common as well as chronic ailments. The Council undertook
clinical studies in Tribal Health Care, Family Welfare and Reproductive and Child
Health Programmes.

27
63. Audit noticed that there was a large gap between the number of clinical trials
completed and documented as well as the dissemination of the research findings for
the benefit of various stakeholders such as educationists, researchers, physicians,
manufacturers and the common man.
64. With regard to the clinical research carried out by Central Council for Research
in Ayurveda and Siddha, the Ministry in their written note submitted to the Committee
stated as under:—
 “CCRAS has completed clinical trials on 22 disease conditions and a number
of various drugs have been tried on each condition.   On the basis of these
trials monographs are published for each disease condition.   This explains
the gap observed by the Committee as a gap between number of clinical trials
and documentation. These are made available for educationist, researchers,
physicians, manufacturers and general public.”
65. The Committee enquired as to why the research activities of the Research
Councils have not been able to contribute effectively in the discovery/invention of
new drugs in the areas of epidemics diseases and family planning measures. In reply,
the Ministry in a written note stated as under:—
“CCRAS:
The Council since inception has been focusing on epidemic diseases and
developed Ayush-64 an anti-malarial formulation through extensive pre-clinical
standardization, pharmacological and clinical studies on large number of
subjects and the trial revealed that the said formulation is highly beneficial in
the management of P-Vivax malaria. The AYUSH-64 has been patented and
commercialized through different pharmacies which is in use in various
Ayurvedic dispensaries of Central and State Government and also available
in the market. Filariasis is another important area explored by the Council. The
systematic studies have been conducted on 15 sets of various combinations
in microfilaria stage and morbid conditions of Filariasis and the results are
encouraging. Besides, this the Council has actively participated in various
epidemic control programmes on Malaria, Plague, Kala-a-zar etc. in various
parts of country and rendered timely services in the prevention and treatment
of the conditions. Regarding the development of contraceptives this Council
has screened 9 single and compound contraceptive drugs. Taking leads from
these pilot-screening studies, extensive clinical trials have been conducted
on Pippalyadi yoga—an oral contraceptive for females through pre-clinical
formalities viz. standardization, toxicity, teratogenicity studies and phased
clinical trials in association with Department of Family Welfare, National
Institute of Immunology, NIPER.  The Phase II trials are in progress at JIPMER,
Pondicherry, KEM Hospital, Mumbai and AIIMS, New Delhi.
CCRUM:
Although the CCRUM has not taken up any drug development for epidemic
control, yet the Council has been able to effectively counter disease menace
during dengue epidemic, dropsy epidemic, plague epidemic etc.  During these
epidemics the Council have proved successfully the effectiveness of Unani
Medicine in different clinical conditions.

28
CCRH:
HIV/AIDS
A Randomized Placebo Controlled Clinical Trial of Homoeopathic medicine in
HIV infection conducted at Mumbai (1195 – 97) carried out on 100 HIV infected
persons indicated a positive role of Homoeopathic medicine in the
management of HIV infected people.   A substantial increase in CD4 + T Cell
was reported among subjects to the Homoeopathic medicine group. Results
of another open clinical trial of Homoeopathic medicine on 1337 individuals
with HIV infection at Mumbai, Chennai, Gudiwada and New Delhi indicate
that Homoeopathic therapy has a positive role in the management of
asymptomatic HIV infection and also minor infections such as Diarrhoea,
Cough, Fever, moth ulcers (Candida albicans).
Filaria
Three most useful Homoeopathic medicines in the management of Filaria
(Grade-I Lymphoedmia) identified –Apis Mellifica,.Bryonia Alba, and Rhus
Toxicodendron. These three remedies have been able to relieve Grade –I
Lymphoedema in more than 75per cent of the cases. Collaborative pilot study
with ICMR, Bhubaneswar was also undertaken in which these remedies were
able to reduce the level of cytokine TNF-alpha which was found significantly
high in Filaria cases.
Malaria
Indian plant based Homoeopathic drugs Ceasalpenia boducella, Amoora
rohutika and Nyetanthes arbortristis have been reported in the management
of Malaria due to plasmodium vivax parasite, when prescribed on specific
indications which are characteristic of these drugs.   The successful
management of Malaria cases with these drugs underline the efficacy of
indigenous drugs when prescribed homoeopathically. Homoeopathy has
proven efficacy in microbial infections such as Cholera, Yellow fever,
Diphtheria etc. which occurred frequently in epidemic form in 19th Century
when antibiotics were not discovered. Homoeopathy has been successfully
used during the epidemics of Japanese Encephalitis in Andhra Pradesh and
Gorakhpur (U.P.). The Council has undertaken clinical studies in 32 epidemics/
diseases occurring in the aftermath of natural calamities (cyclones,
earthquakes). The findings of these studies have underlined the utility of
Homoeopathic medicines in epidemics. Discussion with High Security Animal
Research Lab (HSARL), Bhopal and Institute of Veterinary Science, Izzatnagar,
UP for collaborative studies on Bird Flu is in progress. Efforts are also being
made to undertake studies in recurrent epidemics such as Japanese encephalitis
in Andhra Pradesh.
Homoeopathy and Family Planning:
The Council has undertaken a study at Department of microbiology, Banaras
Hindu University to ascertain anti-fertility effect of homoeopathic medicines
on albino rats. The results of the study were not definitively conclusive.”

29
Patenting of Drugs
66. The number of medicines patented is an indicator of the overall achievement of
Research Councils in clinical research. The position of Ayurvedic and Unani medicines
patented by the councils was not encouraging as patents for only three drugs had
been obtained and five were under process. It was stated in the Exit Conference
(October 2005) that it had been decided to patent all the drugs that would be developed.
It was further stated that since National Research Development Corporation (NRDC),
which had been assigned the task of patenting of drugs, was not very active, alternative
methods would be explored to overcome the problem.
67. When the Committee enquired whether the patented drugs have been put to use
for production and what is their acceptability in the market, the Ministry submitted in
a written note as under:—
“Keeping the commercialization/dissemination of research work aspect in view
the Department of AYUSH and AYUSH Research Councils are now involving
industry partner in the Golden Triangle Project research initiative at initial stage.
Recently during CCRAS – Industry interface Pharma majors like RANBAXY,
Dabur, Maharishi Ayurveda have indicated their willingness to participate in
R&D projects in areas like Obesity/Diabetes/Hypertension/Heart disease, etc.
for developing more effective herbal drugs based on our classical knowledge.
From now on at least one major company will be involved with every major
R&D project. In CCRS commercialization of the research findings of the Council
is being done through National Research Development Corporation from time
to time.  The summary of patents obtained and commercialization is as follows:
(i) Patents obtained—19, (ii) Patents filed/processing for filing—12,  (iii) Patents
/Processes released to the Industry (commercialized)—6.
In CCRUM upto 1996, it was the policy of the CCRUM to only publish its
research work in the form of monographs.  Such Monographs were discussed
in Seminars and thereafter made available to the Research Institutions/
Hospitals for larger use.  CCRUM has published monographs on 12 drugs,
filed patents for 8 and 17 drugs (a kit of common remedies for OPD use) have
been commercialized through one centralized agency NRDC.  12 drugs are in
the pipeline for filing patents.  The drugs developed by the Council for
different ailments have been widely in use at the Council’s outlets and have
been accepted by the public taking into confidence because of success rate
and their cost effectiveness. The public has also found the Kit medicines,
which have been commercially exploited, useful and acceptable.
In CCRH Homoeopathy does not have any patent drug or formulations,
except two held by Laboratories Boiron, France and the other held by Bi-
force in United States. Both of these are Influenza virus based preparations
and are made using a special process. The preparation keeps changing in
composition as viral strain mutates and changes almost every year.  In India,
there are no homoeopathic patent medicines as before a homoeopathic
medicine is made available for use it has to undergo many stages of evolution
viz. identification of drug substance, proving and clinical application for

30
clinical confirmation. The confidentially of data gets breached after proving.
As such no patents are allowed.”
XII. Drug Standardisation and Quality Control of  AYUSH Drugs
Pharmacopoeial Standards of Ayush Drugs
68. The Drugs and Cosmetics Act of 1940 and the rules framed thereunder, enacted
for regulating the standards of allopathic drugs, were amended in 1964 to include
Ayurveda, Unani and Siddha medicines under its enforcement and regulatory
mechanism. Homoeopathy system was also brought under the ambit of the Act in 1978
through an amendment. The Ministry established Pharmacopoeia Committees between
1962 and 1964 for developing Pharmacopoeial standards in Ayurveda, Unani and
Homoeopathy systems. The main function of Pharmacopoeia Committees was to prepare
and publish official formularies and pharmacopoeia under the respective systems for
evolving uniform standards in preparation of AYUSH drugs and prescribe working
standards for single drugs and compound formulations. Development of
pharmacopoeial standards was primarily the responsibility of two national level
laboratories viz., Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine, Ghaziabad (PLIM)
and Homoeopathic Pharmacopoeial Laboratory, Ghaziabad (HPL), which were set up
as standard setting-cum-drug testing laboratories. Standard Operating Procedures
(SOPs) were essential for ensuring uniformity in terms of taste, colour and consistency
in the formulations and also in analysing the effects of the drugs. The laboratories did
not finalise pharmacopoeial standards in respect of compound formulations of Ayurveda
and Unani for want of SOPs. The Ministry had published standards for only 916 out of
1500 mother tinctures of Homoeopathy.
69. According to Audit the performance of pharmacopoeia committees set up by the
Ministry during 1962-64 for developing pharmacopoeial standards for ensuring safety,
quality, purity and efficacy of drugs was far from satisfactory. While standards for
 916 mother tinctures (61 per cent) in Homoeopathy had been published as of March
2005, pharmocopoeial standards had not been finalised in respect of compound
formulations in Ayurveda and Unani even though the Committees were set up more
than 40 years back.
The Ministry stated (September 2005) that the development of pharmacopoeial
standards required basic R&D and that it took time to design formats and undertake
testing. It added that the activity has been accelerated after creation of a separate
Department of AYUSH in 1995. It was further stated in the Exit Conference (October
2005) that the Ministry was also considering ways to use the standardisation work
being done in the private sector in developing pharmacopoeial standards.
70. When the Committee enquired whether the Government have identified the
bottlenecks in the development of Standard Operating Procedure (SOPs) by the
Pharmacopoeia Committees as a result of which it had failed to develop Pharmacopoeial
Standards for formulation of compound drugs in Ayurveda and Unani even after
40 years of their inception, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:—
“Unlike allopathy & homoeopathy, all the R&D work for laying down
pharmacopoeial standards for Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani medicines had to be

31
undertaken from scratch within the country.  The Department and
Pharmacopoeia Committees rightly concentrated on laying down of
standards for single crude drugs and so far standards for 418 single crude
drugs of Ayurveda have been laid down. Multiple ingredients ASU
formulations are prepared by mixing number of herbs.  Sometimes minerals
and metals are also mixed with the herbs. The preparations of various dosage
forms e.g. churna, vati, avaleha  formulations require crushing, powdering,
mixing, boiling, grinding and other many processes to make them in various
doses forms of churna, vati, syrup, avaleha etc.  To develop quality standards
of these formulations is a cumbersome time consuming  scientific activity.
First step in this exercise is to  authenticate the genuine raw-material, then
develop Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) of manufacturing process,
and then to develop scientific quality standards and shelf life studies.  15
laboratories were identified and most commonly used compound
formulations were allocated since year 2003-2004.  In the last 3 years,
about 100 formulations every year were allocated. In this way 300 compound
formulations have been allocated.  Each formulations is required to be
manufactured in 3 batches to standardize the process and Quality Standards.
Till July, 2006, we have received the scientific data on 144 compound
formulations. Experts of Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee have analysed
the data and some of the corrections, additions, alterations have been
suggested. So far as 10 compound formulations have been finally approved
by the APC and Department of AYUSH.  These formulations have been
introduced under the National Reproductive Child Health (RCH) programme
also.  Another 80 formulations have been screened by the experts and are
being placed before the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee for approval in
its next meeting on 13th & 14th September, 2006. We will be finalizing about
100 Compound formulations this year for publication. To develop
pharmacopoeial standards of  multiple ingredient formulations, first of all we
should know the Quality Standards of individual ingredients.  Till March,
2006, we have developed and published pharmacopoeial standards of 418
single drugs of plant origin in 5 V olumes of Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of
India.  Therefore, it can be seen that a considerable work has been done by
Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani Pharmacopoeia Committees on single drugs.  The
work on compound formulations has been accelerated by associating 15
reputed laboratories & 12 manufacturing units under the APC Scheme.  This
work is time consuming and no shortcut is possible. Department of AYUSH is
giving considerable attention to support various activities of Ayurveda/
Siddha/Unani Pharmacopoeial Committees. It is  true that a lot of work still
needs to be done in respect of compound formulations but the gains/success
achieved in formulating quality standards for a large number of single drugs
should not be belittled. This issue may kindly be considered in the background
of existing situation prevailing in Unani System in which different classical
texts provided for preparation of different Unani drugs based on different
compositions and different methods of preparation.  This was obviously not
desirable and therefore the Unani Pharmacopoeia Committee, while taking

32
note of this situation, decided to standardize formulations and method of
preparation.   For this purpose, National Formularies were prepared which
contained Unani composition of a particular formulation with uniform method
of manufacture.  Based on this, C.C.R.U.M. initiated work of standardization
of single and compound drugs.  This work was initiated for the first time in the
history of Unani Medicine and as a result of this effort of the Council, 277
single and 385 compound drugs were standardized and their monographs
published.  Subsequently, U.P.C. desired that some more modern parameters
needed to added for which is work is underway in CCRUM and PLIM.”
71. When asked as to how does the Ministry ensure safety, quality, purity and
efficacy of drugs in the absence of pharmacopoeial standards, the Ministry in a written
note clarified as under:—
“Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has published
5 V olumes of Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of India containing 418 single drugs
of plant origin.  The Pharmacopoeia contains standards of identity, purity
and strength of the individual drugs.  Therefore, in a multiple ingredient
formulation standardised for individual ingredient need to be applied in
beginning, during the process of preparation as well as in the final product.
Ayurvedic Formulary of India containing 636 compound drugs is also available
to manufacturers for standardization of compound drugs. For safety and
efficacy of drugs, Research Councils and other CSIR laboratories have been
associated to establish the safety of the formulations especially with toxic
ingredients.  To study the efficacy of the drugs is not under the purview of
Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee.  However, efficacy studies are carried
out by the Research Councils as well as under Extra Mural Research (EMR)
projects and Golden Triangle Project (GTP) project of the Department of
AYUSH/ICMR/CSIR.  In the case of Unani medicines, Unani Formulary of
India with 914 compound drugs is available to manufacturers for
standardization of compound drugs.  Quality standards for 144 Unani single
drugs have been notified by the Govt. of India, in the recently published
Unani Pharmacopoeia of India.  The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
have been constantly emphasizing upon the manufacturers to ensure
standards of raw drugs in the process of manufacture of compound
formulations as well as Patent and propriety items.  In case of classical drugs,
they are supposed to manufacture drugs according to composition and method
prescribed in National formulary whereas they themselves are responsible
for developing SOPs and quality standards for their Patent and Proprietary
medicines.”
Drug Standardisation
72. According to Audit, the Central Research Councils had developed their own
standards for single and compound drugs in Ayurveda, Unani and Homoeopathy
systems over the years. However, the Ayurveda Pharmacopoeia Committee did not
accept the standards for Ayurvedic drugs developed and published by Ayurveda
Research Council, as there was large-scale variation in data. Similarly, the standards

33
developed by Unani Research Council were not being published in the Unani
Pharmacopoeia of India as the mandate for publishing the standards lay with the
Pharmacopoeia Committee.
73. The Ministry separately launched a Central Scheme in 1997 in order to expedite
the work of development of pharmacopoeial standards. Though the Ministry identified
921 formulations including 427 single and 494 compound drugs, for development of
standards and also awarded the work to 32 laboratories in 1997-98 involving an
expenditure of Rs. 5.26 crore, the laboratories did not develop pharmacopoeial standards
for compound drugs. The Ministry thereafter assigned the work of development of
Standard Operating Procedure (SOPs) to 16 laboratories for 225 drugs in 2002 and
released grant-in-aid of Rs. 2.01 crore between 2002-2005. The final report was awaited
(October 2005).
74. As regards single drugs, Audit pointed out that standards in 120 (38 per cent)
out of 315 of Ayurveda/Siddha and 51 (46 per cent) out of 112 in the case of Unani
drugs were approved by the Pharmacopoeia Committees. The following Table gives
the status of single drugs standardised by these laboratories upto March 2005.
System-wise position of standardization of drugs
System No. of Cases in which Standards Standards ready Standards under
drugs work could not approved for placing before evaluation
allotted be taken up due by Pharmacopoeia
to non-availability Pharmacopoeia Committees
of plants Committee and
under
Publication
Ayurveda/
Siddha 315 17 120 37 141
Unani 112 14 51 24 23
Thus, there was a duplication of efforts and wastage of resources by the Central
Research Councils and Pharmacopoeia Committees in the field of standardisation of
drugs. The Ministry did not ensure finalization and publication of standards for
formulation of compound drugs in particular, even after incurring an expenditure of
Rs. 7.85 crore on the committees between 2000 and 2005 and when more than forty
years had passed since the establishment of Pharmacopoeia Committees.
75. Regarding development of pharmacopoeia  standards of drugs in India, one of
the experts during the evidence deposed as under:—
“Very little was done in the field of pharmacopoeia.  However, during the past
several years the Government has prepared single drug pharmacopoeia of
about 480 drugs.  Work is also going on regarding 290 compound drugs, out
of which work has been completed for 90 drugs.  It is very essential to prepare
a pharmacopoeia of other drugs also.  Work in this regard is very slow due to
low funding, lack of infrastructure and manpower.  In such a scenario how will
the preparation of pharmacopoeia gather pace. We cannot achieve this without
strengthening the PLMT laboratories.”

34
76. When asked about the efforts made to put into use the standardization work
being done in the private sector in developing pharmacopoeial standards, the Ministry
in a written reply stated as under:—
“Under the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia Committee (APC) Scheme, Department
of AYUSH has associated 12 private drug manufacturing units to develop
SOP of manufacturing process, which ultimately helps to standardise the
product.  In this regard, we have received the research data of 144 compound
formulations which is a joint activity of private Pharmacies and reputed
laboratories. To develop the Pharmacopoeial standards of water and hydro-
alcoholic extracts of ASU drugs, 3 private sector laboratories have been
associated and given a target of 15 drugs.  These laboratories are Natural
Remedies, Bangalore, SAMI Labs, Bangalore and Chemloids, Vijayawada.”
77. When the Committee desired to know how the Ministry ensure avoidance of the
duplication of efforts by the Central Research Councils and Pharmacopoeia Committees
in the field of standardization, the Ministry in a written note submitted as under:—
“To avoid the duplication of efforts in developing Pharmacopoeial standards,
the Directors of the Research Councils have been made the Member
Secretaries of the Pharmacopoeia Committees.  Central Council for Research
in Ayurveda and Siddha (CCRAS) is already providing Secretarial Assistance
for Ayurveda & Siddha Pharmacopoeia Committees and CCRUM has been
designated as the Secretariat for Unani Pharmacopoeia Committee.
Laboratories of CCRAS/CCRUM have been fully involved in the
Pharmacopoeial work.  All the drugs allocated for Pharmacopoeial work are
jointly decided by the Pharmacopoeia Committees in which Advisers of the
Department and Director of Research Councils are members. In so far as the
Unani Medicine is concerned, the Council has been working in close
collaboration with Unani Pharmacopoeia Committee and PLIM, Ghaziabad
for developing pharmacopoeial standards.”
78. When asked whether the final Report in respect of development of SOPs for 225
drugs that were assigned to 16 laboratories in 2002, been received, the Ministry in their
written reply stated as under:—
“We have received SOP, Quality Standard data in respect of 144 compound
formulations till July, 2006.  The data has been screened by the experts and is
at different levels of approval.  In the coming meeting of Ayurvedic
Pharmacopoeia Committee scheduled on 13-14th September, 2006, SOPs for
40 formulations are being placed for approval.  We have a target to publish
first Pharmacopoeial volume of Compound Ayurvedic medicines in 2006-07.”
Quality Control of Ayush Drugs
79. With a view to restoring public faith in AYUSH systems, ensuring availability of
quality AYUSH drugs in conformity with the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and
eliminating the possibility of production and marketing of sub-standard drugs, the
Ministry launched a Centrally Sponsored Scheme—‘Quality control of AYUSH drugs’
in 2000-01.  Grants of Rs. 51.13 crore were released to 93 units in 23 States/UTs

35
during 2000-05.  Audit examination revealed that the scheme envisaged projects for
strengthening 21 Drug Testing Laboratories (DTLs) and 40 pharmacies within 18
months of the release of the financial assistance. However, none of the DTLs and
pharmacies had been able to utilise the entire grant-in-aid and make the facilities
functional even after 5 years of implementation of the Scheme. This resulted in
blocking of ‘Plan’ funds amounting to Rs. 25.31 crore. The State Governments either
delayed release or did not release funds, which contributed to the slow progress of
capital work and delays in completion of procedural formalities.  The Ministry stated
(September 2005) that the State Governments were being reminded to complete the
work and submit the utilisation certificates.
80. Test check of records in the States revealed that the Ministry did not release
any grant for establishing drug control mechanism to Haryana though it had 375
licensed pharmacies while Rs.1.07 crore was released to Tripura though it had only
one private pharmacy in the State. Reasons for assisting the States on a selective
basis were not on record. Funds amounting to Rs. 3.20 crore meant for purchase of
machinery and equipment remained unutilised while the machinery and equipment
valuing Rs. 4.89 crore though purchased, remained uninstalled in the states owing to
non-completion of civil work and/or trained manpower.
81. When the Committee enquired whether the Government have analysed the
reasons as to why none of the Drug Testing Laboratories have been able to utilise the
grant-in-aids even after a lapse of five years of implementation of the Scheme, the
Ministry in a written note stated as under:—
“The Department of AYUSH has funded 24 Drug Testing laboratories (DTLs)
for various States.  The building component as well as equipments/
procurement has been completed in more than 18 DTLs.  The technical
manpower is one of the constraint shown by the State authorities.  The
Scheme has been amended to provide Rs. 20 lakh for contractual scientific
manpower. Training workshops are being organized to train the existing
scientific manpower in the latest tools and technologies for testing of AYUSH
drugs.”
82. Explaining about the steps taken to strengthen the drug testing laboratories, the
Ministry in a written note submitted as under:—
“The Quality Control infrastructure of AYUSH system was weak in term of
non-availability of Drug Testing Laboratories (DTLs) for AYUSH drugs, poor
conditions of the manufacturing units and lack of manpower in the Drug
Control organizations in the Centre and States.  To fill up these gaps, a
Centrally Sponsored Scheme (CSS) is being implemented in the last 5 years to
provide financial assistance to strengthen DTL and Pharmacies of Government
sector under this Scheme.  Every State should have one DTL for AYUSH
drugs to meet the statutory requirements of drug testing.  For this purpose,
the Scheme provides financial assistance for building, machinery and scientific
manpower on contractual basis.  Earlier, the Scheme was having provisions
of Rs. one crore.  During the year 2005-06, the financial provisions have been
raised to Rs. 1.5 crore.  Under this Scheme, 21 DTLs were funded till 2004-05.

36
The construction work, procurement of machinery require lot of codal
formalities on an average it takes 2-3 years to complete the utilization.  Out of
21 DTL funded under the Scheme, 14 labs are functional and carrying out
testing of ASU drugs.  During the year 2005-06, 4 more laboratories have been
supported. For north-east region i.e. Tripura, Sikkim, Nagaland, Mizoram,
Meghalaya, Arunachal Pradesh labs were funded during the last one year.  It
will take some more time to make them functional. The 2nd component of the
Scheme relates to strengthening of Government Pharmacies manufacturing
ASU & H drugs.  40 Pharmacies were supported under the Scheme upto
Rs. 1 crore per pharmacy. This includes money for building, machinery and
equipments. 36 pharmacies are functional and producing ASU & H drugs.
4 pharmacies funded within last one year belonging to Arunachal Pradesh,
Nagaland, Tripura and Meghalaya are under construction. The 36 pharmacies
are manufacturing medicines to meet the need of State Government dispensaries
and hospitals. With the Central assistance, their production capacity has
been increased.  It is, therefore, further clarified that the amount of Rs. 51.13
crore has been meaningfully utilized under the Scheme and will have far
reaching effects to improve the quality and quantity of ASU & H drugs.  So
far Pharmacopoeial standards of 474 drugs have been published for Ayurveda
and Unani drugs.  Another 250 single drugs of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani
have been finalized.”
83. When asked to state the number of inspections carried out by the Central/ State
Governments for testing drug samples manufactured by AYUSH drug companies during
the last three years and what are the results of the samples tested, the Ministry submitted
in a written note as under:—
“The Department of AYUSH has issued order to the Director Pharmacopoeial
Laboratory of Indian Medicine, Ghaziabad and Homeopathic Pharmacopoeial
Laboratory to obtain 10 samples of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani medicines from
CGHS stores and  40 samples from open market every month for the purpose
of testing contents, heavy metals and other adulterants.  Test reports should
be submitted to the Department of AYUSH for the first week of every month
for the preceding month for initiation of necessary action by the Department
for sensitizing ASU&H drugs manufacturing units and for boosting public
confidence in such medicines.    It has been directed that while lifting random
samples from CGHS and the market, PLIM should ensure that most widely
used ASU medicines are selected which should include all groups of medicines
which claim to contain precious metals should also be included in this random
testing with a view to verify their claims.  The sample should be tested for
presence of ingredients, heavy metals any other adulterants.  Reference
samples of all such medicines should be maintained by these laboratories for
atleast a period of 12 months.  The State Govt. have also been asked to test
their samples in Govt./ NABL accredited laboratories.”
84. When asked whether the Ministry have brought out any guidelines regarding
standardization of drugs so as to maintain the quality and authenticity of the drug

37
formulations which have been laid down in the Ancient Ayurvedic Texts, the Ministry
in their written reply stated as under:—
“Department of AYUSH, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare has set up a
permanent Technical Committee in the name of Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia
Committee having expert of Ayurveda, Botany, Chemistry, Pharmacy etc.  This
Committee has formulated guidelines for developing Standard Operating
Procedures (SOPs) of manufacturing process and evolving pharmacopoeial
standards for the identity, purity and strength of the Ayurvedic formulations.
The standard format has also been designed to carry out scientific work on
Ayurvedic formulations. Department of AYUSH has published official
formularies of Ayurveda, Siddha & Unani systems of medicines.  These books
give clear-cut details of the quantity of individual ingredient drugs and method
of preparation.  The method of purifying the toxic ingredient is also given.  It
is mandatory to follow the manufacturing process as described in the text to
ensure the safety of these formulations.  Pharmacopoeial standards have
already been laid down for 418 most widely used single Ayurvedic drugs and
standards for most widely used compound drugs are under preparation.”
XIII. Pricing  of  AYUSH Drugs by Pharma Companies
85. The Committee have come to notice that quite often the price of a drug product
is quite cheaper as compared to the ingredients that are used in its preparation, which
are quite expensive. In this regard, the Committee enquired about the measures
Government have taken or proposed to be taken by Government to ensure that the
ingredients as shown to be used in the manufacture of the medicines are actually used
in the production and the quality of the end product is maintained.  In response, the
Ministry have stated as under:—
“Important action taken to ensure that the ingredients as shown to be used in
the composition of the medicine are actually used and the quality of the end
product is maintained are as follows:  (i) Department has made self-certification
mandatory for the export of ASU drugs;  (ii) Department has been supporting
establishment and functioning of Drug Testing Laboratories in the States,
(iii) Department has asked the Pharmacopoeial Laboratory of Indian Medicine
(PLIM), Ghaziabad to test 50 samples every month, (iv) GMP has been notified,
and (v) Labeling provision  has been made mandatory. Department has written
to all States to get ASU drugs tested from NABL accredited laboratories for
which, Rs. 500/- per sample will be reimbursed by this Department.”
XIV. Use of Heavy and Banned Metals in the Manufacture of AYUSH Drugs
86. The Committee came to know from several news reports that heavy and banned
metals & toxic substances are being used in manufacture of Ayurvedic Drugs. During
the hearing of the AYUSH experts/drug manufacturers by the Committee one of the
representative of Ayurvedic Drug Companies had stated that there was no truth in
these allegations as also in the article published by the Journal of American Medical
Association (JAMA) regarding use of heavy and banned metals in Ayurvedic drugs.
They emphatically stated that the metals use in the drugs are safe and are permissible
under the ancient texts.

38
87. When asked whether the Ministry have taken measures for rebutting the
allegations made in the journal (JAMA) and educate the public about the safety of
ayurvedic medicines, the Ministry in their reply stated as under:—
“Metals and minerals should be used in ASU drugs after detoxification as
prescribed in Ayurvedic and Unani classical texts.  However, the Department
has taken up the study of validity of such drugs under the Golden Triangle
Project.  The Council for Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) has been
given study for most commonly used 8 herbo-mineral drugs for their study
on Physio Clinical Character and safety and toxicity studies. The majority of
drugs came into criticism of containing heavy metals in JAMA article were
purely herbal drugs. Therefore Department of AYUSH adopted multi-pronged
integrated strategy for handling the situation.  The strategy includes self-
certification, development of drug testing laboratories across the country,
involving PLIM in drug testing etc. Important action taken are as follows:
(i) Department has made self-certification mandatory for the export of ASU
drugs, (ii) Department has been supporting establishment and functioning of
Drug Testing Laboratories in the States, (iii) Department has asked the
Pharmacopoeial Laboratory of Indian Medicine (PLIM), Ghaziabad to test 50
samples every month. Department has written to all States to get ASU drugs
tested from NABL accredited laboratories for which, Rs. 500/- will be
reimbursed by this Department. As per the direction of the Deptt. of AYUSH,
CCRAS has taken nine available Ayurvedic formulations manufactured by
different companies as per reference for heavy metal contents & toxicity
studies. None of the tested drugs shows any toxic effect on acute and sub
acute studies in laboratory animals.”
88. Explaining the scientific evaluation and safety efficacy data in respect of
Ayurvedic drugs, the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of
AYUSH) during the evidence deposed as under:—
“In 2005… we have launched this Golden Triangle Project with the help of the
ICAR and ICMR, for the simple reason that we want scientific evaluation and
safety efficacy data. We need that data to tell these countries that this has
been scientifically evaluated and this is what is coming out of it even if we
may know that this is not harmful, but we need those stamps of scientific
authorities. That process has been launched quite aggressively; it has been
taken up not in isolation. I would like to submit that it is in partnership with
the industry. In the first case, Maharishi Ayurvedic drugs have been taken
and evaluated and now we had a meeting with some other industry partners;
they are also going to be giving their drugs for this because it is in their own
interest. While initially there might have been some resistance on the part of
the industry as to why we are going in for mandatory testing or self-
certification or random testing, now even they understand that if this is all
done and the certification is in place, they have a better chance in the outside
market. But with select Missions, we are in constant touch; we are taking up
this matter; they are also asking us; everyday, we get 3-4 letters from our
Embassies on this aspect.”

39
XV .  Research Journals on AYUSH
89. The Committee are given to understand that presently there is no separate
journal on Ayurveda System and research in Ayurveda.  In this regard, the Committee
enquired about the measures taken by the Government to bring out a separate journal
on Ayurveda which can provide a platform for Ayurvedic Drug Companies to put forth
their views/suggestions and also to counter the allegations made by some countries
on the quality of Ayurvedic medicines etc. In response, the Ministry replied as under:—
 “Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha, Department of AYUSH
is publishing specific Journal on Ayurvedic System and research in Ayurveda
entitled “Journal of Research in Ayurveda and Siddha”. JRAS is bilingual
Journal on the work carried out of fundamental, anthropological and behavioral
details referred to in medicinal systems, critical and literary studies,
observations and interpretations emanating the clinical research in all its
facets, divisions and dimensions.  As far as the CCRUM is concerned, the
Council have already launched Hippocratic Journal of Unani Medicine on six
monthly basis since 2005.  Periodicity is now being revised to quarterly.  The
Council publishes a Research Journal in Urdu language titled “Jehan-e-Tibb”
which is constantly published on quarterly basis.  Apart from this a Research
bulletin in the form of CCRUM Newsletter is published in every two months
which carries success stories of CCRUM for the benefit and exchange with
the Industry and profession.”
XVI. Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP)
90. The Department of AYUSH issued a notification in June 2000 directing the
drug manufacturers to mandatorily adhere to Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP)
standards as laid down in the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, the time limit for
which was extended up to June 2003 with a view to enabling the drug manufacturers
to improve their infrastructure, comply with statutory requirements and obtain GMP
certificates from the concerned State Drug Control Authorities. Audit examination
revealed that out of 7849 manufacturing units, only 707 pharmacies possessed GMP
certificate.  The respective State Governments/UTs i.e. Gujarat, Rajasthan, Karnataka,
Pondichery, Daman & Diu, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Uttaranchal, Haryana , Delhi,
Chandigarh, Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal, Orrisa, Punjab, Madya
Pradesh and Tamil Nadu did not cancel the licenses of non-GMP manufactures for
not adhering to norms. It has further revealed that thirteen State Governments did
not carry out annual inspection of AYUSH manufacturing units and regular testing
of drug samples for ensuring quality control under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act,
1940 because of shortage of manpower and non-availability of specified standards
for testing AYUSH drugs. Thus, funds amounting to Rs. 51.13 crore earmarked by
the Ministry for quality control during 2000-05 proved largely unfruitful as funds
were blocked in incomplete projects or the State Governments released funds in
unplanned and injudicious manner.

40
91. When asked to explain the measures taken for enforcing Good Manufacturing
Practices (GMP) standards as laid down in the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945, the
Ministry in a written note stated as under:—
“Schedule–T, under Drugs and Cosmetics Act & Rules, making provision for
Good Manufacturing Practices of ASU drugs was issued in the June, 2000 giving
2 years period for the existing units to improve their manufacturing facilities. In
October, 2005, Department of AYUSH has issued orders to the State Secretaries
under Section 33 (P) of Drugs & Cosmetic Act to cancel the manufacturing
licenses of non-GMP complying units. Secretary (AYUSH) has written D.O. letters
to all Chief Secretaries on 8th Feb. 2006 for ensuring for implementation of GMP.
The matter also taken up in a meeting of Ayurveda, Siddha, and Unani Drugs
Consultative Committee held on 29 June 2006.  It is evident that Department of
AYUSH has constantly pursued with the State Governments and drug
manufacturers to improve the infrastructure to comply GMP norms. It is worthwhile
to mention that most of the manufacturing units are medium and small scale and
therefore, the constraints of resources is also one of the major factors.  However,
gradually the industry is moving ahead and the number of GMP complying units
is increasing. In due course, the non-GMP complying units will be closed as there
will be no renewal of their manufacturing licenses.”
92. Explaining the efforts made by the Government for enforcement of GMPs, the
Secretary, Ministry of Health (Department of AYUSH) during evidence deposed as under:—
“….. I would like to say that we have over 8,000 manufacturing units and as of
now we have almost 4.500 GMPs because sometime has elapsed since the
Performance Audit was done. As of today we have 4,500 GMPs.  But we have
expressed our own concern about the fact that 2000 GMPs have been reported
from one State alone. That is because there may be an error and it could not
be correct.  We are not ourselves very satisfied with the report given by that
particular  State alone. That is because there may be an error and it could not
be correct.  We are not ourselves very satisfied with the report given by that
particular State that all the units are GMP certified. We cannot believe that
situation as given because GMP became mandatory in 2003.  It was introduced
in 2000.  So, the effort is on to find out the details. We have asked the State
Governments also to gear up their inspections, visits, testing of drugs, etc.,
to see that the units move in that direction.”
 93. When enquired about the current status with regard to obtaining of GMP certification
by the remaining 3500 manufacturing units, the Ministry replied in a written note as under:—
“The current status of GMP compliance in various States till September, 2006
for Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani Drugs are as under:—
Status of GMP compliance in various States (September, 2006) for Ayurveda/Siddha/
Unani drug manufacturing units
S. No. State GMP Non-GMP Legal Notices
Complying Complying Issued/
Units  Units Cancelled
12 3 4 5
1 Andhra Pradesh 300 149 76/153
2. Gujarat 394 0 222

41
12 3 4 5
3. Uttar Pradesh 1855 0 18/27
4. Orissa 27 168 92
5. Karnataka 144 0 0
6. Delhi 70 36 36
7. Rajasthan 166 300 300
8. Himachal Pradesh 60 13 13
9. Uttaranchal 97 54 17
10. Madhya Pradesh 293 325 0
11. Kerala 352 100 150
12. Maharashtra 275 0 400
13. Punjab 226 111 79
14. Haryana 165 288 11/1
15. Sikkim 1 1 1
16. Dadra & Nagar Haveli 5 0 0
17. Chhattisgarh 2 1 2 4 24/2
Total 4451 1569 6020/183’’
94. When asked about the action taken by the Ministry against the remaining units
for not possessing GMPs, the Ministry replied in a written note as under:—
“In pursuance of the section 33P of Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, Central
Government has issued another order dated 13.10.05 directing all the State
Ayurveda, Siddha & Unani (ASU) Drug Licensing Authority to take action
against the defaulting ASU drug manufacturers for revocation of their licenses
under Rules 157, 158 & 159 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 for failure
to comply with the Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) notified under
Schedule ‘T’ of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. Department of AYUSH
is pursuing with State Government and Drug Licensing Authority for getting
GMP complied at the earliest.  The matter has been taken in the meeting with
State Health Secretaries/ directors and Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani
Consultative Committee (ASUDCC).”
95. The Committee desired to know whether the Ministry periodically monitor/
review the action taken by the State Governments in cancelling the licenses of those
manufacturers who failed to adhere to GMPs standards. In reply the Ministry submitted
in a written note as under:—
“The Department of AYUSH have written letters to state drug licensing
authorities to make periodical inspection of ASU drug manufacturing units
and sent their monthly progress for enforcement mechanism of the provisions

42
of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act and Rules thereunder.  In pursuance of the
section 33P of Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940, Central Government has
issued another order dated 13.10.05 directing all the State Ayurveda, Siddha
& Unani (ASU) Drug Licensing Authority to taken action against the
defaulting ASU drug manufacturers for revocation of their licenses under
Rules 157, 158 & 159 of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945 for failure to
comply with the Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) notified under Schedule
‘T’ of the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945.  Department of AYUSH has been
regularly monitoring GMP compliance. The status of compliance of GMP has
improved in recent months due to regular monitoring.”
96. Explaining the importance of adherence to Good Manufacturing Practices by
drug manufacturing units, one of the AYUSH experts during hearing of the Committee
stated as under:—
“GMP should be compulsory for all pharmacies.  Good quality medicine
is not possible without this.  Similarly, after great efforts we succeeded
in convincing the Government to set up a Medicine Plant Board.
However its co-ordination needs to be fine tuned with agricultural
university and forest department.  The medicines provided by the
Medicine Plant Board to the V aidyas were not upto the mark.  We are
not able to cultivate the herbs needed to prepare medicines.  Co-
ordination in this regard is also poor.”
The Expert further added:
“Apart from this as far as GMP is concerned, practically it has been observed
that small-scale industries are mushrooming in the field of Ayurveda now a
days and it has been made compulsory for them to follow these norms but
they do not imbibe these norms in their system.  They have got their own
system and they either by-pass these norms or follow their own system.
Hence, it is my suggestion to make them follow the GMP norms more strictly
as these small-scale industries spread misconception among the people about
this system that is not good.”
XVII. Conservation and Development of Medicinal  Plants for AYUSH Drugs
97. Medicinal plants constituted about 80 per cent of the raw materials required for
manufacture of AYUSH drugs. Most of these plants grow in the wild as natural
components of vegetation of a particular region. With a view to streamlining the
medicinal plants sector and developing an appropriate mechanism for initiating and
implementing the policies for conservation and development of medicinal plants at the
National and State levels, the Ministry had set up a National Medicinal Plant Board
(NMPB) in November 2000 for ensuring coordination of all matters relating to medicinal
plants including drawing up of policies and strategies for conservation, proper
harvesting, marketing of raw material and protecting, sustaining and developing this
sector. At the initiative of the NMPB, State Medicinal Plant Boards (SMPB) were set up
in all the States/UTs (except Delhi and Meghalaya) between 2001 and 2004 to assist the
NMPB in implementation of schemes and policies. With a view to achieving its goals,
NMPB implemented various promotional and contractual farming schemes.

43
98. During the years 2000-01 to 2004-05, 472 promotional schemes and 1389
contractual farming scheme were sanctioned and expenditure of Rs. 59.37 crore
and Rs. 34.02 crore respectively was incurred.  Out of 472 Promotional Scheme
Projects and 1389 contractual farming scheme projects only 6 and 36 projects
respectively were completed.   Further, out of 1077 projects in all, sanctioned under
the promotional and contractual farming schemes during 2001-04 involving financial
assistanceof  Rs. 62.16 crore, only 210 projects were assigned by the State Medicinal
Plant Board to the Indian Institute of Forest Management and Directorate of
Research for monitoring and the remaining 867 projects were neither supervised
nor monitored. The Ministry was, thus, not able to ascertain the status of utilisation
of grants released and achievement of projected increase in production of medicinal
plant material in these cases.
99. A test-check of records revealed that out of 98 projects covering all the activities,
in 51 cases applications were received directly by NMPB, which should have been
routed through respective SMPBs/State Governments with their recommendations as
per guidelines of the scheme. Himachal Pradesh and Orissa did not utilise funds
amounting to Rs. 12.45 lakh sanctioned by the Ministry for infrastructural development,
standardisation of drying and storage, development of herbal gardens, and promotion
of medicinal plants due to delay in granting administrative approval and other reasons.
100. The Ministry stated (September 2005) that since SMPBs had not been formed
in all the States upto 2003, some projects were considered without their recommendation
and that now only the projects recommended by SMPBs were being considered. The
reply is not tenable as in the absence of SMPBs, the project proposals should have
been forwarded through the respective State Governments/ Directorates of AYUSH.
101. When the Committee desired to know about the status of the 1819 incomplete
projects, which were sanctioned during 2000-01 and 2004-05, the Ministry in a written
note stated as under:—
“A total of 472 projects under Promotional Scheme and 1389 projects under
Contractual Farming Scheme were sanctioned between the years 2000-01 to
2004-05 (till the period of report). Out of these, 5 projects under Promotional
scheme and 134 projects under Contractual Farming scheme were cancelled
due to various reasons of non-fulfilment of the terms and conditions of
operational guidelines.  The revised status of the projects sanctioned and
those completed during the period is as under:—
Y ear Promotional Scheme Contractual Farming Scheme
Projects Can- Balance Comp- Projects Can- Balance Comp-
sanctioned celled leted sanctioned celled leted
2000 – 01 5 — 5 — — — — —
2001 – 02 144 1 143 90 — — — —
2002 – 03 101 — 101 48 79 16 63 36
2003 – 04 66 1 65 28 687 60 627 110
2004 – 05 156 3 153 26 623 58 565 30
Total 472 5 467 192 1389 134 1255 176

44
‘‘From the above table it may be seen that 192 projects out of 467 projects under
Promotional scheme have been completed so far.  Similarly, 176 projects out of
1255 projects under Contractual Farming scheme have been completed. Thus, a total
of 368 (21per cent) of the projects have been completed so far. It may also kindly be
noted that out of 1861 projects sanctioned during the period under report, 41per
cent (753 projects) pertained to the year 2003-2004 and 42per cent (779 projects)
to the year 2004-2005. Since the project period is usually three years, only those
projects which were sanctioned during  2003-2004 or earlier could have been completed
by March 2006. The project sanctioned during 2004-2005 would be completed by
March 2007. In the light of this the progress of completion of projects as indicated
above appears to be satisfactory.”
102. When the Committee desired to know whether the Ministry have developed
any monitoring and evaluation mechanism for various plantation schemes in respect
of the utilization of grants released and achievements of the Scheme, the Ministry in a
written reply explained as under:—
“The National Medicinal Plants Board has facilitated setting up of 35 State
Medicinal Plants Boards (SMPBs) in States/UTs. Grants under the schemes
are sanctioned on the basis of recommendations of the SMPBs. The NMPB
has taken the following measures to strengthen monitoring and evaluation:
(i) The State level Boards have been asked to carry out pre-appraisal of the
projects before these are recommended to Government of India and also
carry out monitoring and evaluation.  The NMPB is also providing financial
support to augment the infrastructure of the State Boards for this purpose. In
addition, 5 per cent of the total funds released to a particular State during the
last financial year is provided to SMPBs for the purpose of strengthening
appraisal and monitoring mechanism.  Detailed guidelines have been issued
to State Boards to engage the services of researchers, university staff and
other professionals on short term consultancies for carrying out monitoring
and evaluation in view of the general restriction on creation of new posts,
(ii) The projects are also technically and financially appraised and monitored
by the Banks providing credit to the farmers, (iii) All the projects that are
implemented by NGOs under the Promotional scheme, and those under the
Contractual Farming scheme under which financial assistance/subsidy is
provided to the farmers are necessarily required to be inspected and monitored
by the officials of the SMPB before 2nd/3rd installments are released,
(iv) Officials of NMPB also visit the project sites from time to time to  review
and monitor the progress made and suggest corrective action wherever
required, and (v) An independent evaluation has also been carried out through
two organizations, namely, Indian Council of Forestry Research and Education,
Dehradun and Indian Institute of Forest Management (IIFM), Bhopal. The
report of IIFM, Bhopal has been received and the suggestion made therein
for improvement of the programme will be suitably incorporated during the
11th Plan.”

45
Cultivation of Medicinal Plants and Development of Agro-techniques
103. The Ministry launched (1990-91) an innovative scheme for development and
cultivation of medicinal plants before NMPB was set up in November 2000, which
aimed at enhancing the availability of medicinal raw material and provided grants in aid
for the development of agro-techniques and cultivation of medicinal plants. This scheme
continued to be implemented even after NMPB and SMPB were set up.  Ministry
provided financial assistance of Rs. 73.85 lakh during 2000-01 and 2002-03 to various
institutions/State Governments under 18 projects for setting up demonstration medicinal
plant gardens. The Boards did not, however, monitor the status of medicinal plant
gardens set up under the scheme, such as details of production, survival/mortality of
plants raised and utilisation of funds as of December 2004.
104. Audit examination revealed that 45 medicinal plants were identified for
development of agro-techniques under the component Development of agro-
techniques. Rs. 5.05 crore was released under 33 projects for development of agro
techniques for 133 plants. Audit noticed that out of 45 species identified for agro-
techniques, projects in respect of 25 species only had been undertaken and no patents
were obtained.  The Ministry wound up the scheme for development of agro-techniques
in 2001 rendering the entire expenditure of Rs 5.05 crore unproductive. The Board
stated (December 2004) that the agro-techniques developed were being compiled for
publication for dissemination of the research finding among the masses.
105.  Absence of an authentic database of demand and supply of prioritized medicinal
plants coupled with the failure in monitoring and evaluation of various plantation
schemes by the NMPB prevented the attainment of the objectives of increasing
production of plant based quality raw material and conservation, marketing and export
of AYUSH drugs.
106. When asked to explain the reasons for delay in completion of projects relating
to development of agro-techniques, the Ministry informed the Committee in a written
note as under:—
“Projects were allocated to 33 specialized scientific organizations in
government sector consisting of Agriculture Universities and Research
Laboratories etc. for development of agro-techniques of identified medicinal
plants. Each organization was normally allocated 4 plant species under a
project which was for a period of 3 – 4 years. However, the agro-techniques
could not be finalized early due to the following reasons: (i) The allocated
plants included tree varieties also which had a long gestation period. These
species require longer period of observation to study growth parameters,
seeding and germination patterns and studies relating to harvesting of the
produce.  Some of the tree species like Guggal and Ashok require a much
longer period of study ranging from 10 – 15 years,  (ii) In some cases the
projects got delayed due to poor/infrequent seeding behaviour of certain
species making it difficult to carry out trials of seed germination, nursery
development, planting and harvesting etc., and  (iii) All parameters required
for finalization of agro techniques of a plant could not be worked out in some
cases and technical gaps were observed by the Project Evaluation Committee.

46
Therefore, the reports could not be finalized and published so far. Agro-
techniques of 120 medicinal plants allocated under the projects have been
finalized. Out of these, in the first stage, agro techniques of 50 medicinal
plants are proposed to be published after necessary editorial corrections and
removal of minor technical gaps, if any, within next three months. Since agro-
techniques are in the nature of agronomic practices, these may not be
patentable.”
107. Enumerating the reasons for undertaking only 25 out of 45 species identified
for agro-techniques and no patents for the same, the Ministry explained in a written
note as under:—
“A total of 120 plants were identified and included for development of agro
techniques under the scheme viz “Central Scheme for development of agro
techniques and cultivation of medicinal plants”. In all 33 specialized scientific
organization in government sector consisting of Agricultural Universities
and Research Laboratories etc. were selected for development of agro-
techniques under a project mode. As per status position given under question
no. 64, the agro-techniques are being finalized for publication for bringing in
public domain. Since agro-techniques are in the nature of agronomic practices,
these may not be patentable.”
108. To a query as to why assessment of the demand and supply of prioritized
medicinal plants not made a pre-requisite for the projects before sanctioning and
releasing funds for the cultivation of medicinal plants, the Ministry replied as under:—
“Study was conducted for assessment of demand and supply of medicinal
plants during the year 2000. The study conducted by Centre for Research,
Planning and Action (CERPA) covered 162 species used in trade.  In addition
the Task Force set up by the Planning Commission on Conservation and
sustainable utilization of medicinal plants had identified 100 medicinal plants
for conservation/cultivation. Accordingly, the Medicinal Plants Board had
prioritized 32 species of medicinal plants for development and cultivation.
Therefore, the projects for cultivation through farmers as well as those for
conservation, R&D and value addition primarily focused on prioritized species.
In fact, projects for cultivation were supported only for those species which
were included in the list of prioritized plants and those that had a ready
market. A fresh Demand and Supply study has been initiated through the
Foundation for Revitalization of Local Health Traditions (FRLHT),
Bangalore— a centre of excellence of Ministry of Environment and Forest for
Medicinal Plants, with a view to carrying out a nation wide survey and to
assess medicinal plants in demand in trade and industry.  This will help the
Board to provide sharper focus while approving projects on species important
from the point of view of trade as well as their conservation status.”
XVIII. Development  of  Healthcare Facilities, Integration and Expansion of  Outreach
in Healthcare under AYUSH
Specialised Therapy Centres/Speciality Clinics
109. The Ministry introduced a Centrally Sponsored Scheme in 2002-03 for ‘Promoting
Development of Healthcare Facilities’ in AYUSH in order to make AYUSH systems

47
available to the public at large and also to bridge the gaps between AYUSH and
modern medicine. The scheme provided financial assistance to the States for setting
up specialised therapy centres with hospitalisation facility in AYUSH system, specialiIty
clinics of AYUSH i.e. system specific outdoor treatment centres, an AYUSH wing in
district allopathic hospitals with outdoor as well indoor facility in one or two systems
of AYUSH and purchase of essential drugs for identified AYUSH dispensaries in rural
and backward areas. During the year 2002-03 to 2004-05, Rs. 33.74 crore were released
to cover 8819 units in 24 States under the scheme.  Audit scrutiny further revealed that
out of Rs. 494.94 lakh released by the Ministry during 2002-05 to Andhra Pradesh,
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, Tripura and West Bengal, Rs. 490.38
lakh (99 per cent) remained unutilised as the State Governments did not release the
funds to the implementing agencies.
110. Explaining the problems in implementation of the scheme, the Ministry in a
written note stated as under:—
“It is new a Centrally Sponsored Scheme for mainstreaming AYUSH System
of medicine with modern system.  It has been emphasized on State Govt. to
release the fund to implementing agencies in time and get the schemes
implemented  in letter and spirit.  The scheme is  gaining acceptance in the
States and implementation problems are being sorted out by rigorous
monitoring.”
111. When enquired about  the reasons/constraints due to which the State
Governments of Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur,
Tripura and West Bengal did not release funds to the implementing agencies, the
Ministry in a written note replied as under:—
“Under the federal structure of Government, States have their own
constitutional responsibilities in respect of timely and proper utilization of
Central grants received by them.  There are variety of reasons for delay in
release of funds by the States to the implementing agencies and their proper
utilization, relating to weak AYUSH infrastructure in the States and budgetary
constraints of the States.  This matter has been taken up with the concerned
States through meetings with the State secretaries and letters from the
Secretary and Joint Secretary in Department of AYUSH to the Chief Secretaries
and Health Secretaries in the States, besides through visits by other officers
of the Department of AYUSH to the concerned States.  No further assistance
is being released to the defaulting States until the UCs are received for the
grants released earlier.”
Promotion of AYUSH under The Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)
112. The Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) network had 78 AYUSH (CGHS)
dispensaries functioning at the end of the IX Plan. During the X Plan (2002-07), 21 new
AYUSH dispensaries were planned to be established in the premises of the existing
allopathic dispensaries. Seven new dispensaries were approved in 2003-04 and the
budget provision of Rs. 86 lakh was placed at the disposal of DGHS. As of June 2004,
only 2 dispensaries had been opened. The Ministry sanctioned seven more dispensaries

48
during 2004-05 at a cost of Rs. 1.30 crore but none of the sanctioned dispensaries
could be set-up during 2004-05 due to shortage of doctors and para-medical staff.
113. In view of the declining trend in the attendance of patients in Ayurveda and
Homoeopathy dispensaries from 1994-95 to 2001-02, the Ministry released Rs. 17.10
lakh in three installments to the Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR) between
September 2002 and December 2004 for conducting a survey and submitting a report
within one year from the release of first installment. The survey aimed at assessing the
acceptability/non-acceptability level of AYUSH facilities under CGHS, perception of
CGHS beneficiaries about AYUSH, availability of AYUSH facilities under CGHS in the
country and the level of availability of infrastructure and facilities in the selected
teaching hospitals of A YUSH. The survey report had not been received as of
March 2005, 30 months after the release of the first instalment of the grant, which
delayed implementation of the required policy initiatives based on the survey findings.
114. In this regard, the Ministry in a written note explained their position as under:—
“For the survey on ‘ ISM&H Beneficiaries covered under CGHS and Selected
Teaching Hospitals attached to ISM&H colleges’ assigned to ICMR , the 1st
instalment of Rs 7.6 lakh was released in Sept. 2002 as an advance payment.
Subsequently, the instalments were released on assessment of the progress.
The 2nd instalment of Rs 5.7 lakh was released in Nov. 2003 on completion of
50 per cent of the survey work. Afterwards, on submission of first draft
survey report, 3rd instalment of Rs 3.8 lakh was released in Jan. 2005. Inputs
from this report are being utilized in policy formulation.   Final report is under
printing.”
115. When asked about the number of new AYUSH (CGHS) dispensaries opened
during the X Plan (till 2006) as against the target of 21 set under the Plan, the Ministry
in a written reply stated as under:—
“Seven out of target of 21 AYUSH units, which were proposed to be opened
during the X Five Year Plan has been opened so far.  Post of doctors and para-
medical staff could not be filled due to instructions of DOPT dated 16th May,
2001 for optimization in direct recruitment in civil post and non-implementation
of SIU report.  The Union Cabinet has since exempted the technical post in
the Ministry of Health including Department of AYUSH for the provision of
DOPT order dated 16.5.2001 and action to fill up the post of ISM&H physicians
through UPSC has already been taken and recommendation of the Commission
is expected shortly.  Likewise, with the implementation of SIU report w.e.f.
29th June, 2006 with the approval of Hon’ble HFM, action to fill up the post
of para-medical staff has been initiated by Director CGHS who is the appointing
authority.”
116. To a query whether ICMR had submitted its report on the survey regarding
acceptability of AYUSH facilities under CGHS, the Ministry in a written note stated as
under:—
“Yes, the survey report of ICMR regarding AYUSH facilities under CGHS has

49
been received. The findings of the survey are as follows:
l The ISM&H facilities under CGHS are largely accepted by the beneficiaries
for common ailments like Gastro-intestinal disorders, Arthritis, Skin disease
etc.   The reasons for preference for ISM&H were cheap, effective and no
side-effects of ISM&H medicines.  Still there is very less preference for ISM&H
for serious ailments.
l Most of the teaching hospitals have their own building and have various
facilities like X-Ray, Ultrasound, Pathology and Operation Theatre etc.  About
one-third of the ISM&H dispensaries were housed in rented buildings.  Most
of the CGHS dispensaries were reported to have sufficient medicines.
l Perception of CGHS beneficiaries towards ISM&H was found satisfactory in
the survey.
l Most of the patients preferred to utilize the same system in future and were
reportedly satisfied with the availability of the facilities provided in the
Government as well as non-Government hospitals.  Majority of the patients
reported the treatment as satisfactory in ISM&H dispensaries.  Long time
and too far distances were the reasons for not visiting the ISM&H
dispensaries.
l Suggestions for improvement as reported by beneficiaries were sufficient
supply of medicine, strengthening of manpower in hospitals, proper publicity
about ISM&H facilities.  To increase the acceptability of ISM&H systems of
medicine, it was suggested to situate dispensaries belonging to ISM&H in
the same building in which the allopathic dispensaries are housed.”
Procurement of Ayush Drugs in CGHS
117.  The Committee understand that there is a tender system for procurement of
AYUSH drugs for use in CGHS hospital/dispensaries, while there is no such system
for Allopathic medicines. When asked about the reasons for having a tender system
for purchase of AYUSH medicines in CGHS,  the Ministry in a written note replied as
under:—
“There is no tender system in the procurement of Siddha drugs to the Siddha
Units under CGHS at Delhi and Chennai.  All the classic Siddha drugs are
being purchased either from TAMPCOL, Chennai-106 (Tamil Nadu Medicinal
Plants Corporation Ltd.), a Govt. of  Tamil  Nadu undertaking or from IMPCOPS,
Chennai – 41 (Indian Medicine Practitioners Co-operative Pharmacy and
Stores Ltd.), a co-operative drug manufacturing unit. As far as the supply of
classical Ayurveda and Unani drugs to Central Government Health Scheme
(CGHS) is concerned and other institutions of Health Ministry of Government
of India are purchasing medicines from Indian Medicines Pharmaceutical
Corporation Ltd. (IMPCL), a joint-venture company of Government of India
and Government of Uttaranchal.  Prices of their products are fixed on the
basis of cost of production including the raw material and 30% margin.
Therefore, there is no question of drugs purchased from IMPCL on the basis
of tender.  The existing system of tendering has to be followed at present in

50
accordance with the existing General Financial Rules (GFR) in respect of open
market purchase by States.  However, separate technical and price bids are
invited and it should be possible for the purchase committees to weed out
sub standard suppliers under the technical criterion and not open the price
bids of sub standard suppliers.  These instructions will once again be reiterated
to all concerned States/Central agencies.”
 118. The Committee desired to know about the measures Government propose to
take to supply quality medicines in CGHS dispensaries of AYUSH. In reply, the Ministry
in a written note replied as under:—
“As far as the supply of quality Siddha medicine to CGHS Siddha dispensary,
the Department advised the CGHS to procure Siddha drugs either from
TAMPCOL, Chennai-106 (Tamil Nadu Medicinal Plants Corporation Ltd.), a
Govt. of Tamil Nadu undertaking or from IMPCOPS, Chennai – 41 (Indian
Medicine Practitioners Co-operative Pharmacy and Stores Ltd.), a co-operative
drug manufacturing unit.    As regards Ayurveda/Unani medicines, they are
procured from the Indian Medicines Pharmaceutical Corporation Ltd. (IMPCL),
Mohan, Uttranchal, an AYUSH Department’s PSU.”
119.  As regard the extant system available in the Department of AYUSH for selection/
shortlisting of Homoeopathy medicines dispensed in the Government hospitals/
dispensaries, the Ministry submitted in a written note as under:—
“The Department of AYUSH has prepared a list of essential medicines which
has been circulated to all the State Governments to procure essential drugs.
The Centre is providing Rs. 25,000 p.a. per AYUSH dispensary under the
Centrally Sponsored scheme for procuring essential drugs for Government
AYUSH dispensaries and the medicines are procured under the scheme are
as per their prevailing State purchase procedures.  Suggestions regarding
short listing of companies for procuring quality medicines would be sent to
the State Governments for necessary action.”
XIX. Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Act, 1954
120. The main objective of Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable
Advertisement) Act, 1954  [DMR(OA)] is to control the advertisement of drugs in
certain cases, to prohibit the advertisements for certain purposes of remedies alleged
to possess magic qualities and to provide for matters connected therewith.  Under this
Act “Magic Remedy” includes a talisman, mantra, Kavacha and any other charm or
any kind which is alleged to possess miraculous powers for or in the diagnosis, cure,
mitigation, treatment or prevention of any disease of human beings or animals or for
affecting or influencing in any way the structure or any organic function of the body
of human beings or animals. It has been noticed that several advertisements appear in
print and beamed in electronic media regarding false claims made by quacks for the
cure of various chronic ailments under various disciplines of AYUSH.
121. In pursuance of recommendation of the Parliamentary Standing Committee on
Human Resource Development (118th Report), the Department of AYUSH have informed

51
the State Drug Licensing Authorities and Directors of Indian Systems of Medicine of
the State to take action including setting up a monitoring cell at State level for checking
the misleading advertisements and exaggerated claim of Ayurvedic Siddha/Unani drugs
made by individuals, companies that are objectionable under the Act.  Department of
AYUSH had also issued general guidelines on action proposed to be taken under the
Act on   30.9.1999, whereunder all the licensing authorities were asked to draw the
attention of the provisions of the Act, to the manufacturers of Indian Systems of
Medicine drugs under their jurisdiction as also the leading publishers of  newspapers
for strict compliance.
122. Explaining the measures taken for implementation of the DMR(OA)Act, the
Ministry stated that during the year 2003-2004 Department of AYUSH had engaged
Akhil Bhartiya Grahak Panchayat, Osmanabad an NGO for one year with the objectives:
(i) to provide the services for monitoring National Local News Papers in different
languages for the misleading advertisement with respect to ASU drugs under DMR(OA)
Act 1954, and (ii) to compile the relevant advertisement clipping from identify
newspapers and magazine to facilitate State Drug Licensing Authorities to take action
against the companies/agents issuing misleading advertisements under DMR(OA)
Act in the country.  This agency had collected 23051 misleading advertisements from
different magazines and newspapers and reputed Journals within one year and send
them to the concerned State Drug Licensing Authorities for taking action under
DMR(OA) Act.  Later the Department of AYUSH had reviewed the work of this agency
and the project was closed after due approval of Secretary (AYUSH).
123. It had also been stated that the status of implementation of DMR(OA) Act was
reviewed in the meeting of State Drug Controllers from time to time.  Government have
also issued a letter to all States on 10.11.2005 along with the proforma for seeking
information on the action taken under DMR(OA) Act.  Some States have responded to
the said letter and provided requisite information. Recently a meeting of Ayurvedic,
Siddha, Unani Drug Consultative Committee (ASUDCC) was held on 29.6.2006 during
which the matter was reviewed. It was decided that State Drug Controllers should
initiate action against the defaulters and issue notices as per the Act to check such
practices.  The Department had issued a D.O. letter on 11.7.2006 addressed to Principal
Secretary (Health and Family W elfare) Government of Punjab to take action against the
violator, the Prince Pharma (Regd.) Kailash Cinema Chowk, Ludhiana and to cancel the
license under Rule 159 (1)(2) of the Drugs and Cosmetic Rule 1945.
124. The Ministry have further stated that the Government have proposed that the
matter regarding the misleading advertisements would be taken up with the State Drug
Licensing Authorities of Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy to give priority
to the compliance of Drugs & Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act,
1954.  Further Department of AYUSH would also put advertisement in National Dailies
urging manufacturers, Newspapers, practitioners and regulating agencies to ensure
compliance of the Act.
125. The Committee enquired about the steps taken by the Ministry to stop these
advertisements as well as booking of the quacks under the Drugs and Magic Remedies

52
(Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954. In response, the Ministry replied in a written
note as under:—
“The Ministry has written to Secretary, Information and Broadcasting,
Government of India for getting the Act complied with by the print and
electronic media.  The Ministry has also written to PIB for getting the Act
complied across the country.  Further, all State Governments have been
requested to ensure strict compliance with the Act. Advertisement is also
being issued in national/regional newspapers through the DAVP for drawing
attention of health professionals/drug manufactures/general public and the
print and electronic media regarding the provisions of the Act and cautioning
them against contravention of the same.”
126. When enquired whether Government have written to all newspapers and the
electronic media asking them to prohibit publishing/telecasting of objectionable
advertisements under DMR (OA) Act, the Ministry in a written note replied as under:—
“A Public Notice is being issued through national/regional newspapers for
attracting the attention of general public/health care professionals/drug
manufacturers /print and electronic media to the provisions of the Act and
cautioning them against contravention thereof.  Print and electronic media is also
being cautioned by the Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and PIB.”
127. When asked about the steps the Government have taken or propose to take for
setting up an effective surveillance mechanism to check the advertisements, which
make false claims for cure of different ailments through the Indian Systems of Medicine,
the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:—
“The Ministry has written to Secretary, Information and Broadcasting,
Government of India for getting the Act complied with by the print and
electronic media.  The Ministry has also written to PIB for getting the Act
complied with across the country. Further, all State Governments have been
requested to ensure strict compliance of the Act.  Further, a Public Notice is
being issued.  Further, AYUSH Research Councils have been asked to set up
surveillance units for monitoring such advertisements.”
128. When enquired whether any amendments are required in the Drugs and Magic
Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954 so as to make it more effective,
the Ministry submitted in a written note as under:—
“Government is considering amendment of the Act for following reasons:
(i) to bring treatment within the scope of the Act to prevent luring of patients
through advertisements offering cure or treatment,(ii)Increase penalties to
make the law more deterrent.(iii) to bring electronic media under its scope to
prevent exaggerated advertisements of drugs and, (iv)To delete the Schedule
to the Act containing list of diseases and disorders for bringing it under the
Rules to facilitate its timely revisions.”
XX. Study Visit of The Public Accounts Committee to Shimla and Jaipur  in
connection with Examination of the Subject
129. Keeping in view the topicality and public importance of the subject, the Committee
held informal discussions with the representatives of the State Governments of

53
Himachal Pradesh and Rajasthan and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department
of AYUSH) at Shimla and Jaipur during the months of June and September 2006
respectively as a part of their on-the-spot study visit programmes. During these
discussions the Committee enquired about the corrective/remedial measures taken
by the State Government on the various Audit findings till date. The Committee also
desired to know the reasons for the delay if any, in furnishing Action Taken Notes to
the Audit as well as in rectifying the flaws which have been pointed out in  the Audit
Report.
Visit to Shimla
130. During their study visit to Shimla in June, 2006 the Committee held informal
discussions with representatives of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
(Department of AYUSH), and Secretary (Department of Health) and other senior officials
of the Government of Himachal Pradesh on various aspects relating to Audit Report
viz  enforcement, regulation and adherence to Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP)
standards by the drug manufacturing companies/units, establishment of specialised
therapy centers/speciality clinics and setting up of health resort clinics for tourists in
Himachal Pradesh.
131. The important points/issues that emanated from the informal discussions were
as follows:—
(i) The Government of Himachal Pradesh should streamline the system and
procedure of transfer of funds to implementing agencies so that funds do not
remain  unutilized.  Stricter monitoring of the performance of the field agencies
by the State Government at regular intervals should be ensured.
(ii) The State Government should formulate appropriate guidelines for taking up
research and development of Ayurvedic products by adhering to Good
Manufacturing Practices within  a time bound period.
(iii) The State Government should encourage more research work in different fields of
AYUSH and the research finding should be disseminated to the rest of the country.
The ongoing projects in the State should also be completed at the earliest.
(iv) The State Medicinal Plant Board of Himachal Pradesh should be entrusted
with clear and direct responsibility of monitoring and evaluating various
plantation schemes of  herbal plants.
(v) The Government should encourage farmers to grow more medicinal plants so
as to supplement the natural herbs that are  available in the natural vegetation.
(vi) The outreach and healthcare facilities in AYUSH should be properly maintained
and kept well equipped.  Before undertaking expansion, the existing facilities
should be optimally utilised and at the same time the Government should make
extra efforts to make AYUSH systems of medicine easily available to the rural
population.
(vii) The Government should have a strict vigil on the various claims made by
unscrupulous practitioners about their claims of curing  different ailments

54
through A YUSH systems of medicine.  All such claims should be brought
under the penal provisions of the Drugs Magic Remedies (Objectionable
Advertisement) Act, 1954  at the earliest. State Government should also co-
operate and co-ordinate with the Central Government in overcoming this malady.
Visit to Jaipur
132. During their study visit to Jaipur, the Committee visited National Institute of
Ayurveda and  held informal discussion with the Chief Secretary, and other senior
officials of the Government of Rajasthan and the Director, National Institute of Ayurveda
and representatives of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (Department of AYUSH)
on the functioning of National Institute of Ayurveda.  The Committee also discussed
the issues arising out of enforcement, regulation and adherence to Good Manufacturing
Practices (GMP) standards by drug manufacturing units  and cultivation of medicinal
plants  and development of ago-techniques in the State of Rajasthan.
133. The important points/issues that emanated from the informal discussions were
as follows:—
(i) The good work done by the National Institute of Ayurveda should be
disseminated to all the Ayurvedic Colleges, Institutions, Organizations and
Hospitals and Dispensaries in the country.
(ii) Significant achievements and research results of the Institute in respect of a
medicine should be made known to general public as well as other Ayurvedic
Colleges/Institutes in the country.
(iii) The National Institute of Ayurveda should publish their research work in
international journals so that Ayurveda can get more attraction and publicity in
foreign countries. All related  documents regarding the research findings may
also be send to the Parliament library for information of People’s Representatives.
(iv) Drugs manufactured in the National Institute of Ayurveda should undergo
stringent testing to check whether they contain toxic elements, so as to prove
to the rest of the world that their medicines are not harmful and  are safe.
(v) Drugs for the institute should as far as possible be procured from the Pharmacy
of the institute. For this the institute should make all out effort to increase the
drugs/medicines production capacity of the institute.
(vi) The State Government of Rajasthan should take immediate steps to hand over
the land to National Institute of Ayurveda for developing Medicinal Plants
Garden and extend all support to the institute so that it can compete with
Allopathic Hospitals. Further, Government  should also increase the fund
allocation of the institute.
(vii) Government of Rajasthan should also open Ayurvedic Resorts in the State on
the lines of Kerala.

55
 Observations/Recommendations
134. Inspite of the spectacular advances made by the system of modern/allopathic
medicines, the alternative or traditional systems of medicine currently serve the
health care needs of a large population in the world.  In India, this indigenous medicinal
system comprises of different components namely Ayurveda, Y oga and Naturopathy,
Unani and Siddha systems. These ancient systems of medicine which are a treasure
house of knowledge for both preventive and curative health care are embedded in
Indian culture well before the advent of Allopathic System of medicines and  have
continued to be an integral and significant part of our society. They are officially
recognized, codified and well documented.  However, its growth and development has
not  been as encouraging as it should be. Various problems/constraints affecting the
growth of Indian systems of medicine are : neglect by Government,  individualized and
inhibitive behaviours, lesser adaptability, lack of quality parameters, abuse of system
by unscrupulous practitioners, ad-hoc growth, poor resources and allocation and
neglect of basic research.
135. With a view to have a focussed development of the Indian System of Medicine
and Homoeopathy and to address the health care delivery services through these
systems the  Government of India (GOI) in 1995 established an independent department
of Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H) under the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare. Government have also formulated and approved a National
Policy on ISM&H in 2002 which, inter-alia, reiterated that Ayurveda, Unani,
Homoeopathy, and Yoga offered a wide range of preventive, promotive and curative
treatments and renamed the Department of ISM&H as the Department of Ayurveda,
Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH) in November 2003.
The major objectives of Department of AYUSH were to promote good health and
expand the outreach of health care; to improve the quality of teachers and clinicians;
to ensure affordable AYUSH services & drugs which are safe and efficacious; to
facilitate availability of raw drugs which are authentic and contain essential
components; to integrate AYUSH in health care delivery system and National
Programmes; to re-orient and prioritize research in AYUSH; to create awareness
about the strengths of these systems in India and abroad and sensitize other
stakeholders and providers of health; and to provide full opportunity for the growth
and development of these systems.
136. The performance review conducted by the Audit of the Department  of
Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy during the period
2000-01 to 2004-05 form the basis of this Report. This review has included its
subordinate offices and implementing agencies in 29 States and Union Territories.
The principal objectives of this review was to assess the efficacy of planning for
implementation of various programmes, budgetary allocation and utilisation of funds,
results of the efforts of the Union Government/States to strengthen medical  education,
efficiency and extent of achievement of research activities and dissemination of
research findings for the benefit of educationists, researchers, manufacturers and
common man, extent of achievement of drug standardisation and availability of authentic
AYUSH drugs, regulation, enforcement, adherence to Good Manufacturing Practices
(GMPs) and publication of formulations and pharmacopoeial standards of AYUSH

56
drugs, extent of conservation and sustainable supply of medicinal plants for research
work, development of agro-techniques, contractual farming for developing marketing
mechanism and extent of expansion of the outreach of health care under AYUSH and
integration of AYUSH with modern medicines, Health Care Delivery System and
National Health Programmes.
137. The Committee regret to observe that the Department of AYUSH had achieved
very little success in achieving the objectives of growth and development, propogation
and promotion of AYUSH health care in the country. Policy pronouncements contained
in the National Policy on AYUSH-2002 could not be effectively implemented due to
poor budgetary support, inadequate monitoring, evaluation and lack of coordination
between various implementing agencies and the Ministry. The share of AYUSH in the
total health Plan at the Central level was static at 2 per cent during 2000-05 though
the policy envisaged raising of AYUSH share to 10 per cent with designed growth of
5 per cent in every Five Year Plan. The programme also suffered from absence of an
effective system of transfer of funds to the implementing agencies. Out of  Rs. 30.98
crore released to 12 State Governments under Centrally Sponsored Schemes during
2002-05, Rs.16.94 crore were not released to the implementing agencies with delays
even upto 36 months.  Out of total 444 colleges, 142 colleges whose records Audit test
checked, did not possess adequate infrastructural facilities, faculty, attached hospitals
with requisite bed strength and Out Patient Department/In Patient Department (OPD/
IPD) facilities in accordance with the norms laid down by the Regulatory Councils.
Five Apex level Institutes set up by the Ministry as centres of excellence for imparting
high quality education and research also lacked infrastructural facilities. Ministry
did not ensure that the database of practitioners of AYUSH was updated and revised
promptly and regularly. Delays in updation ranged between 3 and 22 years in 20
States. There was neither correlation between the drugs standardised, drugs proved
and drugs clinically verified nor any systematic approach to standardisation of drugs
as 44 Homoeopathic drugs were taken up for proving and 47 for clinical verification
without having been standardised.  Pharmacopoeia Committees on which expenditure
of Rs. 7.85 crore was incurred between 2000 to 2005 failed to develop pharmacopoeial
standards for formulation of compound drugs in Ayurveda and Unani even after
40 years of their inception as a result of which official pharmacopoeia under the
respective system for evolving uniform standards in preparation of AYUSH drugs
could not be published.  Out of 7849 manufacturing units only 707 had obtained the
mandatory ‘Good Manufacturing Practices’ certificate from Government as of
December 2004. The National Medicinal Plant Board, set up as a nodal agency to
oversee policies for conservation and development of medicinal plants at the National
and State levels did not have an authentic database on demand and supply of medicinal
plants and failed to monitor and evaluate the progress of 1077 projects funded by it at
a cost of Rs. 62.16 crore during 2001-04. Ministry did not ensure evaluation of
progress of demonstrative medicinal plant gardens though financial assistance of
Rs. 73.85 lakh was released to 18 institutions during 2000-03. Inordinate delay in
completion of 33 projects of development of agrotechniques in respect of 133 medicinal
plants and failure to patent and disseminating the research findings resulted in
blockade of funds to the tune of Rs. 5.05 crore.  These issues have been discussed in
detail in the succeeding paragraphs.

57
138. The Committee are surprised to note that the budget allocation for Department
of  AYUSH during 2000-01 to 2004-05 constituted only two per cent of the total health
budget of the Union Government as against 10 per cent envisaged in the National
Policy on  Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H)-2002. As per the
National Policy  the share of   allocation for AYUSH in the total health plan at the
Central level was to be raised to 10 per cent  and was to be increased at the rate of 5 per
cent in every Five Year Plan. However, Government did not allocate the targeted funds
till 2005-06 which meant that there was inadequate support for the achievement of
envisaged objectives. The budgetary allocation to AYUSH was recently enhanced to
Rs. 350 crore in the Annual Budget 2005-06.  Although the allocation for AYUSH had
increased in the recent years  from 2.34 per cent  of the Health budget in 2002 – 03
to 3.38 per cent in 2006-07, nevertheless the  fact remains that it is still way below the
target level of 10 per cent of the total health budget as envisaged in the National
Policy.  The Budget allocation is much less as compared to China which is allocating
significant portion of its health budget on their indigenous systems of  medicine
which has not only led in providing better and adequate health services to their people
but also contributed to huge export of herbal Chinese medicines across the world.
The Committee  emphasise the need for increasing the allocation to the targeted
levels so that the objectives laid down in National Policy on Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homoeopathy could be achieved and the Indian System of
Medicine is able to contribute effectively in expanding the outreach of AYUSH
health care through preventive, promotive, mitigating and curative
interventions and ensuring affordable and efficacious AYUSH services and
drugs and integrating AYUSH in health care delivery system under the National
Health Programme.
139. Whereas substantial funds are required under AYUSH with a view to
achieve the avowed objectives, it is a matter of concern that not only there
was under-utilization of funds by the various States but there was delay also in
release of funds by the State Governments to the implementing agencies. This
is evident from the fact that out of the total outlay of Rs. 50.87 crore that was
released to 12 States during 2000-01 to 2004-05, Rs. 30.98 crore (61 per cent)
was routed through the States and Rs. 19.89 crore (39 per cent) was released
directly to the implementing agencies. Surprisingly, out of these Rs. 50.87
crore, an amount of  Rs.36.52 crore (72 per cent) remained unutilised.  Further,
the State Governments failed to release  Rs. 16.94 crore (55 percent of the
total amount released) in time  to the implementing agencies leading to  delays
ranging  upto 36 months. It was also noticed that out of the total amount of Rs. 62.63
crore that the Ministry had released to all the States during 2002-03 and 2003-04, as
much as Rs. 14.82 crore (24 per cent) were released only in March in the two years,
only to  prevent lapse of  the funds.  The Ministry have explained that substantial
amount remaining unutilised related to the scheme for strengthening Drug Testing
Laboratories and Pharmacies and that the construction of buildings and procurement
of equipment for which funds were provided under the scheme to the States were a
time consuming activity and that the Government was pursuing the matter with the
State Governments. It was further stated that monitoring and evaluation of projects
sanctioned under various Centrally Sponsored Schemes was being done by Secretary

58
(AYUSH).  The Committee conclude that the Ministry not only failed to provide the
envisaged or targeted funds for the schemes under AYUSH till 2005-06 but could
also not ensure complete utilization of funds released. State Governments, in turn,
delayed release of funds to implementing agencies and also released substantial
funds only in March which would appear to have been a ploy to prevent lapse of
funds. Achievement of objectives of the scheme that depended on prompt and complete
disbursement of allocated funds thus became, ab initio, doubtful and difficult.
140. The Ministry have clarified that they have initiated some steps to check
underutilization of the funds as well as to ensure that there is no delay in the release
of funds by the State Governments to the implementing agencies. Further, Department
of AYUSH are also stated to have taken concurrence of Planning Commission and
Ministry of Finance for release of Centrally Sponsored Schemes funds  of the
Department to States through the State Health Societies for onward release to the
implementing agencies.  The Committee hope that Department of AYUSH would
completely streamline the system and procedures of transfer of funds to States and
further allotment by States to implementing agencies by identifying the specific
bottlenecks and monitoring the internal procedures closely.  A computer based tracking
system may be installed for querying the data so that utilization of released grants
improves significantly. They may also insist on refund of unutilized balances retained
by State Governments for over a year which would help avoid blocking of resources
when competing sectors face funds crunch.  At their end the Ministry should also
desist from releasing of funds at the fag end of the Financial Y ear and take measures
for timely release of funds to the States.
141. With a view to strengthen and regulate medical education the Ministry had
set-up two Regulatory Councils namely, the Central Council of Indian Medicine
(CCIM) and the Central Council of Homoeopathy (CCH) as autonomous bodies under
the Indian Medicine Central Council (IMCC) Act, 1970 and the Homoeopathy Central
Council (HCC) Act, 1973, for advising the Government in matters relating to
recognition and withdrawal of medical qualification, prescribing minimum standards
of infrastructure and manpower to be maintained by medical institutions, undertaking
regular inspection to ensure adherence to the standards and maintaining Central
Registers of Practitioners and update them from time to time. As per amendments
brought about in 2002-2003 to the Indian Medicine Central Council (IMCC) Act,
1970 and the Homoeopathy Central Council (HCC) Act, 1973, prior permission of the
Ministry had to be obtained for opening new colleges, starting new courses and
increasing intake of students.  However, the Committee are constrained to note from
the records of Central Council of Indian Medicine and Central Council of Homoeopathy
that as of March 2005, medical qualification awarded by 69 out of 444 colleges was
yet to be recognised. Further, the Councils allowed these colleges to run various
courses from time to time without recognition.  Though the courses of the concerned
universities were not recognised, 6830 students had already passed out from various
colleges of Ayurveda and Unani systems during 1997-2005. The Ministry had also
granted permission to two Homoeopathy colleges in Chhattisgarh and Orissa for
continuance of courses in new sessions during 2003-04 and 2004-05 respectively
against the specific advice of the Regulatory Council, though these colleges lacked

59
adequate infrastructural facilities.
The Committee cannot but deprecate the casual manner in which the Regulatory
Councils permitted as many as 69 colleges to run courses without recognition, and
due to which careers of 6830 students who have already passed out from these
unrecognised colleges were put into jeopardy. The Committee recommend that the
Government should set up a High Level Committee to investigate into the reasons and
circumstances under which these colleges were allowed to run courses without
recognition by the Regulatory Councils. The Government ought to devise ways and
means to ensure that the careers of those students who have passed out from the
unrecognized colleges are protected and they are allowed to conduct their own practice/
take up jobs. The Committee while expecting that a harmonious relationship between
the Government and the Regulatory Councils would be developed, recommend that
permission to open new colleges, starting Post Graduate Courses and increasing
admission capacity are accorded only after it is ensured that the minimum standards
of infrastructure prescribed by the Regulatory Councils are achieved.
142. Test-check  of records  of 142 colleges including 35 new colleges, which
were inspected by the representatives of Regulatory Councils during 2000-2005,
revealed that none of these colleges met the minimum requirement of infrastructural
and teaching facility standards prescribed by the Councils.  The deficiencies noticed
were non-availability of enough class rooms, operation of Ayurvedic colleges without
laboratory and pharmacy facilities, non-availability of own college building, inadequate
books or staff in Library.  The test-check of records of educational institutes in
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Maharasthra,
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal revealed shortage of teaching staff ranging
between 19 and 72 per cent of paramedical and other staff ranging between 13 and
78 per cent while bed occupancy ranged between 1 and 71 per cent.
The Committee note that Central Council of Indian Medicine and Central Council
of Homoeopathy (CCIM and CCH) granted permission or recognition to new as well
as existing colleges for admission of a specified number of students on session-to-
session basis on the recommendations of a Committee of experts nominated by the
Councils for inspection of each colleges.  The Committee are, however, concerned to
note that 32  to 59 per cent of the Ayurvedic colleges and 23  to 71 per cent of the
Homoeopathy colleges were inspected every year by Regulatory Councils during
2000-2005.  61 to 62 percent colleges of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy were inspected
only once or twice in the last five years. What is the surprising is the fact that no
systematic or rational system for inspecting the colleges had been devised or followed
and visits were generally carried out randomly.
 The Ministry have acknowledged various infrastructural inadequacies in the
colleges and the deficiencies in the inspections made by the Regulatory Bodies.
Although the Ministry have ensured that they would take necessary steps in this
regard, the Committee feel that they should have noticed these deficiencies  earlier
and corrective remedial measures  taken timely.  That this was not done is regrettable.
The Committee would, therefore, like the Ministry to ensure that adequate and
identifiable measures are taken in a time bound manner  to bring in parity in medical
education across the country and strengthen the infrastructure  in the apex level

60
institutes so as to enable them to function as centres of excellence.
143.  Another area of concern is the fact that the teams of experts constituted by
the Councils for inspection of colleges included members of the Executive Committee
of these Councils. As these members also took part in the Executive Committee’s
meetings in which inspection reports were considered, there could be a conflict of
interest diluting the regulatory mechanism.  The Ministry  have informed the
Committee that a panel of experts prepared by them for inspection for Ayurveda,
Unani and Siddha and Homoeopathy colleges and forwarded to the respective Councils
were largely disregarded by the Councils.  Central Government have no powers
under the Central Council of Indian Medicine/Central Council of Homoeopathy Acts
to enforce directions given to them.  As Central Government has no powers under the
Acts to enforce its directions the Central Council of Indian Medicine and Central
Council of Homoeopathy (Amendment) Bills, 2005 have been introduced in the
Parliament to address this anomaly.  The Committee express their serious concern
over the utter disregard shown by the Regulatory Councils to the advice/direction
given by the Ministry in the matter of selection and composition of expert panels for
inspections of AYUSH colleges, which is nothing but inexplicable.  This only reinforces
the belief that the Regulatory Councils want to promote the interest of some of the
errant colleges by showing favours in recognition of colleges.  The Committee expect
that the Ministry would take advocacy and other  procedural  measures for expeditious
passing of the Bills for amending the Central Council of Indian Medicine and Central
Council of  Homoeopathy Acts by the Parliament so as to put an end to this despicable
practice.
144. The Committee note that the preparation and maintenance of a database of
practitioners of AYUSH was one of the important functions of the Regulatory Bodies.
A Central Register containing the names of persons enrolled on any State Register
of Indian medicine or Homoeopathy and who possessed any of the recognized medical
qualifications included in the respective schedules of the Acts was to be maintained
and notified in the Gazette of India. A practitioner who did not possess a recognized
medical qualification and had been practicing Indian  Medicine or Homoeopathy before
the commencement of Central Acts was also eligible for enrolment on the State
Register of Indian Medicine or Homoeopathy.  Against 6.95 lakh AYUSH practitioners
(4.93 lakh qualified and 2.02 lakh non-qualified) registered with the States, as of
December, 2002, database of only 1.86 lakh practitioners had been maintained by the
Councils. Out of 29 States and 7 Union Territories (UTs), the database had not been
updated and revised for periods ranging between 3 and 22 years in respect of these 20
States.  The delay in notification of the Central Register deprived the practitioners of
the opportunity to practice in other States or throughout the country. The Committee,
while expressing their concern over the inordinate delay in updation of Central
Register by Central Council of Indian Medicine desire that the Ministry should
immediately update the database and lay down a periodicity to  take up the matter with
the respective State Governments at the appropriate level for timely submission of the
list of practitioners so that the Central Register of practitioners are kept updated by
Central Council of Indian Medicine.

61
145.  The Committee note that the total number of AYUSH medical colleges under
Ayurveda, Unani and Homoeopathy systems has increased by 19 per cent, from 374 at
the end of March 2001 to 444 at the end of March 2005. While Bihar, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Uttar Pradesh accounted for 62 per cent of the
total AYUSH medical education institutions, no college had been set up in Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland and Sikkim. The Committee have been informed by
the Ministry that there are 2 Homoeopathy and one Ayurveda colleges in Assam and
one Homoeopathic College in Arunachal Pradesh.  The Government have  proposed to
set up a North-Eastern Institute of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy and the Government of
Arunachal Pradesh and North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute of Health
and Medical Sciences (NEIGRIMS), Shillong have  identified land for development of
this institution. It has further been stated that the Central Government may set up an
Ayurveda College in Arunachal Pradesh and a Homoeopathy college in NEIGRIMS
Shillong. The Committee expect that Department of AYUSH would take necessary
steps so that the proposed AYUSH colleges are setup expeditiously in the North
Eastern Regions. The Committee also recommend that  Government should give
special focus to the North Eastern Regions considering its richness in flora and
fauna and availability of medicinal/herbal plants in abundance.  Emphasis should be
laid for commercial exploitation of medicinal plants and identification of tribal medical
practices and setting up of AYUSH dispensaries in this region.
  146.  The Committee note that a State-of-the-Art All India Institute of Ayurveda is
proposed to be set  up at New Delhi.  For this, an Expenditure Finance Commission
Memo was prepared in the light of the observations made by the Planning Commission
as well as Investment for Development (IFD).  The estimated project cost was
Rs. 325.00 crore. In September, 2004, the Delhi Development Authority allotted
approximately 6.00 acres of land near Apollo Hospital at Sarita Vihar, New Delhi.  at
a cost of Rs. 13.62 crore.  The proposal for setting up of such an Institute was stated
to have been considered by the Expenditure Finance Commission in October, 2005
and recommended the proposal ‘in-principle’  subject to certain observations.  The
Committee are informed that in pursuance of the observations of the Expenditure
Finance Commission a detailed project report is being reformulated. The Committee
regret to observe that the proposal is yet to be approved by Expenditure Finance
Commission even though  two years have elapsed since land was allotted to the institute
by the Delhi Development Authority. This clearly indicate that the Ministry have not
accorded the urgency that this project deserved. At the tardy pace with which the
Ministry is proceeding, it would take years for the completion of the prestigious
institute. The Committee strongly urge the Ministry to take urgent steps for getting
the project approved/cleared by the concerned agencies so that the project is completed
expeditiously within a time bound period. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the progress made by the Ministry so far in this regard and the precise date by which
the project would be completed and made functional.
147.  With a view to mainstream AYUSH System of Medicine with modern/allopathic
medicine, the Ministry have introduced a Centrally Sponsored Scheme in 2002-03
for ‘Promoting Development of Health Care Facilities’ in AYUSH. The scheme
provided financial assistance to the States for setting up specialised therapy centres

62
with hospitalisation facility in AYUSH system, speciality clinics of AYUSH i.e. system
specific outdoor treatment centres, an AYUSH wing in district allopathic hospitals
with outdoor as well indoor facility in one or two systems of AYUSH and purchase of
essential drugs for identified AYUSH dispensaries in rural and backward areas.
During the year 2002-03 to 2004-05, Rs. 33.74 crore were released to cover
8819 units in 24 states under the scheme.  Audit scrutiny has revealed that out of
Rs. 494.94 lakh released by the Ministry during 2002-05 to Andhra Pradesh,
Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, Tripura and West Bengal,
Rs. 490.38 lakh (99 per cent) remained unutilised as the State Governments did not
release the funds to the implementing agencies. The Committee are constrained to
note that the scheme was a total failure, as virtually no funds were released by the
States to the implementing agencies even after a lapse more than 3 years since the
scheme has been introduced, which is anything but inexplicable.  The Committee
would like the Ministry to find out the reasons for non implementation of the scheme
by the States, sort out the same by having periodical meetings with the concerned
States at an appropriate level and report progress to the Committee.
 148. The Committee note that Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) had a
network of 78 AYUSH (CGHS) dispensaries functioning at the end of the IX Plan.
During the X Plan (2002-07), 21 new AYUSH dispensaries were planned to be
established in the premises of the existing allopathic dispensaries. Seven new
dispensaries were approved in 2003-04 and the budget provision of Rs. 86 lakh was
placed at the disposal of Director General of Health Services (DGHS).  However, as of
June 2004, only 2 dispensaries had been opened. During 2004-05 seven more
dispensaries were sanctioned at a cost of  Rs. 1.30 crore but none of these dispensaries
could be set-up during 2004-05 due to shortage of doctors and paramedical staff. In
view of the declining trend in the attendance of patients in Ayurveda and Homoeopathy
dispensaries, the Ministry asked the Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR) to
conduct a survey to assess the acceptability/non-acceptability level of AYUSH facilities
under Central Government Health Scheme, perception of Central Government Health
Scheme beneficiaries about AYUSH, availability of AYUSH facilities under Central
Government Health Scheme in the country and the level of availability of infrastructure
and facilities in the selected teaching hospitals of AYUSH. The Report of the Indian
Council for Medical Research has since been submitted to the Ministry.  The
Committee hope that Government would take necessary corrective steps in the light
of findings of the survey Report of Indian Council for Medical Research by streamlining
and strengthening the function of AYUSH dispensaries of Central Government Health
Scheme.  With a view to increase the acceptability of AYUSH among the masses
Government should launch special campaigns to educate and increase the awareness
of the people regarding the beneficial aspects of the Indian Systems of Medicine.  The
Committee would like to be apprised of the main findings of the ICMR and the action
taken by Government thereon.
149.  Availability and supply of drugs in all AYUSH hospitals/dispensaries as well
as in the open market is a pre-requisite for expanding the out-reach of AYUSH system
in the country.  To ensure availability of quality drugs at an affordable prices to the
people, there ought to be assured supply for which it is also essential to have enough

63
availability of authentic raw-material for production of quality drugs by AYUSH drug
units in the country. This, in turn, would require cultivation of medicinal plants on a
commercial scale and also setting up  captive nurseries  to ensure assured supply of
raw-material in large quantity to the drug manufacturers. It is understood that
medicinal plants constitute about  80 per cent of raw materials required for
manufacture of AYUSH drugs. The Committee understand that presently there is
shortage of quality  raw-material in the form of medicinal plants which is affecting
the growth of AYUSH industry as well as availability of quality medicines in the
country. Government should  therefore, take steps for cultivation of medicinal plants
on a commercial scale in different parts of the country for availability of abundant
quantity raw-material. The Committee note that production of some precious and
rare ingredients such as ‘Kasturi’ are banned in India. However, their availability and
production is very important in production of certain critical drugs. In this regard
the Committee are given to understand that China has successfully been producing
and exporting Kasturi by extracting the same from the animals without torturing or
killing them. The Committee recommend that Government should devise similar
ways and means to extract Kasturi, Shing etc. from the animals. The methods being
adopted by China in this regard may be  arranged to be studied  by experts so as to
replicate the same in the country.  Government should also explore the possibility of
import of rare precious material such as ‘Praval’ and ‘Munga’ when these are
considered to be very essential in the manufacture of certain critical drugs.
150. Most of the medicinal plants grow in the wild as natural components of
vegetation of a particular region. With a view to streamlining the medicinal plants
sector and developing an appropriate mechanism for initiating and implementing the
policies for conservation and development of medicinal plants at the National and
State levels, a National Medicinal Plant Board (NMPB) was set up by the Ministry in
November 2000 for ensuring coordination of all matters relating to medicinal plants
including drawing up of policies and strategies for conservation, proper harvesting,
marketing of raw material and protecting, sustaining and developing this sector. At
the initiative of the National Medicinal Plant Board, State Medicinal Plant Boards
(SMPB) were set up in all the States/UTs (except Delhi and Meghalaya) between 2001
and 2004.  During the period from 2000-01 to 2004-05, 472 promotional schemes
and 1389 contractual farming schemes were sanctioned by the Board and an
expenditure of Rs. 59.37 crore and Rs. 34.02 crore respectively was incurred and
only 368 (21 per cent) of the projects have been completed so far. The Ministry have
explained in this regard by saying that out of 1861 projects sanctioned during the
period under report,  41 per cent (753 projects) pertained to the year 2003-2004 and
42 per cent (779 projects) to the year 2004-2005. Since the project period is usually
three years, only those projects which were sanctioned during 2003-2004 or earlier
could have been completed by March 2006. The project sanctioned during 2004-2005
would be completed by March 2007.
It is evident from the above that there is avoidable delay in completion of the
Projects as only 21 per cent of them could be completed whereas according to the
Ministry themselves 58 per cent of the projects should have been completed by
March, 2006.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should set up

64
an institutional mechanism in the Department of AYUSH so as to  periodically monitor
the progress made by the National Medicinal Plant Board and State Medicinal Plant
Boards in respect of the projects that were sanctioned and are still pending under the
scheme.  The Ministry should also ensure that the State Governments/ State Medicinal
Plant Boards submit the utilization certificates on time with respect to the funds
sanctioned and spent on the various projects under the scheme. The Committee, are
of the opinion that Ministry should also prepare an action plan in consultation with
State Governments and voluntary organisations/ Non Government Organisations for
exploitation of the rich store house of aromatic and medicinal plants in different
vegetation zones of  the country so that gainful employment can be provided to the
people living in the rural and interior areas of the country by encouraging them to
grow these plants which can provide in abundance the raw material for the
manufacturing of AYUSH drugs.
151.  In order to restore public faith in the efficacy of AYUSH system, it is imperative
that quality and safe AYUSH drugs are produced and made available in the market. A
Centrally Sponsored Scheme namely—‘Quality control of AYUSH drugs’ was launched
by Ministry in 2000-01  for ensuring availability of quality AYUSH drugs in conformity
with the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and eliminating the possibility of production
and marketing of sub-standard drugs.  Grants of Rs.51.13 crore were released to
93 units in 23 States/UTs during 2000-05.  Audit examination revealed that the
scheme envisaged projects for strengthening 21 Drug Testing Laboratories (DTLs)
and 40 pharmacies within 18 months of the release of the financial assistance. However,
none of the Drug Testing Laboratories and pharmacies had been able to utilise the
entire grant-in-aid and make the facilities functional even after 5 years of
implementation of the Scheme. This resulted in blocking of ‘Plan’ funds amounting
to Rs. 25.31 crore. The State Governments either delayed release or did not release
funds, which contributed to the slow progress of capital work and delays in completion
of procedural formalities. The Committee have  been informed by the Ministry that
the construction work, procurement of machinery required a lot of codal formalities
and  on an average it  takes 2-3 years to complete the utilization.  Out of 21 Drug
Testing Laboratories funded under the Scheme, 14 labs are  stated to be functional
and carrying out testing of Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani drugs and during the year
2005-06, 4 more laboratories have been supported.  As regards pharmacies, Ministry
have indicated that out of 40 pharmacies that were supported under the scheme,
36 pharmacies are functional and producing drugs. It has been contended that
Pharmacopoeial standards of 474 drugs have been published for Ayurveda and Unani
drugs.   Another  250 single drugs of Ayurveda, Siddha and Unani have been finalized.
The Committee recommend that Government should make all out efforts for setting
up Drug Testing Laboratories in the remaining States where they have not been setup
and also to ensure that they become functional within a year.
152. The Committee have noticed that quite often the price of a drug product is
cheaper as compared to the ingredients that go into its manufacturing. This gives
rise to the suspicion about the quality and quality of ingredients used in the composition
of the medicine. In this regard, the Ministry have explained that Department of AYUSH
have been supporting establishment and functioning of Drug Testing Laboratories in

65
the States, and the Pharmacopoeial Laboratory of Indian Medicine (PLIM), Ghaziabad
have been asked to test 50 samples every month.   Good Manufacturing Practices
have been notified  and labelling provision  has been made mandatory. Further the
Department have written to all States to get Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani drugs tested
from National Accreditation Board for Testing and Calibration Laboratory   (NABL)
accredited labs for which Rs. 500 per sample will be reimbursed. The Committee note
that notwithstanding these measures several sub-standard drugs are still available
in the market without any Good Manufacturing Practices certification. The Committee
feel that Ministry should not just remain content with issue of instructions but
should put in place  an effective enforcement  mechanism in co-operation and co-
ordination with respective State Governments so that drugs sold in the market maintain
the stipulated quality standards.  Further, Government should also conduct frequent
surprise checks at the chemist shops and get the samples tested to ensure that the
drugs sold in the market conforms to the quality standard.
153. In June 2000 the Department of AYUSH had issued a notification directing
the drug manufacturers to mandatorily adhere to Good Manufacturing Practices
(GMP) standards as laid down in the Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. The time
limit for adherence was extended up to June 2003 with a view to enabling the drug
manufacturers to improve their infrastructure, comply with statutory requirements
and obtain Good Manufacturing Practices certificates from the concerned State Drug
Control authorities. The Committee regret to note that out of 7849 manufacturing
units, only 707 pharmacies possessed Good Manufacturing Practices certification.
Nineteen State Governments/UTs namely Gujarat, Rajasthan, Karnataka, Pondicherry,
Daman & Diu, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Uttaranchal, Haryana , Delhi, Chandigarh,
Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, West Bengal, Orissa, Punjab, Madhya
Pradesh and Tamil Nadu did not cancel the licences of non- Good Manufacturing
Practices manufactures for not adhering to Good Manufacturing Practices norms.
Further, thirteen State governments did not carry out annual inspection of AYUSH
manufacturing units and regular testing of drug samples for ensuring quality control
under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 due to shortage of manpower and non
availability of specified standards for testing AYUSH drugs. Thus, funds amounting
to Rs. 51.13 crore earmarked by the Ministry for quality control during 2000-05
proved largely unfruitful as funds were blocked in incomplete projects or the State
Governments released funds in unplanned and injudicious manner.   The Ministry
have informed the Committee that in October, 2005, Department of AYUSH had issued
orders to the State Secretaries under Section 33 (P) of Drugs & Cosmetics Act to cancel
the manufacturing licenses of non- Good Manufacturing Practices complying units.
The Committee note that despite the various measures taken by the Ministry for
making Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani drug manufacturing units Good Manufacturing
Practices compliant, still around 1569 units are yet to get Good Manufacturing
Practices certification as of September, 2006. The Committee recommend that
Ministry should take all possible steps including the feasibility of increasing the
level of subsidy to the Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani drug units so that they are motivated to
upgrade their manufacturing facilities and become Good Manufacturing Practices
(GMP) compliant. They further recommend that the Department of AYUSH should fix

66
a time-table within which all the drug units become Good Manufacturing Practices
compliant failing which their drug licenses should be cancelled. The Committee also
recommend that Drug and Cosmetics Act, 1940 should be suitably amended with a
view to take stringent penal measures against drug companies which fail to adhere
Good Manufacturing Practices standards.
154. Drug standardisation is a pre-requisite for manufacture of quality drugs. It
involves evolution of standards for  single and compound drugs (for both Ayurvedic and
Unani medicines) and mother tinctures (for homoeopathic medicines) in order to establish
various qualitative characteristics of drugs.  The Committee note that  only 76, 68 and 16
per cent of single and compound drugs standardised under Ayurveda, Unani and
Homoeopathy systems respectively had been documented in the form of monographs as of
March 2005. The progress in this regard after 1999 was insignificant as 11 monographs
of homoeopathic drugs had been published only in 2004-05. The Committee further note
that the standards for single drugs developed by Central Council for Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha were not found suitable by the Ministry for inclusion in the Ayurvedic
Pharmacopoeia of India due to large variations in the data and absence of Standard
Operating Procedures. The standards published by the Research Councils on the basis of
research conducted from time to time did not also conform to the quality and standards
prescribed by Government’s Pharmacopoeia Committees.  Evidently the Ministry did not
effectively guide, monitor and coordinate the work of its Research Councils, which
continued with their work regardless of its acceptance by Pharmacopoeia Committees.
The Committee recommend that the Department of AYUSH should take necessary steps
in close consultation and coordination with the Research Councils for expeditious
completion of drug standardization and documentation of various single and compound
drugs so that quality drugs can be manufactured.
155.  The Clinical research facilitates assessment of therapeutic utility of a drug
in specific disease conditions and was expected to aid in establishing economically
cheap and effective remedies for common as well as chronic ailments. The Research
Councils undertook clinical studies in Tribal Health Care, Family Welfare and
Reproductive and Child Health Programmes.  However, Audit Review pointed out that
there was a large gap between the number of clinical trials completed and documented
as well as the dissemination of the research findings for the benefit of various
stakeholders such as educationists, researchers, physicians, manufacturers and the
common man.  The Committee have been informed  by the Ministry that Central
Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha has developed Ayush-64 an anti-malarial
formulation  which is highly beneficial in the management of Plasmodium-Vivax
malaria. As regards Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine the Ministry
have stated that the effectiveness of Unani medicine have been proved during dengue,
dropsy and plague epidemics.   In so far as Central Council for Research in
Homoeopathy is concerned, it has been stated that Filaria, Malaria and Japanese
Encephalitis cases have been successfully managed with Homoeopathic drugs.
Though considerable work has been done by  the Research Councils in clinical
Research, the Committee however, note that the research work has largely been
confined to communicable and non-communicable diseases such as Malaria, Filaria,
Cholera, etc. and no worthwhile clinical research has been conducted in respect of

67
life style related diseases and other diseases like diabetes, AIDS, Cancer, Tuberculosis
etc.  To enable the Research Councils  to conduct research in these diseases and
other newly emerging diseases the Committee recommend that necessary
infrastructural and financial support should  be extended by Government to the
Research Councils.  Ministry should also involve reputed private drug companies for
collaborative research in invention of drugs for various diseases.   The Government
may also track the research activities conducted by various research institutes in the
world in Complementary  System of Medicine so as to coordinate and collaborate with
each other for the mutual benefit.  The Committee also recommend that Ministry
should draw appropriate guidelines for taking up research activities under fixed
parameters in a time bound manner and ensure that research findings relating to all
components of each scheme are finalized, patented and disseminated among the
stakeholders.  The ongoing research should be completed early and findings
disseminated to stakeholders such as educationist, researchers, manufacturers and
Government Institutions through internet and research journals.
156.  The number of medicines patented is an indicator of the overall achievement
of Research Councils in clinical research. Audit examination revealed that  position
of Ayurvedic and Unani medicines patented by the councils was not encouraging as
patents for only three drugs had been obtained and five were under process.  The
Committee have been informed by the Ministry that  the number of patents obtained by
Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha is  19 and  patents filed/
processing for filing is 12.  The  patents /processes released to the Industry
(commercialized) is 6.  As regards Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine
it has been stated that the Council  has published monographs on 12 drugs, filed
patents for 8 and 17 drugs (a kit of common remedies for Out Patient Department
use) have been commercialized through National Research and Development Centre
(NRDC).  12 drugs are in the pipeline for filing patents.  In so far as  Central Council
for Research in Homoeopathy, the Ministry have stated that  in India, there are no
homoeopathic patent medicines as before a homoeopathic medicine is made available
for use it has to undergo many stages of evolution. The confidentiality of data gets
breached after proving. As such no patents are allowed.   The Committee hope that
Ministry would extend all possible support-financial, infrastructure and logistics so
that research work  for patenting of drugs is carried out without any impediments.
The Committee expect that the Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha
and Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine would take all possible steps for
patenting the drugs for which applications have already been filed, at the earliest.
157. Recently some of the Ayurvedic medicines manufactured in the country have
been termed as unsafe particularly by some International Research Institutes/media
etc. for having allegedly containing toxic substances like lead, arsenic etc. and also
human organs/parts. This has naturally created suspicion and doubts in the minds of
public about the efficacy, authenticity and safety of the AYUSH drugs in general and
Ayurvedic drugs in particular. In this regard the Committee heard the views of  experts
in the field of AYUSH as well as reputed AYUSH drug manufacturing companies,
besides the representatives of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The Committee
were informed that the Ayurvedic medicines are manufactured in the country

68
conforming to the formulae prescribed in the ancient texts/treatise etc. and are safe
and does not have any side effects. The Committee are of the opinion that whenever
such allegations are made either in our country or by any foreign country /International
Agency, Government should promptly investigate into these allegations and ensure
that the drugs produced do not contain toxic/heavy materials etc. If the allegations are
found true the licenses of these Drug units/firms manufacturing drugs and the
drugs in question should be immediately  withdrawn.  If after the research the drugs
are found safe, appropriate publicity rebutting the false allegations should be launched
in National and International media informing the general public about the
genuineness as well as safety of these medicines.
The Committee note that at present a bilingual Journal entitled “Journal of
Research in Ayurveda and Siddha” is being brought out by the Central Council for
Research in Ayurveda and Siddha and  the Central Council for Research in Unani
Medicine (CCRUM) have launched Hippocratic Journal of Unani Medicine on quarterly
basis and also publishes a quarterly Research Journal in Urdu titled
“Jehan-e-Tibb”.  The Committee feel that these Journals have very limited circulation
and are mostly confined to research institutions and academia. The outside world and
the general public do not come to know about these Journals. The Committee, are
therefore, of the opinion that Department of AYUSH should bring out a comprehensive
Journal inter alia covering all the disciplines of AYUSH which can act as an effective
medium for publicity campaign and to spread the news and views relating to research
and development done in AYUSH as well as popularising the AYUSH systems of
medicine among the general public. The Journal should be made available in all the
libraries, colleges, academic institutions etc. The Journal should provide a platform
for debate/discussion on all issues relating to AYUSH by the practitioners/experts/
pharmaceutical companies and also to counter the false claims/allegations made by
certain foreign countries on the quality and authenticity of drugs manufactured by
the Indian Drug Companies. Government should also take appropriate measures for
dissemination of information regarding efficacy of the AYUSH drugs manufactured
in the country through internet. For this  an exclusive web site should be created.
158. With a view to control the advertisement of drugs in certain cases and to
prohibit the advertisements for certain purposes of remedies alleged to possess magic
qualities and to provide for matters connected therewith, the Drugs and Magic
Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Act was enacted in 1954.  Under this Act the
definition “Magic Remedy” includes a talisman, mantra, Kavacha and any other
charm or any kind which is alleged to possess miraculous powers for or in the
diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of any disease of human beings
or animals or for affecting or influencing in any way the structure or any organic
function of the body of human beings or animals.  Several advertisements relating to
AYUSH Drugs often appear in print media and are also beamed in electronic media
making claims for the cure of various chronic aliments such as epilepsy, migraine,
etc. and rejuvenation of sex powers. Explaining the measures taken for implementation
of the Act, and rules frame thereunder, the Ministry have stated that  State Drug
Licensing Authorities and Directors of Indian Systems of Medicine of the State were
directed to take action including setting up a monitoring cell at State level for checking

69
the misleading advertisements and exaggerated claim of Ayurvedic Siddha/Unani
drugs made by individuals companies that are objectionable under the Act.  Department
of AYUSH are also stated to have issued general guidelines on action proposed to be
taken under the Act on   30.9.1999, whereunder all the licensing authorities were
required to draw the attention of the provisions of the Act, to the manufacturers of
Indian Systems of Medicine drugs under their jurisdiction as also the leading
publishers of news papers for strict compliance.  It has also been stated that Ministry
have also written to the Secretary, Ministry of Information and Broadcasting and
Press Information Bureau for compliance of the Act by the print and electronic
media. AYSUH Research Councils have also been asked to set up surveillance units
for monitoring such advertisements. Obviously, such measures  have proved ineffective
so far. It is a matter of concern that several misleading advertisement regarding
AYSUH Drugs continue to appear in print media.  The Committee regret to point out
that the Ministry have remained content with issue of directives and did not monitor
the continued publicity campaigns of the delinquent parties with a view to take
deterrent action against them.
The Government  now  propose to amend  the  Drugs and Magic Remedies
(Objectionable Advertisement) Act, 1954 with a view—(i) to bring treatment within
the scope of the Act to prevent luring of patients through advertisements offering
cure or treatment  (ii) to increase penalties so as to make the law more deterrent (iii)
to bring electronic media under its scope to prevent exaggerated advertisements of
drugs and (iv) to delete the Schedule to the Act containing list of diseases and disorders
for bringing it under the Rules to facilitate its timely revision.  The Committee
however, would expect that the Government would show urgency in bringing forward
the legislation for amending the Act, so that the gullible public are not taken for a
ride. The Committee are of the considered view that merely amending the Act would
not achieve the objectives unless its provisions are strictly enforced both in letter and
spirit.  Steps should be taken to ensure strict implementation of the Act both by the
Central and State Governments. The Committee recommend that  while formulating
norms for electronic and print media, the World Health Organisation’s ethical criteria
for medicinal drug promotion which specify that “promotion of drugs must be accurate,
fair and objective” and that “promotional claims should not be stronger than valid,
up-to-date scientific evidence warrants”, should be given due consideration.
Government should also evolve a code of conduct governing the advertisement relating
to promotion of magic drugs so as to protect the interests of consumers.
159. The Committee feel that AYUSH is an efficient and cost effective alternative
system of medicine to the modern/allopathic system of medicine and every possible
effort should be made for its growth and development, popularization and expansion of
its outreach.  However, the Committee regret to note that no long term perspective
plan appears to have been formulated by the Government for achievement of the
avowed objectives.  Had such a perspective plan concieved and implemented earlier, it
would have gone a long way in popularising and expansion of AYUSH in the country.
The Committee are of the considered view that for popularising AYUSH, Government
should formulate a perspective plan/roadmap for the next 20 years under which
Government hospitals/dispensaries equipped with adequate infrastructural facilities

70
such as buildings, staff, laboratories/pharmacies etc. should be set up in every nook
and corner of the country. Special emphasis should be laid for setting up of AYUSH
dispensaries/hospitals in rural/semi-urban areas, where traditionally the AYUSH
System have been well accepted and there is lack of enough allopathic services.   The
Committee would like to be apprised of the steps taken/proposed to be taken in this
regard.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
15 December, 2006 Chairman,
24, Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

ANNEXURE - I
DETAILS  OF  IMPORTANT  COLLABORATIVE  RESEARCH PROJECTS
UNDERTAKEN  BY  THE  DEPARTMENT OF AYUSH  ARE  AS  FOLLOWS
Sl. No. CCRAS Collaborating Research Area
Institutes Institutes
1. CCRAS, University of Delhi Genetic susceptibility to rheumatoid
Hqrs. National Institute of arthritis using a novel combination of
immunology and Holy prakriti based control selection &
Family Hospital, molecular analysis tools
Delhi
2. CCRAS Hqrs / CCMB (CSIR) C linical evaluation of A YUSH-CT drops
CRI, Hyderabad in improving the quality of vision and
New Delhi visual acuity in age related immature
cataract (In progress)
3. CCRAS Hqrs / AIIMS Delhi Under Clinical Studies of AYUSH-CT in age
CRI, process related i mmature cataract (In progress,
New Delhi Ethical clearance awaited)
4. CCRAS Hqrs / AIIMS  Delhi Under Clinical Evaluation of AYUSH-DE Drops
CRI,  process in Dry Eye Syndrome (In progress, Ethical
New Delhi clearance awaited)
5. CCRAS Hqrs / AIIMS  Delhi Under Clinical Evaluation of AYUSH-AC Drops
CRI,  process in Simple Allergic Conjunctivitis (In
progress, Ethical clearance awaited)
6. Clinical NIMHANS, Bangalore Autonomic functions tests in patients
Research Unit, with depression (vishada) Role of
Bangalore A yurvedic therapy and transcranial
magnetic stimulation.
Efficacy of Manasamitram Vadakam on
Generalized Anxiety Disorder : A
polysomnographic Study –
Efficacy of Ayurvedic treatment for motor
weakness due to ischemic stroke a
prospective, randomized, controlled study
7. Central TA TA Cancer Research 1. Improvement of quality of life in
Research  Institute Cancer patients (Study will be initiated
Institute, shortly)
Mumbai
2.Screening of Herbal drugs for potential
anti-Cancer activity (in the process of
finalization)
8. CCRUM Deccan Medical College Liver disorders
9. CCRUM Patel Chest Institute, Bronchial Asthma
New Delhi
71

72
10. CCRUM KG Medical University, Gingivitis
Lucknow
11. CCRH Department of Study on Homoeopathic Medicines for
Medical Elementology the treatment of Cerebral Ischaemia.
and Toxicology, Jamia
Hamdard
12. CCRH Jawahar Lal Institute Effect of Homoeopathic Drugs used in
of Post-Graduate Medical Insomnia on Serum melatonin and
Education and Research Cortisol levels in Healthy volunteers.
(JIPMER), Pondicherry
13. CCRYN Instt. Rotary Cancer Effect of breathing techniques &
Hospital, AIIMS, meditation on normal individuals & those
New Delhi  with cancer in remission
14. CCRYN Deptt. of Pharmacology, Ef fect of Yoga based therapy in Insomnia
JIPMER,  Pondicherry
15. CCRYN Department of A randomized controlled trial on the
Physiology,  AIIMS, ef ficacy of Yoga in the Management of
New Delhi Bronchial Asthma
16. CCRYN Deptt. of Autonomic function tests in epilepsy-
Neurophysiology, Effect of Hatha Yoga
NIMHANS,Bangalore
17. CCRYN Department of Yogic relaxation in the management of
Physiology, ulcerative colitis
AIIMS,  New Delhi
18. CCRYN Department of Randomized Clinical Trial (RCT)  of
Biophysics, Reflexology Therapy and usual drug
AIIMS, New  Delhi treatment in the Management of
intractable Epilepsy
19. CCRYN Deptt. of Physiology, A study to assess acute mental stress
AIIMS, New Delhi induced changes in EEG, cognitive
behaviour and neurosteroids across the
menstrual cycle and effect of meditation
on stress-induced changes
20. CCRYN Deptt. of Psychiatry, An exploratory analysis of genetic
Dr. R.M.L. Hospital, correlates and effects of Y oga on
New Delhi circadian rhythms, cognitive functions and
social burden in major mental disorders:
schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and
depression and their comparison with a
cardiac group (Collaborative project
between CCRYN   and Dr. RML Hospital)
Sl. No. CCRAS Collaborating Research Area
Institutes Institutes

73
21. CCRYN Deptt. of Neuro- Assessment of the efficacy of Vipassana
physiology, Meditation on different age groups: A
NIMHANS, Bangalore polysomnographic and Endocrine function
evaluation
22. MDNIY Escorts Heart Institute Study of the effect of Yoga practices on
and Research Centre, management of Techno-Stress in
Okhla, New Delhi Computer  users:  a   quantitative   approach
using psycho-neuro-physio-motor functions
Sl. No. CCRAS Collaborating Research Area
Institutes Institutes

ANNEXURE - II
DETAILS  OF  THE  ACTIVITIES  OF  THE  SCIENTIFIC  ADVISORY
COMMITTEES  FOR  THE  RESEARCH  COUNCILS
Extra Mural Research
CCRAS
l During last 10 yrs. the Council has executed Clinical Research Programmes on
22 clinical conditions for evaluating the efficacy of 46 sets of various
formulations.  The research outcome has been compiled in the form of
monographs for use researchers and physician etc.
l Currently  9 monographs on Slipada, Madhumeha, Vyanabala-vaisamya,
Arsha, Parinamashula, Amlapitta, Kamala, Amavata and Tamak shwasa
have been completed and being processed for Publication.
l In the year 2003 the Council identified 30 priority areas considering the
strength of Ayurveda and Siddha work is in progress [standardization
(physico chemical analysis, TLC, HPLC, HPTL, Microbial load, pesticide
residue, Heavy metal content etc), toxicity, targeted biological activity
studies] in respect of  8 formulations viz. AYUSH Rasayan-A and AYUSH
Rasayan-B for Improving QOL in elderly persons, AYUSH-RP for Sickle
Cell Anaemia, AYUSH-Osto for Osteoporosis and   fractures, AYUSH-LIV
for Hepatitis B & C, AYUSH-M for Migraine, AYUSH-SL Capsules and
AYUSH-SL External application for Morbid cases of Filariasis, AYUSH
Manas for Mental retardation, AYUSH QOL-2  for improvement of quality
of life in HIV/AIDS and cancer patients The standardisation and
pre-clinical studies of all these formulations are completed. The targeted
biological activity study of AYUSH QOL-2 is completed and the study on
rest of these formulations is under progress.
l The projects of national importance that have been taken up by the council
include Feasibility of introducing Indian systems of medicine (Ayurveda
& Siddha) in the “National RCH programme at the primary health care
(PHC) Level” for which 17 Ayurveda and 16 Siddha interventions for
12 different conditions/ diseases related to women and children have
been prepared. The standardization, Safety and toxicity studies are
completed and the project will be launched after getting the approval
from Ayurvedic pharmacopoeia committee for standards and SOPs.
l Another landmark is standardization and automation of Panchkarma
instrumentations in collaboration with IIT Delhi and development of  Sarva
Dhara instrument. The automation of Vaspasweda yantra (steam bath)
and instrument for preparation of ksharsutra are in progress.
l The development of Nutraceuticals for improving memory and cognitive
functions in school going children as mid day meal supplement is under progress.
This is a joint research venture of CCRAS, National Institute of Naturopathy
74

75
and Amul India. The Council has participated in Annual Indian Scientific
Expeditions to Antarctica in 2003 and developed Ayurvedic Rasayana—Food
Supplement and Drink ( Antartica Tea and Antartica laddu) for improving
physical and mental endurance in cold climate conditions. Significant
Immunomodulatory action, Anti-oxidant effects, besides improvement in
physical and physiological parameters have been observed. Further studies
on assessment of nutrition value, self-life, etc. are under progress at IIT Chennai.
l AYUSH face pack – an Ayurvedic cosmetic agent is being developed through
systematic studies.  Ayurvedic Anti-dandruff agent, Anti fungal Agent and
Anti Pollutant Air Refresher are been developed with raw drugs collected from
garden of Rashtrapati Bhawan in collaboration with Fragrance & Flavour
Development Centre, Kannauj.
l Under Tribal Health care research programme during last ten years
167 villages covering 182301 persons has been surveyed and instant
health care services provided to 83,442 patients besides collecting socio
demographic data.
l In the pharmacological research during the past ten years about
17 Ayurvedic and 10 Siddha drugs screened for their detailed
pharmacological activity  20 plants screened for their antifertility activity
under research scheme on screening of contraceptive agent (RSSCA).
l Council has taken up a project to formulate standard operative procedures
of selected herbomineral preparation (Raskalpas) through extensive
analytical physico-chemical studies and is safety  evaluation to create
referral data.
l After the publication of an article in Journal of American Medicine alleging
that 14 out of 70 herbal products originating from India and collected from
grocery stores in Boston area contained heavy metals above permissible
limits there have been lot of concerns regarding the safety of herbo-
metallic Ayurveda formulations.  Hence, CCRAS carried out acute, sub-
acute toxicity studies.   Chronic toxicity studies are in progress.
l  Under Drug standardization research programme, standardisation of
326 single drugs, 20 drugs of animal origin, 36 drugs of Mineral origin,
271 formulations, TLC/HPTLC of 84 drugs, Microbial load on 65 drugs,
Isolation of marker compound of 24 drugs and Shelf life studies on
4 drugs have been completed.
l Under cultivation of medicinal plants programme 1121 species have been
cultivated along with 14081 Guggulu plants. The area under cultivation is
83.14 acres. Experimental studies on plant tissue culture of 15 rare, endangered,
important Ayurveda & Siddha medicinal plants have been done and developed
protocol for 6 plants.
l Under medico Ethano botanical survey programme, 8819 species and 2289 raw
drugs have been collected through 490 survey tours. 2272 samples have been

76
supplied to 269 institutes for various purposes. Besides this 11002-museum
specimens collected and 11294 herbarium sheets have been prepared. 342 folk
medical Claims have been collected.
l Under literary Research during last 10 years, the Council has undertaken
transcription and revival of the sacred lore of Ayurveda and Siddha System of
Medicine which lay inscribed on Manuscript in Bhurjpatra (Brich Bark) and
Tadpatra (Palm Leaf), besides covering Medic-historical studies as well as
preparing inventory of Sanskrit Medical Manuscripts. As a result of the efforts
put in, periodical reviews undertaken and planned evaluation, the Council has
brought out the following classical works on Ayurveda & Siddha:
Ayurveda:
l Abhinav Cintamani
l Ashtanga Sangrah (Indutika) – Critical editions
l Ashtanga Hrdayam
l Charucharya
l Dhanvantri Saranidhi
l Metra Prakashika
l Netra Roga Nidanam
l Nanavidh Vaidyam
l Samgamuni Visha V aidyam-100
l Pathyapathy Vinischaya
l Shatashloki
l Rasapradipika
l Ratanprabha (Residual Section)
l Publication of 26 Research Monographs.
Siddha:
l Agasthiyar Pooranam 205
l Theriyar Kudineer
l Konganar Mudal Kandam - 1000
l Konganar Nadu Kandam – 1000
l Publication of 2 monographs

77
Misc. Ayurveda & Siddha Works
l Research in Ayurveda & Siddha – Bibliography of CCRAS Contributions
l A Check list of Sanskrit Medical Manuscript in India (Under revision)
The council has published 53 books and monographs during past ten Years under
literary research.
l The time taken for completion of a project depends upon its nature. In general
the average period of completion of new drug developed right from literary
survey, formulation of coded drug, collection of authentic raw material,
formulation of SOPs, standardization, toxicity, targeted activities studies,
drafting of clinical protocol and initiation of clinical trial takes about
10-15 years. For Ayurvedic and Siddha drugs it may take about 6-7 years as
Phase-I studies are not be required.
l The Council’s research activities are periodically reviewed by SAC (Ayurveda
and Siddha) respectively twice or thrice in a year and SAC issues necessary
suggestions/modifications and guidelines. The Standing Finance Committee
approves the financial demands for research activities and also assesses the
expenditure from time to time. The governing body of the council chaired by
Honorable Minister of Health and Family Welfare review and approves the
issues related to policy matters.
l Concerning the dissemination of the research findings among educationists,
researchers, manufacturers etc., the finding of the studies are published by the
Council in scientific journals viz. Journal of Research Ayurveda and Siddha
(JRAS), Bulletin of Medico Ethno Botanical Research (BMEBR) and Bulletin of
Indian Institute of History of Medicine and Scientific Monographs. The findings
are also disseminated through I.E.C. materials in seminars, workshops, Health
melas and distributing to visiting delegates.
CCRUM :
In the Clinical Research Programme, the Council took up work on 55 formulations in
18 different disease conditions either of national importance or those of chronic nature
for which other systems did not have much to offer.  Out of these 55 formulations, the
Council have been able to finalize 31 drugs.  Out of this, results of 12 drugs were
published in the form of monographs and for 8 drugs, the Council have applied for
patent rights. 11 drugs are in the pipeline for obtaining patents.   These conditions
included Leucoderma, Infective Hepatitis, Filaria, Gingivitis and Malaria.  The Council
have  also been able to have provisional patent rights for 17 Kit Medicines which have
been commercially exploited through NRDC.
Under the Drug Standardization Research Programme during last 10 years, standards
for 87 compound drugs were finalized, standardization of methods of manufacture of
27 formulations, quality control of 81 research drugs and standardization of 12 mineral
drugs was done. Some of the standardization work done by the Council’s Units earlier

78
was repeated for some additional parameters based on the recommendations of the Unani
Pharmacopoeia Committee.  Based on Drug Standardization work carried out by the council
on single drugs, standards for 145 single drugs have been approved and adopted by the
UPC and have since been published in the Unani Pharmacopoeia of India.
Under the Literary Research Programme, 44 monographs have been edited/ translated
and published.
In the area of Survey, Collection and Cultivation of Medicinal Plants, the Council
has done the following work during the last 10 years:
During the reporting period the Council surveyed the forest areas in the
States of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Jammu & Kashmir, Orissa, Tamil Nadu,
Uttar Pradesh and Uttaranchal. The survey teams of the Council collected
29, 608 botanical specimens of medicinal plants; besides collection of 2,682
folk medicinal claims through interviews of tribal medicine men. A total of
39,078 herbarium sheets of medicinal plants were prepared with a write-up on
each and deposited in the herbarium of respective regional centres.
The Council has also taken up cultivation of some important plant drugs
on field scale. These include Punica granatum L. (Gulnar farsi), Vitex
negundo L. (Sambhalu), Adhatoda zeylanica L. (Arusa), Cichorium intybus
L. (Kasni), Acorus Calamus L. (Waj), Caesaleinia bonduc L.
Roxb.(Karanjwa), Gymnema sylvestre R. Br. (Gurmar buti), Withania
somnifera Dunal. (Asgandh) etc.  Besides, experimental cultivation trials
on Delphinium denudatum Wall.  ex H & T (Jadwar) and Withania
somnifera Dunal. (Asgandh) were also conducted at different centres.
Farmers’ Meetings
The Farmers’ meetings organized for training of farmers on cultivation of
prioritised medicinal plants at:
Chevella Mandal, Ranga Reddy district; Rajindernagar Mandal, Ranga
Reddy district (Andhra Pradesh); Padapai village, Kurathur Block,
Kanchenpuram district; Perampakam village, Kadampathur Block, Tiruvallur
district (Tamil Nadu); and Aligarh, Etah, Ferozabad districts (Uttar Pradesh).
Maintenance of Nurseries
Aimed at demonstration of Medicinal plants to the public, nurseries of medicinal
plants were maintained in the institutes attached to survey components. About
100 species of medicinal plants were maintained during the period 2005 – 2006.
Development/ maintenance of herbal garden at Lucknow
More than 150 plant species of medicinal value were planted and maintained in
the herbal garden under CRIUM, Lucknow.

79
Compilation of data on folklore claims
Data on folklore claims recorded during the reporting period by Council’s
Survey of Medicinal plants units were compiled and published by the
Council. There is a permanent mechanism of periodical review of Research Projects by
the Ministry of Health & F.W. in the form of monthly reports as well as periodical
reviews and the Council’s Scientific Advisory Committee which comprises of experts
in the field of Unani Medicine, Botany, Chemistry, Pharmacology and Modern Medicine
constantly reviews the progress of work of different Units/Institutes under the Council.
In the Council’s Headquarters also there is a mechanism of regular interaction with the
Research Centres about conduct of Programme and the guidelines are issued by the
Council based on the recommendations of the S.A.C. and directions of the Ministry of
Health & F.W.   During such reviews different aspects such as progress of work,
expenditure incurred vis-à-vis targets assigned are taken into account.   There has
never been any major shortfalls observed in any research programme and by and large
the targets assigned are achieved/fulfilled.
As regards dissemination of research findings, the Council has been regularly
taking steps or disseminating the research outcome by way of  organizing seminars/
conferences, Health Exhibitions and other  public contact programmes  Nationally and
Internationally to ensure that all stakeholders which include educational institutions,
drug industry, research organizations and other institutions are aware of the work
done under the Council.   The Council has been able to organize one International
Conference, eight National Seminars, ten workshops besides participation in Health
Exhibition and other Expos.  The Council had also the advantage of participating in 545
health melas  organized during this period in Parliamentary Constituencies.  The Council
has been directed by the Department of AYUSH to have a regular Quarterly Scientific
Journal which should be peer reviewed.
CCRYN :
The Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy (CCRYN), New Delhi
has so far completed 20 clinical research projects since 1995. The duration of a research
project is 3 years. However, extension of period from 2-3 months to 1 year is made due
to some reasons. The Council conducts a review meeting every year to find out the
progress made under the research projects. In the meeting, the Principal Investigators/
Co-investigators are invited to present the progress made before the expert members.
Regarding the dissemination of research findings the Council has already started
publishing the monograph of each research projects with a view to propagate the
research outcome for the use of common public. The monograph titled, “Coronary
athero-sclerosis reversal potential of Yoga life style intervention” was published and
sent to various Naturopathy & Yoga hospitals in the Country so that the information
may be used in the treatment to such patients.  The Council also publishes the abstract
of each completed research projects in its quarterly newsletter “Yogic Prakritik Jeevan
Sandesh”.
The monographs of all 20 completed research projects are being published.

80
CCRH:
The Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy is engaged in research in the
following areas since its inception in 1979.
1. Drug standardization,
2. Proving of drugs used in Homoeopathy,
3. Clinical verification of pathogenesis obtained through drug proving,
4. Clinical trial of homoeopathic medicine in specific diseases,
5. Literary research, and
6. Survey and collection of medicinal plants.
Drug Standardization
Formulation and establishment of botanical, physico-chemical and pharmacological
standards are essential for drugs used in Homoeopathy, as therapeutic properties are
dependent on the quality of drugs. Standardization studies require expertise of a
number of specialists in allied sciences viz. Botany, Chemistry, Pharmacology, etc. The
Council has undertaken drug standardization as a continuing programme since its
establishment in 1979.
 Publications:
l 9 Monographs
l 28 Research papers in CCRH Quarterly Bulletin (1980 and 2005).
l Standardization of Homoeopathic Drugs, V olume-1: Book containing profiles
of 11 drugs
 Drug Proving Research
Proving of a drug substance in Homoeopathy is a unique process. Unlike modern
medicine where animal experimentation forms the basis of evolution of drug
pathogenesis, homoeopathic medicines are proved on healthy human volunteers,
including controls. Two types of proving are conducted by the Council (i) Short-term
lasting 6-8 months and (ii) Long-term proving lasting for 1-2 years.   The entire process
takes about 2-3 years and has to be repeated more than once at different places and in
different settings. The voluminous data of subjective symptomatic changes, recorded
by each prover is then compiled, sifted and sieved to remove symptoms recorded by
controls and those of doubtful nature. Obviously, the entire process from initiation of
proving to final compilation of proving data and its publication is time consuming and
takes about 3 years (Earlier the proving of a drug used to continue for 3-5 years on
account of longer observational period).
The Council has proved 33 drugs during the last ten years (1995-2005). Proving of
six new drugs was started in 2005. These provings are expected to be completed in
2007.

81
Proving Reports  Published so far
l 52 drugs in CCRH Quarterly Bulletin (1980—2005)
l Homoeopathic Drug Provings—conducted by CCRH- (2005) containing
pathogenesis of 38 drugs (Proving reports were already published in CCRH
Quarterly Bulletin)
l 8 Monographs
Clinical Verification
Clinical confirmation of the signs and symptoms produced during proving of a drug
on healthy human volunteers is essential for validation of proving results and facilitate
therapeutic application of respective drug. Clinical verification study in signs and
symptoms specific and not disease specific. The Council had undertaken clinical
verification of 65 drugs in 1996—2004. These included fragmentarily proved
Homoeopathic medicines that are clinically useful but infrequently used in clinical
practice. Most of these drugs were of Indian origin.  In 2004, the Scientific Advisory
Committee felt that the Council has proved a significant number of drugs since its
inception. Therefore, it decided that the Council should now focus on clinical verification
of drugs proved by it. The Council has, therefore, confined its clinical verification
studies to 35 drugs proved by the Council and whose data have already been published.
Publications
l Clinically verified data of 25 drugs have been published in CCRH Quarterly
Bulletin (1990—2005)
l 9 Monographs containing verified data
Clinical Research
Clinical studies facilitate assessment of therapeutic utility of drug substances in
specific disease conditions thereby prompting their proper and optimum therapeutic
use. The Council has therefore, undertaken disease specific and drug specific clinical
studies.
Like proving of drugs on healthy individuals, clinical studies also entail enrollment
of a prefixed number of subjects and a prefixed duration of study including follow-up.
Entire process is time consuming and takes about 2—5 years depending on the nature
of the disease under study.
The Council has concluded 56 clinical studies, including 14 in tribal dominated
areas. Forty five (45) of these studies were concluded in the year  2003—05.  The
Council has undertaken 18 new clinical studies in 2005-06 on protocols formulated in
consultation with Experts from ICMR, AIIMS, NICD, NACO and Homoeopathy.  These
studies have prefixed number of subjects and time frame of  2—5 years.  These studies
also have Expert Consultant in respective disciplines for assessment of progress and
valid outcome.

82
The Council has, apart from carrying out planned clinical studies, over the years,
undertaken clinical studies in 32 epidemics of different diseases. The findings of these
studies have underlined the utility of Homoeopathic medicines in epidemics.
Publications
l 45 Research papers on clinical studies undertaken by the Council have been
published in the Quarterly Bulletin of the Council and foreign Journals
(1985—2005)
l Final Reports on 23 clinical studies are being prepared for publication
Literary Research
James Tyler Kent’s Homoeopathic Repertory was compiled in early 20th Century,
but continues to top the list of frequently used reference books by clinicians all over
the world. Since its publication, hundreds of drugs have been proved but their proving
data is scattered at various sources. Many of these drugs, which could prove to be
very effective therapeutically, are not used as frequently as they should be. To see that
optimum clinical use of their pathogenic data is made, Council had undertaken revision
of Kent’s Repertory in the light of data available in various source books.  Work on the
revision of 18 chapters of Kent’s Repertory has been completed. Seventeen of the
revised chapters have already been published and work on chapter ‘Generalities’ is
being reviewed for publication.
Publications
l 9 Books containing 17 revised chapters of Kent’s Repertory
Survey and Collection of Medicinal Plants
To identify and locate plants used in medicine and collect them for reference and
standardization studies is an important factor that contributes to the growth of any
system of medicine. In Homoeopathy, the drugs of vegetable origin constitute about
80 per cent of the total drugs proved thus far. Most of these drugs are exotic and were
proved overseas. Although their therapeutic utility is repeatedly confirmed on people
in our country, yet reported variation in active constituents of the raw drug necessitates
re-proving of drugs prepared from plants available in India. It is also necessary for
economic and other reasons, that most frequently used exotic vegetable drugs are
cultivated in the country. CCRH has accorded due importance to this aspect and has
established a Survey, Collection and Cultivation of Medicinal Plants Unit at
Udagamandalam (Ooty), Tamilnadu. This Unit has acquired 12.70 acres of land on
lease from the Government of Tamilnadu. Cineraria maritima, an exotic plant used in the
preparation of widely used homoeopathic eye drops, has successfully been cultivated
by the Unit. Efforts are on to cultivate two other exotic plants namely Arnica montana
and Hydrastis canadenesis which are also widely used in Homoeopathy.
This Unit has also collected 8041 medicinal plants and has prepared Herbarium
Sheets of 7417 medicinal plants. Germ plasms of 65 Drugs are being maintained.
407 raw drugs have been supplied to Drug Standardization Units of the Council for
physico-chemical studies being carried out.

83
Publications
l A check List of Homoeopathic Medicinal Plants of India containing information
on 369 plants used in Homoeopathy (seen two editions)
l A Handbook of Medicinal Plants used in Homoeopathy-Vol.1
Other Activities of the Council
(i) Publications
l Council publishes a Quarterly Bulletin containing scientific papers for
Homoeopathic students, physicians, teachers, research scholars and
homoeopathic industry (28 volumes of the Bulletin, including 10 volumes in
the last 10 years, have been published so far)
l CCRH News containing highlights of activities of the Council  for free
distribution amongst  Registrars of State Boards and Councils, Directorates of
ISM & H, Homoeopathic Medical Colleges, eminent Homoeopathic physicians
in the country (37 Issues, including 17 in the last ten years, have been published
so far)
l 18 Volumes of Current Health Literature Awareness Service (CHLAS) have
been published in the last 10 years
l Medico-abstracts on 6 disease conditions have also been published in the last
10 years.  Work on Medico-abstracts on ‘Cancer’ is in progress.
l 15 priced and 7 Non-priced publications have also been published during the
last 10 years
l 39 Informative Handouts (including 15 in Hindi) on Homoeopathy and some
common disease conditions for lay public have also been published.
(ii) Collaborative/fundamental research studies
National Collaboration
l The Council had undertaken research studies in collaboration with other
Organizations and Scientists from reputed Institutes. Main objective of such
studies is to scientifically validate the principle and efficacy of Homoeopathy.
Eight (8) collaborative studies have already been concluded.
l Seven (7) Collaborative studies with Organizations in the country have been
undertaken in 2005-06.
l One Collaborative study with Scientist from Defence Institute of Physiology
and Allied Sciences (DIPAS) is being finalized and is expected to be undertaken
in 2006-07.
International Collaboration
l One International collaborative study with University of California, Los Angeles
(UCLA) on prevention of HIV/AIDS has also been concluded (2002-04).
l Another study has been undertaken in collaboration with UCLA in 2005-06.

84
(iii) Reorientation and Training Programmes and Seminars/Workshops/
Conferences
Continuing medical education (CME) plays an important role in updating the
knowledge of Scientists engaged in research in health, disease and medicine. The
Council has been conducting Reorientation Training Programmes for its Scientists
and Workshops/Seminars for Scientists and Members of the Profession and
Homoeopathic Industry. It has conducted 13 Reorientation Training Programmes and
24 Workshops/ Seminars during the last 10 years (1996-2006).
    The Council regularly disseminates its research findings through Quarterly Bulletin
and CCRH News; Current Health Literature Awareness Service (CHLAS) and Medico-
abstracts on specific disease conditions; Books, Monographs (priced and non-priced);
Informative handouts (including 15 in Hindi) on Homoeopathy and some common
disease conditions for lay public. It may be seen that the Council do disseminate its
research findings in the manner any Research Organization does. The feed back it
receives indicate that most of the results are reproducible. A consortium of International
Homoeopathic Organizations, including International Federation of Classical
Homoeopathy; Royal London Homoeopathic Hospital; European Committee of
Homoeopathy and American Institute of Homoeopathy which met during the
International Conference held at London in January, 2006, recognized the contribution
of the Council to Homoeopathic Research and decided to involve the Council in future
researches, particularly in Influenza and Avian flu.
 The time taken for completion of a project depends upon its nature. In general the
average period completion of new drug developed right from literary survey, formulation
coded drug, collection of raw material, verification for authenticity formulation of
SOPs standardization, toxicity, targeted activities studies, drafting of clinical protocol
and initiation of clinical trial takes about 10-15 years. For Ayurvedic and Siddha drugs
it may take about 6-7 years as phase-I studies may not be required for this purpose.

APPENDIX-I
Performance audit of
Department of Ayurveda,
Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani,
Siddha and Homoeopathy
(AYUSH)
(Ministry of Health and Family Welfare)
Report of the
Comptroller and Auditor General
of India
for the year ended March 2004
Union Government (Civil)
No. 16 of 2005

CONTENTS
Paragraph Page
Preface 89
Overview 91
Highlights 92
Recommendations 93
Introduction 1 9 5
Objectives of the scheme 2 96
Audit objectives 3 96
Audit methodology and audit criteria 4 96
Audit findings 5 97
Efficacy of planning, budgetary allocation and utilisation 5.1 97
of funds
Recommendations 5.1.7 100
Results of efforts of strengthening medical education 5.2 100
Status of AYUSH Medical colleges 5.2.14 105
National/Apex level institutions 5.2.16 106
Development of infrastructural facilities in educational 5.2.17 107
institutions
Recommendations 5.2.22 111
Achievement of research activities 5.3 111
Formulation of aims and pattern of research on scientific lines 5.3.1 111
Drug research 5.3.2 111
Drug proving and clinical verification of Homoeopathic drugs 5.3.5 113
Clinical research 5.3.7 114
HIV infection research programme through Homoeopathy 5.3.11 115
Extra mural research 5.3.12 115
Patenting of drugs 5.3.15 115
Recommendations 5.3.16 116
Drug standardisation and quality control of AYUSH drugs 5.4 116
Pharmacopoeial standards of AYUSH drugs 5.4.2 116
Drug standardisation 5.4.4 118
Quality control of AYUSH drugs 5.4.8 119
Enforcement, regulation and adherence to Good Manufacturing 5.4.11 120
Practices (GMP) standards by drug manufacturers
Recommendations 5.4.13 120
Production of raw material for AYUSH drugs 5.5 121
Conservation and development of medical plants for AYUSH 5.5.1 121
durgs
Cultivation of medicinal plants and development of agro- 5.5.4 122
techniques
87

Contractual farming scheme 5.5.9 123
Recommendations 5.5.11 124
Development of healthcare facilities, integration and expansion 5.6 124
of outreach in healthcare under AYUSH
Clinical treatment facilities 5.6.1 124
Mainstreaming of ‘‘AYUSH’’ in national healthcare 5.6.3 125
Establishment of specialised therapy centres/speciality clinics 5.6.4 125
Promotion of AYUSH under Central Government Health Scheme5.6.7 126
(CGHS)
Setting up of health resort clinics for tourists 5.6.9 126
Recommendation 5.6.10 127
Conclusions 6 127
88

PREFACE
This report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India containing performance
appraisal of Department of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and
Homoeopathy (AYUSH), Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has been prepared for
submission to the President of India under Article 151 of the Constitution.
The performance audit was conducted through test check of records of the
Department of AYUSH including its subordinate offices and implementing agencies in
29 States and Union Territories during 2004-05.
89

OVERVIEW
Government of India established the Department of Indian Systems of Medicine
and Homoeopathy (renamed AYUSH from November 2003) in March 1995 with the
main objectives of promoting good health, expanding the outreach of AYUSH healthcare
through preventive, promotive, mitigating and curative interventions, improving the
quality of teachers and clinicians, ensuring affordable and efficacious AYUSH services
and drugs and integrating AYUSH in healthcare delivery system and National Health
Programmes.
Policy pronouncements contained in the National Policy on AYUSH-2002 could not
be effectively implemented due to poor budgetary support, inadequate monitoring,
evaluation and lack of coordination between various implementing agencies and the
Ministry. The share of AYUSH in the total health Plan at the Central level was static at
2 per cent during 2000-05 though the policy pronouncement envisaged raising of
AYUSH share to 10 per cent with designed growth of 5 per cent in every Five Year plan.
The programme also suffered from absence of an effective system of transfer of funds
to the implementing agencies. Out of Rs.30.98 crore released to 12 State Governments
under Centrally Sponsored Schemes during 2002-05, Rs.16.94 crore were not released
to the implementing agencies with delays even upto 36 months.
The Regulatory Councils responsible for prescribing minimum standards of
infrastructure in medical institutions, maintaining a centralized database of medical
practitioners and monitoring the prescribed standards of medical education had failed
in checking the growth of substandard institutions. Most of the 444 colleges of
Ayurveda, Unani and Homoeopathy in the country lacked minimum required faculty,
attached hospitals and teaching facilities. The central register of practitioners had
either not been maintained or had not been updated and revised for very long periods.
The independence and autonomy of the regulatory bodies had also been diluted.
Research activities were not undertaken under fixed parameters within specified
time period and their results had not been disseminated for the benefit of educationists,
researchers, manufacturers and the common man. During the last 25 years, the Councils
had obtained patents for only three Ayurveda drugs and did not contribute concrete
research findings in the core area of family planning/contraceptive measures.
Pharmacopoeial Committees did not finalise standards in respect of any of the
compound formulations in Ayurveda and Unani even after 40 years of their
establishment, though the National Policy-2002 had envisaged completion of this
work by 2005.
The National Medicinal Plant Board, set up as a nodal agency to oversee policies
for conservation and development of medicinal plants at the National and State levels
did not have an authentic database on demand and supply of medicinal plants and
failed to monitor and evaluate the progress of 1077 projects funded by it at a cost of
Rs. 62.16 crore during 2001-04.
91
Report No. 16 of 2005

92
Performance Audit report on ‘AYUSH’
Highlights
• Ministry’s allocation of funding for the programmes under AYUSH was inadequate
considering the objectives to be achieved. Ministry allocated
2 per cent of the total Health budget (2000-2005) to AYUSH as against 10 per
cent envisaged in the National Policy. State Governments did not transfer Rs.
16.94 crore (55 per cent) to implementing agencies for periods up to 36 months.
(Paragraphs 5.1.2 and 5.1.5)
• Ministry did not maintain any consolidated record of utilisation of grants
depriving it of an effective monitoring tool. Thus, Rs. 36.52 crore (72 per cent)
remained unutilised with the implementing agencies as of December 2004 out of
the grant in aid of Rs. 50.87 crore released to 12 States during 2000-05. Similarly,
out of Rs. 4.95 crore released by the Ministry to the States for establishing
specialised therapy centres/specialty clinics, ISM&H wings and supply of
essential drugs, Rs. 4.90 crore (99 per cent) remained unutilised. An amount of
Rs. 53.19 lakh released to the Government of Himachal Pradesh under the Pilot
scheme for setting up AYUSH Health Resort Clinics for Tourists also remained
unutilised, which defeated the very purpose of attracting tourists.
(Paragraphs 5.1.4, 5.6.6 and 5.6.9)
• None of the 142 colleges whose records Audit test checked, out of total 444
colleges, possessed adequate infrastructural facilities, faculty, attached hospitals
with requisite bed strength and OPD/IPD facilities in accordance with the norms
laid down by the Regulatory Councils. Five Apex level Institutes set up by the
Ministry as centres of excellence for imparting high quality education and research
also lacked infrastructural facilities. Ministry did not ensure that the database of
practitioners of AYUSH was updated and revised promptly and regularly. Delays
in updation ranged between 3 and 22 years in 20 States, which deprived the
practitioners of the opportunity of practicing in other States and reduced the
outreach of AYUSH Medicare.
(Paragraphs 5.2.4, 5.2.16 and 5.2.13)
• There was neither correlation between the drugs standardised, drugs proved
and drugs clinically verified nor any systematic approach to standardisation of
drugs as 44 Homoeopathic drugs were taken up for proving and 47 for clinical
verification without having been standardised. Besides, out of 66 projects funded
at a cost of Rs. 7.13 crore, 59 projects under the scheme ‘Extra Mural Research’
under ‘AYUSH’ remained incomplete even after seven years, depriving the people
of the benefits accruing out of research.
(Paragraphs 5.3.5 and 5.3.12)
••••• Pharmacopoeia Committees, established in 1962—64, on which expenditure of
Rs. 7.85 crore was incurred between 2000 to 2005 failed to develop
pharmacopoeial standards for formulation of compound drugs in Ayurveda and
Unani even after 40 years of their inception as a result of which official

93
pharmacopoeia under the respective system for evolving uniform standards in
preparation of AYUSH drugs could not be published. Moreover, only 707 out of
7849 manufacturing units had obtained the mandatory ‘Good Manufacturing
Practices’ certificate from Government as of December 2004. Similarly, none
of the 61 State Drug Testing Laboratories/Pharmacies, which were provided
assistance of Rs. 50.09 crore under the scheme ‘strengthening of DTLs/
Pharmacies’, was fully functional as of December 2004.
(Paragraphs 5.4.7, 5.4.12 and 5.4.8)
• Ministry did not monitor the progress of implementation of the Centrally
Sponsored Scheme of ‘Development of Health care facilities in AYUSH’ by
24 States though assistance of Rs. 33.74 crore was released during 2002-05.
Progress of 1077 projects funded under promotional and farming schemes at a
cost of Rs. 62.16 crore during 2001-04 was not monitored through State
Medicinal Plant Boards. Ministry did not ensure evaluation of progress of
demonstrative medicinal plant gardens though financial assistance of Rs. 73.85
lakh was released to 18 institutions during 2000-03. Inordinate delay in
completion of 33 projects of development of agrotechniques in respect of
133 medicinal plants and failure to patent and disseminating the research
findings resulted in blockade of funds to the tune of Rs. 5.05 crore.
(Paragraphs 5.6.5, 5.5.3, 5.5.4 and 5.5.5)
Recommendations
Ministry may
• streamline the system and procedures of transfer of funds to States and further
allotment by States to implementing agencies by identifying the specific
bottlenecks and monitoring the internal procedures closely,
• introduce a computer based tracking system for released grants so that their
utilisation improves significantly and also insist on obtaining refund of unutilised
balances retained by State Governments for over a year which would help avoid
blocking of resources when competing sectors face funds crunch,
• ensure that adequate and identifiable measures are taken to bring in parity in
medical education across the country and strengthen the infrastructure in the
apex level institutes so as to enable them to function as centers of excellence,
• ensure that permission to open new colleges, starting PG courses and increasing
admission capacity are accorded only after minimum standards of infrastructure
prescribed by Regulatory Councils are achieved,
• ensure autonomy and independence of the Regulatory Councils for promoting
transparency and accountability and arrange to get the Central Registers of
Practitioners updated covering all the States/Union territories through a time
bound programme,

94
• draw appropriate guidelines for taking up research activities under fixed
parameters in a time bound manner and ensure that research findings relating to
all components of each scheme are finalised, patented and disseminated among
the stakeholders. The ongoing projects would need to be completed early and
findings disseminated to stakeholders such as educationist, researchers,
manufacturers and Government Institutions,
• ensure that reasons for slackness in development of pharmacopoeial standards
are investigated and specific bottlenecks for ensuring their expeditious
publication in the respective pharmacopoeia are identified. Result oriented
supervision would need to be carried out and drug standardisation work done
by Research Councils in consultation with the Pharmacopoeia committees
monitored by fixing clear areas of responsibility so that efforts are not duplicated
and resources not wasted,
• consider introducing suitable penal measures so that the drug manufacturing
units strictly adhere to GMPs,
• entrust State Medical Plant Boards with clear and direct responsibility of
monitoring and evaluating various plantation schemes and preparing an authentic
database of prioritised medicinal plants and
• critically review the status of expansion of outreach of healthcare and introduce
appropriate control mechanisms with clearly defined responsibility centres to
monitor and ensure optimal utilisation of the existing facilities.

MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
Department of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy
Performance Audit Report on ‘AYUSH’
1. Introduction
1.1 National Health Policy, 1983 referred to our rich heritage of medical and health
sciences and highlighted under utilisation of the vast infrastructure available in the
Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy. For addressing the health care delivery
services through the Indian system of Medicine and Homoeopathy, Government of
India (GOI) established (1995) an independent department of Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H) under the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
Government thereafter, approved a separate national policy on ISM&H in 2002 which,
inter-alia, reiterated that Ayurveda, Unani, Homoeopathy, and Yoga offered a wide
range of preventive, promotive and curative treatments and renamed the department
of ISM&H as the Department of Ayurveda, Yoga and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and
Homoeopathy (AYUSH) in November 2003.
1.2 The Department of AYUSH headed by the Secretary to Government, in the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is the nodal agency for overall direction,
coordination, budgetary control and policy interventions for implementation of the
policy. Out of the 35 States/UTs, 21 States established a separate Directorate to
coordinate and implement AYUSH related programmes. An infrastructure of 3845
hospitals with 65159 beds, 23630 dispensaries, 6.91 lakh registered practitioners, 439
and 96 under-graduate and post-graduate colleges with admission capacity of 23555
and 1888 students respectively and 9226 licensed pharmacies, was created in the
country as of March 2003.
1.3 With a view to augmenting educational facilities, carrying out research activities,
ensuring availability of adequate plant based raw material and quality control of drugs,
mainstreaming of AYUSH drugs in the National health care delivery system, the Ministry
launched several centrally sponsored and central plan schemes. The Ministry set up
two Regulatory bodies, namely, the Central Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM) and
the Central Council of Homoeopathy (CCH) for prescribing standards for infrastructure,
developing curriculum, inspection of medical colleges/institutions and maintaining
Central Register of Practitioners. The Ministry also established Research Councils for
identifying and prioritising research activities/areas and Apex level bodies to act as
centres of excellence.
95

96
2. Objectives of the Scheme
2.1 The objectives under the National Policy on AYUSH of 2002, can be grouped
under the following heads:
• Strengthening the standards of medical, nursing and pharmacy education through
strong regulatory control, upgradation of course curricula, strengthening of
infrastructural facilities in AYUSH educational institutes and setting up of model
colleges and centres of excellence,
• Re-orientation and prioritisation of research activities and areas in ‘AYUSH’
covering clinical trials, pharmacology and toxicology keeping in view the strength
of each system and contemporary relevance,
• Drug standardisation, regulation and enforcement including adherence to good
manufacturing practices (GMPs) and publication of formulations and
pharmacopoeial standards,
• Conservation and sustainable use of medicinal plants including remunerative
farming for ensuring availability of authentic and quality raw drugs with essential
components as required under pharmacopoeial standards,
• Integration of AYUSH with health care delivery systems for optimal use of the
vast infrastructure of hospitals, dispensaries and physicians, and
• Ensuring affordable AYUSH services and safe and efficacious drugs
3. Audit objectives
3.1 The performance audit of Department of AYUSH sought to assess the:—
• efficacy of planning for implementation of various programmes, budgetary
allocation and utilisation of funds,
• results of the efforts of the Union Government/States to strengthen medical
education,
• efficiency and extent of achievement of research activities and dissemination of
research findings for the benefit of educationists, researchers, manufacturers
and common man,
• extent of achievement of drug standardisation and availability of authentic
AYUSH drugs, regulation, enforcement, adherence to Good Manufacturing
Practices (GMPs) and publication of formulations and pharmacopoeial standards
of AYUSH drugs,
• extent of conservation and sustainable supply of medicinal plants for research
work, development of agro-techniques, contractual farming for developing
marketing mechanism, and
• extent of expansion of the outreach of health care under AYUSH and integration
of AYUSH with modern medicines, Health Care Delivery System and National
Health Programmes
4. Audit methodology and audit criteria
4.1 The performance audit of AYUSH covered the period 2000-01 to 2004-05 and
was conducted through sample check of the records in the Ministry of Health and

97
Family Welfare including its subordinate offices and implementing agencies in 29
States and Union Territories. The sample for audit covered all Regulatory bodies,
Research councils and Apex level institutions and 25 to 30 per cent of the expenditure
in the subordinate offices. Details of samples are indicated in Annex-1.
4.2 The criteria used for the performance audit were:—
• attainment of the prescribed levels of performance of each scheme and programme
including level of coordination between the Central and State Governments
towards integrating various schemes,
• progress in review of minimum standards of education comprising faculty,
infrastructure and hospital facilities prescribed by the regulatory bodies,
• inspection of new colleges recommended for recognition, upgradation of colleges
recommended and number of colleges in which recognition was withdrawn based
on inspections made,
• outcome of research culminating in the shape of patents, development of new
drugs and curing endemic diseases,
• achievement of promotional and commercial schemes run by the Ministry on the
development of medicinal plant sector,
• performance of pharmacopoeial committees with reference to which standards,
if any, were developed for AYUSH,
• extent to which drug testing laboratories and pharmacies of States were
strengthened under Centrally Sponsored Scheme, and
• extent to which the Ministry had been able to integrate the AYUSH systems with
the modern health care and how far their reach had expanded.
4.3 Director General of Audit, Central Revenues/Principal Accountants General,
Accountants General and their subordinate officers discussed the audit plan and audit
objectives in entry and exit conferences between November 2004 and March 2005 with
the representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and departments of
AYUSH in respective States as also respective heads of Regulatory bodies, Research
Councils and other senior officers. The recommendations were discussed with the
Secretary (AYUSH) and other senior officers of the Department including the Regulatory
and Research Councils on 6 October 2005. Their views as expressed in the meeting
have been appropriately reflected in the report.
5. Audit findings
5.1 Efficacy of Planning, Budgetary Allocation and utilisation of funds.
5.1.1 Table 1 below contains the details of Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates
and actual expenditure incurred by the Department of AYUSH from 2000-01 to
2004-05.

98
Table 1: Budget Estimates, Revised Estimates & Actual Expenditure
(Rupees in crore)
Y ear Budget Estimates Revised Estimates Actual Expenditure Percentage
Plan Non T otal Plan Non T otal Plan Non T otal utilisation
Plan Plan Plan of plan
funds
w.r.t. BE
2000-01 100.00 43.50 143.50 90.00 44.14 134.14 79.46 43.51 122.97 79
2001-02 120.00 45.56 165.56 90.00 44.84 134.84 82.15 43.58 125.73 68
2002-03 150.00 50.86 200.86 105.00 50.66 155.66 89.78 49.31 139.09 60
2003-04 145.00 51.47 196.47 135.00 51.47 186.47 133.96 51.01 184.97 92
2004-05 173.00 52.73 225.73 200.00 59.20 259.20 198.76 62.07 260.83 115
Total 688.00 244.12 932.12 620.00 250.31 870.31 584.11 249.48 833.59 85

99
5.1.2 Audit noticed that Budget provisions during 2000-05 constituted only two per
cent of total health budget of the Union Government as against 10% envisaged in the
National Policy on ISM&H-2002 which sought to raise the share of allocation for
AYUSH in the total health plan at the central level to 10 per cent to be increased at the
rate of 5 per cent  in every Five Year Plan. Government did not allocate the targeted
funds till 2005-06, when Rs. 350 crore were provided for the scheme in the budget,
which meant inadequate support all along, for the achievement of envisaged objectives.
5.1.3 Table 2 contains activity-wise allocation of funds between 2000-01 and 2004-
05. Research and Education alone accounted for 65 percent of the total allocation of
funds under AYUSH indicating the priority that Government accorded to these activities.
Detailed allocation of funds under different schemes and activities is given in
Annexure-2.
Table 2: Activity-wise allocation of funds (2000-01 to 2004-05)
Sl.No. Items of expenditure Rs. in crore Percentage
1. Education 256.77 30
2. Research 294.78 35
3. Quality control 155.46 19
4. Health Care 74.44 9
5. Information, Education and Communication 21.95 3
6. Administrative and others 30.19 4
Total 833.59 100
5.1.4 Audit examination revealed that out of Rs. 50.87 crore that the Ministry released
to 12 states during 2000-01 to 2004-05, Rs. 30.98 crore (61 per cent) were routed through
the States whereas Rs. 19.89 crore (39 per cent) were released directly to the implementing
agencies. Out of the total funds of Rs. 50.87 crore that the Ministry had released,
Rs. 36.52 crore (72 per cent) remained unutilised.
The Ministry stated (September 2005) that substantial amount remaining unutilised
related to the scheme for strengthening Drug Testing Laboratories and Pharmacies
and that the construction of buildings and procurement of equipment for which funds
were provided under the scheme to the States were a time consuming activity and that
the Government was pursuing the matter with the State Governments. It was further
stated that monitoring and evaluation of projects sanctioned under various Centrally
Sponsored Schemes was being done by Secretary (AYUSH).
5.1.5 Further examination of the promptness of release of funds by the State
Governments to implementing agencies revealed that State Governments did not release
Rs. 16.94 crore that represented 55 percent of the total amount released, the delay
going upto 36 months. Out of the total amount of Rs. 62.63 crore that the Ministry had
released during 2002-03 and 2003-04 as much as Rs. 14.82 crore (24 per cent) were
released only in March in the two years.

100
5.1.6 The Ministry not only failed to provide the envisaged or targeted funds for the
schemes under AYUSH till 2005-06 but could also not ensure complete utilisation of
funds released. State Governments, in turn, delayed release of funds to implementing
agencies and also released substantial funds only in March which would appear to
have been a ploy to prevent lapse of funds. Achievement of objectives of the scheme
that depended on prompt and complete disbursement of allocated funds thus became,
abinitio, doubtful and difficult.
5.1.7 Recommendations
• The Ministry needs to install a system for querying the data through a computer
based tracking system to suit its monitoring requirements;
• The Ministry needs to avoid release of funds at the fag end of each financial
year, streamline the system and procedure of transfer of funds to States and
further allotment by States to implementing agencies by identifying the specific
bottlenecks and monitoring the internal procedures closely; and
• The Ministry may consider insisting on refund of unutilised balances retained
by the State Governments for over a year, which would help avoid blocking of
resources when competing sectors face resource crunch.
5.1.8 The Ministry stated (September 2005) that Secretary (AYUSH) had been writing
to the Chief Secretaries of the States to make the funds available to the implementing
agencies expeditiously and ensure proper utilisation thereof within the stipulated
period. It was further stated during the Exit Conference (October 2005) that the Ministry
was constantly rationalising and reprioritising various schemes and that the Planning
Commission had been requested to allow release of funds to different States through
the State Health Societies instead of routing these through the State Governments.
The Ministry also agreed to the suggestion of audit of installing a system for querying
the data through a computer based tracking system to suit its monitoring requirements.
5.2 Results of efforts of Strengthening Medical Education
5.2.1 The Ministry adopted the mechanism of strengthening medical education
through Regulatory Councils and National/Apex level institutions. Accordingly, the
Ministry set up two Regulatory Councils namely, the Central Council of Indian Medicine
(CCIM) and the Central Council of Homoeopathy (CCH) as autonomous bodies, under
the Indian Medicine Central Council (IMCC) Act, 1970 and the Homoeopathy Central
Council (HCC) Act, 1973 which were responsible for
• advising the Government in matters relating to recognition and withdrawal of
medical qualification.
• prescribing minimum standards of infrastructure and manpower to be maintained
by medical institutions.
• undertaking regular inspection to ensure adherence to the standards, and
• maintaining Central Registers of Practitioners and update them from time to time.
5.2.2 Government brought about amendments in 2002-2003 to both the Acts referred
to in Para 5.2.1 requiring that prior permission of the Ministry be obtained for opening
new colleges, starting new courses and increasing intake of students.

101
5.2.3 Records of CCIM and CCH indicated that as of March 2005, medical qualification
awarded by 69 out of 444 colleges was yet to be recognised. The Councils allowed
these colleges to run various courses from time to time without recognition. Though
the courses of the concerned universities were not recognised, 6830
1 students had
already passed out from various colleges of Ayurveda and Unani systems during
1997-2005. Ministry granted permission to two Homoeopathy colleges (in Chhattisgarh
and Orissa) for continuance of courses in new sessions during 2003-04 and 2004-05
respectively against the specific advice of the Regulatory Council though these colleges
lacked adequate infrastructural facilities. The students passing out of such colleges
would face the prospect of not being considered recognised AYUSH practitioners,
that could be not only detrimental to the growth of the system but also put a question
mark on their future career.
5.2.4 Test check of records of 142
2 colleges including 35 new colleges, which were
inspected by the representatives of Regulatory Councils during 2000-05, revealed that
none of these colleges met the minimum requirement of infrastructural and teaching
facility standards prescribed by the Councils. Table 3 contains the brief description of
the deficiencies noticed in audit.
Table 3: Deficiencies in infrastructural facilities in AYUSH colleges
Sl. Ayurvedic and Unani Colleges No. of Colleges R emarks
No. Ayurvedic U nani
(Total 58) (Total 14)
1. Deficiency in faculty or in minimum 55 14 —
covered area of college building
2. Deficiency in minimum covered 49 14 —
area, bed strength, essential or other
staff, IPD or OPD in attached
hospital
3. Deficiency in minimum sitting 42 11 In one Ayurvedic
capacity, books or staff in library college, sitting
facility was not
available in the
library.
4. Deficiency in herbal garden with 46 11 In three Ayurvedic
regard to minimum prescribed area, and one Unani
maintenance of required number of colleges, herbal
plants or sufficient staff gardens had not
been set up.
5. Deficiency in space, staff or 48 12 Two Ayurvedic
equipment in respect of laboratory colleges were
operating
without
laboratory
facilities.
6. Deficiency in space, staff or 38 10 Nine colleges were
equipment in respect of pharmacy functioning
without the
facility of
attached
pharmacy.

102
7. Deficiency in panchkarma 3 facilities 13 Not Panchkarma
applicable facilities
were not available
in two Ayurvedic
colleges.
1Excludes position of Homoeopathy students passed out as this information was not available
2Ayurveda: 58; Unani: 14 and Homoeopathy: 70
3Panchkarma is a renowned therapeutic treatment in Ayurveda and aims at removal of causative
factors of somatic and psychosomatic diseases.
Sl. Homoeopathy Colleges No. of Colleges Rem arks
No. (Total 70)
1. Non-availability of own college 57 Four colleges were
building, deficiency in library, operating from 2-3
minimum number of class rooms or class rooms
faculty
2. Deficiency in bed strength, IPD, 69 In eight colleges,
OPD, essential or other hospital number of patients in
staff in attached hospital or non- IPD ranged from 1 to
availability of own building 10
3. Non-availability of required number 70 In two cases, there was
of departments, faculty, other staff, no separate staff for
library or equipment attached hosp ital
5.2.5 Test-check of records of educational institutes in Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh,
Delhi, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West
Bengal revealed shortage of teaching staff ranging between 19 and 72 per cent, of
paramedical and other staff ranging between 13 and 78 per cent while bed occupancy
ranged between 1 and 71 per cent.
The Ministry while accepting the deficiencies pointed out in audit agreed (September
2005) to strengthen the regulatory oversight by giving permission to new colleges
strictly on meeting minimum standards.
5.2.6 The Councils (CCIM & CCH) granted permission or recognition to new as well
as existing colleges for admission of a specified number of students on session-
to-session basis on the recommendations of a committee of experts nominated by the
Councils for inspection of each college. In case the representatives of the Councils did
not inspect a specific college in a particular year, permission for admission in the next
academic session was given on the basis of previous inspection. However, CCH was
granting permission on a one-time basis instead of session to session basis until
specifically revoked by the Council/Ministry, notwithstanding the fact that these
colleges did not have the required infrastructural facilities including faculty as per
prescribed norms and standards.
5.2.7 Table 4 indicates the year-wise position of the number of colleges inspected,
colleges permitted to run courses on the basis of new inspections or on the basis of
previous inspections and cases in which the Councils disallowed permission.
Sl. Ayurvedic and Unani Colleges No. of Colleges R emarks
No. Ayurvedic U nani
(Total 58) (Total 14)

103
 Table 4: Year-wise institutions inspected and status of permission
Year System T otal No. Institutions Cases in Cases in Cases in
of inspected which which which
institutions (percentage) permission permission permission
given on refused given on
the basis of the basis of
inspection previous
inspection
(percentage)
12 3 4 5 6 7
2000-01 A yurveda 190 113 (59) 105 8 68* (36)
Unani 34 34 (100) 33 1 -
Homoeopathy 150 97 (65) 96 1 53 (35)
2001-02 A yurveda 194 63 (32) 50 13 126* (65)
Unani 34 27 (79) 25 2 7 (21)
Homoeopathy 160 114 (71) 113 1 45* (28)
2002-03 A yurveda 211 100 (47) 93 7 105* (50)
Unani 38 27 (71) 26 1 10* (26)
Homoeopathy 182 100 (55) 98 2 80* (44)
2003-04 A yurveda 211 96 (45) 94 2 103* (49)
Unani 38 29 (76) 26 3 9 (24)
Homoeopathy 182 72 (40) 67 5 110 (60)
2004-05 A yurveda 221 127 (57) 123 4 84* (38)
Unani 39 34 (87) 31 3 5 (13)
Homoeopathy 184 40 (23) 37 3 138* (75)
* V ariation between the total number of institutions (col. 3), institutions inspected (col. 4) and
institutions in which permission given on the basis of previous inspections (col. 7) is on account
of cases where permission was not given in earlier years and no further inspection was conducted
in the absence of replies, or cases being sub-judice etc.
5.2.8 Audit scrutiny revealed that:
• only 32 to 59 per cent  of the Ayurvedic colleges and 23 to 71 per cent  of the
Homoeopathy colleges were inspected every year by regulatory Councils during
2000-05.
• colleges with persistent deficiencies in infrastructure that were denied permission
to run courses during 2000-05 ranged between 1 and 13 during these years.
• 61 to 62 per cent colleges of Ayurveda and Homoeopathy were inspected only
once or twice in the last five years.
• teams of experts constituted by the Councils for inspection of colleges included
members of the Executive Committee of these Councils. As these members also
took part in the Executive Committee’s meetings in which inspection reports
were considered, there could be a conflict of interest diluting the regulatory
mechanism, and
• no systematic or rational system for inspecting the colleges had been devised or
followed and visits were generally carried out randomly.

104
5.2.9 Well-equipped colleges with attached hospitals were a pre-requisite for
improving educational standards, clinical experience and research. The Ministry in its
reply (September 2005) stated that there was growing concern over mushrooming of
sub-standard colleges.
5.2.10 Audit examination also revealed that the Ministry had constituted a
Commission of Inquiry headed by a retired judge of Delhi High Court in January 2004
to investigate complaints made by certain individuals and institutions and 52
Parliamentarians against the functioning of CCH. The terms of reference of the
Commission, inter-alia, included investigation into violations of section 20(1) of the
CCH Act, 1973 in granting recognition to new colleges and deputing executive committee
members, who participated in the decision making process for inspection of the colleges.
The report of the Commission was awaited as of March 2005. Audit noticed that
though complaints had mentioned involvement of the Vice-President of CCH, he was
nominated by the Council as a member of the Inquiry Commission.
The Ministry, while agreeing with the audit observations stated (September 2005)
that the system of inspection of colleges would be considered by the Councils at the
earliest. The Ministry while acknowledging in the Exit Conference (October 2005) that
the inspections made by Regulatory bodies had been deficient, stated that strict
adherence to prescribed norms was now being ensured while granting recognition to
colleges and that amendments to different laws was being actively considered to
overcome various bottlenecks.
5.2.11 Preparation and maintenance of a database of practitioners of AYUSH was
one of the important functions of the Regulatory bodies. A Central Register containing
the names of persons enrolled on any State Register of Indian medicine or Homoeopathy
and who possessed any of the recognised medical qualifications included in the
respective schedules of the Acts was to be maintained and notified in the Gazette of
India. A practitioner who did not possess a recognised medical qualification and had
been practicing Indian medicine or Homoeopathy before the commencement of Central
Acts was also eligible for enrollment on the State register of Indian medicine or
Homoeopathy.
5.2.12 While the Central Register of Homoeopathy was required to be maintained in
two parts, Part-I containing the names of practitioners who had a recognised Medical
qualification in Homoeopathy and Part-II the names of other practitioners, the Central
Register of Indian Medicine was maintained only for qualified practitioners. Against
6.95 lakh AYUSH practitioners (4.93 lakh qualified and 2.02 lakh non-qualified) registered
with the States, as of December 2002, database of only 1.86 lakh practitioners had been
maintained by both the Councils. Out of 29 States and 7 Union Territories (UTs),
records was maintained in only 20 States/UTs and notified upto the year indicated
against each state in Table 5.

105
Table 5: Notification of data of registered practitioners maintained upto the year ended
Sl. States/Union Territories A yurved & Unani Homoeopathy
No.
1 . Andhra Pradesh March 1994 1989
2 . Assam December 1986 1988
3. Bihar March 1997 —
4 . Chandigarh — 1988
5. Delhi March 2001 1988
6 . Gujarat December 1999 1988
7 . Haryana December 1999 1988
8 . Himachal Pradesh March 1997 1989
9 . Jammu & Kashmir 1983 -
10. Karnataka March 1994 1988
11. Kerala March 1994 1988
12. Madhya Pradesh March 2000 1988
13. Maharashtra March 1991 1988
14. Meghalaya — 1988
15. Orissa March 2002 1988
16. Punjab December 1998 1988
17. Rajasthan March 2002 1988
18. Tamil Nadu March 2001 1988
19. Uttar Pradesh March 2000 1989
20. West Bengal March 1994 1989
5.2.13 The database had not been updated and revised for periods ranging between
3 and 22 years in respect of the above States. Details of practitioners in Arunachal
Pradesh, Goa, Manipur, Mizoram, Nagaland and Sikkim had not been maintained in any
of the Central Registers. Delay in notification of the Central Register deprived the
practitioners of the opportunity to practice in other States or throughout the country.
The Ministry stated (September 2005) that efforts were being made to update and
revise the registers of practitioners on priority.
5.2.14 Status of AYUSH medical colleges
Table 6 below depicts the status of AYUSH colleges imparting education in
‘Ayurveda’, ‘Unani’, and ‘Homoeopathy’ systems in the country.
Table 6: Position of AYUSH colleges
Systems T otal no. of colleges during the year
2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
Total PG Total PG Total PG Total PG Total PG
colleges* colleges* colleges* colleges* colleges*
Ayurvedic 190 52 194 55 211 60 211 60 221 60
Unani 34 4 34 5 38 6 38 6 39 7
Homoeopathy 150 15 160 21 182 31 182 31 184 31
Total 374 71 388 81 431 97 431 97 444 98
*Includes colleges imparting PG courses
5.2.15 Audit noticed that the total number of AYUSH medical colleges under
Ayurveda, Unani and Homoeopathy systems increased by 19 per cent, from 374 at the
end of March 2001 to 444 at the end of March 2005. Annex-3 contains state-wise

106
details of government and non-government colleges. While Bihar, Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, and Uttar Pradesh accounted for 62 per cent of the total AYUSH
medical education institutions, no college had been set up in Manipur, Meghalaya,
Mizoram, Nagaland and Sikkim.
5.2.16 National/Apex level institutes
Department of AYUSH had been financing five apex level institutions of Ayurveda,
Unani and Homoeopathy in different parts of the country which were to act as centres
of excellence and were expected to develop high standards of teaching, training, research
and high quality patient care. Details of financial assistance provided to the apex
institutions, courses run by them and intake capacity are given in Annex-4. Table 7
contains the gist of audit findings from a test check of records of National/Apex level
institutes.
Table 7: Gist of audit findings in National/Apex level Institutions.
Sl. Name of the Audit observation/comments Period Expenditure
No. institute involved involved
(Rs. in crore)
1. National Institute i) There was shortage of 19 teachers. 2 000-01 31.23
of Homoeopathy, ii) 17 posts sanctioned by the Ministry for t o
Kolkata (NIH) PG courses in April 2004 were not filled. 2 004-05
iii) Minimum targets of theoretical and
practical classes were not achieved.
iv) Bed occupancy ranged between 47 and
65 per cent due to shortage of
medical/nursing personnel.
v) Shortfall of essential equipment/ material
ranged between 34 and 86 per cent  in
various departments.
vi) There were no facilities for conducting
clinical trials.
vii) Old equipment in the operation
theatre needed replacement.
2. National Institute i) Shortage of nine teaching staff and 13 and -do- 48.64
of Ayurveda, 36 per cent paramedical staff.
Jaipur (NIA) ii) Bed occupancy declined from 71 to 54
per cent during 2000-01 and 2003-04
3. Institute of Post In 150 bed attached hospital, patients -do- 25.81
Graduate Training declined by 21 per cent during 2000-01 and
& Research in 2003-04.
Ayurveda, Gujarat
(IPGTRA)
4. National Institute i) Post of professors/readers were not filled. 2 004-05 16.50
of Unani ii) Post graduate classes were taken by
Medicine, lecturers.
Bangalore
(NIUM)
5. Rashtriya i) No specific targets in terms of admission 2 000-01 2.45
Ayurveda of students were fixed. t o
Vidyapeeth, New ii) There was poor response to courses 2 004-05
Delhi (RAV) conducted.
iii) CCIM did not recognise the courses.

107
The Ministry stated (September 2005) that:
• out of 17 posts of teachers in NIH sanctioned in April 2004, 11 had since been
filled and the Institute was in the process of filling the remaining 6 posts. It was
also stated that NIH had engaged part-time teachers to overcome the shortages,
• NIH had undertaken measures to upgrade the bed strength from 60 to 100,
• the Staff Inspection Unit of the Ministry of Finance in April 2005 had
recommended reduction in the staff strength of NIA and thus there was no need
to augment the staff strength. The reply is not tenable as teaching and paramedical
staff were to be provided as per norms prescribed by regulatory Councils,
• the bed occupancy in NIA had declined as the hospital building was under
repair and maintenance,
• the decrease in number of patients in IPGTRA was due to the decrease in the
number of doctors as some of the posts had been abolished and new appointments
were not made,
• NIUM had started functioning only from the academic year 2004-05 and the
posts of teachers could not be filled due to non-availability of suitable candidates
and that the PG courses were being managed by three Professors on contract
basis, and
• the courses offered by RAV were to enhance the knowledge of students and not
for according any recognition. The reply is inconsistent with the
recommendations made by the Committee constituted by the Ministry in
May 2000 according to which the courses run by RAV should be recognised as
M.Phil degree and PG Diploma in Ayurveda.
5.2.17 Development of infrastructural facilities in educational institutions:
Ministry launched (1990-91) a centrally sponsored scheme for development of
infrastructure for AYUSH medical institutions, which had six components. Table 8
below indicates year-wise position of grants released to the States under each
component during 2000-01 to 2004-05.
5.2.18 Audit noticed that out of the total allotment of grants of Rs. 76.43 crore
between 2000-01 and 2004-05 (till December 2004) as much as Rs. 32.80 crore (43%) was
released for development of under graduate colleges and Rs. 26.03 crore (34%) was
released for development of State Model institutes, indicating the priority that the
Ministry accorded to the two areas. The Ministry, however, did not maintain
consolidated record of utilisation of grants, thus adversely affecting monitoring of
actual utilisation. Ministry did not receive Utilisation Certificates (UCs) that were
mandatory, from the States in 263 cases till February 2005 involving Rs. 28.44 crore
representing grants released during 1997-98 to 2001-02. State-wise position of grants
in-aid released under different components of the scheme during 2000-05 is given in
Annex-5.

108
Table 8: Year-wise and component-wise position of grant-in-aid released
(Rupees in lakh)
Sl. Period Development Assistance Reorientation Renovation and State Establishment T otal
No. of U.G . for P .G . training strengthening of model of computer
colleges education hospital wards institutes laboratory
1. 2000-01 815.00 204.93 36.11 — — 110.00 1166.04
2. 2001-02 684.46 256.07 40.47 — — 40.00 1021.00
3. 2002-03 403.90 213.24 19.96 — — — 637.10
4. 2003-04 653.79 119.78 71.08 269.61 1286.00 50.00 2450.26
5. 2004-05* 721.95 150.88 31.46 77.59 1317.00 70.00 2368.88
Total 3279.10 944.90 199.08 347.20 2603.00 270.00 7643.28
*position as of December 2004

109
The Ministry stated (September 2005) that the need for submission of UCs in
respect of funds released to the states was regularly being emphasised in the meetings
with State Health Secretaries who were also asked to furnish progress of scheme-wise
utilisation of funds on monthly basis.
5.2.19 Audit scrutiny further revealed that Goa and Jharkhand were not considered
for financial assistance under any of the components of the scheme during the last
5 years. No grant was released to Arunachal Pradesh, Chandigarh, Jammu & Kashmir
and Tamil Nadu under the components ‘Assistance for Post Graduate medical
education’, ‘Re-orientation training programme’ and ‘Renovation and strengthening
of hospitals wards.’ Bihar, Chandigarh, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab and Tamil
Nadu were not considered for assistance under the component ‘Upgradation of colleges
into Model institutes’, and grant under ‘Establishment of Computer laboratory’ was
not released to Arunachal Pradesh, Chandigarh, Haryana and Jammu & Kashmir.
5.2.20 Table 9 contains a gist of irregularities that audit noticed in the utilisation of
grants received by the States, which adversely impacted the development of
undergraduate, post graduate colleges and also in the upgradation of colleges as
model institutes.
Table 9: Gist of irregularities noticed in development of colleges
Sl. Name of programme Irregularities/deficiencies noticed
No.
12 3
1. Development of undergraduate i) Financial assistance was released to 5 colleges though
colleges UCs of earlier years were not submitted.
(Records of 42 out of 157 ii) 7 colleges did not furnish sufficient justification for or
colleges were test checked details of equipment to be purchased in the proposal for
involving grant of Rs. 32.79 grant.
crore in Assam, Andhra iii) 25 colleges did not furnish NOC from local Municipal
Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, bodies in support of construction plan.
Himachal Pradesh, iv) Status of fulfilment of prescribed conditions was not
Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, verifiable from the inspection reports of 41 colleges.
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar v) Advance payment of Rs. 93.50 lakh was made for
Pradesh and West Bengal) building construction which should have been reimbursed.
vi) Out of Rs. 298.20 lakh, grants amounting to
Rs. 117.44 lakh were lying unspent with the governments
of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Haryana, Orissa, Punjab,
Rajasthan, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal.
vii) Grants amounting to Rs. 65.20 lakh were released
with delays ranging from 6 to 39 months in Andhra
Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh, J&K & Uttar Pradesh.
viii) Civil works involving Rs. 53.94 lakh were incomplete
in Assam, Bihar and West Bengal, and
ix) Grant of Rs. 20 lakh was irregularly released to two
private colleges in Maharashtra.

110
2. Development of Post-graduate i) Assistance was released to 3 colleges though
medical education infrastructural requirements as laid down in the guidelines
(Records of 12 out of 31 were not met.
institutions were test checked ii) In 5 cases, permission of regulatory bodies was not
involving grant of Rs. 9.46 crore verifiable from records.
 in Andhra Pradesh, Himachal iii) 8 institutions did not furnish the undertaking as required
Pradesh, Orissa and Rajasthan) under the scheme guidelines.
iv) In Orissa grant of Rs.83.28 lakh was released upto
March 2002 but no admissions were made between
2001-2003.
v) Out of Rs.59.91 lakh released to Andhra Pradesh,
Orissa and Rajasthan, Rs.36.58 lakh, remained unutilised.
3. Reorientation training i) 19 institutions did not submit feedback of training
programme for AYUSH programme.
personnel ii) In 20 cases, UCs were not furnished.
(Records of 20 out of 73 iii) Out of the grant of Rs.15.10 lakh released to colleges
institutions were test checked in Chhattisgarh, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal during
involving grant of Rs. 1.99 the period 1996 and 2004, Rs.11.42 lakh remained
crore in Chhattisgarh, Haryana, unutilised.
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal)
4. Renovation and strengthening i) In 2 cases, copies of inspection reports of Regulatory
of teaching hospitals bodies were not found.
(Records of 6 out of 18 colleges ii) In one case, justification or estimate seeking grant was
were test checked involving not submitted.
grant of Rs. 3.47 crore in iii) Ministry released Rs.20 lakh to a college in Andhra
Andhra Pradesh) Pradesh without an attached hospital.
5. Establishment of computer i) Four institutions purchased inadmissible items or items
laboratory in excess of the prescribed quantities.
(Records of 15 out of 27 ii) Though the scheme provided for regular monitoring,
colleges involving grant of Ministry or regional units of Central Research Councils
Rs. 2.70 crore test checked in did not monitor in five cases,
Bihar, Delhi and Madhya iii) Out of the grant of Rs. 20 lakh released to Bihar and
Pradesh) Delhi, Rs. 2.14 lakh remained unspent.
6. State Model institute of i) Two colleges did not meet the prescribed norm of 50%
Ayurveda/Siddha/Unani/ of the teaching staff in position as posts of Professors
Homoeopathy and Readers were lying vacant.
(Records of 7 out of 19 colleges ii) Andhra Pradesh government released grant of Rs. 100
involving grant of Rs. 26.03 lakh only out of Rs.150 lakh, after a delay of 11 months.
crore were test checked in ii) Maharashtra government had not released grant of
Andhra Pradesh and Rs.171 lakh (December 2004), sanctioned by the Ministry
Maharashtra) in September 2003.
5.2.21 Audit examination revealed that the Ministry needed to refine and improve
the existing system of release of grants for development of under-graduate, post
graduate colleges, model institutes and computer laboratories.
12 3

111
5.2.22 Recommendations
Ministry may ensure that
• permission to open new colleges to start post graduate courses and to increase
admission capacity is accorded only after minimum standards of infrastructure
prescribed by the Regulatory Councils are achieved,
• autonomy and independence of the Regulatory Councils are maintained for
promoting transparency and accountability,
• Central Registers of practitioners are updated covering all the States/UTs,
• adequate measures are taken in accordance with a time bound programme for
removing disparity in medical education across the country and infrastructure in
apex level institutes is strengthened so as to enable them to function as Centres
of excellence, and
• a computer based tracking system for released grants is introduced so that
utilisation of funds improves significantly.
5.3 Achievement of Research Activities
5.3.1 Formulation of aims and pattern of research on scientific lines
Ministry established the Central Council for Research in Indian Medicine and
Homoeopathy (CCRIM&H) in 1969 to formulate aims and pattern of research on
scientific lines with a view to increasing their popularity and acceptance by enabling
scientific research in different aspects of respective systems through apex research
bodies. The Council was split in 1978 into four separate Research Councils to afford
each system maximum opportunity and freedom to develop in consonance with the
fundamentals of the respective systems, as follows:
• Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha (CCRAS),
• Central Council for Research in Unani Medicine (CCRUM),
• Central Council for Research in Homoeopathy (CCRH), and
• Central Council for Research in Yoga and Naturopathy (CCRYN).
Audit examination revealed that Rs. 278.44 crore were allocated to the three councils
(CCRAS, CCRUM and CCRH) selected for examination between 2000-01 and 2004-05
for undertaking various research activities, clinical trials, family welfare, reproductive
and child health research and tribal health care research programme. The overall
shortage of staff in these Councils ranged between 5 per cent and 40 per cent; while 40
per cent shortage existed in CCRAS which stated (July 2005) that action for filling up
the vacant posts was underway .
The Ministry stated (September 2005) that the regional units of the Councils were
being run without sufficient number of pharmacists, compounders, technicians, etc.
and the Councils were making efforts for filling the vacant posts.

112
5.3.2 Drug Research
Drug research consisted of drug standardisation research programme,
pharmacological/toxicological studies and medico-ethno-botanical surveys. A flow
chart of various activities of the drug research programme is given below:
SURVEY &
CULTIVATION OF
MEDICINAL PLANTS
PHARMACOGNOSY DRUG
STANDARDISATION
CHEMISTRY
PHARMACOLOGY
&
TOXICOLOGY
STANDARDISED  RAW DRUGS
PHARMACY
FINISHED PRODUCT
STANDARDISATION SAFETY STUDIES
QUALITY ASSURED DRUG
CLINICAL STUDIES
Isolation of &
characterisation of active
principles
General/specific
screening and safety
profile
Standardisation of
single
drugs/formulations
Diagnostic
characters for
identification
Supply of plant drugs

113
5.3.3 Drug standardisation was a pre-requisite for manufacture of quality drugs and
involved evolving standards of single and compound drugs (for both Ayurvedic and
Unani medicines) and mother tinctures (for homoeopathic medicines) in order to
establish various qualitative characteristics of drugs. Table 10 indicates the details of
drug standardisation work undertaken by each Council.
Table 10: Council-wise drugs standardised, monographs and research findings
published
Name of No. of drug Drugs standardised Monographs Percentage
the Council standardisation since inception published col (4) to (3)
units
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
CCRAS 1 8 Single 500 259
Compound 500 496 76%
CCRUM 6 Single 277 150
Compound 385 300 68%
CCRH 2 Single 122 19 16%
5.3.4 Audit examination revealed that 76, 68 and 16 per cent of single and compound
drugs standardised under Ayurveda, Unani and Homoeopathy systems respectively
had been documented in the form of monographs as of March 2005. The progress in
this regard after 1999 was insignificant, as 11 monographs of homoeopathic drugs had
been published, only in 2004-05. Further, the Ministry did not find the standards for
single drugs developed by CCRAS suitable for inclusion in the Ayurvedic
Pharmacopoeia of India due to large variations in the data and absence of Standard
Operating Procedures (SOPs). The standards published by the Research Councils on
the basis of research conducted from time to time did not also conform to the quality
and standards prescribed by Government’s Pharmacopoeia Committees. The Ministry
did not effectively guide, monitor and coordinate the work of its Research Councils,
which continued with their work regardless of its acceptance by Pharmacopoeia
Committees.
The Ministry stated (September 2005) that the standards had not been published
by CCRUM as these required further modification.
5.3.5 Drug proving and clinical verification of homoeopathic drugs
Unlike conventional medicines, where animal experimentation formed the basis of
evolution of drug pathogenesis, homoeopathic medicines were proved on healthy
human volunteers. Drug standardisation was followed by proving the drug and finally
by clinical verification. Audit examination revealed that out of 122 drugs standardised,
64 were proved and 75 were clinically verified. There was no correlation between the
drugs standardised, drugs proved and drugs clinically verified. Forty-four drugs were
taken up for proving and 47 for clinical verification without having been standardised.
Further, 45 drugs were taken up for clinical verification without proving.
5.3.6 There was, therefore, an unsystematic approach to drug proving and clinical
verification. The Ministry did not ensure that only those drugs which had been
standardised by the Council were taken up for proving and clinical verification, which

114
was the course of action supported by the special committee on clinical research of the
Council in its report of February 2003. WHO guidelines also reiterated that only
standardised drugs should be taken up for proving and clinical verification.
The Ministry stated (September 2005) that on the advice of the Scientific Advisory
Committee, it was decided to focus on 35 drugs proved by the Council and the drug-
proving programme had been revised from 2005-06.
5.3.7 Clinical Research
Clinical research facilitated assessment of therapeutic utility of a drug in specific
disease conditions and was expected to aid in establishing economically cheap and
effective remedies for common as well as chronic ailments. The Councils undertook
clinical studies in Tribal Health Care, Family Welfare and Reproductive and Child
Health Programmes, details of which are in Table 11.
Table 11: Council-wise position of clinical trials taken up, completed, continued and
monograph Published
Name Clinical trials Clinical trials Clinical trials Clinical trials Number of
of the taken up since abandoned completed continued drugs for
Research inception which
Council No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of Monographs
diseases drugs diseases drugs diseases drugs diseases drugs published
CCRAS 28 217 1 1 27 164 22* 52 36
CCRUM 30 120 20 65 11 31 8* 50 12
CCRH 97 - - - 56 — 4 — —
*Further trials continued with new drug
5.3.8 Audit noticed that there was a large gap between the number of clinical trials
completed and documented as well as the dissemination of the research findings for
the benefit of various stakeholders such as educationists, researchers, physicians,
manufacturers and the common man.
5.3.9 CCRAS had initiated a study (1986-87) of three oral and local ayurvedic
contraceptives under the Family Welfare Research Programme. Though some drugs
showed encouraging results their trial was postponed due to variation in composition
of drugs. Drug standardisation studies were eventually assigned to National Institute
of Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Mumbai. The study on Neem Oil, introduced
in 1988-89 indicated encouraging results but due to its bad odour, was not popular
among the women volunteers. The trial was re-initiated by adding lemon grass oil to
improve the odour of the drug. The study was still continuing.
5.3.10 CCRUM undertook a research project on clinical screening of contraceptive
agents in Unani medicine in 1969 in Hyderabad, which was extended to another unit in
Mumbai in 1981. Clinical trials of 18 drugs were conducted but none of the drugs was
found to be cent per cent safe. Further, during 1994—99, the council undertook trials
of a new coded contraceptive drug but discontinued the project (1999-2000) on which
an expenditure of Rs. 88.50 lakh was incurred, on the grounds that none of the drug
trials could provide 100 per cent contraceptive assurance. There were, therefore, no
concrete research results even after 20 years of initiation.

115
5.3.11 HIV Infection Research Programme through Homoeopathy
CCRH undertook studies at the Regional Research Institutes in Mumbai, Chennai
and New Delhi (1989, 1991 and 1998 respectively) for evaluating the role of
homoeopathic therapy in HIV infection. In 690 cases, the study indicated the role of
homoeopathic drugs in inhibiting and delaying progression of infection and improving
the quality of life of HIV infected individuals and was extended to seven centres
(2003). However, no common protocol for the study and laboratory investigations
were planned and carried out. The Council decided only in 2005 to take up the study
afresh with a common protocol and laboratory investigations and therefore ended up
duplicating the efforts, which meant unproductive expenditure and wasteful deployment
of human resources during the last 15 years.
5.3.12 Extra Mural Research
Research in AYUSH sector was limited to the efforts made by Central Research
Councils and was largely in the nature of clinical research. Ministry, therefore, conceived
of research in collaboration with reputed research institutions and Universities (called
Extra Mural Research) in order to generate scientifically acceptable outcomes and
launched a Centrally Sponsored Scheme (1997-98) for undertaking timebound research
projects of one to three years duration whose final outcomes were to be evaluated by
an expert group. Ministry revised the scheme in 2001 as the response was not
encouraging and sought to restrict research only to areas where studies could result in
quicker documentation and dissemination.
5.3.13 Audit noticed that 59 out of 66 research projects had remained incomplete
and though the Ministry had accepted only seven research projects during 2001—05,
their results had not been published or disseminated, as of March 2005. The Ministry
did not obtain any value for the expenditure of Rs. 7.13 crore incurred on the
66 projects even after 7 years, which deprived the public of the benefits accruing out
of research.
5.3.14 Audit examination revealed that the Ministry allowed research activities to be
undertaken by Research councils and external research agencies without fixed
parameters and specific time frame. Findings were not disseminated for the benefit of
researchers, manufacturers and the common man.
The Ministry stated (September 2005) that in order to disseminate the research
findings, specific provision for mandatory publication of the findings had since been
made in the scheme. During the discussions in the Exit Conference (October 2005), the
Ministry stated that the possibility of getting the research activities reviewed and
assessed by a peer group of eminent scientists for identifying such research activities,
which were not promising and could be substituted by other activities, would be
explored.

116
5.3.15 Patenting of drugs
The number of medicines patented is an indicator of the overall achievement of
Research Councils in clinical research. Table 12 indicates the position of drugs patented
or under process.
Table 12: System-wise position of drugs patented
System of No. of drugs Name of drug Year of Therapeutic use
Medicine patented/ patent
under process
Ayurveda 5 A yush-56 1976 Anti-epileptic
Ayush-64 1980 Anti-malaria
Kshar Sutra 2002 Medicinal thread for ano-rectal
diseases
Ayush Ghutti Under Cough, cold, fever, diarrhoea in
process children
Bal Rasayan Under General resistance in children
process
Unani 3 UNIM-352 Under Bronchial asthma (semi solid)
process
UNIM-301 Under Rheumatoid arthritis
process
UNIM-354 Under Bronchial asthma (capsules)
process
The position of Ayurvedic and Unani medicines patented by the councils was not
encouraging as patents for only three drugs had been obtained and five were under
process. It was stated in the Exit Conference (October 2005) that it had been decided to
patent all the drugs that would be developed. It was further stated that since National
Research Development Corporation (NRDC), which had been assigned the task of
patenting of drugs, was not very active, alternative methods would be explored to
overcome the problem.
5.3.16 Recommendations
Ministry may ensure that—
• the aims and patterns of research are formulated on scientific lines,
• the standards for drugs are in conformity with the quality prescribed by the
Pharmacopoeial committees,
• the approach to drug proving and clinical verification is systematic, and
• the appropriate guidelines are drawn up for taking up research activities under
fixed parameters in a time bound manner. The ongoing projects would need to be
completed at the earliest and findings disseminated to stakeholders i.e.
educationists, researchers, manufacturers and Government institutions.
5.4 Drug standardisation and quality control of AYUSH Drugs
5.4.1 The Ministry through its enforcement and regulatory mechanism planned
drug standardisation, regulation, enforcement and adherence to GMPs through
regulatory councils and national level laboratories.

117
5.4.2 Pharmacopoeial standards of AYUSH drugs
The Drugs and Cosmetics Act of 1940 and the rules framed thereunder, enacted for
regulating the standards of allopathic drugs, were amended in 1964 to include Ayurveda,
Unani and Siddha medicines under its enforcement and regulatory mechanism.
Homoeopathy system was also brought under the ambit of the Act in 1978 through an
amendment. The Ministry established Pharmacopoeia Committees between 1962 and
1964 for developing Pharmacopoeial standards in Ayurveda, Unani and Homoeopathy
systems. The main function of Pharmacopoeia Committees was to prepare and publish
official formularies
4 and pharmacopoeia5 under the respective systems for evolving
uniform standards in preparation of AYUSH drugs and prescribe working standards
for single drugs and compound formulations. Development of pharmacopoeial
standards was primarily the responsibility of two national level laboratories viz.,
Pharmacopoeial Laboratory for Indian Medicine, Ghaziabad (PLIM) and Homoeopathic
Pharmacopoeial Laboratory, Ghaziabad (HPL), which were set up as standard setting-
cum-drug testing laboratories. Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) were essential
for ensuring uniformity in terms of taste, colour and consistency in the formulations
and also in analysing the effects of the drugs. The laboratories did not finalise
pharmacopoeial standards in respect of compound formulations of Ayurveda and
Unani for want of SOPs. The Ministry had published standards for only 916 out of
1500 mother tinctures of Homoeopathy. Table 13 indicates the status of the preparation
of official formularies in pharmacopoeia of India and number of single drugs and
formulations included therein as of March 2005:
Table 13: Status of preparation of formularies and pharmacopoeia
Sl. Name of Committee Formulations included in formularies
No. and date of first No. of formulations/ Year of publication Single Year of
 setting-up compound drugs publication
1. Ayurvedic 635 April, 1978 (444) 326 1986 (80)
Pharmacopoeia January 2000 (191) 1999 (78)
Committee (APC) 2001 (100)
(Sept. 1962) 2004 (68)
2. Unani Pharmacopoeia 912 1981 (441) 150 1997 (45)
Committee (UPC) 1998 (202) Under
(March 1964) 1999 (103)   publication
Under publication (166) (105)
3. Homoepathic 1500* -  916 1971–2000
Pharmacopoeia
Committee (HPC) (1962)
Total 3047 1392
*Indicates the estimated number of mother tinctures in Homoeopathy, as no compound drugs exist
in this system. No formulary of Homoeopathy had been published.
5.4.3 Performance of pharmacopoeia committees set up by the Ministry during
1962-64 for developing pharmacopoeial standards for ensuring safety, quality, purity
and efficacy of drugs was far from satisfactory. While standards for 916 mother tinctures
4Formulary is a list of compound drugs prepared from classical texts and other sources. Formulary
also includes list of single drugs used in the preparation of compound drugs.
5Pharmacopoeia is the official compilation of the pharmacopoeial standards finalised by the
Pharmacopoeia Committees.

118
(61 per cent) in Homoeopathy had been published as of March 2005, pharmocopoeial
standards had not been finalised in respect of compound formulations in Ayurveda
and Unani even though the Committees were set up more than 40 years back.
The Ministry stated (September 2005) that the development of pharmacopoeial
standards required basic R&D and that it took time to design formats and undertake
testing. It added that the activity has been accelerated after creation of a separate
Department of AYUSH in 1995. It was further stated in the Exit Conference (October
2005) that the Ministry was also considering ways to use the standardisation work
being done in the private sector in developing pharmacopeial standards.
5.4.4 Drug standardisation
The Central Research Councils had developed their own standards for single and
compound drugs in Ayurveda, Unani and Homoeopathy systems over the years.
However, the Ayurveda Pharmacopoeia Committee did not accept the standards for
Ayurvedic drugs developed and published by Ayurveda Research Council, as there
was large-scale variation in data. Similarly, the standards developed by Unani research
Council were not being published in the Unani Pharmacopoeia of India as the mandate
for publishing the standards lay with the Pharmacopoeia Committee.
5.4.5 The Ministry separately launched a Central Scheme in 1997 in order to expedite
the work of development of pharmacopoeial standards. Though Ministry identified
921 formulations including 427 single and 494 compound drugs, for development of
standards and also awarded the work to 32 laboratories in 1997-98 involving an
expenditure of Rs. 5.26 crore, the laboratories did not develop pharmacopoeial standards
for compound drugs. Ministry thereafter assigned the work of development of SOPs
to 16 laboratories for 225 drugs in 2002 and released grant-in-aid of Rs. 2.01 crore
between 2002—2005. The final report was awaited (October 2005).
5.4.6 Coming to single drugs, standards in 120 (38 per cent) out of 315 of Ayurveda/
Siddha and 51 (46 per cent) out of 112 in the case of Unani drugs were approved by the
pharmacopoeia committees. Table 14 contains the status of single drugs standardised
by these laboratories upto March 2005.
Table 14: System-wise position of standardisation of drugs
System No. of Cases in which Standards approved Standards ready Standards
drugs work could not by Pharmacopoeia for placing under
allotted be taken up committee and before evaluation
due to non- under publication Pharmacopoeia
availability Committees
of plants
Ayurveda/ 315 1 7 120 3 7 141
Siddha
Unani 112 14 51 24 23
5.4.7 Thus, there was a duplication of efforts and wastage of resources by the
Central Research Councils and Pharmacopoeia Committees in the field of standardisation
of drugs. The Ministry did not ensure finalisation and publication of standards for
formulation of compound drugs in particular, even after incurring an expenditure of
Rs. 7.85 crore on the committees between 2000 and 2005 and when more than forty
years had passed since the establishment of Pharmacopoeia Committees.

119
5.4.8 Quality control of AYUSH drugs
With a view to restoring public faith in AYUSH systems, ensuring availability of
quality AYUSH drugs in conformity with the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 and
eliminating the possibility of production and marketing of sub-standard drugs, the
Ministry launched a Centrally Sponsored Scheme -‘Quality control of AYUSH drugs’
in 2000-01. Table 15 contains the component-wise details of grants released and the
number of units assisted during 2000-05.
Table 15: Number of units assisted and grants released
(Rupees in crore)
Sl. Name of the component Purpose Number Amount
No. of units released
assisted during
2000-05
1. Strengthening of State Government Renovation of 61 50.09
AYUSH Drug Testing Laboratories building, equipment
and Pharmacies. Assistance limited and strengthening of
to Rs. one crore per unit. human resource.
2. Strengthening of State Drug Setting up an 11 0.81
Controllers of AYUSH. exclusive office for
State AYUSH Drug
Controller to help
undertake quality
control
implementation.
3. Assistance upto a maximum of Improving the 21 0.23
Rs. 3 lakh per drug manufacturing infrastructure of
unit to meet Good Manufacturing private drug
Practices (GMP) requirements. manufacturers.
5.4.9  Audit examination revealed that the scheme envisaged projects for
strengthening 21 Drug Testing Laboratories (DTLs) and 40 pharmacies within 18 months
of the release of the financial assistance. However, none of the DTLs and pharmacies
had been able to utilise the entire grant-in-aid and make the facilities functional even
after 5 years of implementation. This resulted in blocking of ‘Plan’ funds amounting to
Rs. 25.31 crore. The State Governments either delayed release or did not release funds,
which contributed to slow progress of capital work and delays in completion of procedural
formalities. Annex-6 contains the details of grants in aid of Rs. 51.13 crore released to
93 units in 23 States/UTs during 2000-05 under the scheme.
The Ministry stated (September 2005) that the State Governments were being
reminded to complete the work and submit the utilisation certificates.
5.4.10 Test check of records in the States revealed that the Ministry did not release
any grant for establishing drug control mechanism to Haryana though it had 375
licenced pharmacies while Rs.1.07 crore was released to Tripura though it had only one
private pharmacy in the State. Reasons for assisting the States on a selective basis
were not on record. Funds amounting to Rs. 3.20 crore meant for purchase of machinery
and equipment remained unutilised while the machinery and equipment valuing

120
Rs. 4.89 crore though purchased, remained uninstalled in the states owing to non-
completion of civil work and/or trained manpower.
5.4.11 Enforcement, regulation and adherence to Good Manufacturing Practices
(GMP) standards by drug manufacturers
The Department of AYUSH issued a notification in June 2000 directing the drug
manufacturers to mandatorily adhere to GMP standards as laid down in the Drugs and
Cosmetics Rules, 1945, the time limit for which was extended up to June 2003 with a
view to enabling the drug manufacturers to improve their infrastructure, comply with
statutory requirements and obtain GMP certificates from the concerned State Drug
Control Authorities.
5.4.12 Audit examination revealed that out of 7849 manufacturing units, only 707
pharmacies possessed GMP certificate ( Annex-7 refers). The respective State
Governments did not cancel the licences of non-GMP manufactures for not adhering
to norms. Thirteen State Governments did not carry out annual inspection of AYUSH
manufacturing units and regular testing of drug samples for ensuring quality control
under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 because of shortage of manpower and
non-availability of specified standards for testing AYUSH drugs. Thus, funds
amounting to Rs. 51.13 crore earmarked by the Ministry for quality control during
2000-05 proved largely unfruitful as funds were blocked in incomplete projects or the
State Governments released funds in unplanned and injudicious manner.
5.4.13 Recommendations
Ministry may ensure that—
• reasons for the slackness in development of pharmacopoeial standards are
investigated and the specific bottlenecks for ensuring their expeditious
publication in the respective pharmacopoeia are identified,
• result oriented supervision is carried out and drug standardisation work done
by Research Councils in consultation with the pharmacopoeia committees is
monitored by fixing clear areas of responsibility so that efforts are not duplicated
and resources not wasted, and
• suitable penal measures are introduced and enforced so that the drug
manufacturing units strictly adhere to GMPs.
The Ministry stated (September 2005) that the State Licencing Authorities were
being pursued to implement GMP provisions. It was further stated in the Exit Conference
(October 2005) that with a view to ensuring strict compliance to GMP provisions, a
notification had been issued according to which the licences of noncompliant
manufacturing units would not be renewed after 1 January, 2006 and that the Ministry
was emphasising on the States for strengthening the enforcement mechanism for
GMP.

121
5.5 Production of raw material for AYUSH drugs
5.5.1 Conservation and development of medicinal plants for AYUSH drugs
Medicinal plants constituted about 80 per cent  of the raw materials required for
manufacture of AYUSH drugs. Most of these plants grew in the wild as natural
components of vegetation of a particular region. With a view to streamlining the
medicinal plants sector and developing an appropriate mechanism for initiating and
implementing the policies for conservation and development of medicinal plants at the
National and State levels, the Ministry had set up a National Medicinal Plant Board
(NMPB) in November 2000 for ensuring coordination of all matters relating to medicinal
plants including drawing up of policies and strategies for conservation, proper
harvesting, marketing of raw materials and protecting, sustaining and developing this
sector.
5.5.2 At the initiative of NMPB, State Medicinal Plant Boards (SMPB) were set up in
all the States/UTs (except Delhi and Meghalaya) between 2001 and 2004 to assist
NMPB in implementation of schemes and policies. With a view to achieving its goals,
NMPB implemented various promotional and contractual farming schemes. Table 16
contains the year-wise position of projects sanctioned, amount paid and projects
completed during 2000-2005 (upto December 2004).
Table 16: Year-wise and scheme-wise projects sanctioned, expenditure incurred
and projects completed
(Rupees in lakh)
Promotional scheme Contractual farming scheme
Y ear No. of No. of Expenditure No. of No. of Expenditure
projects projects projects projects
sanctioned completed sanctioned completed
2000-01 5 Not available 93.51 0 - 0
2001-02 144 5 2404.26 0 - 0
2002-03 101 1 995.76 79 36 422.50
2003-04 66 Nil 755.10 687 Nil 1638.82
2004-05 156 Nil 1688.20 623 Nil 1340.18
Total 472 6 5936.83 1389 36 3401.50
5.5.3 A test-check of records revealed that out of 98 projects covering all the activities,
in 51 cases applications were received directly by NMPB, which should have been
routed through respective SMPBs/State Governments with their recommendations as
per guidelines of the scheme. Himachal Pradesh and Orissa did not utilise funds
amounting to Rs. 12.45 lakh sanctioned by the Ministry for infrastructural development,
standardisation of drying and storage, development of herbal gardens, and promotion
of medicinal plants due to delay in granting administrative approval and other reasons.
Further, out of 1077 projects in all, sanctioned under the promotional and contractual
farming schemes during 2001-04 involving financial assistance of Rs. 62.16 crore, only
210 projects were assigned by the State Medicinal Plant Board to the Indian Institute
of Forest Management and Directorate of Research for monitoring and the remaining
867 projects were neither supervised nor monitored. The Ministry was, thus, not able
to ascertain the status of utilisation of grants released and achievement of projected
increase in production of medicinal plant material in these cases.

122
The Ministry stated (September 2005) that since SMPBs had not been formed in all
the States upto 2003, some projects were considered without their recommendation
and that now only the projects recommended by SMPBs were being considered. The
reply is not tenable as in the absence of SMPBs, the project proposals should have
been forwarded through the respective State Governments/ Directorates of AYUSH.
5.5.4 Cultivation of medicinal plants and development of agro-techniques
The Ministry launched (1990-91) an innovative scheme for development and
cultivation of medicinal plants before NMPB was set up in November 2000 which
aimed at enhancing the availability of medicinal raw material and provided grants in aid
for the development of agro-techniques and cultivation of medicinal plants. This scheme
continued to be implemented even after NMPB and SMPB were set up. Ministry
provided financial assistance of Rs. 73.85 lakh during 2000-01 and 2002-03 to various
institutions/State Governments under 18 projects for setting up demonstration
medicinal plant gardens. The Boards did not, however, monitor the status of medicinal
plant gardens set up under the scheme, such as details of production, survival/mortality
of plants raised and utilisation of funds as of December 2004.
5.5.5 Audit examination revealed that 45 medicinal plants were identified for
development of agro-techniques under the component Development of agrotechniques.
An amount of Rs. 5.05 crore was released under 33 projects for development of agro
techniques for 133 plants. Audit noticed that out of 45 species identified for agro-
techniques, projects in respect of 25 species only had been undertaken and no patents
were obtained. The Board stated (December 2004) that the developed agro-techniques
were being compiled for publication for dissemination of the research finding among
the masses.
5.5.6 Absence of an authentic database of demand and supply of prioritised medicinal
plants coupled with failure in monitoring and evaluation of various plantation schemes
by the NMPB prevented the attainment of the objectives of increasing production of
plant based quality raw material and conservation, marketing and export of AYUSH
drugs.
5.5.7 An amount of Rs.7.10 lakh released to Madhya Pradesh and Orissa remained
unutilised due to delay in granting administrative approval. Further, Rs. 25.48 lakh
released to Rajasthan remained idle as the State Government did not provide a matching
share.
5.5.8 The Ministry failed in covering all the identified species for development of
agro-techniques and the undue delay in completion of projects defeated the very
purpose of the scheme. Ministry wound up the scheme for development of agro-
techniques in 2001 rendering the entire expenditure of Rs 5.05 crore unproductive.
The Ministry stated (September 2005) that it had been decided in May 2005—
• to conduct a study involving an agency of competent professionals for assessing
demand and supply position of medicinal plants,
• to strengthen the NMPB and SMPBs and

123
• to constitute a committee to revise the operational guidelines for schemes run
by NMPB and consider mechanism to involve SMPBs more actively in appraisal
and implementation of the projects. It added that project reports on agro-
techniques developed after experimental cultivation had been received from
most of the organisations and an expert agency had been engaged for finalisation
of manuscripts of agro-techniques developed for about 50-55 plants.
5.5.9 Contractual Farming Scheme
The contractual farming schemes run by NMPB aimed at expansion of area of
cultivation on commercial scale with assured market for 32 identified species. The
scheme provided financial assistance to cultivators of these identified medicinal plants
in the form of grants in aid restricted to 30 per cent of the project cost subject to a
ceiling of Rs.9 lakh. Audit noticed that out of 79 projects sanctioned by the Board
during 2002-03, financial assistance of Rs. 59 lakh was paid in excess of the prescribed
norms in 23 cases.
5.5.10 Audit examination further revealed that the scheme was not being implemented
under a proper plan of action for achieving uniform and balanced increase in the
plantation and prioritisation of each of the 32 identified species. During the period
2002-05, the Ministry released total assistance of Rs.34.02 crore under the scheme, out
of which as much as Rs.14.68 crore (43 per cent) was meant for cultivation of one
species only namely Safed Musli which had a low gestation period but the highest
input cost of Rs.2.25 lakh per acre. A similar imbalance in promoting production was
found in 2002-03 when out of the total area of 3946 acres used for cultivation of 32
identified species as much as 2600 acres (66 per cent) was used for cultivation of only
one species namely Senna. In the area of monitoring the actual production of crop
also, there were deficiencies. The Ministry was not aware of the total quantity of
production of these identified species not did it have any information on the actual
marketing of the produce though as per the scheme guidelines, the farmers were
expected to sell the produce only to pre-identified traders with whom they were to sign
the Memorandum of Understanding (MoU). This aspect of the scheme was not
monitored by the Ministry at all.
The Ministry stated (September 2005) that:—
(i) the projects were sanctioned as per the requirements of farmers and were
recommended by a Project Screening Committee and approved by Standing
Finance Committee,
(ii) selection of species was always in the hands of farmers who cultivated only
the profitable species of plants and that the species where profit margin was
less were not taken up, and
(iii) though there was an MoU between the grower and the buyer, the farmers sold
their produce in the open market as the market prices were higher than those
agreed in the MoU.
The Ministry’s reply clearly showed their lack of control over the implementation of
the scheme.

124
5.5.11 Recommendations
Ministry may ensure that—
• State Medicinal Plant Boards are entrusted with clear and direct responsibility of
monitoring and evaluating various plantation schemes,
• research findings relating to development of agro-techniques are finalised,
patented and disseminated among the stakeholders through a well planned and
monitored action plan, and
• an authentic database in respect of prioritised medicinal plants is prepared.
5.6 Development of healthcare facilities, integration and expansion of outreach in
healthcare under AYUSH
5.6.1 Clinical treatment facilities: The Research Councils provided IPD and OPD
patient care facilities as a part of clinical research programmes and for creating
awareness about preventive and promotive health care among the masses. While
CCRAS and CCRH provided clinical treatment facilities in tribal areas through units
specifically set up for the purpose, CCRUM also provided Medicare to the population
in urban slums, rural areas and SC/ST pockets through mobile clinics. Table 17 indicates
the position of patient care provided by the Councils between 2000-01 and 2003-04.
Table 17: System-wise number of clinical units, bed strength and number of patients treated
Name of the Nature of services No. of Bed No. of patients
System units strength 2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04
Ayurvedic Clinical Research IPD 22 520 1465 1685 2201 2285
OPD 25 - 366377 379521 424344 467899
Tribal Health Care Door steps 6 - 8029 6636 7299 5668
Clinical unit, OPD 1 - 18136 18243 29303 32337
Safdarjung Hospital
Unani Clinical Research IPD 9 162 890 1032 932 714
OPD 15 - 304354 338859 338547 329783
Mobile Health Care Door steps 13 - 60020 62666 35119 35855
Services
School Health Care Door steps/ 10 - 1372 2556 3740 3984
Services Schools
Clinical Unit, RML OPD 1 - 58553 66165 57288 48901
Hospital
Homoeo- Clinical Research IPD 3 85 6840 7938 12102 9296
pathy OPD 21 - 243857 308506 321412 281780
Tribal Health Care Door steps 12 - 3273 3473 3425 2806
Clinical Unit, OPD 1 - 25002 25558 28174 30868
Safdarjung Hospital
Note: Up to date position for 2004-05 not available.
5.6.2 Against the bed strength of 520 under Ayurveda, the number of patients per
bed/annum ranged from 3 to 4 only while in the case of Unani, against the bed strength
of 162 there were 4 to 6 patients per year. The number of patients treated by CCRUM
through its mobile health care services in urban slums and SC/ST pockets was reduced
to half the number during 2003-04 as compared to 2000-01. Test check of records in
Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Orissa and Punjab revealed that trial medicines and IPD facilities were not available
and bed occupancy declined due to withdrawal of free distribution of medicine and
poor infrastructure.

125
The Ministry stated (September 2005) that decrease in flow of patients in Mobile
Health Care Services covering SC/ST pockets had been due to non-availability of
vehicles and action for replacement of old and condemned vehicles was being taken.
It further stated that IPD Services in a number of centres could not function due to
non-availability of functional accommodation, unsafe buildings and non-availability
of staff.
5.6.3 Mainstreaming of ‘AYUSH’ in national healthcare
With a view to mainstreaming the Indian Systems of Medicine, the Ministry initiated
a ‘National Reproductive and Child Health Programme’ at the Primary Health care
Centre (PHC) level, in April 2001. The total estimated expenditure of Rs. 497.67 lakh was
to be funded jointly and equally by the Departments of Ayush and Family Welfare. A
total of 17 Ayurveda and 16 Siddha interventions were identified for 12 different
conditions/diseases related to women and children. Ministry did not approve the
drugs manufactured by the Council as SOPs were not followed, acute and sub-acute
toxicity studies of drugs selected for the project were not made, and clearance from
ethical committee was not obtained. Out of an amount of Rs. 149.50 lakh incurred by
CCRAS, Rs. 104.81 lakh turned out to be unfruitful as Ministry did not approve the
drugs manufactured by the Council.
5.6.4 Establishment of specialised therapy centers/specialty clinics
The Ministry introduced a Centrally Sponsored Scheme in 2002-03 for ‘Promoting
Development of Health Care Facilities’ in AYUSH in order to make AYUSH systems
available to the public at large and also to bridge the gaps between AYUSH and
modern medicine. The scheme provided financial assistance to States for setting up
specialised therapy centres with hospitalisation facility in AYUSH system, specialty
clinics of AYUSH i.e. system specific outdoor treatment centres, an AYUSH wing in
district allopathic hospitals with outdoor as well indoor facility in one or two systems
of AYUSH and purchase of essential drugs for identified AYUSH dispensaries in rural
and backward areas. Table 18 contains component-wise details of expenditure under
the programme incurred between 2002-03 and 2004-05. Annex-8 contains statewise
details of funds released during the same period.
Table 18: Component-wise grant-in-aid released and number of units covered
(Rupees in crore )
Component Amount paid and units covered
2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
Amount Units Amount Units Amount Units
covered covered covered
Specialised - - 0 0 1.70 8
Therapy Centre
Specialty Clinic - - 1.46 15 2.72 28
ISM&H wing in District - - 4.32 18 1.68 5
Allopathic Hospitals
Supply of essential drugs 1.20 480 8.76 3504 11.90 4761
Total 1.20 480 14.54 3537 18.00 4802

126
5.6.5 Audit scrutiny revealed that Ministry released grants in aid of Rs. 1.44 crore to
Andhra Pradesh and Madhya Pradesh for setting up two specialised therapy centres
and 10 speciality clinics although the State governments did not fulfil the essential
conditions governing the scheme. Similarly, the Ministry also released Rs. 21.47 lakh
to Kerala for setting up specialised therapy centres’ though the proposal actually
related to allopathic hospitals. No progress report had, however, been received from
any of the units assisted through their respective State Governments, as required
under the programme.
5.6.6 Audit scrutiny further revealed that out of Rs. 494.94 lakh released by the
Ministry during 2002-05 to Andhra Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir,
Manipur, Tripura and West Bengal, Rs. 490.38 lakh (99 per cent) remained unutilised as
the State governments did not release the funds to implementing agencies. Besides,
medicines costing Rs. 20.09 lakh were diverted to other hospitals in Tamil Nadu and
essential medicines worth Rs. 5.58 lakh were supplied to dispensaries not covered
under the proposals while medicines costing Rs. 8.61 lakh were lying unused in the
Medical Store Depot as of January 2005 in Haryana.
5.6.7  Promotion of AYUSH under Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS)
The Central Government Health Scheme (CGHS) network had 78 AYUSH (CGHS)
dispensaries functioning at the end of the IXth Plan. During the Xth Plan (2002-07),
21 new AYUSH dispensaries were planned to be established in the premises of the
existing allopathic dispensaries. Seven new dispensaries were approved in 2003-04 and
the budget provision of Rs. 86 lakh was placed at the disposal of DGHS. As of June 2004,
only 2 dispensaries had been opened. The Ministry sanctioned seven more dispensaries
during 2004-05 at a cost of Rs. 1.30 crore but none of the sanctioned dispensaries was
set-up during 2004-05 due to shortage of doctors and paramedical staff.
5.6.8  In view of the declining trend in the attendance of patients in Ayurveda and
Homoeopathy dispensaries from 1994-95 to 2001-02, the Ministry released Rs. 17.10
lakh in three instalments to the Indian Council for Medical Research (ICMR) between
September 2002 and December 2004 for conducting a survey and submitting a report
within one year from the release of first instalment. The survey aimed at assessing the
acceptability/non-acceptability level of AYUSH facilities under CGHS, perception of
CGHS beneficiaries about AYUSH, availability of AYUSH facilities under CGHS in the
country and the level of availability of infrastructure and facilities in the selected
teaching hospitals of AYUSH. The survey report had not been received as of March
2005, 30 months after the release of the first instalment of the grant, which delayed
implementation of the required policy initiatives based on the survey findings.
5.6.9  Setting up health resort clinics for tourists
With a view to providing specialised facilities, available under the AYUSH to both
domestic and foreign tourists, the Ministry initiated a scheme involving setting up of
Health Resort Clinics with AYUSH component for tourists in 2001-02. Under the scheme,
panchakarma centres were to be set up in the identified ITDC hotels of repute. Ministry
released (March 2002) Rs.73.72 lakh to the Government of Himachal Pradesh, for setting
up panchakarma centres in four identified hotels in the State. The grants in aid was to

127
be utilised, within six months as a one time expenditure on purchase of equipment,
training manpower, essential medicines and advertisements through newspapers.
Audit examination revealed that Rs. 53.19 lakh (72 %) out of the total grant of Rs.
73.72 lakh was lying unspent as of March 2005. Panchakarma centres were not
made operational due to poor response from tourists. The Ministry was thus, not
able to expand the outreach of healthcare under AYUSH and optimally utilise
existing AYUSH facilities.
The Ministry stated (September 2005) that the scheme had since been wound up in
consultation with the Ministry of Tourism and the Government of Himachal Pradesh
had been asked to immediately refund the entire amount of Rs. 73.72 lakh released
under the scheme.
5.6.10  Recommendation
Ministry may critically review the status of expansion of the outreach of healthcare
and put in place appropriate control mechanisms with clearly defined responsibility
centres to monitor and ensure optimal utilisation of existing facilities. During the
discussions in the Exit Conference (October 2005), the Ministry stated that regular
meetings were being held with the State Governments and that the States where the
implementation of this scheme was weak, were being encouraged to visit the states,
that were doing well to determine the rectificatory measures that could be adopted by
the former.
6.  Conclusion
The main objectives of Department of AYUSH were to harness the Indian Systems
of Medicine including Homoeopathy for promoting good health and augmenting the
existing health care delivery system by ensuring availability of affordable and
efficacious AYUSH medicines and services as well as by improving the standards of
education in the Indian Systems of Medicine. Audit examination revealed that the
Department attempted to implement a large number of schemes without adequate
budgetary support, which resulted in dissipation of much of the efforts as well as lack
of proper focus in the implementation of the schemes. The Ministry did not raise the
budgetary allocation to the promised level of 10 per cent of the total health plan. There
were problems of management like lack of coordination between the Ministry and the
regulatory and research bodies, absence of an effective monitoring and evaluation
system and failure to remove different kinds of procedural hurdles. Educational
institutions, hospitals and the apex research bodies suffered from poor infrastructural
facilities including serious shortage of manpower even decades after they were set
up. The regulatory bodies did not exercise their autonomy judiciously resulting in
the Ministry curtailing their delegated authority in some cases. The quality control
activities did not make any impact as the Pharmacopoeia Committees failed to finalise
pharmacopoeial standards in respect of any of the compound formulations in the
Ayurveda and Unani systems. Research activities undertaken by the Research
Councils had not been taken up under any fixed parameters and within any specified
time frame nor had research findings been disseminated for the benefit of stakeholders.
Various promotional and contractual farming schemes were undertaken for
increasing production of medicinal plants without any authentic database on the

128
demand and supply position of prioritised medicinal plants. Poor supervision,
monitoring and coordination among the functionaries only compounded the problems,
as there was no perceptible impact on the production of medicinal plants. The Ministry
did not succeed in achieving the objective of expanding the outreach of health care
under AYUSH.
Sd/-
N
EW DELHI; (Dr. A.K. BANERJEE)
Dated: 9 December, 2005 Director General of Audit,
Central Revenues.
Countersigned
Sd/-
NEW DELHI; (VIJAYENDRA. N. KAUL)
Dated: 12 December, 2005 Comptroller and Auditor General of India.

ANNEXURE-1
(Refers to Paragraph 4.1)
DETAILS OF SAMPLES TEST CHECKED DURING PERFORMANCE AUDIT
Sl. Name of the No. of No. of Nature of records checked Percentage
No. office/ units units test checked
establishment audited
1. Department of 1 1 (a) Records relating to Centrally 27-56 per cent
AYUSH Sponsored Schemes of: of the cases of
-Development of Education assistance
-Quality control of Ayush Drugs released during
-Setting up of speciality clinics 2000-05
etc.
(b)Records relating to Central
Schemes of:
National Apex level institutes 100 per cent
-Development of Pharmacopoeial
standards
-Extra mural research programme
-Setting up of health resorts
2. Regulatory 2 2 (a) Permission for opening of 32 per cent of
Bodies new colleges etc., the colleges
(b) Recognition of medical during 2000-05
qualification and monitoring
of examination
3. Research 3 3 Records relating to drug 100 per cent
Councils standardisation, clinical
research, treatment
facilities etc.
4. National 1 1 Records relating to promotional 25 per cent of
Medicinal schemes, contractual schemes, cases of
Plant Board and schemes relating to assistance
development of agro-techniques during 2000-05
etc.
129

130
ANNEXURE-2
(Refers to Paragraph 5.1.3)
EXPENDITURE UNDER V ARIOUS SCHEMES AND ACTIVITIES DURING 2000-01 TO 2004-05
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl. Name of the activity 2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
No. Plan Non- Plan Non- Plan Non- Plan Non- Plan Non-
Plan Plan Plan Plan Plan
1 2 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2
1. Secretariat 337.76 18.58 312.38 19.23 450.95 30.65 381.62 43.48 419.60 14.89
Total 337.76 18.58 312.38 19.23 450.95 30.65 381.62 43.48 419.60 14.89
2. Regulatory Bodies
(i) CCIM, New Delhi 14.00 47.03 10.00 58.34 12.00 64.41 10.89 78.89 12.00 84.90
(ii) CCH, New Delhi - 61.50 - 64.50 - 151.50 - 55.71 10.00 87.00
Total 14.00 108.53 10.00 122.84 12.00 215.91 10.89 134.60 22.00 171.90
3. Central Research Council
(i) CCRAS 688.47 1872.53 772.60 1786.50 741.00 2041.50 931.10 2090.00 840.00 2691.00
(ii) CCRUM 849.00 641.00 807.00 714.52 838.49 780.00 957.25 830.25 1375.00 1082.07
(iii) CCRH 330.80 374.20 370.71 395.30 391.87 440.00 517.80 455.00 719.00 520.00
(iv) CCRYN 164.50 44.86 175.00 48.72 175.00 54.00 133.25 58.00 175.00 65.00
Total 2032.77 2932.59 2125.31 2945.04 2146.36 3315.50 2539.40 3433.25 3109.00 4358.07
4. Extra Mural Research 62.69 - 147.08 - 90.00 - 110.00 - 130.00 -
(Centrally Sponsored Scheme)
Total 62.69 - 147.08 - 90.00 - 110.00 - 130.00 -
5. Apex Level Institutions
(i) IGPTRA, Jamnagar 75.00 375.00 60.00 423.25 30.00 481.92 92.00 460.00 100.00 484.00
(ii) NIA, Jaipur 316.00 516.10 357.00 493.70 593.64 498.00 459.87 604.00 397.00 628.98
(iii) RA V , New Delhi 40.58 - 46.65 - 50.84 - 53.17 - 51.00 3.00
(iv) NIS, Chennai - - - - 400.00 - 1000.00 - 475.00 -
(v) NIH, Kolkata 463.87 73.50 400.00 85.90 600.00 100.00 500.00 100.00 799.54 105.00
(vi) NIUM, Bangalore 200.00 - 150.00 - 300.00 - 300.00 - 700.00 -
(vii) MDNIY, New Delhi 53.05 134.00 109.00 137.47 317.40 146.00 217.50 149.50 200.00 157.00

131
(viii) V ishwayatan Yogashram, Delhi 16.75 - 19.00 - 17.00 - 17.50 - 2 1.50 -
(ix) NIN, Pune 77.00 - 80.00 - 97.50 - 145.00 - 195.00 -
1242.25 1098.60 1221.65 1140.32 2406.38 1225.92 2785.04 1313.50 2939.04 1377.98
6. Development of Education (Centrally Sponsored Schemes)
(i) Development of AYUSH UG 815.00 - 686.46 - 403.90 - 653.79 - 800.00 -
Colleges
(ii) Assistance to PG Medical 204.93 - 256.07 - 213.24 - 119.78 - 200.00 -
Education in AYUSH
(iii) Information Technology 110.00 - 40.00 - - - 50.00 - 80.00 -
(iv) Establishment of Model - - - - - - 1286.00 - 1589.80 -
Institutes/Centres of Excellence
(v) Renovation/strengthening of - - - - - - 269.61 - 100.00 -
AYUSH teaching Hospitals
(vi) Reorientation and Training 36.08 - 43.94 - 19.96 - 71.07 - 5 4.17 -
Programme (ROTP)
Total 1 166.01 - 1026.47 - 637.10 - 2450.25 - 2823.97 -
7. Standardisation of AYUSH Drugs
(i) National Medical Plants Board 88.24 - 1175.17 - 1580.12 - 1829.09 - 2755.58 -
(ii) PLIM, Ghaziabad 7.04 40.16 7.31 43.54 18.00 47.49 9.86 46.62 6.31 50.99
(iii) HPL, Ghaziabad 17.61 36.31 22.19 37.06 17.38 53.00 15.41 50.84 2 0.76 62.48
(iv) Strengthening of PLIM/HPL - - 20.00 -------
(v) Strengthening of Pharma- 164.90 29.80 86.58 34.10 39.23 29.89 122.30 33.08 145.49 38.19
copoeias Committees
(vi) Homoeopathic Pharma- - 4.06  - 6.04 - 0.55 - 6.83 - 44.45
copoeias Committees
(vii) TKDL Patent Cell for 11.00 - 75.00 - 65.00 - 50.00 - 353.38 -
AYUSH/PR
Total 288.79 1 10.33 1386.25 120.74 1719.73 130.93 2026.66 137.37 3281.52 196.11
8. Quality Control of drugs (Centrally Sponsored Schemes)
(i) Innovative scheme for develop- 144.48 - 75.39 - 49.60 4.35 - - -
ment of Medicinal Plants
(ii) Incentive for Industry for - - - - - - 0.56 - 9.50 -
fairs/market study

132
(iii) Assistance to State drug 2046.88 - 1099.55 - 546.02 - 869.72 - 1088.30 -
Testing Labs./Pharmacies
(iv) Strengthening of State - - - - - - 52.97 - 2 7.85 -
Enforcement Mechanism
(v) Assistance to Units for - - - - - - 13.21 - 1 6.85 -
 obtaining GMP Certificates
Total 2191.36 - 1 174.94 - 595.62 - 940.81 - 1142.50 -
9. Health Care Services
(i) Advance Ayurvedic Centre, 25.00 - 26.00 - 26.00 - 9.57 - - -
NIMHANS
(ii) National Ayurveda Hospital, - - 217.80 - 12.60 - 15.00 - 1369.50 -
Delhi
(iii) Expansion of CGHS - - - - - - 7.76 - 6.46 -
Dispensaries
(iv) A yurveda Hospital, - - - - - - 10.00 29.45 1 9.00 72.95
 Lodhi Road
Total 25.00 - 243.80 - 38.60 - 42.33 29.45 1394.96 72.95
10. Health Care Services
(Centrally Sponsored Schemes)
(i) Ayurveda Park/Panchkarma in - - 73.72 -------
Hotels (CSS)
(ii) Setting up of ISM Wings in - - - - - - 431.84 - 1070.00 -
Distt. Hospitals (CSS)
(iii) ISM Poly Clinic (CSS) - - - ----- 235.86 -
(iv) Specialty Clinic in ISM&H (CSS) - - - - - - 146.28 - 349.14 -
(v) Establishment of demonstrative - - - -------
AYUSH units for popularization
of AYUSH (CSS)
(vi) Essential drugs for AYUSH - - - - 234.03 - 881.24 - 2175.00 -
dispensaries/Home Remedy
kits/Health for all (CSS)
Total - - 73.72 - 234.03 - 1459.36 - 3830.00 -
1 2 3456789 1 0 1 1 1 2

133
11. Information, Education &
Communication
(i) International Exchange 65.61 - 73.52 - 68.09 - 89.87 - 7 5.00 -
Programme
(ii) Information, Education & 357.34 - 208.24 - 474.67 - 328.57 - 393.66 -
Communication
(iii) Awareness Building on Merits - - - -------
of AYUSH
(iv) Manuscript, Publication & - - - - - - 55.00 - 5.00 -
Acquisition
Total 422.95 - 281.76 - 542.76 - 473.44 - 437.66 -
12. Pharmaceutical Company
(i) IMPCL, Mohan, Uttaranchal 51.00 - - ----- 5 1.00 -
Total 51.00 - - ----- 5 1.00 -
13. Others
(i) Central Councils Combined 88.00 7.20 82.55 6.54 96.80 8.00 120.00 8.00 250.00 8.00
Building Complex
(ii) Survey on usage and 22.98 - - - 7.60 - 5.70 - 3.80 -
 acceptability of AYUSH
(iii) CCIM Elections - 75.08 - 3.06 - 3.98 - 1.86 - 7.19
(iv) Lump-sum provision for - - 128.63 ----- 2000.00* -
North Eastern Areas
(v) Publication of Text Books - - - - - - 50.00 - 4.84 -
(vi) Programme training/ - - - ----- 0.10 -
fellowship exposure visits
 for AYUSH personnel
Total 1 10.98 82.28 211.18 9.60 104.40 1 1.98 175.70 9.86 258.74 15.19
Grand Total 7945.79 4350.91 8214.54 4357.77 8977.93 4930.89 13395.50 5101.51 19875.99 6207.09
*Indicates the total allocation for the North Eastern States. The actual expenditure has been accounted for under the respectiv e schemes.

134
ANNEXURE-3
(Refers to Paragraph 5.2.15)
STATE-WISE DETAILS OF GOVERNMENT AND NON-GOVERNMENT U.G. AND P .G. COLLEGES
Sl. Name of the States/ A yurveda* Unani* Homoeopathy* Grand
No. Union Territories Govt. Others T otal Govt. Others T otal Govt. Others T otal Total
1 2 3 456789 1 0 1 1 1 2
1. Andhra Pradesh 03 01 04 01 01 02 04 - 04 10
2. Arunachal Pradesh - - - -  - - - 01 01 01
3. Assam 01 - 01 - - - 03 - 03 04
4. Bihar 05 06 11 01 03 04 01 13 14 29
5. Chhatisgarh 01 01 02 - 01 01 - 03 03 06
6. Chandigarh - 01 01 ---- 0 1 0 1 0 2
7 . D e l h i 0 1 - 0 10 10 10 20 2 - 0 20 5
8 . G o a - 0 1 0 1 ---- 0 1 0 1 0 2
9. Gujarat 06 04 10 ---- 1 5 1 5 2 5
10. Haryana 02 04 06 ---- 0 2 0 2 0 8
11. Himachal Pradesh 01 - 01 ---- 0 2 0 2 0 3
12. Jammu & Kashmir - 01 01 - 02 02 - - - 03
13. Jharkhand - 01 01 ---- 0 2 0 2 0 3
14. Karnataka 04 45 49 02 03 05 01 10 11 65
15. Kerala 03 09 12 - - - 02 03 05 17
16. Madhya Pradesh 07 07 14 01 03 04 01 18 19 37
17. Maharashtra 03 54 57 - 07 07 - 47 47 111
18. Orissa 03 03 06 - - - 04 03 07 13
19. Punjab 01 10 11 ---- 0 5 0 5 1 6
20. Rajasthan 01 05 06 01 - 01 - 07 07 14
21. Tamil Nadu - 06 06 01 - 01 01 09 10 17
22. Uttaranchal 02 01 03 ---- 0 1 0 1 0 4
23. Uttar Pradesh 08 06 14 02 07 09 07 02 09 32
24. West Bengal 01 02 03 - 01 01 05 08 13 17
TOTAL 53 168 221 10 29 39 31 153 184 444
*includes 2 Ayurvedic,1 Unani and 2 Homoeopathy college with PG facility only.

ANNEXURE-4
(Refers to Paragraph 5.2.16)
PERFORMANCE OF APEX INSTITUTES
(Rs. in crore)
Sl. Name of the Institute Year of Courses Intake Grant released
No. establishment run capacity during 2000-05
1. Institute of Post Graduate 1956 PG 42 25.81
Training & Research Ph.D 14
(Ayurveda), Jamnagar
(IGPTRA)
2. National Institute of December, 1975 UG 50 31.23
Homoeopathy, Kolkata PG 18
(NIH)
3. National Institute of February, 1976 UG 60 48.64
Ayurveda, Jaipur (NIA) PG 45
Ph.D 10
4. National Institute of Unani December, 1984* PG 28 16.50
Medicine, Bangalore
(NIUM)
5. Rashtriya Ayurveda 1988 CRA V
1 ** 2.45
Vidyapeeth, New Delhi MRAV 2 **
(RAV)
* OPD started in April 2001,IPD in 2003-04 & PG courses from 2004-05.
** varies from year to year depending upon the number of ‘gurus/shishyas’ available.
1 Certificate of Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth.
2 Member of Rashtriya Ayurveda Vidyapeeth.
135

ANNEXURE-5
(Refers to Paragraph 5.2.18)
STATE-WISE AND YEAR-WISE DETAILS OF GRANT SANCTIONED BY AYUSH
UNDER CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEME FOR ‘DEVELOPMENT OF
INSTITUTIONS’ DURING 2000-01 TO 2004-05
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl. State/UT 200 0-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 Total
No.
1 . Andhra Pradesh 104.59 (5) 95.02 (5) 42.56 (4) 319.79 (21) 257.00 (4) 818.96
2 . Arunachal Pradesh - - 10.00 (1) - - 10.00
3 . Assam - 2.00 (1) 7.20 (1) 20.00 (1) 128.95 (4) 158.15
4. Bihar 71.16 (5) 11.16 (2) - 3.73 (2) 15.00 (1) 101.05
5. Chhattisgarh - 2.55 (1) - 55.83 (3) 107.59 (2) 165.97
6 . Chandigarh - - - - 12.00 (1) 12.00
7. Delhi 38.61 (6) 16.86 (1) - 12.00 (1) 148.86 (2) 216.33
8 . Goa - - - - - -
9 . Gujarat 48.85 (4) 102.22 (8) 54.00 (5) 99.00 (5) 185.51 (3) 489.58
10. Haryana - 27.00 (1) - 2.94 (1) - 29.94
11. Himachal Pradesh 17.49 (2) - 13.59 (1) 210.29 (4) 56.90 (1) 298.27
12. Jammu & Kashmir 14.00 (2) 4.00 (1) - 12.00 (1) - 30.00
13. Jharkhand - - - - - -
14. Karnataka 121.94 (14) 94.73 (10) 122.25 (13) 272.64 (8) 158.36 (12) 769.92
15. Kerala 63.87 (5) 76.44 (7) 79.53 (8) 176.97 (2) 294.35 (11) 691.16
16. Madhya Pradesh 39.23 (3) 70.46 (4) 35.42 (6) 260.99 (8) 164.59 (9) 570.69
17. Maharashtra 276.69 (27) 185.02 (20)163.60 (15) 208.74 (6) 95.45 (10) 929.50
18. Manipur - 2.92 (3) - 0.93 (1) - 3.85
19. Orissa 68.84 (4) 16.05 (5) 22.93 (3) 381.44 (16) 10.00 (1) 499.26
20. Punjab 13.16 (2) 45.16 (4) - 84.99 (2) 12.00 (1) 155.31
21. Rajasthan 30.94 (3) 18.17 (3) 5.37 (1) 35.97 (4) 162.93 (3) 253.38
22. Tamil Nadu 123.13 (5) 37.21 (1) - 15.00 (1) 265.00 (3) 440.34
23. Tripura - - - - 1.02 (3) 2.02
24. Uttar Pradesh 121.54 (8) 122.03 (9) 36.04 (3) 31.87 (3) 104.74 (4) 416.22
25. Uttaranchal - - 10.00 (1) 235.14 (7) 62.93 (4) 308.07
26. West Bengal 12.00 (1) 92.00 (6) 34.61 (4) 10.00 (1) 125.69 (5) 274.30
TOTAL 1166.04 1021.00 637.10 2450.26 2368.87 7643.27
136
Note: Figures within brackets indicate the number of institutions assisted.

137
ANNEXURE-6
(Refers to Paragraph 5.4.9)
STATE-WISE & SCHEME-WISE RELEASE OF FUNDS UNDER THE CENTRALLY SPONSORED SCHEME FOR QUALITY CONTROL OF
AYUSH DRUGS DURING 2000-01 TO 2004-05
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl. State 2000-01 2001-02 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05 T otal
No. DTL Pharmacies DTL Pharmacies DTL Pharmacies DTL Pharmacies Enf. GMP DTL Pharmacies Enf. GMP
Mech. Sch. Mech. Sch.
‘T’ ‘T’
1. Andhra Pradesh 55.00 50.00 - 115.00 - 85.00 45.00 - 7.94 - - 76.90 - - 434.84
2. Arunachal Pradesh - - - - - - 95.00 - 7.40 - - 50.00 - - 152.40
3. Assam - - - - 65.00 45.00 28.50 50.00 3.27 0.60 - - - - 192.37
4. Bihar - 75.00 - - - - - - - - - 15.70 - - 90.70
5. Chhattisgarh - 75.00 95.00 - - - - - - - - 15.00 - - 185.00
6. Delhi - - 95.00 - - - - - - - - - - - 95.00
7 . G o a ---------------
8. Gujarat 58.00 75.00 - 90.00 - - - 65.00 - - - 10.00 - - 298.00
9. Haryana - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
10. Himachal Pradesh 56.24 75.00 19.55 95.00 - 106.02 - - - - - 15.00 8.055 - 374.865
11. Jammu & Kashmir - - 80.00 90.00 - - - - - - - 10.00 - - 180.00
12. Jharkhand - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
13. Karnataka 57.88 55.00 - - - - - 45.00 - - - - - - 157.88
14. Kerala 75.00 - - - - 90.00 - 35.00 7.78 12.39 - 10.00 - 10.31 240.48
15. Madhya Pradesh - 150.00 95.00 - - - - - - - 5.00 30.00 10.90 - 290.90
16. Maharashtra 79.04 52.65 - - - - - - 9.52 0.25 - - - - 141.46
17. Manipur - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
18. Meghalaya - - - - - - 88.62 - - - - - - - 88.62
19. Mizoram - - - - - - 97.60 - - - - - - - 97.60
20. Nagaland - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
21. Orissa 54.00 116.63 - - - - - - - - 16.00 - 8.91 - 195.54
22. Punjab - 70.39 - - - - - - 5.245 - - 24.61 - - 100.245
23. Rajasthan 80.00 150.00 - 95.00 - 90.00 - - 5.03 - 20.00 55.00 - - 495.03
24. Sikkim - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
25. Tamil Nadu 50.00 120.00 - - 35.00 10.00 - 20.00 - - - - - - 235.00
26. Tripura - - - - - - 100.0 100.00 6.78 - - - - - 206.78
27. Uttar Pradesh 65.00 195.00 - 85.00 - 20.00 - - - - - - - - 365.00
28. Uttaranchal 81.05 76.00 - - - - - 100.00 - - - 80.00 - - 337.05
29. West Bengal - - 80.00 65.00 - - - - - - 5.00 8.22 - - 158.22
Total 711.21 1335.67 464.55 635.00 100.00 446.02 454.72 415.00 52.965 13.24 46.00 400.43 27.865 10.31 5112.98

ANNEXURE-7
(Refers to Paragraph 5.4.12)
STATUS OF IMPLEMENTA TION OF GMP IN AYURVEDA, SIDDHA & UNANI
(ASU) PHARMACIES IN THE STATES AS ON OCTOBER 2004
Sl. Name of the State/UT Total no. of drug No. of drug manufacturing
No. manufacturing units units to whom GMP
Ayush/Unani/Siddha Certificate was issued
1. Gujarat 684 (Ayu) 30
4 (Unani)
2. Rajasthan 374 (Ayush) 12
3. Karnataka 167 16
4. Pondicherry 37 (Ayu) 4
15 (Siddha)
5. Daman & Diu 17 2
6. Himachal Pradesh 72 40
7. Kerala 850 222
8. Uttranchal 118 17
9. Haryana 395 59
10. Delhi 58 (Ayu) 35 (Ayu)
17 (Unani) 19 (Unani)
3 (Ayu. & Unani) 1 (Ayu & Unani)
11. Chandigarh 3 -
12. Andhra Pradesh 582 (Ayu) 23 (Ayu)
128 (Unani) 5 (Unani)
13. Uttar Pradesh 2018 (Ayu) 27 (Ayu)
170 (Unani)
14. Chhattisgarh 4 8 Nil
15. West Bengal 321 (Ayu) Nil
15 (Unani)
16. Orissa 273 2
17. Punjab 549 (Ayu) 175
18. Madhya Pradesh 436 (Ayu) 1
22 (Unani)
19. Tamil Nadu 473 17
Total 7849 707
138

139
ANNEXURE-8
(Refers to Paragraph 5.6.5)
STATE-WISE DETAILS OF FUND RELEASED UNDER SCHEME OF SETTING UP OF SPECIALISED THERAPY CENTRE/SPECIALITY
CLINICS/AYUSH WING IN DISTRICT HOSPITALS AND SUPPLY OF ESSENTIAL DRUGS
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl. States/U.T. 2002-03 2003-04 2004-05
No. Supply of Speciality A YUSH wing Supply of Specialized Speciality A YUSH wing Supply of
essential Clinics in District essential Therapy Clinics in District essential
drugs HQs/hospitals drugs Centre HQs/hospitals drugs
1. Andhra Pradesh 15.00 (60) 10.00(1) 15.50(62) 22.00(1) 100.00(10) — 43.50(174)
2. Arunachal Pradesh 0.75(03) 46.76(5) 30.24(1) 16.75(67) 20.00(2) —
3. Assam — — — 67.75(271)
4. Bihar — — 11.25(45) —
5. Chhatisgarh — — 16.50(66) —
6. Gujarat — — — 89.00(356)
7. Haryana 15.00 (60) — 47.50(190) 22.00(1) 30.00(3) 59.75(239)
8. Himachal Pradesh 24.25 (97) — 50.00(200) 202.00(808)
9. Jammu & Kashmir — — 14.25(57) 100.00(400)
10. Karnataka 15.00 (60) — 80.00(320) 42.50(2) 14.62(2) 70.00(2) 63.50(254)
11. Kerala 05.00 (20) — 287.75(1151) 43.47(2) 7.00(1) —
12. Madhya Pradesh — — 124.50(498) 22.00(1) 243.00(972)
13. Maharashtra 19.52(2) 17.89(1)
14. Manipur — — 35.00(1) 2.75(11) —
15. Meghalaya 166.60(8)
16. Nagaland — — 2.50(10) —
17. Mizoram — — 2.50(10) —
18. Orissa — — 15.00(60) —
19. Punjab 15.00 (60) — 18.75(75) 18.75(75)
20. Rajasthan 15.00(60) 10.00(1) — 114.50(458)
21. Tamil Nadu — 60.00(6) 100.00(4) 58.50(234) 100.00(10) 70.00*(2) 27.00(108)
22. Tripura — 14.69(59) 27.68(1) —
23. Uttaranchal 15.00(60) 51.75(207) 134.75(539)
24. West Bengal — 100.00(4) 45.50(182) 26.75(107)
Total 120.00 146.28 431.84 875.94 169.86 271.62 167.68 1190.25
(480) (15) (18) (3504) (8) (28) (5) (4761)
NOTE: figures in bracket indicate the number of units involved.
*Recurring expenditure on medicine Rs.28.00 lakh not included.

APPENDIX- II
Statement of Observations/Recommendations
S. Para Ministry Observations/Recommendations
No.
12 3 4
1. 134 M/o Health  Inspite of the spectacular advances made by the
and Family system of modern/allopathic medicines, the
Welfare alternative or traditional systems of medicine
(D/o AYUSH) currently serve the health care needs of a large
population in the world.  In India, this indigenous
medicinal system comprises of different
components namely Ayurveda, Yoga and
Naturopathy, Unani and Siddha systems. These
ancient systems of medicine which are a treasure
house of knowledge for both preventive and
curative health care are embedded in Indian
culture well before the advent of Allopathic System
of medicines and  have continued to be an integral
and significant part of our society. They are
officially recognized, codified and well
documented.  However, its growth and
development has not  been as encouraging as it
should be. Various problems/constraints affecting
the growth of Indian systems of medicine are :
neglect by Government,  individualized and
inhibitive behaviours, lesser adaptability, lack of
quality parameters, abuse of system by
unscrupulous practitioners, ad-hoc growth, poor
resources and allocation and neglect of basic
research.
2. 135 M/o Health With a view to have a focussed development of
and Family the Indian System of Medicine and Homoeopathy
Welfare and to address the health care delivery services
(D/o AYUSH) through these systems the  Government of India
(GOI) in 1995 established an independent
department of Indian Systems of Medicine and
Homoeopathy (ISM&H) under the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare. Government have also
formulated and approved a National Policy on
140

141
ISM&H in 2002 which, inter-alia, reiterated that
Ayurveda, Unani, Homoeopathy, and Yoga
offered a wide range of preventive, promotive and
curative treatments and renamed the Department
of ISM&H as the Department of Ayurveda, Yoga
and Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and
Homoeopathy (AYUSH) in November 2003.  The
major objectives of Department of AYUSH were
to promote good health and expand the outreach
of health care; to improve the quality of teachers
and clinicians; to ensure affordable A YUSH
services & drugs which are safe and efficacious;
to facilitate availability of raw drugs which are
authentic and contain essential components; to
integrate AYUSH in health care delivery system
and National Programmes; to re-orient and
prioritize research in AYUSH; to create awareness
about the strengths of these systems in India and
abroad and sensitize other stakeholders and
providers of health; and to provide full
opportunity for the growth and development of
these systems.
3. 136 M/o Health The Performance review conducted by the Audit
and  Family of the Department  of Ayurveda, Yoga and
Welfare Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy
(D/o AYUSH) during the period 2000-01 to 2004-05 form the basis
of this Report. This review has included its
subordinate offices and implementing agencies
in 29 States and Union Territories. The principal
objectives of this review was to assess the
efficacy of planning for implementation of various
programmes, budgetary allocation and utilisation
of funds, results of the efforts of the Union
Government/States to strengthen medical
education,  efficiency and extent of achievement
of research activities and dissemination of
research findings for the benefit of educationists,
researchers, manufacturers and common man,
extent of achievement of drug standardisation and
availability of authentic AYUSH drugs, regulation,
enforcement, adherence to Good Manufacturing
Practices (GMPs) and publication of formulations
and pharmacopoeial standards of AYUSH drugs,
12 3 4

142
extent of conservation and sustainable supply of
medicinal plants for research work, development
of agro-techniques, contractual farming for
developing marketing mechanism, and extent of
expansion of the outreach of health care under
AYUSH and integration of AYUSH with modern
medicines, Health Care Delivery System and
National Health Programmes.
4. 137 M/o Health The Committee regret to observe that the
and Family Department of AYUSH had achieved very little
Welfare success in achieving the objectives of growth
(D/o AYUSH) and development, propogation and promotion of
AYUSH health care in the country. Policy
pronouncements contained in the National Policy
on AYUSH-2002 could not be effectively
implemented due to poor budgetary support,
inadequate monitoring, evaluation and lack of
coordination between various implementing
agencies and the Ministry. The share of AYUSH
in the total health Plan at the Central level was
static at 2 per cent during 2000-05 though the
policy envisaged raising of AYUSH share to
10 per cent with designed growth of 5 per cent in
every Five Year Plan. The programme also suffered
from absence of an effective system of transfer of
funds to the implementing agencies. Out of
Rs.30.98 crore released to 12 State Governments
under Centrally Sponsored Schemes during
2002-05, Rs.16.94 crore were not released to the
implementing agencies with delays even upto
36 months.  Out of total 444 colleges, 142 colleges
whose records Audit test checked did not possess
adequate infrastructural facilities, faculty, attached
hospitals with requisite bed strength and Out
Patient Department/In Patient Department (OPD/
IPD) facilities in accordance with the norms laid
down by the Regulatory Councils. Five Apex level
Institutes set up by the Ministry as centres of
excellence for imparting high quality education
and research also lacked infrastructural facilities.
Ministry did not ensure that the database of
practitioners of AYUSH was updated and revised
promptly and regularly. Delays in updation ranged
12 3 4

143
between 3 and 22 years in 20 States. There was
neither correlation between the drugs
standardised, drugs proved and drugs clinically
verified nor any systematic approach to
standardisation of drugs as 44 Homoeopathic
drugs were taken up for proving and 47 for clinical
verification without having been standardised.
Pharmacopoeia Committees on which expenditure
of Rs. 7.85 crore was incurred between 2000 to
2005 failed to develop pharmacopoeial standards
for formulation of compound drugs in Ayurveda
and Unani even after 40 years of their inception
as a result of which official pharmacopoeia under
the respective system for evolving uniform
standards in preparation of AYUSH drugs could
not be published.  Out of 7849 manufacturing units
only 707 had obtained the mandatory ‘Good
Manufacturing Practices’ certificate from
Government as of December 2004. The National
Medicinal Plant Board, set up as a nodal agency
to oversee policies for conservation and
development of medicinal plants at the National
and State levels did not have an authentic
database on demand and supply of medicinal
plants and failed to monitor and evaluate the
progress of 1077 projects funded by it at a cost of
Rs. 62.16 crore during 2001-04. Ministry did not
ensure evaluation of progress of demonstrative
medicinal plant gardens though financial
assistance of Rs. 73.85 lakh was released to
18 institutions during 2000-03. Inordinate delay
in completion of 33 projects of development of
agrotechniques in respect of 133 medicinal plants
and failure to patent and disseminating the
research findings resulted in blockade of funds
to the tune of Rs. 5.05 crore.  These issues have
been discussed in detail in the succeeding
paragraphs.
5. 138 M/o Health The Committee are surprised to note that the
and Family budget allocation for Department of  AYUSH
Welfare during 2000-01 to 2004-05 constituted only two
(D/o AYUSH) per cent of the total health budget of the Union
Government as against 10 per cent envisaged in
12 3 4

144
the National Policy on  Indian Systems of
Medicine and Homoeopathy (ISM&H)-2002. As
per the National Policy  the share of   allocation
for AYUSH in the total health plan at the Central
level was to be raised by 10 per cent  and was to
be increased at the rate of 5 per cent in every
Five Year Plan. However, Government did not
allocate the targeted funds till 2005-06 which meant
that there was inadequate support for the
achievement of envisaged objectives. The
budgetary allocation to AYUSH was recently
enhanced to Rs. 350 crore in the Annual Budget
2005-06.  Although the allocation for AYUSH had
increased in the recent years  from 2.34 per cent
of the Health budget in 2002 – 03 to 3.38per cent
in 2006-07, nevertheless the  fact remains that it is
still way below the target level of 10 per cent of
the total health budget as envisaged in the
National Policy.  The Budget allocation is much
less as compared to China which is allocating
significant portion of its health budget on their
indigenous systems of  medicine which has not
only led in providing better and adequate health
services to their people but also contributed to
huge export of herbal Chinese medicines across
the world.  The Committee  emphasise the need
for increasing the allocation to the targeted levels
so that the objectives laid down in National Policy
on Indian Systems of Medicine and Homoeopathy
could be achieved and the Indian System of
Medicine is able to contribute effectively in
expanding the outreach of AYUSH health care
through preventive, promotive, mitigating and
curative interventions and ensuring affordable
and efficacious AYUSH services and drugs and
integrating AYUSH in health care delivery system
under the National Health Programme.
6. 139 M/o Health Whereas substantial funds are required under
and Family A YUSH with a view to achieve the avowed
Welfare objectives, it is a matter of concern that not only
(D/o AYUSH) there was under utilization of funds by the various
States but there was delay also in release of funds
by the State Governments to the implementing
12 3 4

145
agencies. This is evident from the fact that out of
the total outlay of Rs. 50.87 crore that was
released to 12 States during 2000-01 to 2004-05,
Rs. 30.98 crore (61 per cent) was routed through
the States and Rs. 19.89 crore (39 per cent) was
released directly to the implementing agencies.
Surprisingly, out of these Rs. 50.87 crore, an
amount of  Rs.36.52 crore (72 per cent) remained
unutilised.  Further, the State Governments failed
to release  Rs. 16.94 crore (55 percent of the total
amount released) in time  to the implementing
agencies leading to  delays ranging  upto
36 months. It was also noticed that out of the
total amount of Rs. 62.63 crore that the Ministry
had released to all the States during 2002-03 and
2003-04, as much as Rs. 14.82 crore (24 per cent)
were released only in March in the two years,
only to  prevent lapse of  the funds.  The Ministry
have explained that substantial amount remaining
unutilised related to the scheme for strengthening
Drug Testing Laboratories and Pharmacies and
that the construction of buildings and procurement
of equipment for which funds were provided
under the scheme to the States were a time
consuming activity and that the Government was
pursuing the matter with the State Governments.
It was further stated that monitoring and
evaluation of projects sanctioned under various
Centrally Sponsored Schemes was being done
by Secretary (AYUSH).  The Committee conclude
that the Ministry not only failed to provide the
envisaged or targeted funds for the schemes
under AYUSH till 2005-06 but could also not
ensure complete utilization of funds released. State
Governments, in turn, delayed release of funds to
implementing agencies and also released
substantial funds only in March which would
appear to have been a ploy to prevent lapse of
funds. Achievement of objectives of the scheme
that depended on prompt and complete
disbursement of allocated funds thus became, ab
initio, doubtful and difficult.
12 3 4

146
7. 140 M/o Health The Ministry have clarified that they have initiated
and Family some steps to check underutilization of the funds
Welfare as well as to ensure that there is no delay in the
(D/o AYUSH) release of funds by the State Governments to the
implementing agencies. Further, Department of
AYUSH are also stated to have taken concurrence
of Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance
for release of Centrally Sponsored Schemes funds
of the Department to States through the State
Health Societies for onward release to the
implementing agencies.  The Committee hope that
Department of AYUSH would completely
streamline the system and procedures of transfer
of funds to States and further allotment by States
to implementing agencies by identifying the
specific bottlenecks and monitoring the internal
procedures closely.  A computer based tracking
system may be installed for querying the data so
that utilization of released grants improves
significantly. They may also insist on refund of
unutilized balances retained by State Governments
for over a year which would help avoid blocking
of resources when competing sectors face funds
crunch.  At their end the Ministry should also
desist from releasing of funds at the fag end of
the Financial Year and take measures for timely
release of funds to the States.
8. 141 M/o Health With a view to strengthen and regulate medical
and Family education the Ministry had set-up two Regulatory
Welfare Councils namely, the Central Council of Indian
(D/o AYUSH) Medicine (CCIM) and the Central Council of
Homoeopathy (CCH) as autonomous bodies
under the Indian Medicine Central Council
(IMCC) Act, 1970 and the Homoeopathy Central
Council (HCC) Act, 1973, for advising the
Government in matters relating to recognition and
withdrawal of medical qualification, prescribing
minimum standards of infrastructure and
manpower to be maintained by medical
institutions, undertaking regular inspection to
ensure adherence to the standards, and
maintaining Central Registers of Practitioners and
update them from time to time. As per amendments
12 3 4

147
brought about in 2002-2003 to the Indian
Medicine Central Council (IMCC) Act, 1970 and
the Homoeopathy Central Council (HCC) Act,
1973, prior permission of the Ministry had to be
obtained for opening new colleges, starting new
courses and increasing intake of students.
However, the Committee are constrained to note
from the records of Central Council of Indian
Medicine and Central Council of Homeopathy that
as of March 2005, medical qualification awarded
by 69 out of 444 colleges was yet to be
recognised. Further, the Councils allowed these
colleges to run various courses from time to time
without recognition.  Though the courses of the
concerned universities were not recognised, 6830
students had already passed out from various
colleges of Ayurveda and Unani systems during
1997—2005. The Ministry had also granted
permission to two Homoeopathy colleges in
Chhattisgarh and Orissa for continuance of
courses in new sessions during 2003-04 and
2004-05 respectively against the specific advice
of the Regulatory Council, though these colleges
lacked adequate infrastructural facilities.
The Committee cannot but deprecate the casual
manner in which the Regulatory Councils
permitted as many as 69 colleges to run courses
without recognition and due to which careers of
6830 students who have already passed out from
these unrecognised colleges were put into
jeopardy. The Committee recommend that the
Government should set up a High Level Committee
to investigate into the reasons and circumstances
under which these colleges were allowed to run
courses without recognition by the Regulatory
Councils. The Government ought to devise ways
and means to ensure that the careers of those
students who have passed out from the
unrecognized colleges are protected and they are
allowed to conduct their own practice/take up jobs.
The Committee while expecting that a harmonious
relationship between the Government and the
Regulatory Councils would be developed,
12 3 4

148
recommend that permission to open new colleges,
starting Post Graduate Courses and increasing
admission capacity are accorded only after it is
ensured that the minimum standards of
infrastructure prescribed by the Regulatory
Councils are achieved.
9. 142 M/o Health Test-check  of records  of 142 colleges including
and Family 35 new colleges, which were inspected by the
Welfare representatives of Regulatory Councils during
(D/o AYUSH) 2000-2005, revealed that none of these colleges
met the minimum requirement of infrastructural
and teaching facility standards prescribed by the
Councils.  The deficiencies noticed were non-
availability of enough class rooms, operation of
Ayurvedic colleges without laboratory and
pharmacy facilities, non-availability of own college
building, inadequate books or staff in Library.  The
test-check of records of educational institutes in
Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Delhi, Haryana,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan,
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal revealed shortage
of teaching staff ranging between 19 and 72 per
cent, of paramedical and other staff ranging
between 13 and 78 per cent while bed occupancy
ranged between 1 and 71 per cent.
The Committee note that Central Council of Indian
Medicine and Central Council of Homoeopathy
(CCIM and CCH) granted permission or
recognition to new as well as existing colleges for
admission of a specified number of students on
session-to-session basis on the recommendations
of a Committee of experts nominated by the
Councils for inspection of each college.  The
Committee are, however, concerned to note that
32  to 59 per cent of the Ayurvedic colleges and 23
to 71 per cent of the Homoeopathy colleges were
inspected every year by Regulatory Councils
during 2000-2005.  61 to 62 percent colleges of
Ayurveda and Homoeopathy were inspected only
once or twice in the last five years. What is the
surprising is the fact that no systematic or rational
system for inspecting the colleges had been
devised or followed  and visits were generally
carried out randomly.
12 3 4

149
The Ministry have acknowledged various
infrastructural inadequacies in the colleges and
the deficiencies in the inspections made by the
Regulatory Bodies.  Although the Ministry have
ensured that they would take necessary steps in
this regard, the Committee feel that they should
have noticed these deficiencies  earlier and
corrective remedial measures  taken timely.  That
this was not done is regrettable. The Committee
would, therefore, like the Ministry to ensure that
adequate and identifiable measures are taken in a
time bound manner  to bring in parity in medical
education across the country and strengthen the
infrastructure  in the apex level institutes so as to
enable them to function as centers of excellence.
10. 143 M/o Health Another area of concern is the fact that the teams
and Family of experts constituted by the Councils for
Welfare inspection of colleges included members of the
(D/o AYUSH) Executive Committee of these Councils. As these
members also took part in the Executive
Committee’s meetings in which inspection reports
were considered, there could be a conflict of
interest diluting the regulatory mechanism.  The
Ministry  have informed the Committee that a panel
of experts prepared by them for inspection for
Ayurveda, Unani and Siddha and Homoeopathy
colleges and forwarded to the respective Councils
were largely disregarded by the Councils.  Central
Government have no powers under the Central
Council of Indian Medicine/Central Council of
Homoeopathy Acts to enforce directions given
to them.  As Central Government has no powers
under the Acts to enforce its directions the Central
Council of Indian Medicine and Central Council
of Homoeopathy (Amendment) Bill, 2005 have
been introduced in the Parliament to address this
anomaly.  The Committee express their serious
concern over the utter disregard shown by the
Regulatory Councils to the advice/direction given
by the Ministry in the matter of selection and
composition of expert panels for inspections of
AYUSH colleges, which is nothing but
inexplicable.  This only reinforces the belief that
12 3 4

150
the Regulatory Councils want to promote the
interest of some of the errant colleges by showing
favours in recognition of colleges.  The Committee
expect that the Ministry would take advocacy and
other  procedural  measures for expeditious
passing of the Bills for amending the Central
Council of Indian Medicine and Central Council
of Homoeopathy Acts by the Parliament so as to
put an end to this despicable practice.
11. 144 M/o Health The Committee note that the preparation and
and Family maintenance of a database of practitioners of
Welfare AYUSH was one of the important functions of
(D/o AYUSH) the Regulatory Bodies.  A Central Register
containing the names of persons enrolled on any
State Register of Indian medicine or Homoeopathy
and who possessed any of the recognized medical
qualifications included in the respective schedules
of the Acts was to be maintained and notified in
the Gazette of India. A practitioner who did not
possess a recognized medical qualification and
had been practicing Indian medicine or
Homoeopathy before the commencement of
Central Acts was also eligible for enrolment on
the State register of Indian medicine or
Homoeopathy.  Against 6.95 lakh AYUSH
practitioners (4.93 lakh qualified and 2.02 lakh non-
qualified) registered with the States, as of
December, 2002, database of only 1.86 lakh
practitioners had been maintained by the Councils.
Out of 29 States and 7 Union Territories (UTs),
the database had not been updated and revised
for periods ranging between 3 and 22 years in
respect of these 20 States.  The delay in
notification of the Central Register deprived the
practitioners of the opportunity to practice in other
States or throughout the country. The Committee,
while expressing their concern over the inordinate
delay in updation of Central Register by Central
Council of Indian Medicine desire that the Ministry
should immediately update the database and lay
down a periodicity to  take up the matter with the
respective State Governments at the appropriate
level for timely submission of the list of
12 3 4

151
practitioners so that the Central Register of
practitioners are kept updated by Central Council
of Indian Medicine.
12. 145 M/o Health The Committee note that the total number of
and Family AYUSH medical colleges under Ayurveda, Unani
Welfare and Homoeopathy systems has increased by 19
(D/o AYUSH) per cent from 374 at the end of March 2001 to 444
at the end of March 2005. While Bihar, Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and Uttar Pradesh
accounted for 62 per cent  of the total AYUSH
medical education institutions, no college had
been set up in Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram,
Nagaland and Sikkim. The Committee have been
informed by the Ministry that there are 2
Homoeopathy and one Ayurveda colleges in
Assam and one Homoeopathic College in
Arunachal Pradesh.  The Government have
proposed to set up a North-Eastern Institute of
Ayurveda and Homoeopathy and the Government
of Arunachal Pradesh and North Eastern Indira
Gandhi Regional Institute of Health and Medical
Sciences (NEIGRIMS), Shillong have  identified
land for development of this institution. It has
further been stated that the Central Government
may set up an Ayurveda college in Arunachal
Pradesh and a Homoeopathy college in
NEIGRIMS, Shillong. The Committee expect that
Department of AYUSH would take necessary steps
so that the proposed AYUSH colleges are setup
expeditiously in the North Eastern Regions. The
Committee also recommend that  Government
should give special focus to the North Eastern
Regions considering its richness in flora and fauna
and availability of medicinal/herbal plants in
abundance.  Emphasis should be laid for
commercial exploitation of medicinal plants and
identification of tribal medical practices and setting
up of AYUSH dispensaries in this region.
13. 146 -do- The Committee note that a State-of-the-Art All
India Institute of Ayurveda is proposed to be set
up at New Delhi.  For this, an Expenditure Finance
Commission Memo was prepared in the light of
the observations made by the Planning
12 3 4

152
Commission as well as Investment for
Development (IFD).  The estimated project cost
was Rs. 325.00 crore. In September, 2004, the Delhi
Development Authority allotted approximately
6.00 acres of land near Apollo Hospital at Sarita
Vihar, New Delhi  at a cost of Rs. 13.62 crore.  The
proposal for setting up of such an Institute was
stated to have been considered by the Expenditure
Finance Commission in October, 2005 and
recommended the proposal ‘in-principle’  subject
to certain observations.  The Committee are
informed that in pursuance of the observations
of the Expenditure Finance Commission a detailed
project report is being reformulated. The
Committee regret to observe that the proposal is
yet to be approved by Expenditure Finance
Commission even though  two years have elapsed
since land was allotted to the institute by the Delhi
Development Authority. This clearly indicate that
the Ministry have not accorded the urgency that
this project deserved. At the tardy pace with which
the Ministry is proceeding, it would take years
for the completion of the prestigious institute.
The Committee strongly urge the Ministry to take
urgent steps for getting the project approved/
cleared by the concerned agencies so that the
project is completed expeditiously within a time
bound period. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the progress made by the Ministry so
far in this regard and the precise date by which
the project would be completed and made
functional.
14. 147 M/o Health With a view to mainstream AYUSH system of
and Family Medicine with modern/allopathic medicine, the
Welfare Ministry have introduced a Centrally Sponsored
(D/o AYUSH) Scheme in 2002-03 for ‘Promoting Development
of Health Care Facilities’ in AYUSH. The scheme
provided financial assistance to the States for
setting up specialised therapy centres with
hospitalisation facility in AYUSH system,
speciality clinics of AYUSH i.e. system specific
outdoor treatment centres, an AYUSH wing in
district allopathic hospitals with outdoor as well
indoor facility in one or two systems of AYUSH
12 3 4

153
and purchase of essential drugs for identified
AYUSH dispensaries in rural and backward areas.
During the year 2002-03 to 2004-05, Rs. 33.74 crore
were released to cover 8819 units in 24 states
under the scheme.  Audit scrutiny has revealed
that out of Rs. 494.94 lakh released by the Ministry
during 2002-05 to Andhra Pradesh, Himachal
Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir, Manipur, Tripura
and West Bengal, Rs. 490.38 lakh (99 per cent)
remained unutilised as the State Governments did
not release the funds to the implementing
agencies. The Committee are constrained to note
that the scheme was a total failure, as virtually no
funds were released by the States to the
implementing agencies even after a lapse more
than 3 years since the scheme has been
introduced, which is anything but inexplicable.
The Committee would like the Ministry to find
out the reasons for non implementation of the
scheme by the States, sort out the same by having
periodical meetings with the concerned States at
an appropriate level and report progress to the
Committee.
15. 148 M/o Health The Committee note that Central Government
and Family Health Scheme (CGHS) had a network of 78 AYUSH
Welfare (CGHS) dispensaries functioning at the end of
(D/o AYUSH) the IX Plan. During the X Plan (2002-07), 21 new
AYUSH dispensaries were planned to be
established in the premises of the existing
allopathic dispensaries. Seven new dispensaries
were approved in 2003-04 and the budget
provision of Rs. 86 lakh was placed at the disposal
of Director General of Health Services (DGHS).
However, as of June 2004, only 2 dispensaries
had been opened. During 2004-05 seven more
dispensaries were sanctioned at a cost of Rs. 1.30
crore but none of these dispensaries could be
set-up during 2004-05 due to shortage of doctors
and paramedical staff. In view of the declining
trend in the attendance of patients in Ayurveda
and Homoeopathy dispensaries, the Ministry
asked the Indian Council for Medical Research
(ICMR) to conduct a survey to assess the
12 3 4

154
acceptability/non-acceptability level of AYUSH
facilities under Central Government Health
Scheme, perception of Central Government Health
Scheme beneficiaries about AYUSH, availability
of AYUSH facilities under Central Government
Health Scheme in the country and the level of
availability of infrastructure and facilities in the
selected teaching hospitals of AYUSH. The Report
of the Indian Council for Medical Research has
since been submitted to the Ministry.  The
Committee hope that Government would take
necessary corrective steps in the light of findings
of the survey Report of Indian Council for Medical
Research by streamlining and strengthening the
function of AYUSH dispensaries of Central
Government Health Scheme.  With a view to
increase the acceptability of AYUSH among the
masses Government should launch special
campaigns to educate and increase the awareness
of the people regarding the beneficial aspects of
the Indian Systems of Medicine.  The Committee
would like to be apprised of the main findings of
the ICMR and the action taken by Government
thereon.
16. 149 M/o Health Availability and supply of drugs in all AYUSH
and Family hospitals/dispensaries as well as in the open
Welfare market is a pre-requisite for expanding the out
(D/o AYUSH) reach of AYUSH system in the country.  To ensure
availability of quality drugs at an affordable prices
to the people, there ought to be assured supply
for which it is also essential to have enough
availability of authentic raw-material for
production of quality drugs by AYUSH drug units
in the country. This, in turn, would require
cultivation of medicinal plants on a commercial
scale and also setting up  captive nurseries  to
ensure assured supply of raw-material in large
quantity to the drug manufacturers. It is
understood that medicinal plants constitute about
80 per cent of raw materials required for
manufacture of AYUSH drugs. The Committee
understand that presently there is shortage of
quality  raw-material in the form of medicinal plants
12 3 4

155
which is affecting the growth of AYUSH industry
as well as availability of quality medicines in the
country. Government should  therefore, take steps
for cultivation of medicinal plants on a commercial
scale in different parts of the country for
availability of abundant quantity raw-material. The
Committee note that production of some precious
and rare ingredients such as ‘Kasturi’ are banned
in India. However, their availability and production
is very important in production of certain critical
drugs. In this regard the Committee are given to
understand that China has successfully been
producing and exporting Kasturi by extracting the
same from the animals without torturing or killing
them. The Committee recommend that
Government should devise similar ways and means
to extract Kasturi, Shing etc. from the animals.
The methods being adopted by China in this
regard may be  arranged to be studied  by experts
so as to replicate the same in the country.
Government should also explore the possibility
of import of rare precious material such as ‘Praval’
and ‘Munga’ when these are considered to be
very essential in the manufacture of certain critical
drugs.
17. 150 M/o Health Most of the medicinal plants grow in the wild as
and Family natural components of vegetation of a particular
Welfare region. With a view to streamlining the medicinal
(D/o AYUSH) plants sector and developing an appropriate
mechanism for initiating and implementing the
policies for conservation and development of
medicinal plants at the National and State levels,
a National Medicinal Plant Board (NMPB) was
set up by the Ministry in November 2000 for
ensuring coordination of all matters relating to
medicinal plants including drawing up of policies
and strategies for conservation, proper
harvesting, marketing of raw material and
protecting, sustaining and developing this sector.
At the initiative of the National Medicinal Plant
Board, State Medicinal Plant Boards (SMPB) were
set up in all the States/UTs (except Delhi and
Meghalaya) between 2001 and 2004.  During the
12 3 4

156
period from 2000-01 to 2004-05, 472 promotional
schemes and 1389 contractual farming schemes
were sanctioned by the Board and an expenditure
of Rs. 59.37 crore and Rs. 34.02 crore respectively
was incurred and only 368 (21per cent) of the
projects have been completed so far. The Ministry
have explained in this regard by saying that out
of 1861 projects sanctioned during the period
under report, 41per cent (753 projects) pertained
to the year 2003-2004 and 42per cent (779 projects)
to the year 2004-2005. Since the project period is
usually three years, only those projects which
were sanctioned during 2003-2004 or earlier could
have been completed by March 2006. The project
sanctioned during 2004-2005 would be completed
by March 2007.
It is evident from the above that there is avoidable
delay in completion of the Projects as only 21 per
cent of them could be completed whereas
according to the Ministry themselves 58 per cent
of the projects should have been completed by
March, 2006.  The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry should set up an
institutional mechanism in the Department of
AYUSH so as to  periodically monitor the progress
made by the National Medicinal Plant Board and
State Medicinal Plant Boards in respect of the
projects that were sanctioned and are still pending
under the scheme.  The Ministry should also
ensure that the State Governments/State
Medicinal Plant Boards submit the utilization
certificates on time with respect to the funds
sanctioned and spent on the various projects
under the scheme. The Committee, are of the
opinion that Ministry should also prepare an
action plan in consultation with State
Governments and voluntary organisations/Non-
Government Organisations for exploitation of the
rich store house of aromatic and medicinal plants
in different vegetation zones of  the country so
that gainful employment can be provided to the
people living in the rural and interior areas of the
country by encouraging them to grow these plants
which can provide in abundance the raw material
for the manufacturing of AYUSH drugs.
12 3 4

157
18. 151 M/o Health In order to restore public faith in the efficacy of
and Family AYUSH system, it is imperative that quality and
Welfare safe AYUSH drugs are produced and made
(D/o AYUSH) available in the market. A Centrally Sponsored
Scheme namely—‘Quality control of AYUSH
drugs’ was launched by Ministry in 2000-01  for
ensuring availability of quality AYUSH drugs in
conformity with the Drugs and Cosmetics Act,
1940 and eliminating the possibility of production
and marketing of sub-standard drugs.  Grants of
Rs. 51.13 crore were released to 93 units in
23 States/UTs during 2000-05.  Audit examination
revealed that the scheme envisaged projects for
strengthening 21 Drug Testing Laboratories
(DTLs) and 40 pharmacies within 18 months of
the release of the financial assistance. However,
none of the Drug Testing Laboratories and
pharmacies had been able to utilise the entire
grant-in-aid and make the facilities functional even
after 5 years of implementation of the Scheme.
This resulted in blocking of ‘Plan’ funds
amounting to Rs. 25.31 crore. The State
Governments either delayed release or did not
release funds, which contributed to the slow
progress of capital work and delays in completion
of procedural formalities. The Committee have
been informed by the Ministry that the
construction work, procurement of machinery
required a lot of codal formalities and  on an
average it  takes 2-3 years to complete the
utilization.  Out of 21 Drug Testing Laboratories
funded under the Scheme, 14 labs are  stated to
be functional and carrying out testing of Ayurveda,
Siddha, Unani drugs and during the year 2005-06,
4 more laboratories have been supported.  As
regards pharmacies, Ministry have indicated that
out of 40 pharmacies that were supported under
the scheme, 36 pharmacies are functional and
producing drugs. It has been contended that
Pharmacopoeial standards of 474 drugs have been
published for Ayurveda and Unani drugs.
Another 250 single drugs of Ayurveda, Siddha
and Unani have been finalized.  The Committee
recommend that Government should make all out
12 3 4

158
efforts for setting up Drug Testing Laboratories
in the remaining States where they have not been
setup and also to ensure that they become
functional within a year.
19. 152 M/o Health The Committee have noticed that quite often the
and Family price of a drug product is cheaper as compared to
Welfare the ingredients that go into its manufacturing.
(D/o AYUSH) This gives rise to the suspicion about the quantity
and quality of ingredients used in the composition
of the medicine. In this regard, the Ministry have
explained that Department of AYUSH have been
supporting establishment and functioning of Drug
Testing Laboratories in the States, and the
Pharmacopoeial Laboratory of Indian Medicine
(PLIM), Ghaziabad have been asked to test
50 samples every month.   Good Manufacturing
Practices  have been notified  and labeling
provision  has been made mandatory. Further the
Department have written to all States to get
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani drugs tested from
National Accreditation Board for Testing and
Calibration Laboratory   (NABL) accredited labs
for which Rs. 500 per sample will be reimbursed.
The Committee note that notwithstanding these
measures several sub-standard drugs are still
available in the market without any Good
Manufacturing Practices certification. The
Committee feel that Ministry should not just
remain content with issue of instructions but
should put in place  an effective enforcement
mechanism in co-operation and co-ordination
with respective State Governments so that drugs
sold in the market maintain the stipulated quality
standards.  Further, Government should also
conduct frequent surprise checks at the chemist
shops and get the samples tested to ensure that
the drugs sold in the market conforms to the
quality standard.
20. 153 -do- In June 2000 the Department of AYUSH had issued
a notification directing the drug manufacturers to
mandatorily adhere to Good Manufacturing
Practices (GMP) standards as laid down in the
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules, 1945. The time limit
12 3 4

159
for adherence was extended up to June 2003 with
a view to enabling the drug manufacturers to
improve their infrastructure, comply with
statutory requirements and obtain Good
Manufacturing Practices certificates from the
concerned State Drug Control authorities. The
Committee regret to note that out of
7849 manufacturing units, only 707 pharmacies
possessed Good Manufacturing Practices
certification. Nineteen State Governments/UTs
namely Gujarat, Rajasthan, Karnataka,
Pondicherry, Daman & Diu, Himachal Pradesh,
Kerala, Uttaranchal, Haryana , Delhi, Chandigarh,
Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh, Chattisgarh,
West Bengal, Orrisa, Punjab, Madhya Pradesh
and Tamil Nadu did not cancel the licences of
non- Good Manufacturing Practices manufactures
for not adhering to Good Manufacturing Practices
norms.  Further, thirteen State Governments did
not carry out annual inspection of AYUSH
manufacturing units and regular testing of drug
samples for ensuring quality control under the
Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 due to shortage
of manpower and non availability of specified
standards for testing AYUSH drugs. Thus, funds
amounting to Rs. 51.13 crore earmarked by the
Ministry for quality control during 2000-05 proved
largely unfruitful as funds were blocked in
incomplete projects or the State Governments
released funds in unplanned and injudicious
manner.   The Ministry have informed the
Committee that in October, 2005, Department of
AYUSH had issued orders to the State Secretaries
under Section 33 (P) of Drugs & Cosmetic Act to
cancel the manufacturing licenses of non- Good
Manufacturing Practices complying units.
The Committee note that despite the various
measures taken by the Ministry for making
Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani drug manufacturing
units Good Manufacturing Practices compliant,
still around 1569 units are yet to get Good
Manufacturing Practices certification as of
September, 2006. The Committee recommend that
Ministry should take all possible steps including
the feasibility of increasing the level of subsidy
12 3 4

160
to the Ayurveda, Siddha, Unani drug units so that
they are motivated to upgrade their manufacturing
facilities and become Good Manufacturing
Practices (GMP) compliant. They further
recommend that the Department of AYUSH
should fix a time-table within which all the drug
units become Good Manufacturing Practices
compliant failing which their drug licenses should
be cancelled. The Committee also recommend that
Drug and Cosmetics Act, 1940 should be suitably
amended with a view to take stringent penal
measures against drug companies which fail to
adhere Good Manufacturing Practices standards.
21. 154 M/o Health Drug standardisation is a pre-requisite for
and Family manufacture of quality drugs. It involves
Welfare evolution of standards for  single and compound
(D/o AYUSH) drugs (for both Ayurvedic and Unani medicines)
and mother tinctures (for homoeopathic
medicines) in order to establish various qualitative
characteristics of drugs.  The Committee note that
only 76, 68 and 16 per cent of single and compound
drugs standardised under Ayurveda, Unani and
Homoeopathy systems respectively had been
documented in the form of monographs as of
March 2005. The progress in this regard after 1999
was insignificant as 11 monographs of
homoeopathic drugs had been published only in
2004-05. The Committee further note that the
standards for single drugs developed by Central
Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha
were not found suitable by the Ministry for
inclusion in the Ayurvedic Pharmacopoeia of
India due to large variations in the data and
absence of Standard Operating Procedures. The
standards published by the Research Councils
on the basis of research conducted from time to
time did not also conform to the quality and
standards prescribed by Government’s
Pharmacopoeia Committees.  Evidently the
Ministry did not effectively guide, monitor and
coordinate the work of its Research Councils,
which continued with their work regardless of its
acceptance by Pharmacopoeia Committees.  The
Committee recommend that the Department of
12 3 4

161
AYUSH should take necessary steps in close
consultation and coordination with the Research
Councils for expeditious completion of drug
standardization and documentation of various
single and compound drugs so that quality drugs
can be manufactured.
22. 155 M/o Health The Clinical research facilitates assessment of
and Family therapeutic utility of a drug in specific disease
Welfare conditions and was expected to aid in establishing
(D/o AYUSH) economically cheap and effective remedies for
common as well as chronic ailments. The Research
Councils undertook clinical studies in Tribal
Health Care, Family Welfare and Reproductive and
Child Health Programmes.  However,  Audit Review
pointed out that there was a large gap between
the number of clinical trials completed and
documented as well as the dissemination of the
research findings for the benefit of various
stakeholders such as educationists, researchers,
physicians, manufacturers and the common man.
The Committee have been informed  by the
Ministry that Central Council for Research in
Ayurveda and Siddha has developed Ayush-64
an anti-malarial formulation  which is highly
beneficial in the management of Plasmodium-Vivax
malaria. As regards Central Council for Research
in Unani Medicine the Ministry have stated that
the effectiveness of Unani medicine have been
proved during dengue, dropsy and plague
epidemics.   In so far as Central Council for
Research in Homoeopathy is concerned, it has
been stated that Filaria, Malaria and Japanese
Encephalitis cases have been successfully
managed with Homoeopathic drugs.
Though considerable work has been done by  the
Research Councils in clinical Research, the
Committee however, note that the research work
has largely been confined to communicable and
non-communicable diseases such as Malaria,
Filaria, Cholera, etc. and no worthwhile clinical
research has been conducted in respect of life
style related diseases and other diseases like
diabetes, AIDS, Cancer, Tuberculosis etc.  To
12 3 4

162
enable the Research Councils  to conduct research
in these diseases and other newly emerging
diseases the Committee recommend that
necessary infrastructural and financial support
should  be extended by Government to the
Research Councils.  Ministry should also involve
reputed private drug companies for collaborative
research in invention of drugs for various diseases.
The Government may also track the research
activities conducted by various research institutes
in the world in Complementary  System of
Medicine so as to coordinate and collaborate with
each other for the mutual benefit.  The Committee
also recommend that Ministry should draw
appropriate guidelines for taking up research
activities under fixed parameters in a time bound
manner and ensure that research findings relating
to all components of each scheme are finalized,
patented and disseminated among the
stakeholders.  The ongoing research should be
completed early and findings disseminated to
stakeholders such as educationist, researchers,
manufacturers and Government Institutions
through internet and research journals.
23. 156 M/o Health The number of medicines patented is an indicator
and Family of the overall achievement of Research Councils
Welfare in clinical research. Audit examination revealed
(D/o AYUSH) that  position of Ayurvedic and Unani medicines
patented by the councils was not encouraging as
patents for only three drugs had been obtained
and five were under process.  The Committee have
been informed by the Ministry that  the number
of patents obtained by Central Council for
Research in Ayurveda and Siddha is  19 and
patents filed/processing for filing is 12.  The
patents /processes released to the Industry
(commercialized) is 6.  As regards Central Council
for Research in Unani Medicine it has been stated
that the Council  has published monographs on
12 drugs, filed patents for 8 and 17 drugs (a kit of
common remedies for Out Patient Department use)
have been commercialized through National
Research and Development Centre (NRDC).
12 drugs are in the pipeline for filing patents.
12 3 4

163
In sofar as  Central Council for Research in
Homoeopathy, the Ministry have stated that  in
India, there are no homoeopathic patent medicines
as before a homoeopathic medicine is made
available for use it has to undergo many stages of
evolution. The confidentially of data gets
breached after proving. As such no patents are
allowed.   The Committee hope that Ministry
would extend all possible support-financial,
infrastructure and logistics so that research work
for patenting of drugs is carried out without any
impediments.  The Committee expect that the
Central Council for Research in Ayurveda and
Siddha and Central Council for Research in Unani
Medicine would take all possible steps for
patenting the drugs for which applications have
already been filed, at the earliest.
24. 157 M/o Health and Recently some of the Ayurvedic medicines
family welfare manufactured in the country have been termed as
(D/o AYUSH) unsafe particularly by some International
Research Institutes/media etc. for having allegedly
containing toxic substances like lead, arsenic etc.
and also human organs/parts. This has naturally
created suspicion and doubts in the minds of
public about the efficacy, authenticity and safety
of the AYUSH drugs in general and Ayurvedic
drugs in particular. In this regard the Committee
heard the views of experts in the field of AYUSH
as well as reputed AYUSH drug manufacturing
companies, besides the representatives of
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare. The
Committee were informed that the Ayurvedic
medicines are manufactured in the country
conforming to the formulae prescribed in the
ancient texts/treatise etc and are safe and does
not have any side effects. The Committee are of
the opinion that whenever such allegations are
made either in our country or by any foreign
country /International Agency, Government
should promptly investigate into these allegations
and ensure that the drugs produced do not contain
toxic/heavy materials etc. If the allegations are
found true the licenses of these Drug units/firms
12 3 4

164
manufacturing drugs and the drugs in question
should be immediately  withdrawn.  If after the
research the drugs are found safe, appropriate
publicity rebutting the false allegations should
be launched in National and International media
informing the general public about the
genuineness as well as safety of these medicines.
The Committee note that at present a bilingual
Journal entitled “Journal of Research in Ayurveda
and Siddha” is being brought out by the Central
Council for Research in Ayurveda and Siddha and
the Central Council for Research in Unani
Medicine (CCRUM) have launched Hippocratic
Journal of Unani Medicine on quarterly basis and
also publishes a quarterly Research Journal in
Urdu titled “Jehan-e-Tibb”.  The Committee feel
that these Journals have very limited circulation
and are mostly confined to research institutions
and academia. The outside world and the general
public do not come to know about these Journals.
The Committee, are therefore, of the opinion that
Department of AYUSH should bring out a
comprehensive Journal inter alia covering all the
disciplines of AYUSH which can act as an effective
medium for publicity campaign and to spread the
news and views relating to research and
development done in AYUSH as well as
popularising the AYUSH systems of medicine
among the general public. The Journal should be
made available in all the libraries, colleges,
academic institutions etc. The Journal should
provide a platform for debate/discussion on all
issues relating to AYUSH by the practitioners/
experts/pharmaceutical companies and also to
counter the false claims/allegations made by
certain foreign countries on the quality and
authenticity of drugs manufactured by the Indian
Drug Companies. Government should also take
appropriate measures for dissemination of
information regarding efficacy of the AYUSH
drugs manufactured in the country through
internet. For this  an exclusive web site should be
created.
12 3 4

165
25. 158 M/o Health With a view to control the advertisement of drugs
and Family in certain cases and to prohibit the advertisements
Welfare for certain purposes of remedies alleged to
(D/o AYUSH) possess magic qualities and to provide for matters
connected therewith, the Drugs and Magic
Remedies (Objectionable Advertisement) Act was
enacted in 1954.  Under this Act the definition
“Magic Remedy” includes a talisman, mantra,
Kavacha and any other charm or any kind which
is alleged to possess miraculous powers for or in
the diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or
prevention of any disease of human beings or
animals or for affecting or influencing in any way
the structure or any organic function of the body
of human beings or animals.  Several
advertisements relating to AYUSH Drugs often
appear in print media and are also beamed in
electronic media making claims for the cure of
various chronic aliments such as epilepsy,
migraine, etc. and rejuvenation of sex powers.
Explaining the measures taken for implementation
of the Act, and rules frame thereunder, the
Ministry have stated that  State Drug Licensing
Authorities and Directors of Indian Systems of
Medicine of the State were directed to take action
including setting up a monitoring cell at State level
for checking  the misleading advertisements and
exaggerated claim of Ayurvedic Siddha/Unani
drugs made by individuals companies that are
objectionable under the Act.  Department of
AYUSH are also stated to have issued general
guidelines on action proposed to be taken under
the Act on   30.9.1999, whereunder all the
licencsing authorities were required to draw the
attention of the provisions of the Act, to the
manufacturers of Indian Systems of Medicine
drugs under their jurisdiction as also the leading
publishers of news papers for strict compliance.
It has also been stated that Ministry have also
written to the Secretary, Ministry of Information
and Broadcasting and Press Information Bureau
for compliance of the Act by the print and
electronic media. AYSUH Research Councils have
also been asked to set up surveillance units for
12 3 4

166
monitoring such advertisements. Obviously, such
measures  have proved ineffective so far. It is a
matter of concern that several misleading
advertisement regarding AYSUH Drugs continue
to appear in print media.  The Committee regret to
point out that the Ministry have remained content
with issue of directives and did not monitor the
continued publicity campaigns of the delinquent
parties with a view to take deterrent action against
them.
The Government  now  propose to amend  the
Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable
Advertisement) Act, 1954 with a view- (i) to bring
treatment within the scope of the Act to prevent
luring of patients through advertisements offering
cure or treatment, (ii) to increase penalties so as
to make the law more deterrent, (iii) to bring
electronic media under its scope to prevent
exaggerated advertisements of drugs and (iv) to
delete the Schedule to the Act containing list of
diseases and disorders for bringing it under the
Rules to facilitate its timely revision.  The
Committee however, would expect that the
Government would show urgency in bringing
forward the legislation for amending the Act, so
that the gullible public are not taken for a ride.
The Committee are of the considered view that
merely amending the Act would not achieve the
objectives unless its provisions are strictly
enforced both in letter and spirit.  Steps should
be taken to ensure strict implementation of the
Act both by the Central and State Governments.
The Committee recommend that  while formulating
norms for electronic and print media, the World
Health Organisation’s ethical criteria for medicinal
drug promotion which specify that “promotion of
drugs must be accurate, fair and objective” and
that “promotional claims should not be stronger
than valid, up-to-date scientific evidence
warrants”, should be given due consideration.
Government should also evolve a code of conduct
governing the advertisement relating to
promotion of magic drugs so as to protect the
interests of consumers.
12 3 4

167
26. 159 M/o Health The Committee feel that AYUSH is an efficient
and Family and cost effective alternative system of medicine
Welfare to the modern/allopathic system of medicine and
(D/o AYUSH) every possible effort should be made for its growth
and development, popularization and expansion
of its outreach.  However, the Committee regret to
note that no long term perspective plan appears
to have been formulated by the Government for
achievement of the avowed objectives.  Had such
a perspective plan concieved and implemented
earlier, it would have gone a long way in
popularising and expansion of AYUSH in the
country. The Committee are of the considered view
that for popularising AYUSH, Government should
formulate a perspective plan/roadmap for the next
20 years under which Government hospitals/
dispensaries equipped with adequate
infrastructural facilities such as buildings, staff,
laboratories/pharmacies etc. should be set up in
every nook and corner of the country. Special
emphasis should be laid for setting up of AYUSH
dispensaries/hospitals in rural/semi-urban areas,
where traditionally the AYUSH System have been
well accepted and there is lack of enough
allopathic services.   The Committee would like to
be apprised of the steps taken/proposed to be
taken in this regard.
12 3 4

PART-II
MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007) HELD ON THIRTEENTH  JUNE, 2006
The Committee sat from 1100 hours to 1300 hours on 13th June, 2006 in Committee
Room  ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri Raghunath Jha
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
6. Shri Kharabela Swain
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Janardhana Poojary
9. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
10. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
Representatives of  the office of  the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India
1. Shri U. Bhattacharya, ADAI (RC)
2. Dr. A.K. Banerjee, DGA
3. Shri P. Sesh Kumar, Principal Director
Experts in the field of Ayurveda and Unani
Ayurveda
1. Vaidya Devender Triguna — President, All India Ayurveda Congress
2. Dr. V .N. Pandey — Former Director, Central Council for
Research in Ayurveda and Siddha
(CCRAS)
3. Dr. K.K. Sijoria — Reader, Ayurveda Tibia College,
Karol Bagh, New Delhi.
168

169
4. Shri Rajeev Bansal — Chief General Manager, Divya Pharmacy,
Divya Yog Mandir (Trust),  Kankhal,
Hardwar.
5. Dr. M.K. Bhardwaj — Practitioner, Divya Pharmacy, Divya Yog
Mandir (Trust), Kankhal, Hardwar.
Unani
1. Prof. Shakir Jameel — Dean, Faculty of Medicine Hamdard
University, New Delhi
2. Hakim Madan Saroop Gupta — Practitioner and Member of Central
Council of Indian Medicine (CCIM)
3. Hakim A.J. Khan — Former Professor, Ayurveda Tibia
College, Karol Bagh, New Delhi
4. Dr. M. Khalid Shiddqui — Director, Central Council for Research in
Unani Medicine (CCRUM)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members, the experts in the fields of
Ayurveda and Unani and the Audit Officers to the sitting of the Committee.  The
Chairman informed the experts that the Committee have selected C&AG’s
Report No. 16 of 2005 relating to the “Performance Audit of Department of Ayurveda,
Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH)” for detailed
examination. In view of the importance of the subject, the Committee considered it
appropriate to hear the views and suggestions of the experts in the fields of Ayurveda
& Unani, in the first instance, on the present status of AYUSH in the country, the
various constraints and challenges being faced by Ayurveda and Unani Systems of
Medicines and suggestions to improve and strengthen the Indian Systems of Medicine
in general and Ayurveda & Unani in particular.  The Chairman stated that experts from
Yoga, Naturopathy, Homoeopathy, etc. would also be called before taking evidence of
the representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of
AYUSH).
3. Thereafter, the experts explained briefly their views on Ayurveda and Unani
Systems of Medicine and also gave important suggestions to improve and strengthen
the Indian Systems of Medicine. The experts explained to the various points and
queries raised by the Members. As regards some queries which remained unresolved,
the Hon’ble Chairman suggested that the experts might submit the clarifications/
explanations thereon together with their suggestions so as to improve, strengthen and
popularise the Ayurvedic and Unani Systems of Medicine.
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007) HELD ON FIFTH SEPTEMBER, 2006
The Committee sat from 1600 hours to 1800 hours on 5th September, 2006 in
Committee Room  ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri R.L. Jalappa
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Prof. M. Ramadass
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
8. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
9. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri R.K. Dhawan
11. Shri Janardhana Poojary
12. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
13. Dr. K. Malaisamy
14. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
Representatives of  the office of  the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India
1. Shri B.K. Chattopadhyaya, ADAI (RC)
2. Dr. A.K. Banerjee, DGACR
3. Shri A.N. Chatterji, DG (PA)
4. Shri P.S. Das, Director
170

171
Experts in the fields of  Y oga, Naturopathy and Homoeopathy and
representatives of  drugs companies
Yoga
1. Swami Ananta Bharati — Director, Keshavanand Yoga Institute,
New Delhi.
2. Yogiraj Swami M. Lal Ji — Director, Yoga Divya Mandir, New Delhi.
3. Prof. Acharya Chandrahas — Director, Central Council for Research
Sharma in Y oga & Naturopathy, New Delhi.
Naturopathy
1. Dr. S.N. Pandey — Assistant Research Officer,
Central Council for Research in Yoga
and Naturopathy, New Delhi.
2. Dr. Preeti Agarwal — Senior Research Fellow,
Department of Psychiatry,
Dr. R.M.L. Hospital, New Delhi.
Homoeopathy
1. Dr. Ramjee Singh — Vice President,
Central Council of Homoeopathy,
New Delhi.
2. Dr. Lalit Verma — Secretary, Central Council of
Homoeopathy, New Delhi.
3. Dr. V.T. Augustine — Practitioner
4. Dr. Diwan Harish Chand — Practitioner
Ayurvedic Drug Companies
1. Dr. Narendra Bhatt — Chief Executive Officer, M/s Zandu
Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Mumbai.
2. Shri R.K. Kohli — Director, M/s Dabur India  Ltd.,
Ghaziabad , (UP).
3. Shri Anurag Sharma — Director, M/s Shri Baidyanath Ayurveda
Bhawan Ltd. Nagpur.
4. Dr. Raj Kumar Rawat — General Manager, Gurukul Kangri
Pharmacy, Haridwar (Uttaranchal).
Unani Drug Manufacturing Companies
1. Mr. Hamid Ahmed — Managing Director, Hamdard Laboratories,
New Delhi.
2. Dr. Shamshad Ahmad — Director, Rex Remedies (A&U) Pvt. Ltd.
Delhi.
3. Dr. Ghayoor — Research Manager, Rex Remedies (A&U)
Pvt. Ltd. Delhi.

172
Homoeopathic Drug Companies
Mr. Rajneesh  Chandan — General Manager,  M/s SBL Ltd.,
Sahibabad, UP
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the Officers of the
Comptroller & Auditor General of India  to the sitting.  The Chairman informed the
Members that five Performance Audit Reports have been presented by C&AG of India
during the  Monsoon Session (August 2006). The Committee, then decided to select
all the five subjects contained in the Audit Reports as mentioned in ‘‘Annexure for
examination during 2006-2007 and out of these five subjects, two namely ”Sarva Shiksha
Abhiyan (SSA)’’  and “Management of Foodgrains”  were priortized.
3. Thereafter, the Chairman welcomed the experts in the fields of Yoga, Naturopathy
and Homoeopathy and the representatives of Ayurveda, Unani and Homoeopathy
drug companies to the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee.  The Chairman informed
the experts and the representatives of drug companies that the Committee had selected
C&AG’s Report No. 16 of 2005 relating to the “Performance Audit of Department of
Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH)” for
detailed examination. The Chairman stated that the Committee had already heard the
views and suggestions  of the experts in the fields of Ayurveda and Unani  on the
various issues relating to  present status of AYUSH in the country, the constraints and
challenges being faced by AYUSH Systems of Medicines and measures  to improve
and strengthen the system. The Chairman informed that the Committee would now
interact with experts in the fields  of Yoga, Naturopathy and Homoeopathy and the
representatives of Ayurveda, Unani and Homoepathy  drug companies on the subject,
before taking evidence of the representatives of the concerned Ministry.
4. Thereafter, the experts and the representatives of drug companies  explained in
brief the constraints/problems faced by  AYUSH Systems of Medicine and also gave
suggestions to improve, strengthen and popularize these Systems. They also clarified
the various points and queries raised by the Members. The Chairman asked  the
experts/representatives of the drug companies to submit a written note giving  their
views/suggestions for improving, strengthening  and popularising  the AYUSH Systems
of Medicine.
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE
LIST OF ADDITIONAL SUBJECTS SELECTED BY THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2006-2007) FOR EXAMINATION  DURING 2006-2007
Audit Report No. Subject
15 of  2006 Performance Audit of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA)-
Department of Elementary Education and Literacy
(Ministry of Human Resource Development) (P)
16 of  2006 Performance Audit of Management of Food Grains (P)
17 of  2006 Performance Audit of Disinvestment of Government
Shareholding in Selected Public Sector Undertakings
during 1999—2003
18 of  2006 Performance Audit of Conservation and Protection of
Tigers in Tiger Reserves
19 of  2006 Performance Audit of the System of Revenue Generation
by Doordarshan and All India Radio-Prasar Bharti.
173

MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007) HELD ON SIXTH SEPTEMBER, 2006
The Committee sat from 1100 hours to 1250 hours on Sixth September, 2006 in
Committee Room  ‘C’, Parliament House Annexe,  New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
3. Shri R.L. Jalappa
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Prof. M. Ramadass
7. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
8. Shri Kharabela Swain
9. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri V . Narayanasamy
11. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
12. Dr. K. Malaisamy
13. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
Representatives of  the office of  the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India
1. Shri V .N. Kaul, C&AG
2. Shri B.K. Chattopadhyaya,  ADAI (RC)
3. Dr. A.K. Banerjee, DGACR
4. Shri A.N. Chatterji, DG (PA)
5. Shri P.S. Das, Director
174

175
Representatives of  the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Department of Ayush)
1. Smt. Anita Das — Secretary
2. Shri Raghubir Singh — Addl. Secretary & Financial Advisor
3. Shri Shiv Basant — Joint Secretary
4. Shri Vergsese Samuel — Joint Secretary
5. Shri B.S. Sajwan — Chief Executive Officer (National)
Medicinal Plant Board
6. Dr. S. K. Sharma — Advisor (Ayurveda)
7. Dr. S.P. Singh — Advisor (Homoeopathy)
8. Dr. A.A. Ansari — Advisor (Unani)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and the C&AG of India
and his team of Officers to the sitting of the Committee.  The Chairman informed the
Members that the sitting has been convened to take oral evidence of the representatives
of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of AYUSH) on C&AG’s
Report No. 16 of  2005  relating to “Performance Audit of Department of AYUSH”.
Then the representatives of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of
AYUSH) were called in.
3. The Committee then commenced oral evidence on the subject. The Secretary,
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of AYUSH) gave a power point
presentation showing the action taken by the Ministry on the Audit observations as
well as the achievements made by the Department and steps proposed to be taken to
strengthen the AYUSH Systems. Thereafter, the Members sought certain clarifications
on the issues arising out of  the power point  presentation and the Audit Report.  The
Secretary explained to the various points arising out of the Audit Report and the
queries raised  by the Members.  To certain queries, for which the witnesses could not
give satisfactory replies, the Hon’ble Chairman directed that the Ministry  might furnish
the requisite information in writing at the earliest.
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF  THE SIXTEENTH SITTING OF  THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2006-2007) HELD ON FIFTEENTH DECEMBER, 2006
The Committee sat from 1600 hours to 1650 hours on 15th December, 2006 in
Room No. 51, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Brajesh Pathak
6. Shri M. Ramadass
7. Shri Mohan Singh
8. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
9. Shri Kharabela Swain
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
12. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
13. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
Officers of the office of the C&AG of India
1. Dr. A.K. Banerjee, DGACR
2. Shri A.N. Chatterjee, DG (Performance Audit)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members and Audit Officials to the
sitting. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the Draft
Report on ‘‘Performance Audit of Department of Ayurveda, Y oga & Naturopathy,
Unani, Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH)’’.
176

177
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the Draft Report without any
amendments/modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalise and present the
same to Parliament in the light of factual verification done by Audit.
The Committee then adjourned.
MGIPMRND—35LS—02-03-2007.

178
PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING AUTHORISED AGENTS:—
Sl. No. Name of Agents
ANDHRA PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle, Vasavya Nagar, Vijaywada-520006 (A.P.)
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842002 (Bihar)
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem House, Connaught Place, P.B. No. 1113,
New Delhi-110001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari Colony, Kingsway Camp, Delhi-110009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency, IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double Storey,
New Delhi-110024 (T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6 . M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd., P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India Corporation, Publishers, Improters & Exporters,
L-27, Shastri Nagar, Delhi-110052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3, Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110002.
9. M/s. Bibilia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18, Ansari Road, New Delhi-110002
(T. No. 23262515)
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80, Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110054 (T. No. 23911966)
11. M/s. Seth & Co. Room No. 31 D, Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah Road,
New Delhi-110003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market, Delhi-110006.
(T. No. 23866768).
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol Bagh,
New Delhi-110055.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125, Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P.B. No. 708, New Delhi-110001 (T. No. 23411919)
15. M/s. D. K. Agencies (P) Ltd., A/15-17, Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110059.

16. M/s. Vijay Book Service C-D/123/C. Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110034.
MADHYA PRADESH
17. M/S Suvidha Law House, 28 Malviya Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462003.
MUMBAI
18. M/s Usha Book Depot. 585/A, Chitra Bazar, Khan House, P.B.No. 2621,
Mumbai-400002.
19. M/s Jaina Book Agency (India), 649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd Dhobi Talao
Lane, Mumbai-400002.
PONDICHERRY
20. Editor of debates, Legislative Assembly Department, Pondicherry-605001.
TAMIL NADU
21. M/s M. M. Subscription Agencies, 123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641012.
22. M/s C. Sitaraman & Co. 73/ 37, Royappettah High Road, Chennai-600014.
UTTAR PRADESH
23. M/s Law Publishers, Sardar Patel Marg, P.B. No 1077, Allahabad (U.P.)
24. M/s Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair Building, Hazrat Ganj, GPO Box No. 154,
Lukhnow-226001.
MGIPMRND—35LS—26-02-2007.