NINTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
NATIONAL SCHEME OF LIBERATION AND
REHABILITATION OF SCA VENGERS
AND THEIR DEPENDENTS
(MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT)
Presented to Lok Sabha on___________________________
Laid in Rajya Sabha on______________________________
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
February, 2005/Phalguna, 1926 (Saka)

PAC  No.  1760
Price : Rs. 42.00
© 2005 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  (2004-2005) ..................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................. (v)
REPORT ...................................................................................................................... 1
APPENDIX I Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
for the year ended 31 March, 2002 (No. 3 of  2003), Union
Government (Civil—Performance Appraisals) .......... 41
A
PPENDIX II Conclusions and Recommendations......................... 77
PART-II
Minutes of the sittings of Public Accounts Committee
(2004-2005) held  on  13th  &  14th  October,  2004  and
18th February, 2005 .................................................... 94

(iii)
COMPOSITION  OF  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra       —      Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
*6. Shri Naveen Jindal
7. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasalu Reddy
9. Dr. R. Senthil
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
13. Kunwar Revati Raman Singh
14. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Dr. K. Malaisamy
19. Shri V . Narayanasamy
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
21. Shri Jairam Ramesh
22. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1.  Shri P.D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
6. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar       —Committee Officer
*Shri Naveen Jindal, MP has been elected a Member of the Committee on 16th December, 2004, vice
Shri A.R. Antulay, MP who resigned from the membership of the Committee w.e.f. 27th August, 2004.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee having been authorised by the Com-
mittee to present the Report on their behalf, do present this Ninth Report on Chapter I
of the  Report of C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March, 2002 (No. 3 of 2003),
Union Government (Civil—Performance Appraisals) relating to "National Scheme of
Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their Dependents".
2. The Report of the C&AG for the year ended 31 March, 2002 (No. 3 of 2003), Union
Government (Civil—Performance Appraisals) was laid on the Table of the House on
22 April, 2003.
3. The Committee took the evidence of the representatives of the Ministries of
Social Justice & Empowerment, Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation and Rural
Development on the subject at their sittings held on 13th and 14th October, 2004.
The Committee considered and finalised this Report at their sitting held on 18th
February, 2005.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommenda-
tions of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and
have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministries
of Social Justice & Empowerment, Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation and Rural
Development for the cooperation extended by them in furnishing information and
tendering evidence before the Committee.
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
    N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
23 February, 2005 Chairman,
4 Phalguna, 1926 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

REPORT
Background
The 'National Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their
Dependents' marks the convergence of several public initiatives over a period of four
decades preceding its introduction in 1992. The first initiative taken by the erstwhile
State of Bombay resulted in the submission of a report on the living conditions of
scavengers in 1952. The major recommendations contained in the report were circulated
by the Government of India to the State Governments for wider application in 1955. In
its report submitted in 1955, the first Backward Classes Commission also recommended
measures for the alleviation of the sub-human living conditions of scavenges. These
recommendations were again brought to the notice of the State Governments in 1956.
The Government of India also constituted a Central Advisory Board of Harijan Welfare
in 1956, which had reviewed the working and living conditions of scavengers in the
country and had recommended that the Government introduce a Centrally Sponsored
Scheme for the alleviation of their condition. A Centrally Sponsored Scheme was
accordingly introduced in the Third Five Y ear Plan in pursuance of various
recommendations. This scheme, however, failed primarily because it merely sought to
shift the mode of carrying night soil from the head to a wheel-barrow and the handling
of the wheel-barrow proved impractical. The scheme was discontinued during the
Fifth Five Y ear Plan following the realisation that the practice of scavenging was
inextricably linked with the evils of a stratified social structure.
2. A Committee was then appointed in 1965 by the Government of India to examine
the question of abolition of customary rights of the scavengers. In its report, the
Committee recommended the dismantling of the customary rights under which non-
municipalized cleaning of private latrines was passed on from generation to generation
of scavengers in the  form of a hereditary right. The recommendations of the Committee
though circulated to the State Governments failed to evoke any response.
3. Thereafter, the National Commission on Labour recommended in 1968-69 a
comprehensive legislation for regulating the working, service and living conditions of
scavengers. During the Gandhi Centenary Year (1969), a special programme for
converting dry latrines to water borne flush latrines was undertaken. A pilot project
with the same objective was undertaken during the Fifth Five Year Plan. The conversion
scheme failed principally because it had no element of subsidy and the State
Governments failed to generate the necessary internal resources. The scheme was,
therefore, deleted from the Sixth Five Year Plan.
4. The first major initiative in the direction of consolidating and spearheading a
concrete proposal was taken in 1980 with the Ministry of Home Affairs introducing a
scheme for conversion of dry latrines into sanitary latrines and rehabilitation of liberated

2
scavengers and their dependents in dignified occupations in selected towns. The
scheme was dovetailed into the then existing Centrally Sponsored "Implementation of
the Protection of Civil Rights Act" Scheme as one of the measures for the removal of
untouchability. The thrust was on urban areas and the Central grant was dependent on
a matching grant being provided by the State Governments.
5. The scheme was taken up in two towns of  Bihar initially and was subsequently
extended to Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Tripura and Uttar Pradesh. The scheme was operational in sixteen States by the end
of the Sixth Five Year Plan period. The scheme succeeded in converting about one
lakh dry latrines into water-borne flush latrines and rehabilitated 5,000 scavengers in
alternative employment in seventy towns. The scheme was thereafter transferred
from the Ministry of Home Affairs to the Ministry of Welfare in 1985. A task force
constituted by the Planning Commission in July, 1989 estimated that there were 76
lakh dry latrines in the country. By 1991, Rs. 82.00 crore had been released as Central
assistance for implementing the scheme in 490 towns. The efforts resulted in the
conversion of 10 lakh dry latrines into water borne sanitary latrines and around
17,000 unemployed scavengers were rehabilitated in alternative trades and
occupations. Following a review of the working of the scheme in 1991, the Planning
Commission decided to bifurcate the scheme and the Ministries of Urban Development
and Rural Development were made responsible for conversion of dry latrines and
the Ministry of Welfare were made responsible for the rehabilitation of scavengers.
The Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines
(Prohibition) Act was introduced in 1993. Under this Act, the States could formulate
schemes to further the objectives of the law, but no reference to the national scheme
was made.
Main components of the Scheme
6. The National Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their
Dependents has the following main components:
• Formulation of a time-bound programme for identification of scavengers and
their dependents and their aptitude for alternative trades through a survey.
• Provision of training in the identified trades for scavengers and their depen-
dents at the nearest local training institutes of various departments of State
Governments, Central Government and other semi-Government and non-Gov-
ernment organisations.
• Rehabilitation of scavengers in various trades and occupation by providing
subsidy, margin money loan and bank loan.
Objective of the Scheme
7. The principal objective of the scheme was to provide an alternative, dignified and
viable occupation to scavengers and their dependents in a time span of five years
(1992—97). It envisaged the rehabilitation of all the identified scavengers during the
Eighth Plan period.

3
Audit Review
8. Audit reviewed the implementation of the Scheme during the period from 1992-93
to 2001-02 with particular reference to its implementation during the period 1997-98 to
2001-2002 and the details thereof have been given in Chapter I of the Report of Comp-
troller and Auditor General of India for the year ended March, 2002—Union Govern-
ment (Performance Appraisals) No. 3 of 2003. The primary objective of Audit was to
identify the areas of "disconnect" between the rehabilitation efforts expected to be
made under the Scheme and the efforts actually made followed by goals sought to be
achieved and the extent to which these were met. Another important dimension of the
Adult was to examine a host of related factors that could impinge on the implementa-
tion of the Scheme such as the enforcement of the law prohibiting employment of
manual scavengers, adequacy of liberation measures, training efforts, success of spe-
cial targeting exercises, the effect of the role played by spearhead agencies, viability of
self-employment projects and the quality of monitoring standards. The Committee's
examination of some of the more important aspects based on Audit Review of the
Scheme are dealt in the succeeding paragraphs.
The Organistational Structure of the Scheme
9. The 'National Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers and  their
Dependent's was introduced by the Ministry of Welfare ( now Ministry of Social
Justice & Empowerment) on 22 March, 1992. The liberation part of the scheme was
entrusted to the Ministry of Urban Development and Ministry of Rural Development
in their respective areas. While the work of rehabilitation and training of the
scavengers and their dependents were given to the then Ministry of Welfare along
with the nodal responsibility of the Scheme.
10. As a sequel to Hon'ble Prime Minister's declaration on Independence Day, 2002
regarding amalgamation of all schemes meant for liberation and rehabilitation of
scavengers implemented by various Ministries/Departments, the Planning
Commission had prepared "National Action Plan" (NAP) for total eradication of Manual
Scavenging by 2007. The Plan envisages that the entire programme of manual
scavengers be implemented by Ministry  of Urban Development through the
Department of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation (now Ministry of Urban
Employment & Poverty Alleviation). The NAP in April, 2003 provided that NSLRS be
transferred to Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation. Since then, the
Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation have been made the nodal
Ministry  and the scheme has been transferred to them.  However, the programmes of
the NAP are still being monitored by Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment.
11. The Committee have been given to understand that the Ministry of Urban
Development (now the Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation) is
implementing all the three components of the three-fold programme mentioned below:
(i) The Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines
(Prohibition) Act, 1993 (under the Ministry of Urban Employment and
Poverty Alleviation);

4
(ii) Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme (ILCS) (under the Ministry of Urban
Employment & Poverty Alleviation and HUDCO); and
(iii) The National Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers and
their Dependents (NSLRS) (up to August, 2003 under the Ministry of Social
Justice & Empowerment and thereafter under the Ministry of Urban
Employment & Poverty Alleviation).
12. As regards, the rationale behind transferring of all the three aforesaid
components of the Scheme to the Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty
Alleviation, the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment explained the position in a
written note as under:
(i) It is only through  the construction of wet latrines that will lead to the
liberation of  scavengers and free them so as to be trained and rehabilitated or
simply rehabilitated in other dignified occupations. This aspect have always
been dealt by the Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation.
(ii) The construction of wet latrines as well as conversion of dry latrines into wet
latrines is dependent on water supply systems, which are also dealt by the
Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation.
(iii) The manual scavengers generally function with municipalities, city
corporations and urban local bodies. These are also under the control of
State Governments/Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation.
(iv) The Em ployment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines
(Prohibition) Act, 1993 has always been dealt by the Ministry of Urban
Employment & Poverty Alleviation.
(v) The Integrated Low Cost Sanitation (ILCS) scheme has always been dealt by
the Ministry of Urban Employment &  Poverty Alleviation.
(vi) It is only National Scheme of  Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers
and their dependents (NSLRS) which was with the Ministry of Social Justice
& Empowerment till August, 2003. Now this is also with the Ministry of Urban
Employment & Poverty Alleviation.
(vii) The National Safai Karamcharis Finance and Development Corporation
(NSKFDC) is with the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment. However,
this only provides funds to Scheduled Castes Development Corporations
(SCDCs) for loaning to both Safai Karamcharis and manual scavengers and
their families. The Scheduled Castes Development Corporations (SCDCs) are
under the State Governments.
(viii) Audit has very strongly pointed out that there had been a lack of
coordination between the two Ministries which led to the progress to be slow
and all the  relevant schemes should be in one place.
(ix) A monitoring  Committee was established under the Chairpersonship of
Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment. However, in the

5
interest of effective implementation, the monitoring Committee should be
with the implementing agency. Hence, this should also be  transferred to the
Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation. This would have a
positive impact in the coming years.
Organisational Mismatches
13. The Scheme was organised with a four-tier structure going down
vertically from the  programme implementing Ministry of the Central
Government to the town or mohalla level. Organisationally, the Scheme did not
contemplate a network at the rural level presumably on the assumption that the
practice of scavenging was not predominantly a rural phenomenon. The 'Rural
Sanitation Programme', however, addressed itself to the liberation of
scavengers. Thus, it was necessary to have rural link down the line below the
district level, which was not available  in the Scheme. The District became the
controlling unit with the towns and mohallas integrated to the structure of
implementation and the District Collector the key functionary in the structure.
It was through the District Collector that interaction  with banks, urban local
bodies, Scheduled Castes Development Financial Corporation (SCDC),
training institutes and the monitoring committees was sought to be achieved.
It was also through the district authority that the interfaces with other
development schemes could be worked out.
14. Audit has, however, pointed out that the role of the district administrative
head was confined largely to survey and identification and that too not in all cases.
Day to day implementation of the Scheme was transferred to the SCDC. It is for this
reason that consolidated figures were often not available  with the District
Collectors and information had to be collected from SCDCs. This resulted in a lack of
coordination in the operation of the Scheme. There was no evidence in the test-
checked district that there was any initiative taken by the District Authorities in
identification of training institutes and development of portfolio of vocations. The
State Governments passed on funds directly to the SCDCs and the District Collector
had no role to play.
15. Audit para has revealed that coordination between the District Collector
and the nodal department of the State was insignificant except that periodic
reports were generated at the Collectorates on the basis of  information obtained
from SCDCs. In many cases, the district level monitoring committees under the
Chairmanship of Collectors were not formed. There was no coordination between
the Secretary  of the implementing department at the State level with the State
departments handling Urban Development, Rural Development, Labour and
Technical Education, as required. The Central Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment also had no coordination with the Ministries of Urban Development
and Rural Development. Its relationship with the National Safai Karamcharies
Finance Development Corporation was only visible in the area of Sanitary Marts.
These organisational mismatches and failure in coordination adversely affected
the implementation of the Scheme.

6
The Law — 'Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines
(Prohibition) Act, 1993"
16. The major provisions of the Act, 1993 ["Employment of Manual Scavengers and
Construction of Dry Latrines ( Prohibition) Act] are as follows:—
"Sec. 3. (1) Subject to Sub-Section (2) and the other prohibitions of this
Act, with effect from such date and in such areas as the State Government,
may, by notification specify in this behalf, no person shall:
(a) engage in or employ for or permit to be engaged in or employed for any other
person for manually carrying human excreta; or
(b) construct or maintain a dry latrine."
17. Explaining the importance of such an Act, the Ministry of Social Justice &
Empowerment stated in a note as under:
"As per the Entry No.6 of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution,
'Sanitation' is a State subject. However, in order to supplement the
efforts of the State Governments to put an end to this abominable
practice as quickly as possible, Government of India enacted a Central
legislation, namely the Employment of Manual Scavengers and Con-
struction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993. The State Govern-
ments are responsible  for enforcing the various provisions of the Act.
The Central legislation was enacted to enable uniformity in provisions.
The fundamental issue remains the planning and implementation of the
provision of the Act by State Governments and coordination among
their nodal agencies because the problem lies in the domain of the
State Governments and their nodal agencies. The Model by-laws can-
not be implemented without adoption, support and involvement of the
State Governments. Section 23 of the said Act also empowers the State
Governments to make rules for carrying out the provisions of this
Act."
18. The law that prohibited the engagement of manual scavengers, thus, could
have provided a powerful instrument to the implementers of the Scheme. By
adopting this Central Law, and enforcing  it in right earnest, the States could
have paved the way for the Scheme and liberation of scavengers would have
progressed in tandem with rehabilitation measures. However, only 17 States viz.
Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Chattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand,
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Tamil Nadu, Tripura,
West Bengal and Uttar Pradesh have adopted the Act. The Ministry of Social
Justice & Empowerment have also stated that the North Eastern States and
Kerala do not have problem of manual scavenging and so far the States of
Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Manipur,
Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Rajasthan, Sikkim and Uttaranchal are yet to
adopt the Act. Regarding the enactment of the State Act, the matter is stated to
be under legislative processing  in Rajasthan and in case of Delhi  it is pending

7
for Cabinet approval. The Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment added to
say that they have been regularly pursuing with the  State Governments for
adoption and implementation of the Act.
Lateral support through liberation
19. The Scheme envisaged that the obnoxious occupation of manual scavenging
would come to an end if all those who were engaged in this occupation and their
dependents were rehabilitated in alternative and dignified occupations.
20. An appropriate scheme of rehabilitation would provide the liberated scavengers
with trades and occupations that would enable them to earn their livelihood honourably
thereby preventing  them from relapsing into the scavenging occupation. Thus
'Liberation' and 'Rehabilitation' are mutually intertwined, without which the Scheme
would be incomplete. The Scheme, however, failed to provide the necessary linkages
amongst the implementing agencies and the Ministries administering the Scheme
encompassing the whole range of operations. Instead, it confined itself only to the
aspects of identification, training and rehabilitation leaving the liberation issues to the
Ministries or Urban Development and Rural Development who, separately and
independently, implement their own schemes for liberation under the 'Low Cost Scheme'
and the 'Rural Sanitation Programme' respectively. There was no coordination amongst
the three Ministries, nor had the Scheme interfaces been mapped in any of the Scheme
documents to avoid overlaps and asymmetries. This "disconnect" resulted in insulating
the Scheme within the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.
21. Audit reviewed the performance of the two liberation schemes 'Low Cost
Sanitation Scheme' implemented by the Ministry or Urban Development and Poverty
Alleviation and the 'Rural Sanitation Programme' implemented by the Ministry of Rural
Development during the period from 1991-92 to 2001-02.
Low Cost Sanitation Scheme
22. The Scheme had estimated in 1992, that of a total population of 4 lakh scavengers,
3.34 lakh (83 per cent)  were in urban areas. In 1997, the total number of scavengers was
raised to 7.87 lakh based on a rapid survey but the rural-urban configuration was
unavailable. Based on the 1992 ratio, the number of urban scavengers could be placed
at 6.5 lakh. Audit examination of the scheme in the Urban Development Ministry has
revealed the following:
• The Ministry did not fix any physical or financial targets. The scheme was
operated through Housing and Urban Development Corporation as a demand
driven scheme and no initiatives were in the hands of the  sponsoring
Ministry.
• The Ministry did not directly monitor the implementation or progress of the
scheme. It was monitored by Housing and Urban Development Corporation,
which sent its reports to the Ministry. Audit scrutiny of the reports brought
out that these reports were neither current nor followed any schedule pre-
scribed for the purpose. For instance, the status of conversion of dry latrines
and construction of flush latrines under the Low Cost Sanitation Scheme at

8
the end of March 2002 was based on reports of 2000 in a majority of the
States. On the other hand, in Karnataka and Haryana, the reports pertained
to the position as  on 31 December 1996 and 30 June 1998 respectively.
Evidently, the Ministry continued to accept reports that were not current and
no attempt was also ever made to verify the progress reported by Housing
and Urban Development Corporation. The Ministry stated that the liberation
and rehabilitation components of the Scheme were being looked after by the
Ministry  of Social Justice and Empowerment. However, it was the Ministry of
Urban Development which was responsible for the liberation component of
the scheme in urban areas.
• Of the subsidy aggregating to Rs 480.22 crore sanctioned by the Ministry,
only Rs 246.68 crore had been released up to 31 December 2001. Similarly, of
loans aggregating to Rs 583.51 crore sanctioned, only Rs 278.60 crore were
released up to 31 December 2001.  The Ministry cited in this context a report
of Housing and Urban Development Corporation, which attributed the time
lag between the sanction and release of subsidy and loans to delays in
documentation, non-availability of government guarantees, belated submis-
sion of utilization certificates and slow physical progress. There was, how-
ever, no evidence of the Ministry having initiated any remedial measures
aimed at removing these hurdles to enable the successful implementation of
the scheme.
• As against 6 lakh scavengers identified in the urban areas, the Ministry
reported having liberated only 37,340 (6.2 per cent). While admitting that the
scheme had not achieved the desired results, the Ministry cited the following
reasons for its poor progress:
— Slow generation of schemes by the States and Local Bodies.
— Lack of awareness among the people about the benefits of the Low
Cost Sanitation Scheme.
— Unwillingness of the beneficiaries   to bear the burden of their contri-
bution and subsequent repayment of loans.
— Absence of a proper monitoring system for effective implementation
of the programme at the State level.
— Delay in providing guarantees by the State Governments to Housing
and Urban Development Corporation Limited in respect of the loan
assistance to be provided.
23. During evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alle-
viation explained in detail the low cost sanitation programme carried out in urban areas
as under:—
"The Integrated Low-Cost Sanitation Scheme (ILCS) which this Ministry
has been mandated is implemented through HUDCO. The Integrated Low-
Cost Sanitation Programme was launched with two main objectives. The

9
first objective was to convert dry latrines into twin pit pour flush units,
and the second objective was to construct new toilets where no facility
was available in order to liberate the persons involved in manual scaveng-
ing. The Programme is primarily meant for small and medium towns having
population of up to 5 lakh as per 1981 Census. Hence, there is  a need to
update this, and we have to bring it up to the 2001 Census. Its  implemen-
tation is, according to our scheme, expected to be on a whole-town basis."
24. Explaining the position further in this regard, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban
Employment & Poverty Alleviation stated as under:
"Under the Act, HUDCO has been mandated to be the implementing agency
through its regional offices. We have a co-ordination Committee which
has been set up in the Ministry under our Economic Advisor and as we get
projects and proposals from HUDCO through their regional offices this
Committee sanctions and approves them or looks into them and if need be
discusses them with the State Governments and local bodies."
25. The Secretary, Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation further
added in this regard:
"The funds which we are transferring to the State Governments, are being
transferred to the implementing agencies nominated by the State Govern-
ments. The funding  pattern under the ILCS is part subsidy and part loan
given by the HUDCO. The loan is availed by the municipal board or which-
ever is the agency and the subsidy element is taken away but the State
Governments are wary of taking loans. HUDCO is a commercial
organisation. So, they insist on State guarantees. It is not that the State
guarantees are not forthcoming. They have been getting State guaran-
tees. I think, there is considerable progress as far as the low cost sanita-
tion scheme is concerned. So, we adopt that methodology."
26. When asked to furnish the present status of the achievements of the Low Cost
Sanitation Scheme, the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment informed through a
note as under:—
"The latest status of the Low Cost Sanitation Scheme revealed that it was
carried out in 23 States with a project cost of Rs. 204, 798.69 lakhs. the total
number of units sanctioned under the  scheme was 5,178,175 units and the
total number of units completed as on 30th September, 2004 was 1,730,739
units i.e. only 33.42 per cent. Regarding the total number of scanvengers
to be liberated, the Ministry informed that out  of 118464 only 41469 were
liberated i.e. only 35 per cent."
Rural Sanitation Programme
27. Audit also reviewed the performance of the  "Rural Sanitation Programme'
implemented by the Ministry of Rural Development during the period from 1991-92 to
2001-02. Examination of records in the Ministry and the replies furnished by them revealed
that the scheme had no credible links with the Scheme implemented by the Ministry of

10
Social Justice and Empowerment. The Ministry of Rural Development contended
that 20 States and Union Territories had no dry latrines and no manual scavenging
was prevalent in rural areas. The Ministry contended that only Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh, Manipur, Rajasthan and Sikkim had reported the practice of manual
scavenging in rural areas. The Ministry did not fix any targets for conversion of dry
latrines into water-borne flush latrines, nor were separate allocations for the purpose
made. The State Governments were directed by the Ministry to utilise the funds
allocated under the Central Rural Sanitation Scheme for conversion of dry latrines
into flush latrines. No separate data could be obtained from field audits in the States
as the allocation-based approach had been replaced by a 'demand driven approach'
and alternate delivery mechanism with beneficiary participation had apparently taken
away the initiative from the Government  to the beneficiaries themselves. Further, the
'Rural Sanitation Programme' had got dovetailed into the 'Total Sanitation Campaign'
launched in 1999. At the time of initiation of the Scheme in 1992, 17  per cent of all
scavengers estimated by a Task Force constituted by the Planning Commission were
in rural areas. By 1998, a baseline survey carried out by the Indian Institute of Mass
Communication placed the number at 8 per cent  of the service units. The figures
were neither comparable, nor were the baselines adopted in 1992 and in 1999 in any
manner susceptible of verification. The fact remains that liberation of scavengers
through conversion of dry latrines into flush latrines in rural areas has not been
adequately calibrated in the comprehensive sanitation format and the obnoxious
practice continues.
28. When asked to give the present status of achievements of "Rural Sanitation
Programme" (RSP), the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment stated through a
written note that:
"The Rural Sanitation Programme is being implemented by the Ministry
of Rural Development with the main thrust on accelerating sanitation
coverage in the rural areas of the country. Centrally Sponsored Central
Rural Sanitation Programme (CRSP) was first launched in 1986 during
the UN Decade on Water and Sanitation to give focus on sanitation and
hygiene promotion. It emphasized on individual latrine construction in
rural areas. The programme attained limited success in its objectives as
the rural sanitation coverage was low compared to the required pace, a
comprehensive review of the scheme was taken up and a re-structured
Central Rural Sanitation Programme (CRSP) was launched in 1999. As
part of this, a demand responsive, community driven Total Sanitation
Campaign (TSC) was introduced in selected districts. The main  objectives
of Total Sanitation Campaign  (TSC) was to accelerate sanitation coverage
by creating felt need among the rural population about sanitation and
also impart hygiene education to the people. It aimed to attain this
objective by focusing on intensive Information, Education and
Communication & providing cost effective and appropriate technologies
through alternate delivery mechanism like Rural Sanitary Marts or
Production Centres. It also reduced the emphasis on subsidy and
increased the emphasis on awareness creation."

11
29. The Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment further elaborated that the
scheme was implemented with the wider objective of attaining open defecation-free
villages and thereby reducing the health hazards. However,   keeping in view the
objectives of this scheme and the Action Plan for liberation and rehabilitation of
scavengers and their dependents, conversion of dry latrines to pour-flush  latrine and
eliminating the practice of manual scavenging has been included as of the objectives
in the revised Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) Guidelines issued in January, 2004.
Both under earlier CRSP and present TSC programmes, water seal pour flush latrines
are being promoted.
30. Elaborating on rural sanitation programme the Secretary, Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Drinking Water Supply) stated inter-alia:
".........the total amount provided since 1999 when this total sanitation
campaign started, is Rs. 4135.38 crore. Out of which the Government
of India support is Rs. 2443.08 crore. The State's contribution has to
be Rs. 917.58 crore and the beneficiary contribution  is Rs. 774.72
crore. Out of which—the programme moved a bit slowly up to 2002
and then picked up and the actual expenditure has been to the tune
of Rs. 787.4 crore. In rural areas, the toilets for below poverty line
individual, the finding pattern is that 60 per cent goes from the
Government of India, 20 per cent is the contribution of the State
Government and 20 per cent  is left to the individual.........There is a
Review Mission which consists of the Government of India, the
training institutions who train the people as to how to do it, and the
State Governments or the Panchayats. It also consists of the NGOs
wherever we find suitable NGOs. In fact, the Review Mission visit
quite often. It is a regular monitoring."
31. The Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment through a written note added
that:
"It is worth mentioning that existence of dry latrines and manual
scavenging is more an urban phenomenon and this is not much
prevalent in rural areas. However, all State Governments have been
advised to ensure that if any dry latrines exist in the rural areas and the
ones which are existing should be converted into pour flush latrine
and practice of manual scavenging should be eliminated. At present,
Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC)  is being implemented in 426 districts
of the country, which is likely to be further scaled up to cover all the
remaining districts in the country. So far under TSC, 100.13 lakh
individual toilets, 1.14 lakh school toilets, 17,606 Balwadi toilets and
3,862 community sanitary complexes have been constructed. Prior to
launching of TSC, under CRSP, 94.80 lakh individual household toilets
had been constructed in rural areas."
32. Audit has also noticed that there was no coordination amongst the three
Ministries, nor had the Scheme interfaces been mapped in any of the Scheme documents
to avoid overlaps and asymmetries. During evidence, when asked to comment on the

12
audit finding regarding non-coordination amongst the three Ministries, the Secretary,
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment admitted that:—
"There has been a lack of coordination between the Ministries. It is
because information relating to liberation is not there, and whether those
particular people were rehabilitated or not, that exercise has not been
done."
Rehabilitation Measures
Survey and Identification
33. Identification of scavengers and their dependents and their aptitude for
alternative trades was one of the most important components of the Scheme. The
Task Force constituted by the Planning Commission had estimated in its report of
March 1991 that there were 4,00,999  scavengers and their dependents. The survey
and identification exercise was intended to locate, specify and particularise the
beneficiaries and their needs. The Scheme envisaged that survey was to be
completed well before June 1992. However, none of the States completed and
communicated results of the surveys to the then Ministry of Welfare. Four States
(Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Pondicherry) communicated the
number of identified scavengers after delays ranging from one to four years.
Fourteen other States (Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka,
Kerala, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, West
Bengal and Delhi) did so after delays ranging from six to ten years. A comparison
of the State-wise number of scavengers estimated by the Task Force of the Planning
Commission and identified in the surveys conducted in four States (Bihar, Delhi,
Madhya Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh) revealed significant variations as indicated in
the following Table:
State No. of scavengers No. of scavengers
estimated by the Task identified in surveys
Force of Planning by  State Government
Commission
Bihar 22,398 12,226
(5.59) (1.81)
Delhi 34,022 17,420
(8.48) (2.57)
Madhya Pradesh 36,894 80,072
(9.20) (11.84)
Uttar Pradesh 62,029 1,49,202
(15.47) (22.07)
Note: Figures within parentheses represent percentage of total scavenger population in the
country.

13
34. Audit has pointed out that according to the records of the Ministry of Social
Justice & Empowerment, the number of scavengers identified was 8,01,839. In its Ninth
Five Year Plan proposals submitted to the Planning Commission in 1996-97, the Ministry
indicated that 7.87 lakh scavengers had been identified. However, during examination
of its grants for the year 1997-98 the Ministry had informed the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on Labour & Welfare that 8,25,572 scavengers had been identified.
Consequently, as many as five different sets of figures were in the Ministry's possession.
While explaining the reasons for the variations, the Ministry informed the Standing
Committee that the State Governments had reported a higher number of scavengers in
certain cases. Subsequently, the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment had
requested the Chief Secretaries of State Governments and the Administrators of Union
Territories in June 2001 to conduct a month-long survey in July 2001 to identify
scavengers and their dependents. Audit also noticed that in Andhra Pradesh,
methodology adopted for survey/re-surveys was not credible. Regarding Assam, it
was revealed that the identified scavengers increased three-fold between January
1994 and March 1997. In Gujarat, the number of beneficiaries identified bore no relation
to the number of dry latrines in the State. Another baffling revelation is with regard to
Uttar Pradesh. Though all scavengers were stated to have been rehabilitated by the
State Government in 2001, a survey conducted thereafter revealed that 38,253
scavengers were still to be rehabilitated in the State. Thus, the baseline surveys
conducted in the States suffered from a number of infirmities. This resulted in non-
availability of any reliable data with the Ministry even after a decade. In an appraisal
undertaken in June 2001, the Project Appraisal and Management Division of the Planning
Commission had also maintained that the Scheme had suffered because of incorrect
and incomplete identification  of beneficiaries besides other factors.
35. When asked by the Committee as to what were the bottlenecks in building up a
reliable  data base on the number of scavengers even after a decade of implementation
of the Scheme, the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment informed the Committee
as under:
"The Scheme visualizes identification of scavengers in a time bound manner.
State Governments are conducting survey from time to time to assess the
exact number of scavengers. This Ministry had also requested the State
Governments to conduct survey in every municipal corporation,
municipalities and other urban areas and major panchayats throughout
the State to know  about the number of dry latrines in existence and the
number of scavengers and their families involved in manual cleaning  of
those dry latrines. To ensure that physical survey is conducted in all
seriousness, it was also intimated that the District Collectors may be
directed for random sample checking  of the survey results."
36. One of the reasons for significant variations in the various surveys for
identification of Scavengers was the absence of a proper definition of  ‘Scavenger’.
The ADAI, C&AG stated during evidence:—
"The definition of scavenger is there in the Act. One of the comments in
this very Report is that his particular scheme was not linked to the Act.

14
The statutory force, which was available under the Act, was not made use
of. Secondly, in 1992 when the scheme came into force, the scheme did not
define a scavenger. It simply said that 'scavengers and their dependent
should be liberated from the existing hereditary obnoxious and inhuman
occupation of manually removing night-soil and filth. In 1996, when the
guidelines of the scheme were revised, the then Ministry of Welfare itself
had mentioned in the clarification that they were receiving references from
various State Governments as to what is meant by scavenger. In fact this
lack of a proper definition for scavenger is what created the confusion as
far as identification was concerned, because different surveying agencies
identified the scavengers in a different manner. In this clarification, which
the then Ministry of Welfare had issued in 1996, the revised Scheme guide-
lines had also mentioned, after saying it is going to be limited to only
those who are carrying this in this fashion, that all Safai Karamcharis
eligible for benefit grant under the scheme in a basti should be rehabili-
tated. So they are also including Safai Karamcharis. That is what has
created the confusion. There was a need to define scavenger under the
scheme but not  in the Act because Act has not been linked to this scheme."
37. When asked to clarify the definition of scavengers and their dependents, the
Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment explained as under:—
"Scavenger is one who is partially or wholly engaged in the obnoxious
and inhuman occupation of manually removing night-soil and filth. The
dependent of a scavenger is one who is a member of his family or who is
dependent on him irrespective of the fact whether he is partially or wholly
engaged in the said occupation."
38. According to the scheme, definition of scavenger is "one who is partially or
wholly engaged in the obnoxious and inhuman occupation of manually removing
night soil and filth". The Committee enquired whether this definition is sufficient or
need to be enlarged so as to bring into focus all those who are engaged in any manner
in removing, carrying etc. of the night soil and filth. In reply, the Ministry of Social
Justice & Empowerment stated that the definition as envisaged under the scheme is
sufficient.
39. According to the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment the National
Actions Plan, envisages the total eradication of manual scavenging by 2007. In this
regard, in the first meeting of the Central Monitoring Committee, it was decided that
the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation and the Ministry of Rural
Development would take necessary action for conducting a survey on a priority basis
about the status of manual scavengers and existence of number of dry latrines.
40. In this regard, the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment through a written
note informed the Committee that the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty
Alleviation have adderssed the State Governments to have a detailed survey on the
number of dry latrines existing in the respective State/Union Territory and also identify
the number of scavengers and their family members/dependents.

15
Training
41. Training to identified scavengers and their dependents, in the age group of 15 to
50 years, was expected to equip them with the requisite skills and expertise to success-
fully implement self-employment projects. No systematic efforts according to Audit
were made in this direction in any State.
42. The Committee desired to know about the components as well as the efforts
made to impart effective training to the scavengers and also the steps taken by the
Government to develop special curriculum, if any, for unskilled and illiterate scaven-
gers. To this, the Ministry stated that the scavengers were trained in the institutes run
by the Centre and State Governments and also by reputed voluntary organizations as
per 'Training of Rural Youth for Self-employment' (TRYSEM) norms. The type of train-
ing imparted also depended upon the aptitude of the person concerned and his/her
inclination to take on a particular trade. The contents of training were also appropriately
oriented keeping in view the capability of the person. Depending upon their aptitude, the
women scavengers were also allowed to choose a training programme from amongst a
variety of training programmes. Publicity through clubs, NGOs, scavengers associa-
tions, campaigning in scavengers' locality, notification in Government Offices, urban
Local Bodies etc. were made to invite applications for training in different trades. In order
to make the training programme more attractive, stipend, training fee, honorarium and
tool-kit allowance upto Rs. 2000 per beneficiary were also provided by the Central
Government. Regarding the special curriculum of training the Ministry of Social Justice
& Empowerment informed the Committee that the State Governments/SCDCs were asked
to provide suitable training to scavengers as per TRYSEM norms in Central/State
Government Training Institutes and also in the institutions run by reputed NGOs.
Shortfall in  achievement of targets for training
43. Audit has pointed out that the Scheme had visualized that the training should be
imparted in respect of 3.50 lakh eligible scavengers and their dependents by the year
1995-96 to facilitate rehabilitation of all identified scavengers by the end of the Eighth
Plan Period (1992—97). However, as per Audit only 2.02 lakh beneficiaries were trained
during the Eighth and Ninth Plan periods (1992-2002). Hence, the targets set for the
Eighth Plan period could not be achieved even by the end of the Ninth Plan period. It
has also been noticed that no training programme was conducted in States of Bihar,
Gujarat, Kerala and Punjab during 1997-2002.
44. The Committee desired to know the reasons for shortfalls in the achievement of
targets in respect of training which was to be imparted to the liberated scavengers. In
reply, the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment have admitted that the training of
scavengers was not keeping pace with the rehabilitation programme due to many
reasons. According to the Ministry, there was also lack of willingness amongst the
scavengers to new challenges and they have proposed some modifications in the
Scheme in the 10th Five Year Plan.
45. It is seen from Audit para that on receipt of the survey results from the States,
the Ministry had fixed the targets for training during the Ninth Plan period (1997—2002).
These targets were not communicated to the States and, as a result, the States either

16
did not fix any targets or fixed only ad hoc targets unrelated to the targets fixed by the
Government of India. In response to a question as to why the targets of training during
Ninth Plan period were not communicated to the States, the Ministry of Social Justice
& Empowerment have stated that the States were aware that they had to rehabilitate
the identified scavengers in suitable alternative dignified trades within a stipulated
time, so as to put an end to the practice of manual scavenging.
46. The Committee also desired to know whether any efforts have been made in the
States of Bihar, Gujarat, Kerala and Punjab for imparting training to the liberated scav-
engers. To this, the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment have stated that as per
the information provided by theStates/SCDCs., the details of training upto 2001-02 in
Bihar, Gujarat, Kerala and Punjab are as under:—
Sl.No. Name of the State No. of Scavengers and
their dependents trained
upto 2001-02
1 Bihar 425
2 Gujarat 965
3 Punjab 156
4 Kerala 4523
47. When enquired as to whether the Ministry have issued any instructions to the
States to ensure that there are no gaps in training of beneficiaries, the Ministry of
Social Justice & Empowerment have replied that the Scheme envisages that training
will be provided to eligible scavengers and their dependents in suitable identified
trades. However, the Ministry did not address to the question whether any instruction
have been issued to various States to ensure that there were no gaps in training of
beneficiaries.
Training and employment mismatches
48. Training, which was a pre-requisite for successful rehabilitation, remained the
weakest link in the entire progress. Test check of records by Audit had revealed that
adequate attention was not paid towards this aspect even in the Ninth Five Year Plan
period (1997-2002) and this hampered the rehabilitation process, as there are number of
instances of mismatch between training and rehabilitation which highlighted the fact
tht untrained scavengers were rehabilitated while trained scavengers were not reha-
bilitated.
49. On being asked about the reasons for training and employment mismatches
and the steps taken to avoid such mismatches, the Ministry of Social Justice &
Empowerment replied that sometimes the beneficiaries did not want to take loans
in the trades in which they were trained. The refusal of beneficiaries to take loan
and pursuing trade for which they were not trained lead to mismatch in training
and their employment. In this regard, the Ministry also informed that SCDCs
have instructed their field offices to rehabilitate the left out trained scavengers

17
in the trades in which they were trained on priority basis. Further ,  the Ministry
informed that there were certain trades, which did not require training and in
such a case scavengers were rehabilitated without training. There were also
instances in  which many scavengers were also changing their occupations after
being trained with the changing conditions. According to the Ministry, another
reason was disparity in the job opportunity and the trade or profession chosen
for training by the beneficiaries which resulted in mismatch of training and reha-
bilitation. Therefore, the rehabilitation of trained and untrained scavengers had
to go simultaneously.
Occupational Rehabilitation
50. Rehabilitation Programme under the Scheme contemplated (i) a time bound
survey to identify scavengers and their dependents and their aptitudes for alter-
native trades; (ii) identification of trades and preparation of a shelf of projects;
and (iii) the imparting of training with stipend to identified beneficiaries in the
identified trades. The programme sought to adopt the strategy of phased cover-
age. Funding under the programme combined elements of subsidy, margin money
loan and bank loan aimed at generating self-employment. The success of the
programme rested upon the availability of complete information in regard to the
number employed in the scavenging occupation, their aptitudes for alternative
occupations and the availability of resources. However, resources were neither
released nor applied judiciously, thereby leading to accumulated unspent funds and
hasty release at the end of the financial year. The absence of reliable baseline data
which could form the basis of target setting, led to incorrect projections and even more
incorrect conclusions in regard to the outcome of the rehabilitation measures.
51. Audit Review revealed that in March 1992, the Scheme had set a target of
rehabilitating four lakh scavengers and their dependents by the end of the Eighth
Plan period (1992-97). However, only 2.68 lakh beneficiaries were rehabilitated by
1997. While formulating the proposals for the Ninth Plan period, the Ministry
projected coverage of  7.87 lakh beneficiaries based on subsequent surveys. Inter-
estingly, this included 2.68 lakh beneficiairs claimed to have been rehabilitated
already. The year-wise targets fixed, thus, added up to 5.2 lakh beneficiaries. Evi-
dently, this was an arithmetical exercise unrelated to ground realities. By the end of
the Ninth Plan period, the number of scavengers which were rehabilitated was 2.03
lakh, leaving a backlog of around 3 lakh beneficiaries. This analysis establishes
that
(i) the results of the rehabilitation efforts in the Ninth Plan period were poorer
numerically than those achieved in the Eighth Plan period; and
(ii) the clearance being less than the backlog there was a progressive accelera-
tion, in net terms, of numbers. In other words, when there were 1.32 lakh
beneficiaries still awaiting rehabilitation at the end of the Eighth Plan period,
the number of such potential beneficiaries increased to 3.17 lakh at the end of
the Ninth Plan period.

18
52. The targets set for each of the years of the Ninth Plan period and the achieve-
ments there against are tabulated below:—
Year Target for Number of Shortfall in
Rehabilitation Scavengers achieving the target
as fixed by rehabilitated
Ministry during the year
1997-98 1,50,000 32,540 1,17,460 78.31
1998-99  1,50,000 36,559 1,13,441 75.63
1999-2000 1,50,000 26,538 1,23,462 82.31
2000-2001 50,000 30,312 19,688 39.38
2001-2002 20,000 76,840 — —
53. It is seen from above that the five years targeting exercise was largely
hypothetical because it did not take into account the year-wise progress. An
adverse consequence of such targeting was that the poor performance in a particular
year was not taken into account in suitably increasing the target for the subsequent
year. While the shortfalls ranged from 75 per cent to 82 per cent  in the first three
years of the Scheme during the Ninth Plan period, it improved to 39.38 per cent  in
the fourth year and close to four times the target set for the fifth year. This
improvement was, however, not attributable to the outcome of the rehabilitation
measures being higher but to the whittling down of the target to one third or less
of the previous years in 2000-01. The overall targeting exercise  was, thus, deficient
and inaccurate. Despite receiving periodic information in this regard from the States
and obtaining evaluations at its own level the Ministry did not revise the targets
upwards. These targets were not communicated to the implementing agencies in
the States. The States fixed their own targets, which varied widely from those set
by the Ministry.
54. The Committee enquired as to why the Ministry did not communicate year-
wise targets for rehabilitation to States. In response to this, the Ministry have
stated that the States were aware that they have the responsibility to rehabilitate
the identified scavengers in suitable alternative dignified trades within a stipulated
time. Various State Governments were addressed from time to time for effective
implementation of the scheme. The matter was also being reviewed through the
various meetings, held by Ministry with various State Governments. The Senior
Officers of the Ministry have emphasized upon the State Governments officials
the need for urgent/effective implementation of the scheme during their visits to
the States.
 Numbers Percent

19
55. The following table sums up the achievement of the Scheme in terms of number
rehabilitated with reference to the targets set and backlog:
Period Tar geted Number Number  Backlog
beneficiaries awaiting rehabilitated
rehabilitation
1992-93 to 1996-97 400,000 1,32,000 2,68,000 1,32,000
8th Plan Period
1997-98 1,50,000 1,32,000 + 32,540 4,86,460
3,87,000@
1998-99 1,50,000 4,86,460 36,559 4,49,901
1999-2000 1,50,000 4,49,901 26,538 423,363
2000-01 50,000 4,23,363 30,312 3,93,051
2001-02 20,000 3,93,051 76,840 3,16,211
1997-98 to 2001-02 5,20,000 3,16,211 2,02,789 3,16,211
9th Plan Period
@ 3,87,000 added to the total number as per Ninth Plan proposals.
56. It is evident from the above that the number  of scaveners awaiting rehabilitation
at the end of the Ninth Plan period was more than twice the number  at the close of the
Eighth  Plan period and barely 39 per cent of the target could be met during the Ninth
Plan Period. More than 40 per cent of  the estimated beneficiaries remained
unrehabilitated  even after a decade of  the implementation of the Scheme.
57. On being enquired about the reasons for shortfall in achieving the targets of
rehabilitation and also the measures taken to achieve the targets, the Ministry have
informed that NSLRS  was designed to cater  to the need  of  scavengers  thereby
bringing themselves into the mainstream of development. The success of the  scheme
depended on a number of host  factors like social prejudice, attitudinal change amongst
the scavengers as well as the people using dry latrines, motivation on the part of the
implementing agencies, etc. The very success of the scheme depended  on dovetailing
of the schemes  targeted for liberation and rehabilitation of  scavengers. The identified
svavengers  have not been rehabilitated completely during the last 10 years. However,
they have proposed  an idea for constitution of a Mission for rehabilitation of the
remaining scavengers in a time  bound manner. But, the Planning Commission did not
agree to the proposal.
Misapplication of resources
58. In Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and West Bengal,
instances of misapplication of resources were noticed. In Andhra Pradesh, a joint
inspection by Audit with the Enforcement Directorate of District Societies revealed
that 24 of the 28 rehabilitation units in Cuddapah district, which were financed during
1997-98 at a unit cost of Rs 80,000 to Rs 1 lakh, were non-existent. Similarly,in Kurnool
district, 3 of the 4 shops set up under the rehabilitation package were non-existent. In
Assam, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal, the beneficiaries who were assisted under
the Scheme were not listed in the survey records.

20
Higher Project package
59. According to Audit, the Scheduled Castes Development Financial Corporations
entrusted with the responsibility of sanctioning projects generally continued to sanc-
tion low cost projects. There was hardly any evidence of evaluation of the commercial
viability of a project. The Scheme  envisaged a maximum assistance of Rs. 50,000 per
project per beneficiary. In Haryana the average financial assistance for the rehabilita-
tion of 6,327 beneficiaries during 1997-2002  was Rs. 21,279, while it was Rs. 16,279 in
Orissa and barely Rs. 2,000 in Pondicherry. In six districts of Tamil Nadu, the project
cost in respect of 1,431 projects ranged between Rs. 3,500 and Rs. 20,000. In West
bengal, 353 of the 373 beneficiaries in 20 municipalities and  9 blocks got assistance of
less than Rs. 20,000. In Uttar Pradesh, only 970 of the 18,674 projects were provided
assistance of more than Rs. 20,000. While no recorded reasons for the Scheduled
Castes Development  Financial Corporation preference for low cost projects were
available, the basic hurdle appeared to be the  complexity of project formulation and
estimation of its viability. The level of educaiton of the beneficiaries, their indigent
circumstances and the lack of initiative on the part of the implementing agencies could
have contributed to the low cost mode of financing projects being accepted as an
easier alternative.
60. When the Committee desired to know as to why the funds flow to Scheduled
Caste Development  Financial Corporations was not reviewed to check preponderance
of low  cost projects, since smaller financial packages failed  to generate sustainable
income, the Ministry explained as under:
"The scheme provides proejcts costing upto Rs. 50,000/- for rehabilitation
of scavengers. The scheme also envisages projects costing above Rs.
50,000/. Taking into account all the aspects, the Ministry had initiated a
proposal for modification of the NSLRS since 1998, which includes the
provision  to increase the project cost, subsidy, etc. However, that did not
materialize due to some  reasons or other."
Role of Banks
61. Banks have a crucial role to play in providing financial assistance for rehabilita-
tion of beneficiaries under the Scheme. Scheduled Castes Development Financial Cor-
porations recommend the applications of beneficiaries for sanction of loans by banks.
However, banks were cautious  in providing  loans to the recommended scavengers
resulting in a large  number of applications being rejected. The position in some of the
States in this regard is as under:—
• In Maharashtra, the Scheduled Castes Development Financial Corporation
received 12,726 applications for rehabilitation projects during 1998-2002. Of
these, 12,666 proposals were recommended to the banks. However, the banks
rejected 3,806 proposals and 4,530 proposals were pending with them as of
March 2002. Thus, the rate of rejection of proposals for loan by banks was as
high as 47 per cent. Scheduled Castes Development  Financial Corporation
attributed the rejection to the non-viability of the projects and poor record of
past recoveries.

21
• In Orissa, Scheduled Castes Development Financial Corporation attributed
the shortfall in achieving rehabilitation targets to the banks  not sanctioning
loans (a) to other members in the event of default by one of the members of a
family; (b) on the ground that the beneficiaries were non-existent following
the conversion of dry latrines into water-borne ones; and (c) poor rate of
recovery.
• In Pondicherry, the banks had rejected 22 of the 109 applications  forwarded
to them by the Adi Dravidar Development Corporation. In October 1997, the
Corporation reported to the Government of Pondicherry that these appli-
cants would be contacted in person and necessary action taken to recom-
mend alternative viable projects to the banks. Further action was, however,
not taken to resubmit their cases to the banks for sanction of loans.
• In Rajasthan, Scheduled Castes Development Financial Corporation  attrib-
uted the shortfall in achieving the rehabilitation targets to the non-coopera-
tion of banks.
• Of the 3,870 proposals recommended in four districts of Tamil Nadu during
1997-2000, 2,862 applications (74 per cent)  were rejected.
62. The Committee  desired to know whether any steps were taken by the
Government to ensure that SCDCs formulate technically and commercially viable
projects to avoid rejection of loan applications  by the banks. In response to this, the
Ministry have stated that the scheme provided  that the scavengers should be
rehabilitated  in the trades as per their aptitudes and local conditions. The State
Governments/SCDCs  were advised from time to time to take effective steps for
rehabilitation of manual scavengers by way of suitable training and by providing
loan/subsidy for suitable projects in different trades for which an illustrative list of
trades was provided.
63. When asked about the initiatives taken by the Ministry for helping the illiterate
Scavengers for taking loans for setting up new enterprises, the Ministry of Social
Justice & Empowerment have responded and said that the Scheme envisages that the
State Scheduled Castes Corporations would stand surety to the bank loan. The
Ministry added in this regard as under:
"It has been decided in the third meeting of the Central Monitoring Com-
mittee that the Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation to
issue of instructions to the nationalized banks for providing loans in
accordance with the National Action Plan. The persons applying for loan
should be guided by the officers of the State  Channelising Agencies
(SCAs) for filling up the loan applications. The District Welfare Officer
should also be asked to take interest in the work."
Women not specially targeted
64. Women of the scavenging community constitute the most oppressed section.
Even after men of the family shift to more dignified professions, women continue to

22
remain engaged in manual scavenging. The revised guidelines of the Scheme, issued
in 1996, stressed the special targeting of women scavengers in rehabilitation
programmes, besides formulation of specific women-oriented schemes. Special atten-
tion was to be given to women beneficiaries in providing post-assistance support.
Awareness camps focussing attention on women were also required to be regularly
organized in the scavenger colonies. Audit has pointed out that this was not done.
65. Audit review revealed  that no women-oriented scheme was formulated by the
then Ministry of Welfare. Implementing agencies in Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Madhya
Pradesh, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal did not  formulate any
specific  women oriented schemes. Of the 6,244  scavengers rehabilitated in seven
districts of Andhra Pradesh, women constituted only 39 per cent. In six districts of
Assam, women constituted  49 per cent of 1,266 scavengers rehabilitated. In Delhi,
separate details of the women scavengers were not maintained. Of the 14,674 women
scavengers identified for training in Punjab 8,212 opted to receive  training; of these,
only 1,396 women (17 per cent) could be rehabilitated as of March 2002. In the East
Godavari district of Andhra Pradesh, 181 women scavengers were provided financial
assistance of Rs. 8,000 each for  establishing kirana, cloth business, etc. however, the
units failed very soon. According to the District Society, these women scavengers did
not also give up their earlier professions of scavenging. This is illustrative of the lack
of post-assistance  support to rehabilitated women scavengers, which was contem-
plated in the revised guidelines of the Scheme. In six districts of Tamil Nadu, however,
of the 2,754 scavengers rehabilitated, 1,750 (64 per cent) were women. In Karnataka,
the SC/ST Development  Corporation did not provide any information on the male and
female  scavengers rehabilitated. However, in the test checked districts other than
Gulbarga, 2,502 female  scavengers were rehabilitated as against 2,384 male  scaven-
gers. In Gujarat, the Gujarat Scheduled Castes Development Corporation had no infor-
mation on the organization of awareness camps for women on the other hand, in
Madhya Pradesh awareness camps were organized only in Bhopal district. In  Rajasthan,
the implementing agency was not aware of the guidelines relating  to the rehabilitation
of women scavengers through specially focused activities.
66. When the Committee enquired as to why no steps were taken by the  Ministry
of Social justice & Empowerment to formulate women oriented programme and why
were the assistance to women scavengers not monitored separately, the Ministry of
Social Justice & Empowerment have explained that the Government  was committed to
rehabilitate all the identified  scavengers, in the age group of 15-50 years including
females, in suitable dignified trades. Hence, women scavengers were rehabilitated in
suitable trades like knitting, embroidery, beauty parlour,  tailoring and dress making,
fancy and general store, mini dairy, cold drink shop  etc., keeping in view of the local
conditions via-a-vis their ability to switch over to the new occupations. Besides this
NSKFDC is implementing Mahila Samridhi Yojana for women. Under the scheme, term
loan assistance for Micro Credit Finance was provided to Safai  Karamchari and
Scavenger women and their dependent daughters for engaging in small and petty
trade/business and sundry income generating activities at concessional rate of
interest.

23
Cluster approach not adopted
67. The revised guidelines of 1996 envisaged that the Scheduled Castes Develop-
ment Financial Corporation should adopt a cluster approach in training and rehabilita-
tion programmes. All scavengers eligible  for benefits under the Scheme in a basti were
to be rehabilitated together. Scheduled Castes Development  Financial Corporation
were  to encourage formation of group projects so as to pool together subsidy and
margin money loans.
68. According to Audit, the scrutiny of records has revealed that the cluster
approach was not adopted  in any State. Though  in  Andhra  Pradesh, Gujarat,
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and
West Bengal Group projects in the form of Sanitary Marts  were adopted for rehabilitat-
ing scavengers, no other project following the cluster approach was formulated or
implemented. In States like Assam, Haryana and Punjab, the cluster approach was not
implemented at all. Keeping in view the limited success of the Sanitary Mart project
and the absence of any other project for training and rehabilitation of scavengers
in the cluster approach, the revised guidelines in this regard remained un-
implemented.
Sanitary Mart Scheme
69. The concept of rehabilitation of scavengers through the establishment of
Sanitary Marts was included in the Scheme in January 2000. A sanitary Mart is a
shopping place where the sanitary needs of the common man  could be met and
materials and equipment such as pans, traps etc. would be produced at its production
centre. Under the scheme, the implementing agencies had to steer the formation of
co-operatives, ideally of 20-30 scavengers, and these co-operatives would run the
sanitary marts. The main  goal of the scheme was to erase the need for scavenging by
converting dry latrines to wet latrines and subsequently, the need of engaging the
scavengers.
70. The success of this scheme was largely dependent on the commitment of the
implementing agencies in (a) motivating scavengers to set up sanitary marts; and (b)
planning for information, educaiton, and communication so as to generate demand for
items and services available with the  sanitary marts. Test-check of records, however,
revealed that the scheme failed at the initial stage itself, despite release of Rs. 130.05
crore, representing 93 per cent of the total funds released, by the Ministry during
1999-2002. As against a target of setting up of 4,606 Sanitary Marts for rehabilitation of
1,15,150 scavengers in fourteen States, the implementing agencies could set up only
636 Sanitary Marts rehabilitating 4,107 scavengers.
71. In Delhi, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, Kerala, the scheme was not imple-
mented. It is also interesting to note that the Sanitary Mart Scheme under the National
Scheme could be implemented only with limited success in West Bengal though it was
a complete success as a State Scheme. The failure was attributed mainly to the
absence  of the subsidy element  to the customers of these marts, which was provided
in the West Bengal Government's scheme. Haryana and Punjab did not  implement the
scheme as it was not viable.

24
Deficiencies in Financial Management
Flow of Funds
72. During the Eighth Plan period, funds required for training and rehabilitation
under the Scheme were estimated at Rs. 563.80 crore, whereas only Rs. 386.20 crore
were provided and expenditure of Rs. 384.67 crore incurred. Though the Scheme was
to be completed by the end of the Eighth Plan period, it continued during the Ninth
Plan period. Details of the fund allocations vis-a-vis the actual expenditure during the
Eight and Ninth Plan periods are tabulated below:—
(Rupees in crore)
Y ear Budget Revised Reduction at Actual
Estimates Estimates Revised Expenditure
Estimates
Stage
VIII Plan Period 386.20 386.20 — 384.67
(1992-97)
1997-1998 120.00 90.00 30.00 90.00
1998-1999 90.00 20.00 70.00 5.90
1999-2000 70.00 70.00 — 70.00
2000-2001 67.50 60.94 6.56 60.92
2001-2002 74.00 8.21 65.79 9.20
IX Plan Period 421.50 249.15 172.35 236.02
(1997-02)
Grand Total 807.70 635.35 172.35 620.69
73. It is seen from above that during the Ninth Plan period (1997-2002), the initial
budgetary commitment of Rs. 421.50 crore was scaled down to Rs. 249.15 crore which
amounts to an overall reduction of almost 41 per cent. The Ministry of Social Justice &
Empowerment attributed the reduction in budgetary support to the Scheme in the
Revised Estimates to the amounts lying unspent with State Scheduled Castes
Development Financial Corporations and the disinclination of the Planning
Commission to revise the Scheme in 2001-02.
74. When asked by the Committee why the Ministry did not take into year-wise
progress to revise its target for rehabilitation. To this, the Ministry of Social Justice &
Empowerment informed as under:
"The funds allocated for the scheme of NSLRS were Rs. 67.50 crores and
Rs. 74.00 crores for the years 2000-01 and 2001-02 respectively. As against
the allocated funds only Rs. 60.92 and Rs. 9.20 crores were released during
the years 2000-01 & 2001-02 respectively due to availablity of large

25
unspent balances with the State Governments. The funds released during
the Tenth Five Year Plan are Rs. 40.95 crore and Rs. 24.27 crore for the
years 2002-03 and 2003-04 respectively."
75. During the evidence, the Committee asked the Ministry to clarify as to why the
actual budgetary allocation for 2004-2005 has been reduced from Rs. 40 crore to Rs. 20
crore. To this the Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice clarified that:
"it is correct that the allocation for 2003-2004 is Rs. 20 crore. But, in addi-
tion to that the States have unspent balances of Rs. 104 crore. So actually
a sum of Rs. 124 crore is at the disposal of the State Governments to
implement the Scheme."
76. When asked to explain as to how much the reduction in the flow of funds has
affected the achievement of target, the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment
informed as under:—
"Reduction in the flow of funds has been mainly due to availability of
unspent balances with the SCDCs. Reduction in the flow of fund did not
affect the achievement of target. The accumulated funds were utilized to
achieve the target."
Release of grant despite retention of heavy unspent balances
77. Scrutiny of the records in the Ministry revealed that grant-in-aid was released
to such Scheduled Castes Development Financial Corporations which had heavy
unspent balances. The Ministry stated (May 2002) that the State Governments/
Scheduled Castes Development Financial Corporations were regularly pursued for
timely utilization of funds under the Scheme.
78. When the Committee asked the Ministry to explain the reasons for non-
utilisation of funds by the State agencies leading to a huge accumulation of un-
spent amounts with them, the Ministry stated that some of the main reasons for
non-utilisation of funds by the State agencies could be attributed to lack of
willingness on the part of potential beneficiaries to avail the benefit; inadequate
sponsoring of loan applications by Urban Local  Bodies; difficulty in finding
schemes that can meaningfully rehabilitate the scavengers; absence of skills in
scavengers to quickly shift to new professions and reluctance on the part of
people using dry latrines to convert to wet latrines. The State of West Bengal
reported that most of the scavengers were in permanent employment with Urban
Local Bodies, Railways, etc. On their liberation from the scavenging job, they were
provided with alternative employment in the Urban Local Bodies, etc. In addition
to this, they being natives of other States, their dependent family members were
floating residents, who did not quilify for any of the financial scheme of rehabilita-
tion.

26
79. On being asked to state the status of unspent funds lying with the States, the
Ministry furnished the information under the NSLRS as of July, 2003, as under:—
(Rs. in lakhs)
Sl.No. State Unspent Balance
1. Andhra Pradesh 224.70
2. Assam 353.31
3. Bihar Not available (N.A.)
4. Chhattisgarh N.A.
5. Gujarat N.A.
6. Haryana 527.59
7. Himachal Pradesh Nil
8. Jammu & Kashmir N.A.
9. Jharkhand N.A.
10. Karnataka 630.00
11. Kerala N.A.
12. Madhya Pradesh 1727.50
13. Maharashtra 2019.15
14. Meghalaya N.A.
15. Negaland N.A.
16. Orissa 362.17
17. Punjab 300.62
18. Rajasthan 3342.62
19. Tamil Nadu N.A.
20. Uttar Pradesh N.A.
21. Uttaranchal 987.30
22. West Bengal N.A.
23. Delhi N.A.
24. Pondichery N.A.
Total 10474.63
80. Enquired as to why the Central Assistance was released to the agencies which
were not able to utilize the earlier funds at the desired pace, the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment, submitted in a note that the Scheme contemplated a cluster
approach for the purpose of training and all the scavengers who were eligible for
benefits residing in a basti were rehabilitated together. To engergize and accelerate the
pace of NSLRS, the concept of formulation of Sanitary marts as a group activity, was
suggested to States/UTs during the year 1999-2000. Accordingly, SCDCs had
submitted their proposal for setting up of Sanitary  Marts to cover all the eligible
scavengers and their dependents. Elaborating further, the Ministry informed that al-
though the SCDCs of Tamil Nadu, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh and Rajasthan had un-
spent balances they were sanctioned Central Assistance during the year 1999-2000
after deducting the available unspent balance so as to avoid any financial constraints.
Another reason for the release of funds was to ensure that liberated scavengers might
not be left out from training and rehabilitation and the SCDCs should not face any
difficulty in rehabilitating the eligible scavengers and also to ensure that scavengers
do not relapse to their age-old occupation.

27
81. The Committee enquired whether the Scheme has a mechanism for first utilizing
the funds already sanctioned and then releasing further fund requirements. To this, the
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment replied that at the time of release of grants to
SCDCs for subsequent years, the financial progress of the earlier grant was taken into
account. Even if unspent balances are available, that was deducted from the subse-
quent central assistance so that the work of rehabilitation of manual scavengers does
not suffer. The Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment also added:
"Funds were also released to ensure that liberated scavengers might not
be left out from training and rehabilitation. If adequate funds were not
released, the SCDCs would have faced difficulties in rehabilitating all the
eligible scavengers, thus, denying the scavengers from falling back to
their age-old occupation."
Rush of disbursements in March
82. A significant portion of the disbursements during the year was made in the last
quarter of the financial year as well as in the month of March as shown below:—
(Rupees in crore)
Y ear Total Disbursement Percentage of Disbursement Percentage
Disbursement During Last Disbursement During March of
During the Quarter During Last Disbursement
year Quarter During March
1997-1998 90.00 20.56 23 11.46 13
1998-1999 5.90 5.90 100 5.90 100
1999-2000 70.00 70.00 100 70.00 100
2000-2001 60.92 60.92 100 60.92 100
2001-2002 9.20 2.25 24 2.25 24
83. Audit review has revealed that in the years 2000-01 and 2001-02, demand drafts
for release of grants were despatched to the implementing agencies in the subsequent
financial years. Release of Funds at the fag end of the financial year was indicative of
poor financial management and was aimed to avoid lapse of budgetary grants.
84. When asked to state the reasons for release of funds at the fag end of the
financial year, the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment stated in a reply as under:
"Release of funds to State Channelising Agencies (SCAs) based on the
proposals received from them. At the beginning of the financial year, the
Ministry calls for proposals for the SCAs. Thereafter, the SCAs submit
proposals in the prescribed proformae. Sometimes, the proposal is not
complete in all respects. This results in correspondence between the
Ministry and the SCAs. Owing to this reason funds were not released in
time. Moreover, there is also late receipt of proposals from the SCAs."
Utilisation of funds by State Governments/Scheduled Castes Development Financial
Corporations
85. State-wise position of funds released during 1997-2002 and expenditure
incurred there against is tabulated below:—

28
(Rupees in crore)
Sl. State/Union Opening Central State T otal Funds Unutilised Funds
No. Territory Balance Release Contribution/ Funds Spent As on 31.3.2002
Bank Loan/ A vailable (1997-2002)
NSKFDC Loan Amount Percentage
1 . Andhra Pradesh 3.42 14.10 13.25 30.77 53.60 _ Nil
2 . Assam 1.65 3.72 1.93 7.30 1.70 5.60 77
3. Bihar 6.13 4.64 Nil 10.77 1.56 9.21 86
4. Delhi 4.70 Nil 0.33 5.03 1.80 3.23 64
5 . Gujarat 0.42 20.51 Nil 20.93 3.28 17.65 84
6. Haryana 11.49 Nil 7.51 19.00 13.72 5.28 28
7 . Jammu & Kashmir 1.51 0.35 1.96 3.82 1.88 1.94 51
8. Jharkhand Nil 10.85 Nil 10.85 _ 10.85 100
9. Karnataka 3.09 10.63 Nil 13.72 8.12 5.60 41
10. Kerala 0.42 Nil Nil 0.42 * 0.42 100
11. Madhya Pradesh 4.63 33.34 47.79 85.76 67.40 18.36 21
12. Maharashtra 7.89 21.35 7.33 36.57 9.20 27.37 75
13. Orissa 6.98 6.96 Nil 13.94 9.92 4.02 29
14. Pondicherry 0.05 Nil Nil 0.05 0.01 0.04 80
15. Punjab 1.58 Nil Nil 1.58 0.61 0.97 61
16. Rajasthan 17.81 19.35 Nil 37.16 3.73 33.43 90
17. Tamil Nadu 23.65 22.53 7.82 53.90 18.38 35.52 66
18. Uttar Pradesh 36.89 44.46 3.06 84.41 65.46 18.95 23
19. West Bengal 4.51 Nil 0.37 4.88 1.50 3.38 69
Total 136.72 212.79 91.35 440.86 261.87 201.82
*The expenditure in Kerala being negligible (Rs. 13,000) has been rounded off to zero.

29
86. It is evident from the above that as against funds aggregating to Rs. 440.86 crore
available during 1997-2002, actual expenditure was only Rs. 261.87 crore. This consti-
tuted 59 per cent of the total funds available. Analysis of the State-wise position
revealed that more than 40 per cent of the funds remained unutilised in 14 States. The
entire amount released to Kerala and Jharkhand remained unutilised. The percentage
of unutilised funds in Bihar, Gujarat, Pondicherry and Rajasthan varied between 80
to 90 per cent. The position of utilisation of funds was also dismal in Assam, Delhi,
Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Punjab, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal
as the percentage of unutilised funds in these States varied between 41 and 77. Under
utilisation of funds was generally attributed to the indifferent attitude of banks in
sanctioning loans to scavengers, non-availability of technical manpower, delay in
finalisation of projects, rejection of applications at the district level and non-viability
of projects.
87. When asked to explain the reasons for poor utilization of funds by the States,
The Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment replied as under:—
(i) Lack of willingness on the part of potential beneficiaries to avail the benefit.
(ii) inadequate sponsoring of loan applications by Urban Local Bodies.
(iii) Difficulty in finding schemes that can meaningfully rehabilitate the scaven-
gers.
(iv) Lack of willingness in scavengers to quickly shift to new callings.
(v) Reluctance on the part of people using dry latrines to convert to wet latrines.
(vi) Sanitary mart scheme was a group project. However, Scavengers are not
interested in group projects.
(vii) Some States are also reported that there were difficulties in getting loans from
the banks. At times, Banks were interested to sanction only few small loans
that are far below the fixed target.
Retention of Central Assistance by the State Governments
88. Central assistance of Rs. 11.84 crore was retained by the State Governments
without being disbursed as under:—
• In Madhya Pradesh, the State Government retained Central assistance of
Rs. 9.29 crore during 1992-96 and the amount had not been transferred to the
implementing agency till March, 2002. During 1997-2002, Madhya Pradesh
Scheduled Castes Development Corporation received Central assistance of
Rs. 33.34 crore under the Scheme. Had the State Government not retained
Central assistance of Rs. 9.29 crore, the requirement of funds by the Corpora-
tion would have been lesser by an equal amount.
• In Punjab, the State Government retained Central assistance of Rs. 2.55 crore
released during 1995-96 even as of March 2002. The Ministry had also not
pursued the matter with the State Government to obtain refund of the amount
as of August 2002.

30
89. When the Committee inquired from the Ministry about the action taken in
respect of unauthorized retention of funds by the State Governments of Madhya
Pradesh and Punjab, the Ministry informed that they were in constant touch with the
concerned State Governments/SCDCs for transfer of the amount and the matter came
up for discussion during the visit of officers of the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment to States as well as in the meetings organized with the concerned
Secretary of the respective State Governments.
Shortfall in Matching Contribution by State Governments
90. The Margin money loan component of the financial package for rehabilitation
was to be funded in the ratio 49:51 between the Centre and States/Union Territories.
However, Audit has highlighted that the States' share of margin money was either not
contributed or less contributed by States of Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
West Bengal, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar and Karnataka. On being asked to explain the
steps taken by the Ministry to ensure that the share of margin loan money was
contributed properly by the concerned State Governments, the Ministry have informed
that the matter was constantly being pursued with the State Government concerned in
their periodical meetings.
91. On being enquired that whether funds allocation could be brought upto 80 per
cent from the Centre and 20 per cent from the States, the Secretary, Ministry of Urban
Employment & Poverty Alleviations explained during evidence as under:—
"The problem is that we cannot commit it because it has to be taken up
with the Planning Commission. The amount would be so small that it
would not create any difference to motivate the State Government to
monitor this Scheme."
92. The Committee also desired to know whether the State Governments concerned
have now contributed their shares and also asked whether there is any possibility of
converting the scheme to 100 per cent Centrally Sponsored Scheme. To this, the
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment replied as under:—
"The share of the State Governments is very nominal i.e., 51 per cent of
15 per cent of Margin Money loan of the project cost. Since sanitation is
State subject, at least the marginal financial contribution should continue."
Outstanding Utilisation Certificates
93. The Ministry released grants-in-aid for the implementation of the Scheme to the
agencies concerned through the State Governments up to 1996-97, and thereafter
grants were released directly to the agencies themselves. State Governments and the
Scheduled Castes Development Financial Corporations were required to submit
utlisation certificates in respect of grants-in-aid released to them.
94. Audit review has revealed that as against release of grants-in-aid of Rs. 642.43
crore during 1991-2002, the Ministry had received utilisation certificates for Rs. 60.77
crore only (9 per cent of the total funds released).

31
95. When asked to state the reasons for non-submission of utilisation certificates
by the State implementing agencies, the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment
have replied that under the scheme, Central assistance was initially released to the
State Governments. In case of scheme(s) where funds are directly released to the State
Governments, utilisation certificates duly certified by the chartered accountant are not
generally submitted by the State Governments. Subsequently, funds were directly
released to SCDCs from 1996-97.
96. The Committee also desired to know whether the State Governments/SCDCs
have since submitted the utilisation certificates. To this, the Ministry of Social Justice
& Empowerment have replied that due to the constant persuasion by the Government
SCDCs have started sending some utilization certificates.
Monitoring
97. The Scheme provides for the setting up of a network of Monitoring Committees.
There should be a Central Monitoring Committee at the apex level, State-level Moni-
toring Committees, supported by District-level Monitoring Committees and the Town
Committees or Mohalla Committees at the ground level. While the Central and State-
level Committees were required to meet quarterly, no periodicity was prescribed for
District and Town Committees. However, Audit scrutiny revealed that the Central
Monitoring Committee met only once in February 1993 during 1992-2002, whereas it
should have met at least forty times. The State-level Monitoring Committees in Assam,
Gujarat, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West
Bengal met less than half the number of times required. In the States of Jammu &
Kashmir and Orissa, they did not meet even once. In the States of Bihar, Jharkhand,
Kerala, and Pondicherry, no State-level Committees were set up. District-level Commit-
tees were not set up in the States of Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Maharashtra and
Pondicherry. In Haryana, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Pondicherry and Tamil Nadu no
Town or Mohalla Committees were set up. Records of the proceedings of Committee
meetings were not maintained in many of the cases.
98. The District-level, State-level and Central-level Monitoring Committees depends
on reports generated at the operational level for evaluating the Scheme. Audit has also
revealed that many of these committees were not constituted. Even when these were
constituted, they did not meet to review the details of progress made. The absence of
a comprehensive reporting standard, highlighted the failure of the Scheme on many
fronts. There were incorrect/incomplete identification of beneficiaries, non-identifica-
tion of skill requirements, lack of monitoring mechanism, lack of awareness among
beneficiaries, lack of motivation for self-help and misutilisation of cash assistance by
the beneficiaries. There was no evidence on record to suggest that during any of these
evaluations, findings were considered at the appropriate levels to provide corrective
and remedial measures.
99. The Committee wished to be apprised about the reasons for the shortfall in the
number of meetings of Central Monitoring Committees, State level Monitoring Com-
mittees and District level Monitoring Committees. In reply, the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment stated that in regards to Government of Jammu & Kashmir,

32
it was reported that because of disturbed conditions in the State, the monitoring
committee meetings could not be held regularly. The Government of Pondicherry in-
formed that since there were no dry latrines in the UT of Pondicherry and hence, no
such monitoring committees have been constituted in the UT so far. The Government
of Rajasthan reported that the meeting was held at the level of Secretary concerned
prior to 1999 and also informed that the State level Monitoring Committee met regularly
under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary and also the meeting of the District Level
Scavengers Committee were held from time to time. Regarding the Government of Tamil
Nadu, it was reported that the Committee met periodically once in three months and the
District Level Monitoring Committee (DLMCs) met at least once in a year. Regarding
the Government of Uttar Pradesh it was reported that the District units of UPSCDC
were holding meetings once in a month. The Government of West Bengal informed
that regular meeting of monitoring committees were not held. However, meetings were
held, whenever there were issues for discussions and decisions. When asked by the
Committee regarding the steps taken to ensure constitution of State Level Monitoring
Committee in the States of Bihar, Jharkhand and Kerala, the Ministry responded that
State Governments have been requested time and again to constitute it as envisaged
under the Scheme. Besides this, at the time of calling proposals under the Scheme,
State Governments/SCDCs have been requested to provide copies of the minutes of
the meeting held in the recent past.
100. When enquired about the outcome of the meetings of the State level Monitor-
ing Committees that took place in the last three years, the Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment have informed that some of the important issues discussed in these
meetings were:—
• effective enforcement of the Act;
• matter relating to issuance of notices to all individual dry latrine households
for conversion into septic ones in a time bound period;
• low cost sanitation programme;
• meeting of the executive Committee on monthly basis;
• effective monitoring by District Collectors;
• training programme in professional courses for scavengers;
• implementation of the scheme of Sanitary Mart;
• education of the dependents of scavengers; and
• modern/cost effective technology in all cleaning operation to avoid manual
operations.
101. As regards the existing monitoring mechanism available in the Ministry for
monitoring the implementation of the Scheme, the Ministry have explained that as a
sequel to Hon'ble Prime Minister's declaration on Independence Day, 2002, the
Planning Commission prepared "National Action Plan for Total Eradication of Manual
Scavenging by 2007". NSLRS have been transferred to the Ministry of Urban Employ-

33
ment & Poverty Alleviation in 2003, which have been made as the nodal Department at
the Centre. However, as per the direction of the Cabinet Secretariat, a Central Monitor-
ing Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary (SJ&E) has been constituted to
review the implementation of the National Action Plan. As the Ministry of Urban
Employment & Poverty Alleviation have been made the nodal Department at the
Centre, it was expected that the revised centralized set up would come a long way to
cope up with all the difficulties in the implementation of the programme. They added
that the nodal Department was also reviewing the progress of the implementation of
the scheme.
102. In reply to a query as to how could to person who has nothing to do with the
implementation, can be the Chairman  of the Monitoring Committee the Secretary, the
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment clarified the position during evidence as
under:—
"That is because the Scheduled Caste Development is part of our Ministry also.
We have a corporation named National Safai Karamchari Finance and Develop-
ment Corporation. This Corporation given loans to the State Scheduled Caste
Financial Development Corporation which in turn give it to the scavengers who
are to be rehabilitated."
Observations and Recommendations
103. The Committee note that the 'National Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilita-
tion of Scavengers and their Dependents' mark the convergence of several public
initiatives over a period of four decades preceding its introduction in 1992. It was
introduced by the Ministry of Welfare (now Ministry of Social Justice & Empower-
ment) on 22nd March, 1992 with the objective to provide alternative, dignified and
viable occuptation to them. The Centrally Sponsored Scheme was conceived to deal
with three principal issues. Firstly, the identification of scavengers and their depen-
dents through a time bound survey; secondly, imparting of training in their identified
trades; and thirdly, providing subsidy, margin money and bank loan for their rehabili-
tation. While bifurcating the integrated scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of
Scavengers in 1991, the liberation component was entrusted to the Ministries of
Urban and Rural Development and the rehabilitation component was entrusted to the
then Ministry of Welfare (now Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment) along
with the nodal responsibility for the Scheme. Undoubtedly, the Scheme was well
intentioned with the objective to provide an alternate, dignified and viable occupation
to scavengers and their dependents in a stipulated time span. However, the Committee
are constrained to point out that it has failed to implement its operational parameters
in a highly stratified society resisting change from a hereditary occupational struc-
ture even after 10 years of its implementation involving investment of more than
Rs. 620 crore. It is a matter of national shame that anywhere between 5-8 lakh
manual scavenger remain unrehabilitated. The scheme failed to deliver its social
vision after ten years of continuous but regrettably half-hearted efforts. It failed in
working out a coherent strategy for policy initiatives as it could not take advantage of
an existing law that prohibited employment of Scavengers. Divorcing liberation from
rehabilitation was an error of judgement that weakened the foundation of the Scheme
and led to uncoordinated efforts without focus. It failed in enhancing or re-orienting

34
the skill-levels of the beneficiaries necessary for change of occupation. For the same
reason, it failed in its mission of replacing the hereditary practice by skill-based
choice of profession. Absence of base-line survey, non-involvement of district develop-
ment authorities, commercialisation of the assistance patterns have led to a loss of
focus of the monitoring aspect of the scheme.
104. The Committee observe that even at this stage of its implementation, the
Scheme still continues to remain a prisoner of its own statistics. Absence of credit-
able database of targeted beneficiaries has robbed the scheme of its objectivity. The
loss of links between liberation, training and rehabilitation has derailed the Scheme.
The Scheme visualised the rehabilitation of all the 4 lakh scavengers and their
dependents estimated by the Task Force in March 1991 by the end of the Eighth Plan
period (1992-97). Against this, the Scheme claimed to have rehabilitated only 2.68
lakh. This did not, however, result in a reduction in the total number, as subsequent
surveys conducted between 1994-95 and 2001-02 estimated the number as 7.87 lakh
necessitating  upward revision of the targets. Further, the Ministry of Social Justice
& Empowerment, which was the then  nodal Ministry for the Scheme, claimed to have
rehabilitated 4.71 lakh scavengers during 1992-2002, while the Ministries of Urban
and Rural Development projected that only 0.37 lakh scavengers had been liberated
during the same period. In addition to this, there is no evidence to suggest the actual
number of those liberated and the number which were in fact  rehabilitated. The
Scheduled Castes Financial Development Corporations responsible for implementa-
tion of the scheme at the State level have failed to deliver the positive results, which
can be substantiated by the fact that there is no clear-cut indication in the occupa-
tional change of scavengers. Besides, training imparted is inadequate, impractical
and disoriented. The Commttee is of the view that it is the lack of purpose in aligning
the parameters of the Scheme and lack of will in implementing it that led to the
Scheme floundering on its own principles. The Committee's examination of some of
the important dimensions on the issues reviewed by Audit  highlights the fact  that the
implementation of the Scheme continues to be afflicted by serious  shortcomings
which are summed up in the succeeding paragraphs.
105. The  major provision of the 'Employment of Manual Scavengers and Con-
struction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993, states that  State Government may
by notification, specify that no person shall engage in  or employ for and permit to be
engaged in or employed for any other person for manually carrying human excreta,
or construct or maintain a dry latrine. However, the Committee note that the scheme
suffered, because it was not calibrated to relate its parameters to the legal framework
provided by the Act and continued to operate in a persuasive mode without the legal
means to penalize for its violation. Although only  17 States have adopted this Act, yet
its implementation aspects left much to be desired since these States have failed to
analyse and substantiate with facts  for its effective  implementation. Some of the
States have not even adopted  the Act till date, and the Ministry has  neither assessed
the drawbacks in its enforcement nor has taken concrete steps to ensure its adoption
and implementation.  The law that prohibited the engagement of manual scavengers,
this, could have provided a powerful instrument to the implementers of the Scheme.
By adopting this Central Law and enforcing it in right earnest, the States could have

35
paved the way for the successful implementation of the Scheme and liberation of
scavengers would have progressed in tandem with rehabilitation measures. The fact
that this was not adopted and implementated by all the States is regretted. The Com-
mittee recommend that the Ministry should look not the grey areas experienced by
the States in enforcing the Act and bring out clear cut steps to remove the bottlenecks
and correlate the legal framework with the attainment of objectives of the Scheme.
The Committee also hope that the Ministry will wake up to their responsibility and
ensure that the Act is adopted by all the States which are yet to adopt it and at the same
time, initiate urgent measures for its implementation in all the States.
106. For the success of the scheme proper identification of scavengers and their
dependents was vital. However, various surveys for identification of scavengers and
their dependents necessary to locate, specify and to give particularized training to
the beneficiaries according to their needs were often not methodogically sound. The
results varied widely. Even the definition of 'Scavengers' was not settled which
resulted in the inclusion of ineligible persons in the list of beneficiaries. Even the
Ministry of Welfare in 1996 received references from various State Governments
about the exact definition of a Scavenger. Thus the absence of proper definition of
'Scavenger' let to different surveys by different agencies. As many as five different
sets of figures were in the Ministry's possession. The Committee note that the base-
line surveys conducted in the States suffered from a number of infirmities which
resulted in non-availability of any reliable data with the Ministry even after a decade
on the number of scavengers and their dependents which was essential to estimate
the fund requirements, to facilitate the preparation of a well considered action plan.
At this stage, the Committee cannot but over emphasise the need for fresh survey to
be undertaken immediately so as to ensure the availability of a reliable data of the
number of scavengers to be liberated and rehabilitated. For this, it is also essential to
define the boundaries so as to make the out reach of the scheme only to the potential
beneficiaries i.e. Scavengers as envisaged in the scheme and not to all the Safai
Karamcharies engaged in cleaning and  sweeping occupation as extension of benefit
to them is construed as leakage of benefits to ineligible persons.
107. The Scheme had envisaged that the obnoxious occupation would come to an
end if all those who were engaged in this occupation and their dependents were
rehabilitated in alternative and degnified occupation. The liberation of the scaven-
gers was possible only when the practice of using dry latrines was eliminated. The
Committee are constrained to point out that the scheme failed to provide the neces-
sary linkages amongst the implementing agencies and the Ministries administering
the scheme  encompassing the whole range of operations. Instead, the Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment confined itself only to the aspects of identificatin,
training and rehabilitation leaving  the  liberation issues to the Ministries of Urban
Development and Rural Development who, separately, and independently implemented
their own schemes for liberation under the "Low Cost Sanitation Scheme" and the
"Rural Sanitation Programme" respectively. The Committee regret to observe that
there  was no coordination amongst the three Ministries nor had the scheme
interfaces be mapped in any of the  scheme documents to avoid overlaping and
asymmetries. Another disquieting fact observed by the Committee is that the Low

36
Cost Sanitation Scheme carried out by the then Ministry of Urban Development for
liberation of urban scavengers was a failure as they did not fix any physical or finan-
cial targets. The Committee recommend that a single national programme be formu-
lated and implemented by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment as a
mission  with the  objective of eliminating this scourage within the next four-five
years.
108. The Committee find that the Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme was
implemented through Housing Urban Development Corporation. The first objective
was to convert  dry latrines into twin pit pour flush units, and the second objective
was to construct new toilets where no facility was available in order to liberate the
persons involved in manual scavenging. The funding pattern, according to the
Ministry, under Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme is part subsidy and the part
loan given by the HUDCO. The loan is availed by the Municipal Board or by the
concerned agency  and  the subsidy element is taken away but the State Governments
are wary of taking loans since HUDCO being a commercial organization, insists on
State guarantees. The  Committee also note that out of the subsidy aggregating to
Rs. 480.22 crore sanctioned by the then Ministry of Urban Development, only
Rs. 246.68 crore had been released upto 31  December, 2001  and loans aggregating
to Rs. 583.51 crore sanctioned, only Rs. 278.60 crore were released and out of the 6
lakh  identified scavengers in urban areas only 37340 i.e. 6.2 per cent were liberated.
The low progress made by this scheme has been attributed by HUDCO to the time lag
between the sanction and release of subsidy and loans to delays  in  documentation,
non-availability of Government guarantees, belated submission of utilization
certificates and slow physical progress. The Committee are constrained to point out
that there was no  evidence of the Ministry having initiated any remedial measures
aimed at removal of these hurdles to  enable the successful implementation of the
scheme.
109. The Committee note that  according to the Ministry of Rural Development,
20 States and UnionTerritories have no dry  latrines and no manual sanitation was
prevalent in rural areas. The Ministry have contended that only Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh, Manipur, Rajasthan and Sikkim  had  reported the practice  of manual
scavenging in rural areas. The Committee note that the Ministry had not fixed any
targets for conversion of dry latrines into water-borne flush latrines, nor were sepa-
rate allocations made for the purpose. The State Governments are stated to have been
directed by the Ministry of Rural Development to utilise the funds allocated under the
Central Rural Sanitation Scheme for conversion of dry latrines into  pour flush
latrines. Further, the 'Rural Sanitation Programme' had got dovetailed into the
'Total  Sanitation Campaign' launched in 1999. The  main objectives of the Total
Sanitation Campaign was  to accelerate the sanitation coverage by creating the felt
need among the rural population about sanitation  and also impart hygiene education
to the people. It aimed at attaining this  objective by focussing  on intensive  Informa-
tion, Education and Communication and by providing cost effective  and appropriate
technologies through alternate delivery mechanism such as the Rural Sanitary Marts
or Production Centres.

37
110.  At  present Total Sanitation Campaign is being implemented in 426 districts of
the country, which is likely to be further scaled up to  cover all the remaining districts  in
the country. According to the Ministry, 100.13 lakh individual  toilets, 1.14 lakh  school
toilets, 17,606 Balwadi toilets and 3,862 community sanitary complexes have  been
constructed. Prior  to launching  of  Total Sanitation Campaign, under Central Rural
Sanitation Programme, 94.80  lakh individual  household toilets had been constructed  in
rural areas. Concurrent evaluation of  the campaign is essential. The Committee wishes
that the Ministry of Rural Development to place the highest emphasis on this aspect.
111. The Committee feel that Liberation, meaning removal of the very cause and
basis of manual scavenging, thereby  allowing the beneficiary liberate from the
stigmatised occupation, should  have been the cornerstone of the Scheme as there could
be no rehabilitation without  liberation. Some half-hearted measures seem to have been
taken in rural as well  as in urban areas to convert dry latrines into wet latrines. A lot,
however, needs to be done to liberate all the scavengers. For this, it is necessary that
revised stipulated targets are refixed for conversion of dry latrines into wet latrines for
which a time bound programme may be drawn up to achieve the revised targets. Lack of
requisite funds should not come in the way of successful achievement of the objectives
and therefore, the Ministry accordingly should take timely and effective steps to pro-
vide the necessary funds. The Committee would also like the Ministry to have close
coordination with HUDCO and other implementing agencies in Urban as well as in
Rural areas to accomplish the task. For this, proper monitoring of the physical and
financial targets should be carried out at the highest level.
112. The Committee note that training to identified scavengers and their depen-
dents, in the age group of 15 to 50 years, was expected to equip them with the requisite
skills and expertise to successfully implement self-employment projects. The Com-
mittee have been informed that the scavengers are trained in the institutes run by the
Centre and the State Governments and also by reputed voluntary organizations as per
TRYSEM norms. The type of training imparted depended upon the aptitude, capability
and inclination towards a particular trade. However, to their uttar dismay, the Com-
mittee have found that only 2.02 lakh beneficiaries out of 5.38 lakh eligible beneficia-
ries were trained during the Eighth and Ninth Plan periods (1992-2002). The Com-
mittee regret to observe that targets for training were not communicated by the
Ministry to the States which resulted either in targets not being prescribed by the
States or in targets being determined only on ad hoc basis. Consequently, shortfall in
training coverage was as high as 68 per cent and targets set for the Eighth Plan were
not achieved even at the end of the Ninth Plan. No special curriculum was developed
for training of scavengers though it was recognized that occupational shift in low-
skill areas would require special measures.
113. The Committee desire that the Ministry should immediately lay down the
requisite targets for training purposes of the scavengers liberated so that they do not
relapse into their hereditary occupation. For this purpose, special training scheme
should also be designed keeping in view their low skill level the focus being on the
creation and upgradation of the skills for self-employment. The Committee further
feel that the need for revitalizing the training infrastructure should also be looked

38
into a greater depth. For this, the Ministry should consider the feasibility of involving
Non-Governmental Organisations, especially in certain selected training activities
to bring about a fruitful training programme ensuring that their attitudinal behaviour,
aptitude and educational standards are taken into consideration for the rehabilitation
programme.
114. The Committee note the Rehabilitation Programme under the Scheme con-
templated (i) a time bound survey to identify scavengers and their dependents and
their aptitudes for alternative trades; (ii) identification of trades and preparation of a
shelf of projects; and (iii) the imparting of training with stipend to identified benefi-
ciaries in the identified trades. The Committee, however, note that against the taget of
5.20 lakh scavengers to be rehabilitated from 1997-98 to 2001-2002, only 2.03 lakh
scavengers were rehabilitated during this period. During 9th Plan only 39 per cent of
the target could be met whereas in the 8th Plan 67 per cent of the targeted beneficia-
ries were rehabilitated. Thus, the number awaiting rehabilitated at the end of the
9th Plan period was more than twice the number at the close of the 8th Plan period.
The Committee, however, regret to observe that more than 40 per cent of the benefi-
ciaries remained unrehabilitated even after a decade of the implementation of the
scheme. This, according to the Committee, was due to the fact that the resources were
neither released nor applied judiciously, thereby leading to accumulated unspent
funds and hasty release at the end of the financial year. But absence of reliable
baseline data which could form the basis of target setting, led to incorrect projections
and even more incorrect conslusions in regard to the outcome of the rehabilitation
measures. The Committee would however, also like to point out that rehabilitation
efforts were characterized by misapplication of resources, emphasis on low-cost
projects for availing of cash benefits without income generation and mismatches
between skills and occupations.
115. The Committee found that District Collectors were to act as key functionar-
ies for coordinating with training institutes, financial institutions and various
departments of State Governments executing welfare schemes. However, their role
was confined largely to survey and identification of beneficiaries. The responsibility
of the Scheme was transferred to Scheduled Castes Development Financial Corpora-
tions, which were not accountable to the District Collectors in the normal course of
their functioning. These organisational mismatches adversely affected the imple-
mentation of the Scheme.
116. The Scheduled Castes Development Financial Corporations and banks which
were responsible for the implementation of income generating rehabilitation schemes
failed to deliver as there was no clear indication of the path of occupational change.
Training in low skill alternative occupation was inadequate, impractical and
disoriented. Factors of habitation cluster, apitute, gender and motivation were
 ignored for the statistically visible loan-projects. There too the rejection percentage
was as high as 74 per cent in Tamil Nadu and 47 per cent in Maharashtra. To Expect
an illiterate and poor scavenger to comply with the rigours of project-financing by
commercial banks, was to say the least, unimaginative. Instances of banks rejecting
a large number of applications or adopting a cautious approach was also indicative of

39
the fact that the implementing agencies and Scheduled Castes Development Finan-
cial Corporations did not exercise sufficient care in the formulation of viable projects
that could be financed by the banks. The Committee recommend that Ministry of
Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation should take up the matter with the State
Governments to impress upon SCDCs that they should formulate technically and
commercially viable projects to avoid rejection of loan applications by the banks. The
bank should also be instructed through Ministry of Finance to be more compassion-
ate while dealing with the loan applications of the scavengers. The Committee  would
like to be informed of the precise steps taken in this regard.
117. The Committee have been given to understand that against the budget esti-
mate of Rs. 807.70 crore, the actual expenditure was Rs. 620.69 crore during the
years 1997-2002. The funds released for the scheme during 2002-2003 and 2003-
2004 have been Rs. 40.95 crore and Rs. 24.27 crore respectively, Reduction in funds
released during the last two years has been explained by the Ministry  by saying that
this has been done due to accumulation of the unspent balances of the previous years
with the State Governments. They have contended that the reduction in the flow of
funds have not affected the achievement of targets. The Committee are constrained to
point out that there has not been proper utilisation of funds by the State Governments
for this vital scheme which is evident from the accumulation of the huge unspent
balances at the end of each Financial Year. This in turn has contributed to the tardy
progress of the implementation of the scheme. It is obvious that the Ministry have not
been able to identify the precise reasons from the State Governments for this finan-
cial mismanagement. The Committee have taken a serious view of this state  of  this
affairs and would like to emphasise the need to ensure full utilization of the funds
released for the scheme by the States. The Committee would like the Ministry to step
up monitoring efforts for the optimum utilization of funds by the States on a regular
basis and should promptly take up the matter with that States where there are in-
stances of poor utilzation of allocated funds.
118. Another areas of concern in the financial management that came to the notice of
the Committee is the failure on the part of the State Government s and SCDs to submit the
outstanding utilization certificate in 91 per cent of the total grants-in-aid of Rs. 642.43
crore released during 1991-2002 for the implementation of the Scheme. The Committee
are constrained to point  out that even after a lapse of 12 years, the Ministry have still not
realized outstanding utilization certificate from the defaulting State Governments and
the SCDCs. This clearly is indicative of casual approach and lack of urgency on the part
of the those State Governments and SCDCs in effective utilisation of the funds. The
inordinate delay on the part of the Ministry to evolve a viable and effective mechanism for
the realization of such a huge financial corpus is unconscionable. The Ministry could not
explain the reasons for non-submission of utilization certificates by the State Implement-
ing Agencies and have not explained efforts being made by them in this regard. The
Committee expect the Ministry to henceforth strictly monitor the norms regarding sub-
mission of the utilization certificates by the implementing agencies and take prompt
measures at highest level to impress upon the States to act swiftly in this regard.
119. The Scheme provides for the setting up of a network of Monitoring Commit-
tee i.e. Central Monitoring Committee at the apex level, State-level Monitoring

40
Committees, supported by District-level Monitoring Committees and the town Com-
mittees or Mohalla Committees at the ground level. While the Central and State-level
Committees were required to meet quarterly, no periodicity was prescribed for
District and Town Committees.
120. The Committee are surprised to note that the Central Monitoring Committee met
only once in February 1993 during 1992-2002, while it should have at least met 40 times.
In some States, the State Level Monitoring Committee have not even met once. The Com-
mittee are also uphappy to note that in some States, the State Level Committee, District
Level and Town Level Committees have not even been set up. Even the reporting system is
faulty leading to incorrect/incomplete identification of beneficiaries, non-identification
of skill requirements, lack of monitoring mechanism, lack of awareness among benefi-
ciaries, lack of motivation for self-help and misutitisation of financial assistance by the
beneficiaries. The Committee note that it was through the District Collector that interac-
tion with banks, Urban local bodies, SCDCs, Training institutes and Monitoring Commit-
tees was sought to be achieved. It is however noticed that the role of the Collector was
confined largely to survey and identification and that too not in all cases. The day-to-day
implementation of the scheme was done by SCDCs. The State Governments passed the
funds direcly to the SCDCs and District Collector had no role to play. Hence, there was a
lack of coordination in the operation of the scheme. In many cases, the district level
Monitoring Committees Under the Chairmanship of Collectors were not formed. There
was lack of coordination among the State level Departments as well as among the Central
Ministries involved in the Scheme. Therefore, the Committee strongly recommend that
the applications of scavengers for loans from the banks should be routed through the
District Collectors office so that they can identify their needs and suggest viable project,
so that their loan applications are not rejected by the banks out rightly. Even if the Central
authority of laon disbursement remain with the SCDCs, still the loans to the individuals
should be disbursed through the District Collectors office so that the role of district
Collector become more effective and the monitoring of training and rehabilitation
measures is done at district level effectively. The Committee, therefore, are inclined to
conclude that there is a major deficiency in the monitoring system at all levels. They,
therefore, desire the Ministry to put  in place a suitable mechanism to ensure that the
Central Level Committee and the Committees at the State Level must meet regularly to
ensure a high vigil over the progress of the Scheme. As the scheme is implemented
through District level officials, the District Collector should also be involved in finalisation
of the projects and disbursement of funds. The Committee recommend that the Ministry
should strive to ensure theadbare analysis of the reports submitted by the different Moni-
toring Committees at different levels. This would facilitate identification of bottlenecks in
the implementation process for rectification. The Committee also recommend that the
States, which are yet to set up various monitoring Committees should be asked to act
immediately now.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
February, 2005 Chairman,
Magha, 1926 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX-I
CHAPTER-I OF THE REPORT OF C&AG OF INDIA FOR THE YEAR ENDED
31 MARCH, 2002 (CIVIL-PERFORMANCE APPRAISALS) NO. 3 OF 2003
National Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their
dependents
The National Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their
Dependents, implemented by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment since
1992 has failed to achieve its objectives even after ten years of implementation involving
investments of more than Rs. 600 crore. The Scheme was undoubtedly well-intentioned
but ill conceived as it failed to herness its operational parameters to the complex
structure of a highly stratified society resisting occupational reform. Nobility of purpose
was not enough, as the scheme failed to deliver its social vision after ten years of
continuous but regrettably half-hearted efforts. It failed in working out a coherent
strategy for policy initiatives as it could not take advantage of an existing Law that
prohibited employment of Scavengers. Divorcing liberation from rehabilitation was an
error of judgement that weakened the foundation of the Scheme and led to
uncoordinated efforts without focus. It failed in enhancing or re-orienting the skill-
levels of the beneficiaries necessary for change of occupation. For the same reason, it
failed in its mission of replacing the hereditary practice by skill-based choice. Absence
of base-line survey, non-involvement of district development authorities,
commercialisation of the assistance patterns and ruptures in the monitoring format led
to a certain loss of locus. Achievements so far can at best be described as sporadic,
uncoordinated and generally poor, without the strength required for catalysing the
future course. It is the lack of purpose in aligning the parameters of the Scheme and
lack of will in implementing it that led to the Scheme floundering on its own assumptions.
Highlights
The employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines
(Prohibition) Act, 1993 was adopted by sixteen States as of April 2002, but there was no
evidence of its enforcement in any of the States. The Scheme did not even mention the
existence of the Law.
Lateral support to the Scheme through liberation (i.e. conversion of dry latrines into
water-borne ones) of scavengers was not aligned with the progress of rehabilitation
measures.
Surveys for identification of scavengers and their dependents necessary to locate,
specify and particularize the beneficiaries and their needs were often not
methodologically sound and results varied widely. Even the definition of 'Scavenger'
was not on any settled basis by the survey agencies of the States which resulted in
inclusion of ineligible persons in the list of beneficiaries. Reliable base-line data were
not available even after ten years of the implementation of the Scheme.
41

42
Targets for training were not communicated by the Ministry to the States which
resulted either in targets not being prescribed by the States or in targets being determined
only on ad hoc basis. Consequently, shortfall in training coverage was as high as
68 per cent and targets set for the Eighth Plan were not achieved even at the end of
the Ninth Plan. No special curriculum was developed for training of scavengers though
it was recognized that occupational shift in low-skill areas would require special
measures.
The Ninth Plan efforts showed lesser rehabilitation numerically than the Eighth
Plan period. The targeting exercise was largely hypothetical as it did not take into
account the year-wise progress though there was 61 per cent shortfall in achieving
targets for rehabilitation. Rehabilitation efforts were characterized by misapplicaton of
resources, emphasis on low-cost projects for availing of cash benefits without income
generation and mismatches between skills and occupations.
During 1999-2000, a new thrust area in the form of the Sanitary Mart Scheme was
identified and Rs. 130.05 crore were released for the purpose. However, this scheme
failed as only 14 per cent of the targeted Marts could be set up during the period.
District Collectors were to act as key functionaries for coordinating with training
institutes, financial institutions and various departments of State Governments
executing welfare schemes. However, their role was confined largely to survey and
identification of beneficiaries. The responsibility of the Scheme was transferred to
Scheduled Castes Development Financial Corporations, which were not accountable
to the District Collectors in the normal course of their functioning. These organisational
mismatches adversely affected the implementation of the Scheme.
During the Ninth Plan period, the initial budgetary commitment of Rs. 421.50 crore
was scaled down to Rs. 249.15 crore representing a decrease of 41 per cent. Funds for
implementation of the Scheme continued to flow to the Scheduled Castes Development
Financial Corporations notwithstanding substantial unspent balances. Large quantum
of funds was released at the very end of the financial year resulting in either hurried
spending or notional spending for balancing the accounts. The desired financial
support of State Governments was not available.
There was hardly any workable monitoring machinery at the Ministry, State and
District levels. Monitoring Committees were either not formed or were not functioning
properly.
Impact assessment of the Scheme by Audit revealed poor performance along all the
critical parameters, i.e. identification of scavengers, training of beneficiaries,
rehabilitation, monitoring and evaluation of progress of implementation of the Scheme.
1. The Scheme
1.1 Background
The 'National Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their
Dependents' marks the convergence of several public initiatives over a period of four
decades preceding its introduction in 1992. The first initiative taken by the erstwhile

43
State of Bombay resulted in the submission of a report on the living conditions of
scavengers in 1952. The major recommendations contained in the report were circulated
by the Government of India to the State Governments for wider application in 1955. In
its report submitted in 1955, the first Backward Classes Commission also recommended
measures for the alleviation of the sub-human living conditions of scavengers. These
recommendations were again brought to the notice of the State Governments in 1956.
The Government of India also constituted a Central Advisory Board of Harijan Welfare
in 1956, which had reviewed the working and living conditions of scavengers in the
country and had recommended that the Government introduce a Centrally Sponsored
Scheme for the alleviation of their condition. A Centrally Sponsored Scheme was
accordingly introduced in the Third Five Y ear Plan in pursuance of various
recommendations. This scheme, however, failed primarily because it merely sought to
shift the mode of carrying night soil from the head to a wheel-barrow and the handling
of the wheel-barrow proved impractical. The scheme was discontinued during the
Fifth Five Y ear Plan following the realisation that the practice of scavenging was
inextricably linked with the evils of a stratified social structure.
A Committee was then appointed in 1965 by the Government of India to examine the
question of abolition of customary rights of the scavengers. In its report, the Committee
recommended the dismantling of the customary rights structure under which non-
municipalized cleaning of private latrines was passed on from generation to generation
of scavengers in the form of a hereditary right. The recommendations of the Committee
though circulated to the State Governments failed to evoke any response.
Thereafter, the National Commission on Labour recommended in 1968-69 a
comprehensive legislation for regulating the working, service and living conditions of
scavengers. During the Gandhi Centenary Year (1969), a special programme for
converting dry latrines to water-borne flush latrines was undertaken. A pilot project
with the same objective was undertaken during the Fifth Five Year Plan. The conversion
scheme failed principally because it had no element of subsidy and the State
Governments failed to generate the necessary internal resources. The scheme was,
therefore, deleted from the Sixth Five Year Plan.
The first major initiative in the direction of consolidating and spearheading a concrete
proposal was taken in 1980 with the Ministry of Home Affairs introducing a scheme for
conversion of dry latrines into sanitary latrines and rehabilitation of liberated scavengers
and their dependents in dignified occupations in selected towns. The scheme was
dovetailed into the then existing Centrally Sponsored "Implementation of the Protection
of Civil Rights Act" Scheme as one of the measures for the removal of untouchability.
The thrust was urban and the central grant was dependent on a matching grant being
provided by the State Governments.
The scheme was taken up in two towns of Bihar initially and was subsequently
extended to Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Kerala, Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu,
Tripura and Uttar Pradesh. The scheme was operational in sixteen States by the end
of the Sixth Five Year Plan period. The scheme succeeded in converting about one lakh

44
dry latrines into water-borne flush latrines and rehabilitated 5,000 scavengers in
alternative employment in seventy towns. The scheme was thereafter transferred from
the Ministry of Home Affairs to the Ministry of Welfare in 1985. A task force constituted
by the Planning Commission in July 1989 estimated that there were 76 lakh dry latrines
in the country. By 1991, Rs. 82.00 crore had been released as central assistance for
implementing the scheme in 490 towns. The efforts resulted in the conversion of 10
lakh dry latrines into water borne sanitary latrines and around 17,000 unemployed
scavengers were rehabilitated in alternative trades and occupations. Following a review
of the working of the scheme in 1991, the Planning Commission decided to bifurcate
the scheme: the Ministries of Urban Development and Rural Development being made
responsible for conversion of dry latrines and the Ministry of Welfare being made
responsible for the rehabilitation of scavengers. The Employment of Manual Scavengers
and Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act was introduced in 1993. Under the
Act, the States could formulate schemes to further the objectives of the law, but no
reference to the national scheme was made.
The 'National Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their
Dependents' presently under review, was introduced by the Ministry of Welfare on
22 March 1992 after the bifurcation, but before the enactment of the law. In May 1999,
the Ministry of Welfare was renamed the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.
1.2 Main Components of the Scheme
The National Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their
Dependents has the following main components:—
Ø Formulation of a time-bound programme for identification of scavengers and
their dependents and their aptitude for alternative trades through a survey.
Ø Provision of training in the identified trades for scavengers and their dependents
at the nearest local training institutes of various departments of State
Governments, Central Government and other semi-Government and non-
Government organisation.
Ø Rehabilitation of scavengers in various trades and occupations by providing
subsidy, margin money loan and bank loan.
Ø It would be observed that the Liberation Component, despite the title, was not
directly addressed in the Scheme. Liberation, as discussed later constituted
the lateral support provided by removing the condition conducive to the
employment of manual scavengers.
1.3 Objective of the Scheme
The principal objective of the scheme was to provide an alternative, dignified and
viable occupation to scavengers and their dependents in a time span of five years
(1992—97). It envisaged the rehabilitation of all the identified scavengers during the
Eighth Plan period.

45
1.4 Organisation of the Scheme
The accompanying legend provides an overview idea of the organisational structure
and the linkage.
LEGEND
Organisation of the Scheme
Centre
Ministry of Urban Ministry of Rural
Development Development
(Liberation) (Liberation)
Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment (Training
and Rehabilitation)
National Safai State Central Monitoring
Karamcharis Finance & Committee
Development Corporation
State Departments e.g. State level
Urban Development, Scheduled Castes
Rural Development Secretary, Development
Labour, Technical, Scheduled Caste Welfare Financial
Education
Corporations
State level Monitoring
Committee
Banks District Manager
District Scheduled Castes
Development
Financial
Corporations
Urban Level Bodies District Collector Training Institute
Interface with other Town/Mohalla District Monitoring
Development Scheme Committee
Town/Mohalla
Committee
2. Scope of review
2.1 Coverage
The implementation of the Scheme during the period from 1992-93 to 2001-02 was
reviewed in audit with particular reference to its implementation during the period
1997-98 to 2001-02.
2.2 Sample size
Records, data and information relating to the Eighth and Ninth Plan periods (1992-
93 to 2001-02) were generally examined in the Ministry. A test check was also carried
out in 19 States/Union Territories covering 128 districts for the period from 1997-98 to
2001-02. Relevant details are contained in Annex-I.
2.3 Audit Objectives
The Scheme is in many ways a very sensitive and vulnerable one as it addresses the
lowest occupational class mired in the vicious cycle of a hereditary system unmitigated
ß
ßß ß
ß
ß
ßß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß
ß

46
by economic change or social reform. If it is the hereditary system that consigns the
scavengers to a damning occupation, it is poverty combined with lack of skills and
opportunities that force them to continue in it. The primary objective of Audit has been
to seek out the areas of "disconnect" between the rehabilitation efforts expected to be
made under the Scheme and the efforts actually made, goals sought to be achieved
and the extent to which these were met. The Audit review seeks to examine a host of
related factors that could impinge critically on the implementation of the Scheme, like
the enforcement of the law prohibiting employment of manual scavengers, adequacy
of liberation measures, training efforts, success of special targeting exercises, the
effect of the role played by spearhead agencies, viability of self-employment projects
and the quality of monitoring standards.
3. Results of review
The results of the review are set out in the five sub-sections that follows. The
findings of Audit in the sample units test-checked have been calibrated along the
Scheme parameters to arrive at certain conclusions which are indicative of broad
trends, and State-level features of implementation have been highlighted to substantiate
the conclusions. It will be relevant to mention that sub-sections 3.1 and 3.2 which deal
with matters relating to the enforcement of the Employment of Manual Scavengers and
Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act and liberation of scavengers through
conversion of dry latrines and consturction of water-borne flush latrines, as well as
community latrines, structurally do not fall within the ambit of the Scheme. These
issues have nevertheless been highlighted in order to show how the scheme missed
out on vital coordinates and support structures which could have contributed to
greater strength and comprehensiveness. The treatment of the theme of 'rehabilitation'
in the reivew, which is also the central focus of the Scheme, includes all matters
incidental to rehabilitation.
3.1 The law
The Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry
Latines (Prohibition) Act, 1993 could not have been enacted at a more
opportune time. The Scheme had just begun and it had to target a
hereditary occuptational structure where the user of the service was
the perpetrator of the evil practice. While the provider of the service
could not be uprooted from the deeply embedded customary practice
without an alternative occupation, the user could be prevented from
allowing the service in his own premises, thereby eliminating the
occupation itself. The law that prohibited the engagement of manual
scavengers, thus, could have provided a powerful instrument to the
implementers of the Scheme. By adopting this Central Law, and enforcing
it in right earnest, the states could have paved the way for the Scheme
and liberation of scavengers would have progressed in tandem with
rehabilitation measures. However, by April 2002, only sixteen States
(Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Jharkhand,
Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Tamil
Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal) had adopted the Act.
The Employ-
ment of
Manual Scav-
engers and
Construction
of Dry La-
trines (Prohi-
bition) Act,
1993 was
adopted by 16
States by April
2002; it was
however, not
enforced in
any State.

47
Rajasthan and Delhi are yet to adopt the Act: the matter is currently
under legislative processing in Rajasthan and it is pending Cabinet
approval in Delhi. A close scrutiny of the provisions of the Act showed
that enforcement of the Act could have an impact on the Scheme in the
following areas:—
Ø By appointing executive authorities for the implementation of the law, which
also includes administration of schemes created under it, the States and Union
Territories could have created a network of legal authorities for the
implementation of the Central Scheme.
Ø Under the Act, the States and Union Territories could have formulated their
own schemes to supplement the Central Scheme.
Ø By appointing inspectors to oversee the implementation of the Scheme, the
States and Union Territories could have created an effective administrative
machinery for supervision.
Ø The Central Government itself could have created Project Committees and
Monitoring Committees under the Act which would have provided the much
needed impetus to the implementation of the Scheme.
Ø The State Government could have established coordination committees for the
strict enforcement of the Act which would have facilitated the implementation
of the Scheme.
Ø Had the Act been enforced strictly, registration of the manual scavengers and
their rehabilitation would have been legally enforceable instead of leaving it to
the initiatives under the Scheme.
Ø Had the penal provisions been invoked, all persisting cases of employment of
scavengers could have been brought to book, thereby assisting the Scheme in
its rehabilitation endeavour.
The Scheme, by failing to relate itself to the law, continued to operate
in a persuasive mode without the legal means to penalize violations.
Ideally, it should have been reviewed after the promulgation of the Act
to correlate the legal framework to the Scheme's parameters.
3.2 Lateral support through liberation
Without employing the expression 'liberation', the Scheme envisaged
that the obonxious occupation would come to an end if all those who
were engaged in this occupation and their dependents were rehabilitated
in alternative and dignified occupations. Going by the declarations of
this Scheme as well as the schemes implemented by the Ministries of
Urban and Rural Development, such liberation would become possible
only when the practice of using dry latrines itself is eliminated, thereby
eliminating the very need for employing manual scavengers. An
appropriate scheme of rehabilitation would provide the liberated
scavengers with trades and occupations  that  would  enable them  to
Though the
rehabilitation
of scavengers
was to go in
tandem with
their
liberation,
the Scheme
failed to
provide
necessary
networking
The Scheme
suffered due
to absence of
linkage with
the law.

48
earn their livelihood honourably thereby preventing them from relapsing
into the scavenging occupation. Thus 'Liberation' and 'Rehabilitation'
are mutually interwined, without which the Scheme would not be
complete. The Scheme, however, failed to provide the necessary linkages
amongst the implementing agencies and the Ministries administering
the Scheme encompassing the whole range of operations. Instead, if
confined itself only to the aspects of identification, training and
rehabilitation leaving the liberation issues to the Ministries of Urban
Development and Rural Development who, separately and
independently, implement their own schemes for liberation under the
'Low Cost Sanitation Scheme' and the 'Rural Sanitation Programme'.
respectively. There was no coordination amongst the three Ministries,
nor had the Scheme interfaces been mapped in any of the Scheme
documents to avoid overlaps and asymmetries. This "disconnect"
resulted in insulating the Scheme within the Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment. This aspect was also not taken into account while
bifucrating the integrated scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of
Scavengers in 1991, as a result which the liberation component was
entrusted to the Ministries of Urban and Rural Development and the
rehabilitation component was entrusted to the then Ministry of Welfare
(now Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment) along with the nodal
responsibility for the Scheme. While accepting the deifiency, the
Ministry stated (July 2002) that it had initiated a proposal to set up a
unified authority in the Mission Mode.
Audit reviewed the performance of the two liberation schemes ('Low
Cost Sanitation Scheme' implemented by the Ministry of Urban
Development and Poverty Alleviation and the 'Rural Sanitation
Programme' implemented by the Ministry of Rural Development) duirng
the period from 1991-92 to 2001-02. Examination of records in the
Ministries and the replies furnished by them revealed that both the
schemes  had no credible links with the Scheme implemented by the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment. The Urban Develoment
Ministry admitted that the scheme had not produced the desired results.
On the other hand, the Rural Development Ministry contended that 20
Stated and Union Territories had no dry latrines and no manual
scavenging was prevalent in rural areas. The Ministry contended that
only Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Rajasthan and Sikkim had
reported the practice of manual scavenging in rural areas. The Ministry
did not fix any targets for conversion of dry latrines into water-borne
flush latrines, not were separate allocations for the purpose made. The
State Governments were directed by the Ministry to utilise the funds
allocated under the Central Rural Sanitation Scheme for conversion of
dry latrines into flush latrines. No separate data could be obtained from
field audits in the State as the allocation-based approach had been
replaced by a 'demand driven approach' and alternate delivery
mechanism with beneficiary participation had apparently taken away
amongst
agencies
responible for
Liberation
and
Rehabilita-
tion Schemes.
Low cost
sanitation
Scheme' for
liberation of
urban
scavengers
proved to be
a failure.

49
the initiative from the Government to the beneficiaries themselves.
Further, the 'Rural Sanitation Programme' had got dovetailed into the
'Total Sanitation Campaign' launched in 1999. At the time of initiation of
the Scheme in 1992, 17 per cent of all scavengers estimated by a Task
Force constituted by the Planning Commission were in rural areas. By
1998, a baseline survey carried out by the Indian Institute of Mass
Communication placed the number at 8 per cent of the service untis.
The figures were neither comparable, nor were the baselines adopted in
1992 and in 1999 in any manner susceptible of verification. The fact
remains that liberation of scavengers through conversion of dry latrines
into flush latrines in rural areas has not been adequately calibrated in
the comprehensive sanitation format and the obnoxious practice
continues.
The failure of  the 'Low Cost Sanitation Scheme' which contained the prime element
of conversion of dry latrines into flush latrines in urban areas is however, a different
proposition. The Scheme had estimated in 1992, that of a total population of 4 lakh
scavengers, 3.34 lakh (83 per cent) were in urban areas. In 1997, the total number of
scavengers was raised to 7.87 lakh based on a rapid survey but the rural-urban
configuration was unavailable. Based on the 1992 ratio, the number of urban scavengers
could be placed at 6.5 lakh. Audit examination of the scheme in the Urban Development
Ministry revealed the following:—
Ø The Ministry did not fix any physical or financial targets. The scheme was
operated through Housing and Urban Development Corporation as a demand
driven scheme and no initiatives were in the hands of the sponsoring Ministry.
Ø The Ministry did not directly monitor the implementation of progress of the
scheme. It was monitored by Housing and Urban Development Corporation,
which sent its reports to the Ministry. Audit scrutiny of the reports brought
out that these reports were neither current nor followed any schedule prescribed
for the purpose. For instance, the status of  conversion of dry latrines and
construction of flush latrines under the Low Cost Sanitation Scheme as at the
end of March 2002 was based on reports of 2000 in a majority of the States. On
the other hand, in Karnataka and Haryana, the reports pertained to the position
as on 31 December 1996 and 30 June 1998 respectively. Evidently, the Ministry
continued to accept reports that were not current and no attempt was also ever
made to verify the progress reported by Housing and Urban Development
Corporation. The Ministry stated that the liberation and rehabilitation
components of the Scheme were being looked after by the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment. However, it was the Ministry of Urban Development
which was responsible for the liberation component of the scheme in urban
areas.
Ø Of the subsidy aggregating to Rs. 480.22 crore sanctioned by the Ministry,
only Rs. 246.68 crore had been released up to 31 December 2001. Similarly, of
loans aggregating to Rs. 583.51 crore sanctioned, only Rs. 278.60 crore were
released up to 31 December 2001. The Ministry cited in this context a report of

50
Housing and Urban Development Corporation, which attributed the time lag
between the sanction and release of subsidy and loans to delays in
documentation, non-availability of government guarantees, belated submission
of utilization certificates and slow physical progress. There was however, no
evidence of the Ministry having initiated any remedial measures aimed at
removing these hurdles to enable the successful implementation of the scheme.
Ø As against 6 lakh scavengers identified in the urban areas, the Ministry reported
having liberated only 37,340 (6.2 per cent). While admitting that the scheme
had not achieved the desired results, the Ministry cited the following reasons
for its poor progress:—
l Slow generation of schemes by the States and Local Bodies.
l Lack of awareness among the people about the benefits of the Low Cost
Sanitation Scheme.
l Unwillingness of the beneficiaries to bear the burden of their contribution
and subsequent repayment of loans.
l Absence of a proper monitoring system for effective implementation of the
programme at the State level.
l Delay in providing guarantees by the State Governments to Housing and
Urban Development Corporation Limited in respect of the loan assistance
to be provided.
The following table presents details of the status of the scheme in different States
in relation to the units sanctioned for conversion of dry latrines into water-borne ones,
construction of flush latrines and provision of community toilets as of March 2002:—
Conversion of dry latrines Construction of flush latrines Community Toilets
Sl. State No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of No. of
No. units units units  units  units  units units units  units
santion- comple- in pro- santion- comple- in pro- santion- comple- in pro-
ed ted gress ed ted gress ed ted gress
1 Andhra Pradesh 54706 26657 1491 568742 320310 46888 158 40 50
2 Assam 87014 3904 747 3826 807 280 Nil Nil Nil
3 Bihar 4165 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
4 Haryana 91648 Nil Nil 108576 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
5 Jammu & Nil Nil Nil 16927 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
Kashmir
6 Jharkhand 779 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
7 Karnataka 30652 12293 Nil 147037 57358 Nil 117 Nil Nil
8 Kerala Nil Nil Nil 14540 13325 1087 Nil Nil Nil
9 Madhya 291377 71592 23184 Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil Nil
Pradesh
10 Maharashtra 75133 71724 1161 124333 22698 Nil 2809 2663 120
11 Orissa 11788 8228 Nil 39809 14084 Nil 10 10 Nil
12 Punjab 149350 121576 741 72772 55012 354 Nil Nil Nil
13 Rajasthan 166385 97992 64608 257562 93542 159606 Nil Nil Nil
14 Tamil Nadu 72850 47980 Nil 82711 47459 68 372 269 15
15 Uttar Pradesh 491042 66546 Nil 284071 46732 195 100 Nil Nil
16 West Bengal 218925 118226 9526 75743 13589 2571 400 Nil Nil
Total 1745814 646718 101458 1796649 684916 211049 3966 2982 185

51
Ø As against 17,45,814 units sanctioned for conversion, only 37 per cent could
be converted as of March 2002. While in Jammu & Kashmir and Kerala,
conversion of dry latrines was not sanctioned, in Bihar, Haryana and
Jharkhand, no conversion had taken place at all though this had been
sanctioned. The pace of conversion was slow in Assam ( 5 per cent), Uttar
Pradesh (14 per cent), Madhya Pradesh (33 per cent) and Karnataka (40 per
cent). It will be relevant to mention in this context that 50 per cent of the total
number of scavengers were concentrated in those States in which no dry
latrines were converted or where the pace of conversion was tardy.
Ø As against the sanction for construction of 17,96,649 units of flush latrines,
only 38 per cent were constructed as of March 2002. While construction of
flush latrines was not sanctioned in Bihar, Jharkhand and Madhya Pradesh,
none was constructed in Haryana and Jammu & Kashmir though construction
of 1,08,576 units and 16,927 units respectively was sanctioned in these two
States.
Ø The construction of community toilets was not undertaken by the majority of
the States. Though 117, 100 and 400 units respectively were sanctioned in the
States of Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal, no community toilets
were constructed.
3.3 Rehabilitation Measures
3.3.1 Survey and Identification
Identification of scavengers and their dependents and their aptitude for alternative
trades was one of the most important components of the Scheme. The Task Force
constituted by the Planning Commission having estimated in its report of March 1991
that there were 4,00,999 scavengers and their dependents, the survey and identification
exercise was intended to locate, specify and particularize the beneficiaries and their
needs.
The Scheme envisaged identification of scavengers through a survey which was to
be completed well before June 1992. The District Officers/District Collectors were
responsible for carrying out these surveys. The survey in urban local bodies was to be
carried out through their officers and employees, District Social Welfare Officers,
District level Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes Development Corporations, etc.
The Scheme envisaged that the survey would be based on a proforma prescribed for
the purpose, which was to include details such as heads of families, name and age of
each member of the family, educational qualification, annual income, aptitude for specific
alternative occupation, etc. None of the States, however, completed and communicated
results of the surveys to the Ministry in accordance with the schedule stipulated. Four
States (Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir and Pondicherry) communicated
the number of identified scavengers after delays ranging from one to four years.
Fourteen other States (Andhra Pradesh,  Assam, Gujarat, Haryana, Karnataka, Kerala,
Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal
and Delhi)  did so after delays ranging from six to ten years. A comparison of the State-
wise number of scavengers estimated by the Task Force of the Planning Commission

52
and identified in the surveys conducted in four States (Bihar, Delhi, Madhya
Pradesh and Uttar Pradesh) revealed significant variations as indicated in the following
table:—
State No. of scavengers estimated No. of scavengers identified in
by the Task Force surveys by State Government
Bihar 22,398 (5.59) 12,226     (1.81)
Delhi 34,022 (8.48) 17,420 (2.57)
Madhya Pradesh 36,894 (9.20) 80,072   (11.84)
Uttar Pradesh 62,029  (15.47) 1,49,202   (22.07)
Note: Figures within parentheses represent percentage of total scavenger population in the country.
Further, according to the records of the Ministry, the number of
scavengers identified was 8,01,839. In its Ninth Five Year Plan proposals
submitted to the Planning Commission in 1996-97, the Ministry indicated
that 7.87 lakh scavengers had been identified. However, during
examination of its grants for the year 1997-98, the Ministry had informed
the Parliamentary Standing Committee that 8,25,572 scavengers had
been identified. Consequently, as many as five different sets of figures
were in the Ministry's possession. While explaining the reasons for the
variations the Ministry informed the Standing Committee that the State
Governments had reported a higher number of scavengers in certain
cases. Subsequently, the Ministry had requested the Chief Secretaries
of State Governments and the Administrator of Union Territories in
June 2001 to conduct a month-long survey in July 2001 to identify
scavengers and their dependents. While the results of this survey
were awaited as of May 2002, scrutiny in audit of the survey and
identification processes in the States brought out certain significant
findings having a bearing on the very assumptions underlying the
Scheme. These are discussed in the following paragraphs:—
Andhra Pradesh
 Whereas the survey conducted in 1992 identified 7,938 beneficiaries
of whom 5,537 were rehabilitated by 1995-96 leaving a balance of 2,401,
the 1996 survey identified 7,448 beneficiaries representing an increase
of 5,047. According to the records of the State Government, 6,493 of the
7,448 identified beneficiaries were rehabilitated during 1996-2000, thus
leaving only 955 beneficiaries to be rehabilitated. Surprisingly, the
survey of August 2000 identified 30,921 beneficiaries (scavengers: 8,402;
dependents: 22,519). This appeared to indicate that none of the surveys
could provide reliable baseline data and that the methodology adopted
not credible.
Ministry
suspected the
reliability of
survey
results.
Methodology
adopted for
survey/re-
surveys was
not
credible.

53
Assam
Three surveys were conducted between January 1994 and
March 1997. While that conducted in January 1994 identified 11,873
beneficiaries, the January 1995 survey projected the number as 16,877
and the March 1997 survey as 40,413. During this period, only 574
beneficiaries were rehabilitated.
Delhi
Between September 1992 and May 1993, four independent agencies (the Delhi
Scheduled Castes Finance and Development Corporation, the Marketing and Research
Group, the Bureau of Economics and Statistics and the Delhi School of Social Work)
were commissioned by the State Government to conduct surveys without clearly
spelling out the areas to be covered by them. While the Delhi Scheduled Castes
Finance and Development Corporation identified 505 scavengers, the Marketing and
Research Group placed the number at 500. On the other hand, the number of scavengers
identified by the Bureau of Economic and Statistics and the Delhi School of Social
Work was 7,988 and 8,427 respectively. Instead of ascertaining the reasons for these
variations, the State Government adopted the number as 17,420, representing the sum
of the results of these four surveys. It would appear prima facie that the same area was
covered by more than one agency, resulting in overlap and duplication.
Gujarat
A survey conducted in Gujarat in 1994 had identified 32,402
scavengers and 31,793 dependents. Scrutiny by Audit of the data
separately available with the State Government in this regard, however,
revealed that only 974 dry latrines were stated to exist in the State as
against the 32,402 scavengers identified. It would, therefore, appear
that the survey results were not reliable.
Haryana
The survey was completed by June 1992 as stipulated but its results were
communicated to the Central Government only in March 1993. This placed the number
of beneficiaries at 18,438. Another survey conducted by the Scheduled Castes
Development Financial Corporation in 1995 at the instance of the State Level Monitoring
Committee showed that there were 6,841 more beneficiaries to be included in the list.
Thus, there were 25,279 beneficiaries to be targeted by the Scheme by 1995. At the
instance of the National Commission for Safai Karamcharis, yet another survey was
taken up in January 1997, which showed that 11,083 more beneficiaries were required
to be catered to raising the total number of beneficiaries to 36,362.
Karnataka
The survey report of the Government placed the number of beneficiaries at 14,555.
This was, however, not supported by district-wise and location-wise lists of
beneficiaries. The State Government could not produce either the survey report or the
relevant file to Audit. Examination of the records of Scheduled Castes Scheduled
Identified
scavengers
increased
three-fold
between
January 1994
and March
1997 in Assam.
Number of
beneficiaries
identified in
Gujarat bore
no relation to
the number
of dry
latrines in the
State.

54
Tribes Development Corporation revealed that survey data in regard to the existence
of dry latrines in the State were not available. The State Government stated (July 2002)
that the survey was in progress.
Madhya Pradesh
The survey was completed in September 1993 and it placed the number of
beneficiaries as 80,072. Another survey carried out in 1996 raised this number to 93,394.
Nevertheless, the records of the Government of India continued to rely only on the
results of the 1993 survey.
Maharashtra
The Government of India had stipulated that the survey should be conducted
through the personnel of  implementing agencies, State Government, local bodies, etc.
However, the services of two private agencies were employed by the State Government
on grounds of urgency. The survey conducted during 1992-93 estimated that 42,563
beneficiaries would require to be covered by the Scheme notwithstanding the fact that
only 5,102 of these were scavengers and their dependents. A second survey was
conducted during 1996-97 by engaging Government officials and the beneficiary
population was placed at 2,32,527.  The steep increase was attributed by the State
Government to the inclusion of sewage sweepers in the list. The department stated
(June 2002) that the complete list of potential beneficiaries was under compilation.
Punjab
The survey in Punjab conducted in June 1992 identified 33,232 beneficiaries. A
subsequent survey conducted in September 2001 placed the figure at 531 thereby
giving the impression that 32,701 beneficiaries had been rehabilitated. Audit scrutiny
of the details of rehabilitation revealed that only 2,904 beneficiaries had been rehabilitated
between June 1992 and September 2001.
Tamil Nadu
The State Government conducted the survey in September-November 1992 in all
districts other than Chennai through Non-Governmental Organisations and identified
35,561 beneficiaries. On the State Government expressing the view in November 1995
that certain eligible beneficiaries had been excluded, the Government of India directed
the State Government in October 1995 that a rapid survey may be undertaken within
the next two months. It could not be ascertained if this was ever completed.
Uttar Pradesh
Surveys in the State were conducted in 1992, 1996 and 2001. While
the first survey identified 2,46,116 scavengers, the number identified in
second survey was only 48,588. The State Government attributed the
decrease in 1996 to the exclusion of sanitary workers from the category
of scavengers based on a clarification of the Government of India.
Further, all the 48,588 scavengers were shown as having been
rehabilitated by the State Government by 2001. However, the third
Though all
scavengers
were stated to
have been
rehabilitated by
State Govern-
ment in 2001,
a survey
conducted
thereafter

55
 survey conducted in 2001 identified 38,253 more scavengers as still
having to be rehabilitated as the fresh number due for rehabilitation. In
response to an audit query, Uttar Pradesh Scheduled Castes Finance
and Development Corporation, replied that it was not possible to liberate
and rehabilitate all scavengers without conversion of all dry latrines.
West Bengal
Municipalities had undertaken a survey of the dry latrines in the State earlier during
1992-93. Survey results finalized as of March 2002 by the West Bengal Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tibes Development and Finance Corporation placed the number
of beneficiaries at 21,189. The survey had, however, been restricted to only 81 of the
122 urban local bodies and 17 of the 341 blocks. Consequently, the survey was
incomplete. Besides, 11,449 prospective beneficiaries had also been excluded from the
survey results on account of failure to treat each dependent as a separate unit.
Thus, the baseline surveys conducted in the States suffered from a number of
infirmities. This resulted in non-availability of any reliable data with the Ministry even
after a decade on the number of scavengers and their dependents, which was essential
to estimate the resource requirements to facilitate the preparation of a well considered
Action Plan. In an appraisal undertaken in June 2001, the Project Appraisal and
Management Division of the Planning Commission had also maintained that the Scheme
had suffered because of incorrect and incomplete identification of beneficiaries besides
other factors.
3.3.2 Training
Lack of Systematic Efforts
Training to identified scavengers and their dependents, in the age group of 15 to 50
years, was expected to equip them with the requisite skills and expertise to successfully
implement self-employment projects. The duration of training could vary from one to
six months for 85 trades under the Scheme classified broadly under agriculture and
allied sectors, small industries sector, service sector and business sector. The
implementing agencies at the District and State levels were required to utilize for the
purpose the training centres, facilities and infrastructure set up by the Central
Government and State Governments as well as by other semi-government and non-
governmental organizations and organise special training programmes for scavengers.
No systematic effort in this direction was, however, made in any State.
No Special Curriculum Developed
Special training schemes were required to be designed for scavengers
keeping in view their low skill level, the focus being on the creation and
upgradation of skills for self-employment. The Ministry was required
to issue guidelines in this regard to the departments of the Central
Government and State Governments concerned. However, no special
curriculum was designed or developed nor were any instructions issued
by the Central Government. A serious consequence of this lapse was
that the identified training modules in the training institutions that
revealed that
38,253
scavengers
were still to
be rehabili-
tated.
No special
curriculum
was designed.

56
were based on pre-determined levels of skill requirements could hardly
accommodate the totally unskilled and illiterate scavengers without
diluting the rigour of the training programme. The Ministry admitted
the shortcoming in June 2002.
Shortfall in achievement of targets
The Scheme visualized that the training programmes in respect of
3.50 lakh eligible scavengers and their dependents, estimated on the
basis of the Report of the Planning Commission Task Force Report,
would be completed by the year 1995-96 to facilitate rehabilitation of all
the identified scavengers by the end of the Eighth Plan period (1992-97).
However, according to the information furnished by the Ministry in
May 2002, training was imparted only to 1.11 lakh scavengers (32 per
cent) up to 1996-97.
On receipt of the survey results from the States, the Ministry fixed
the targets for training during the Ninth Plan period (1997-2002). These
targets were not communicated to the States and, as a result, the States
either did not fix any targets or fixed only ad hoc targets unrelated to
the targets of the Government of India. The following table presents
the overall picture:—
Year Scavengers targeted to be No of scavengers Shortfall
trained trained Number Percentage
1997-1998 1,00,000 15,493 84,507 85
1998-1999 1,00,000 7,981 92,019 92
1999-2000 1,00,000 7,539 92,461 92
2000-2001 50,000 10,252 39,748 80
2001-2002 50,000 49,766 234 -
During the Eighth and Ninth Plan periods (1992-2002), only 2.02 lakh
beneficiaries were trained with the result that the target set for the Eighth
Plan could not be achieved even by the end of the Ninth Plan period. The
Ministry neither made any special efforts to accelerate the pace of training
nor revised its target for the succeeding year to make good the shortfall in
achievement during the previous year. If the performance during the Ninth
Plan period is any indication, the target of training of all eligible scavengers
Training
target
envisaged for
the Eighth
Plan could
not be
achieved
even in the
Ninth Plan.
Non-
communica-
tion of
targets for
training
resulted in
their being
fixed on ad
hoc basis by
the States.

57
and their dependents is unlikely to be met early. The following table contains
the comprehensive picture in respect of 14 States during 1997-2002:—
State No. of scavengers Target Trained Shortfall in training with
identified for fixed reference to target
training Number Percentage
Assam 40,413 N.F . 2397 - -
Delhi N.F. 1000 671 329 33
Bihar 4 ,508 462 NIL 462 100
Gujarat 16,731 N.F . NIL NIL -
Haryana 32,227 8250 1589 6661 81
Jammu & Kashmir 3 ,517 N.F . 60 - -
Kerala 777 777 NIL 777 100
Madhya Pradesh 50,485 45,721 5632 40,089 88
Maharashtra N.A. 10,000 3194 6,806 68
Orissa N.A. 15,000 2782 12,218 81
Punjab 9760 6000 NIL 6000 100
Rajasthan N.A. N.F. 2290 - -
Uttar Pradesh N.A. 44,703 14,641 30,062 67
West Bengal 11,809 3300 82 3218 98
NF: Not fixed
No training was conducted in States of Bihar, Gujarat, Kerala and Punjab and no
targets were fixed in Assam, Gujarat, Jammu & Kashmir and Rajasthan.
Absence of inter-face
The Scheme sought to use the existing training facilities available with both the
Central and the State Governments as well as the autonomous bodies. This entailed
the development of  a series of positive interfaces between the institutions, the
Government departments and the scheme administrators. It was noticed in audit that
these interfaces did not materialize principally due to a lack of initiative on the part of
the parties concerned and the  unbridged gaps between the assessed needs and area-
specific resource configuration. Audit could not locate any worthwhile evidence of
either skill-level assessment or meaningful contacts with training institutions with a
view to utilizing the available training facilities. The list of trades was lifted from the
Handbook of small scale industries compiled for an entirely different set of objectives.
No survey of location of or slots available with training institutions was carried out.
Even a pre-determined interface with the familiar scheme of Training of Rural Youth
for Self-employment (TRYSEM) could not be successfully worked out. Toolkits required
to be provided under TRYSEM were  not provided to the scavenger trainees  in Assam,
Haryana, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Pondicherry, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal.
In Delhi, only 10 of the 131 trainees received the toolkits. The main cause of failure of
the TRYSEM linkage continues to remain uninvestigated, but it is apparent that the
isolation of a separate target group for separate focus within TRYSEM was unworkable.
The picture that emerges is one of uncoordinated efforts, which were unrelated to
the specific low skill requirement of the beneficiaries. Absence of any systematic

58
assessment of the quality of infrastructure, desired linkages and half hearted measures
resulted in the beneficiaries being deprived of the intended benefits of the training
effort.
3.3.3 Occupational rehabilitation
The Rehabiliation Programme under the Scheme contemplated (i) a time-bound
survey to identify scavengers and their dependents and their aptitudes for a alternative
trades; (ii) identification of trades and preparation of a shelf of projects; and (iii) the
imparting of training with stipend to identified beneficiaries in the identified trades.
The programme sought to adopt the strategy of phased coverage. Funding under the
programme combined elements of subsidy,  margin money loan and bank loan aimed at
generating self-employment. The success of the programme rested upon the availability
of complete information in regard to the number employed in the scavenging
occupation, their aptitudes for alternative occupations and the availability of resources.
However, as brought out, resources were neither released nor applied judiciously,
thereby leading to accumulated unspent funds and hasty release at the end of the
financial year. The absence of reliable baseline data which could form the basis of
target setting, led to incorrect projections and even more incorrect conclusions in
regard to the outcome of the rehabilitation measures. Review by Audit of the
rehabilitation programmes disclosed the following:—
(a) In March, 1992, the Scheme had set a traget of rehabilitating four
lakh scavengers and their dependents by the end of the Eighth Plan
period (1992-97). However, only 2.68 lakh beneficiaries were rehabilitated
by 1997. While formulating the proposals for the Ninth Plan period, the
Ministry projected coverage of 7.87 lakh beneficiaries based on
subsequent surveys. Interestingly, this included 2.68 lakh beneficiaries
claimed to have been rehabilitated already. The year-wise targets fixed,
thus, added upto 5.2 lakh beneficiaries. Evidently, this was an
arithmetical exercise unrelated to ground realities. By the end of the
Ninth Plan period, the number rehabilitated was 2.03 lakh, leaving a
backlog of around 3 lakh beneficiaries. This analysis establishes that
(i) the results of the rehabilitation efforts in the Ninth Plan period were
poorer numerically than those achieved in the Eighth Plan period; and
(ii) the clearance being  less than the backlog there was a progressive
acceleration, in net terms, of numbers. In other words, when there were
1.32 lakh beneficiaries still awaiting rehabilitation at the end of the
Eighth Plan period, the number of such potential beneficiaries increased
to 3.17 lakh at the end of the Ninth Plan period.
(b) The targets set for each of the years of the Ninth Plan period and the acheivements
there against are tabulated below:—
Year Target for Number of Scavenges Shortfall in achieving
rehabilitation as  fixed rehabilitated during target
by Ministry the year Numbers Per cent
1997-98 1,50,000 32,540 1,17,460 78.31
1998-99 1,50,000 36,559 1,13,441 75.63
1999-2000  1,50,000 26,538 1,23,462 82.31
2000-2001 50,000 30,312 19,688 39.38
2001-2002 20,000 76,840 - -
Results of
rehabilitation
efforts in the
Ninth Plan
Period were
poorer
numerically
than those
achieved in
Eighth Plan.

59
It will, therefore, be seen that the five-year targeting exercise was
largely hypothetical because it did not take into account the year-wise
progress. An adverse consequence of such trageting was that the poor
performance in a particular year was not taken into account in suitable
increasing the target for the subsequent year. While the shortfalls
ranged from 75 per cent to 82 per cent in the first three years of the
Scheme during the Ninth Plan period, it imporved to 39.38 per cent in
the fourth year and close to four times the target set for the fifth year.
This improvement was, however, not attributable to the outcome of the
rehabilitation measures being higher but to the whittling down of the
target to one third or less of the previous years in 2000-01. The overall
targeting exercise was, thus, deficient and inaccurate. Despite receiving
periodic information in this regard from the States and obtaining
evaluations at its own level the Ministry did not revise the targets
upwards. These targets not having been communicated to the
implementing agencies in the States, the States fixed their own targets,
which varied widely from those set by the Ministry.
(c)   Details of the rehabilitation targets fixed year-wise by the States and by the
Ministry are contained in the following table:
Sl. State 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000 2000-01 2001-02
No.
1. Andhra Pradesh 1,027 1,346 1,350 1,438 20,000
2. Assam     No year-wise target was fixed by State Government
3. Bihar 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000
4. Delhi 3.000 2,200 2,000 2,000 2,000
5. Gujarat 10,000 10,000 10,000 5,000 5,000
6. Haryana 6,000 2,500 3,000 2,000 2,000
7. Jammu & Kashmir No year-wise target was fixed by State Government
8. Karnataka No Y ear -wise target was fixed by State Government
9. Kerala Not Available
10. Madhya Pradesh 15,000 9,085 15,000 5,296 5,525
11. Maharashtra 3,000 3,000 3,000 3,000 3,000
12. Orissa 5,000 5,312 6,646 6,815 6,740
13. Punjab 2,000 2,000 2,000 531 Not fixed
14. Rajasthan 4,559 3,705 6,700 3,741 1,810
15. Tamil Nadu 4,079 4,850 4,850 4,850 4,850
16. Uttar Pradesh 14,000 15,500 19,088 19.905 9,000
17. West Bengal 1,700 800 900 1.000 1.500
18. Pondicherry No Y ear -wise target was fixed by State Government
Total 73,365 64,298 78,534 59,576 65,425
Ministry 1,50,000 1,50,000 1,50,000 50,000 20,000
It will be seen that no annual targets were fixed in Assam, Jammu & Kashmir,
Karnataka and Pondicherry. Kerala could not furnish any evidence of having fixed
targets. The targets fixed by the State Governments were about 50 per cent of those set
Despite
receiving
periodic
information
from the
States, the
Ministry
never revised
its targets
upwards.

60
by the Ministry. Further, while the Ministry had scaled down the targets substantially,
the States had more or less retained those adopted earlier.
The following table sums up the achievement of the Scheme in terms of number
rehabilitated with reference to the targets set and backlog.
Period Trageted Number Number Backlog
beneficiaries awaiting rehabilitated
Rehabilitation
1992-93 to 1996-97
8th Plan Period 400,000 1,32,000 2,68,000 1,32,000
1997-98 1,50,000 1,32,000+ 32,540 4,86,460
3,87,000@
1998-99 1,50,000 4,86,460 36,559 4,49,901
1999-2000 1,50,000 4,49,901 26,538 423,363
2000-01 50,000 4,23,363 30,312 3,93,051
2001-02 20,000 3,93,051 76,840 3,16,211
1997-98 to
2001-02
9th Plan Period 5,20,000 3,16,211 2,02,789 3,16,211
@ 3,87,000 added to the total number as per Ninth Plan Proposals.
It will be observed that:
Ø The number awaiting rehabilitation at the end of the Ninth Plan period was
more than twice the number at the close of the Eight Plan period;
Ø barely 39 per cent of the  target could be net during the Ninth Plan period; and
Ø more than 40 per cent of the estimated beneficiaries remained unrehabilitated
even after a decade of the implementation of the Scheme.
(d) Apart from the unreliable surveys and the consequential non-availability of
baseline data, some of the basic postulates of the Scheme suffered because of
unimaginative management. These basic postulates were as follows:
Ø Assistance would be delivered only to eligible beneficiaries.
Ø Beneficiaries would be encouraged to avail of a higher financial package up to
Rs. 50,000 in the project mode, so as to avoid the low cost occupational trap.
This was based on the experience that smaller financial packages failed to
generate sustainable income.
Ø Training and employment would be so matched as to ensure vocational or
occupational rehabilitation.
Ø Banks would play a crucial role in providing the required assistance in the form
of loans, supplementing the efforts of the Government.
Ø Women, being the most oppressed segment in this class of beneficiaries, would
be specially targeted.

61
Ø The cluster approach would be adoted as a strategy to generate economic
bonding amongst beneficiaries in groups.
Ø Sanitary Marts in the cooperative format would attract beneficiaries.
Misapplication of resources
In Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra and West Bengal,
instances of misapplication of resources were noticed. In Andhra Pradesh, a joint
inspection by Audit with the Enforcement Directorate of District Societies revealed
that 24 of the 28 rehabilitation units in Cuddapah district, which were financed during
1997-98 at a unit cost of Rs. 80,000 to Rs. 1 lakh, were non-existent. Similarly, in Kurnool
district, 3 of the 4 shops set up under the rehabilitation package were non-existent. In
Assam, Madhya Pradesh and West Bengal, the beneficiaries who were assisted under
the Scheme were not listed in the survey records.
Higher Project package not availed of
The Scheduled Castes Development Financial corporations
entrusted with the responsibility of sanctioning projects generally
continued to sanction low cost projects. There was hardly any evidence
of evaluation of the commercial viability of a project. The Scheme
envisaged a maximum assistance of Rs. 50,000 per project per beneficiary.
In Haryana the average financial assistance for the rehabilitation of
6,327 beneficiaries during 1997—2002 was Rs. 21,279. While it was Rs
16,279 in Orissa and barely Rs 2,000 in Pondicherry. In six districts of
Tamil Nadu, the project cost in respect of 1,431 projects ranged between
Rs 3,500 and Rs. 20,000. In West Bengal,  353 of the 373 beneficiaries in
20 municipalities and 9 blocks got assistance of less than Rs. 20,000. In
Uttar Pradesh, only 970 of the 18,674 projects were provided assistance
of more than Rs. 20,000. While no recorded reasons for the Scheduled
Castes Development Financial Corporations' preference for low cost
projects were available, the basic hurdle appeared to be the complexity
of project formulation and estimation of its viability. The level of
education of the beneficiaries, their indigent circumstances and the
lack of initiative on the part of the implementing agencies could have
contributed to the low cost mode of financing projects being accepted
as an easier alternative.
Training and employment mismatches
Training, which was a pre-requisite for successful rehabilitation,
remained the weakest link in the entire programme. Test check of records
revealed that adequate attention was not paid towards this aspect
even in the Ninth five year plan period (1997—2002) and this hampered
the rehabilitation process, as would be evident  from the instances of
mismatch between training and rehabilitation mentioned below:—
In Andhra Pradesh and Gujarat, 19,521 and 7,317 scavengers
respectively were stated to have been rehabilitated without any training.
In Andhra Pradesh, the failure of Corporations and district societies to
Instead of
encouraging
beneficiaries
to avail of
higher
financial
packages,
Scheduled
Castes
Development
Finacial
Corporations
preferred to
sanction low
cost projects.
Unstrained
scavengers
were
rehabilitated
while trained
scavengers
were not
rehabilitated.
Trades for
rehabilitation
were not in
consonance

62
impart any training resulted in most of the scavengers rehabilitated not
continuing their new trades rendering the expenditure on their
rehabilitation largely unfruitful.
In four districts of Assam, 53 scavengers who were rehabilitated were either untrained
or rehabilitated in trades other than those in which they were trained.
In Madhya Pradesh, 12,966 scavengers were rehabilitated without any training. On
the other hand, 3,647 scavangers, who had been trained, wre not rehabilitated. Of the
3,783 scavengers trained at a cost of Rs 139. 58 lakh during 1997—2002,  only 136 were
rehabilitated.
In Maharashtra, mismatches were noticed between the training imparted to 50
beneficiaries and the trades in which they were rehabilitated in the districts of Pune
and Dhulia.
In Punjab, only 66 of the 114 scavengers had taken to the trades in which they were
imparted training.
In Rajasthan, of the 620 scavengers who received training up to March 2002 in two
districts (Ajmer: 269; Jaipur: 351), only 382 could be rehabilitated. While 1,398
scavengers received training in other districts, 4,649 scavengers were rehabilitated,
resulting in 3,251 scavengers being rehabilitated without training.
In five districts of Tamil Nadu (Coimbatore, Cuddalore, Kancheepuram, Madurai
and Thanjavur), of the 293 trained scavangers, only 16 were rehabilitated in two districts.
In eight districts of West Bengal, 763 scavengers were rehabilitated; of these, only
36 scavengers were trained before their rehabilitation.
Apart  from the necessity of training for development of skills in alternate trades
and occupations, it is equally important to promote awareness amongst the identified
scavengers about various avenues available to them for rehabilitation. Thus,
rehablitation of untrained scavengers or rehabilitation of trained scavengers in trades
other than those in which they were trained is suggestive of a casual approach of the
implementing agencies towards the rehabilitations process.
Role of Banks
Banks have a crucial role to play in providing financial assistance for rehabilitation
of beneficiaries under the Scheme. Scheduled Castes Development Financial
Corporations recommend the applications of beneficiaries for sanction of loans by
banks. However, banks were cautious in providing loans to the recommended
scavengers resulting ina large number of applications being rejected. The position in
some of the States is mentioned in the following paragraphs:—
In Maharashtra, the Scheduled Castes Development Financial Corporation received
12,726 applications for rehabilitation projects during 1998-2002. Of these, 12,666
proposals were recommended to the banks. However, the banks rejected 3,806 proposals
with those in
which
beneficiaries
were trained.

63
and 4,530 proposals were pending with them as of March, 2002. Thus, the rate of
rejection of proposals for loan by banks was as high as 47 per cent. Scheduled Castes
Development Financial Corporation attributed the rejection to the non-viability of the
projects and poor record of past recoveries.
In Orissa, Scheduled Castes Development Financial corporation attributed the
shortfall in achieving rehabilitation targets to the banks not sanctioning loans (a) to
other members in the event of default by one of the members of a family; (b) on the
ground that the beneficiaries were non -existent following the conversion of dry latrines
into water-borne ones; and (c) poor rate of recovery.
In Pondicherry, the banks had rejected 22 of the 109 applications forwarded to them
by the Adi Dravidar Development Corporation. In october 1997, the Corporation reported
to the Government of Pondicherry that these applicants would be contacted in person
and necessary action taken to recommend alternative viable projects to the banks.
Further action was, however, not taken to resubmit their cases to the banks for sanction
of loans.
In Rajasthan, Scheduled Castes Development Financial Corporation
attributed the shortfall in achieving the rehabilitation targets to the
non-cooperation of banks.
Of  the 3,870 proposals recommended in four districts of Tamil Nadu
during 1997-2000, 2,862 applications (74 per cent) were rejected.
Instances of banks rejecting a large number of applications or adopting a cautious
approach was also indicative of the fact that the implementing agencies Scheduled
Castes Development financial Corporations did not exercise sufficient care in the
formulation of viable projects that could be financed by the banks.
Women not specially targeted
Women of the scavenging community constitute the most oppressed section. Even
after men of the family shift to more dignified professions, women continue to remain
engaged in manual scavenging. The revised guidelines of the Scheme, issued in 1996,
stressed the special targeting of women scavengers in rehabilitation programmes,
besides formulation of specific women-oriented schemes. Special attention was to be
given to women beneficiaries in providing post-assistance support. Awareness camps
focussing attention on women were also required to be regularly organized in the
scavenger colonies. This was not done. Review by Audit brought out the following:
Ø No women-oriented scheme was formulated by the Ministry.
Ø Implementing agencies in Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Punjab,
Rajasthan, T amil Nadu and West Bengal did not formulate any specific women
oriented schemes.
Ø Of the 6,244 scavengers rehabilitated in seven districts of Andhra Pradesh,
women constituted  only 39 per cent. In six districts of  Assam, women
Rate of rejec-
tion of loan
applications
by banks was
as high as 74
per cent.

64
constituted 49 per cent of 1,266 scavengers rehabilitated. In Delhi, separate
details of the women scavengers were not maintained. Of the 14,674 women
scavengers identified for training in Punjab 8,212 opted to receive training; of
these, only  1,396 women (17 per cent) could be rehabilitated as of march 2002.
In the East Godavari district of Andhra Pradesh, 181 women scavengers were
provided financial assistance  of Rs 8,000 each for establishing kirana, cloth
business, etc. However, the units failed very soon. According to the District
Society, these women scavengers did not also give up their earlier profession
of scavenging. This is illustrative of the lack of post-assistance support to
rehabilitated women scavengers, which was contemplated in the revised
guidelines of the Scheme.
Ø In six districts of Tamil Nadu, however, of the 2,754 scavengers rehabilitated,
1,750 (64 per cent) were women.
Ø In Karnataka, the SC/ST Development Corporation did not provide any
information on the male and female scavengers rehabilitated. However, in the
test checked districts other than Gulbarga, 2,502 female scavengers were
rehabilitated as against 2,384 male scavengers.
Ø In Gujarat, the Gujarat Scheduled Castes Development Corporation had no
information on the organization of awareness camps for women; on the other
hand, in Madhya Pradesh awareness camps were organized only in Bhopal
district.
Ø In Rajasthan, the implementing agency was not aware of the guidelines relating
to the rehabilitation of women scavengers through specially focused activities.
Thus, the directives in regad to special focus on women contained in the revised
guidelines did not receive much attention from the Ministry or the State-level
implementing agencies. Tamil Nadu and Karnataka showed impressive results without
specially focused schemes, which, however, were exogenous to the Scheme.
Cluster approach not adopted
The revised guidelines of 1996 envisaged that the Scheduled Castes Development
Financial Corporation should adopt a cluster approach in training and rehabilitation
programmes. All scavengers eligible for benefits under the Scheme in a basti were to
be rehabilitated together. Scheduled Castes Development Financial Corporation was
to encourage formation of group projects so as to pool together subsidy and margin
money loans.
Scrutiny of records revealed that the cluster approach was not adopted in any
State. Though in Andhra Pradesh, Gujarat, Karnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
Orissa, Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal group projects in the form of
Sanitary Marts were adopted for rehabilitating scavengers, no other project following
the cluster approach was formulated or implemented. In States like Assam, Haryana
and Punjab, the cluster approach was not implemented at all. Keeping in view the
limited success of the Sanitary Mart project and the absence of any other project for
64

65
training and rehabilitation of scavengers in the cluster  approach, the revised guidelines
in this regard remained unimplemented.
Failure of Sanitary Mart Scheme
The concept of rehabilitation of scavengers through the establishment of Sanitary
Marts was included in the Scheme in January 2000. A Sanitary Mart is a shopping place
where the sanitary needs of the common man could be met and materials and equipment
such as pans, traps etc. would be produced at its production centre. Under the scheme,
the implementing agencies had to steer the formation of co-operatives, ideally of 20-30
scavengers, and these cooperatives would run the sanitary marts. The main goal of the
scheme was to erase the need for scavenging by converting dry latrines to wet latrines
and subsequently, the need of engaging the scavengers.
The success of this scheme was largely dependent on the
commitment of the implementing agencies in (a) motivating scavengers
to set up sanitary marts; and (b) planning for information, education,
and communication so as to generate demand for items and services
available with the sanitary marts. Test-check of records, however,
revealed that the scheme failed at the initial stage itself, despite released
of Rs. 130.05 crore, representing 93 per cent of the total funds released,
by the Ministry during 1999—2002. As against a target of setting up of
4,606 Sanitary Marts for rehabilitation of 1,15, 150 scavengers in fourteen
States, the implementing agencies could set up only 636 Sanitary Marts
rehabilitating 4,107 scavengers.
In Delhi, Haryana, Jammu & Kashmir, Punjab, Kerala, the scheme was not
implemented. It is also interesting to note that the Sanitary Mart Scheme unde the
National Scheme could be implemented only with limited success in West Bengal
though it was a complete success as a State Scheme. The failure was attributed mainly
to the absence of the subsidy element to the customers of these marts, which was
provided in the West Bengal Government's scheme. Haryana and Punjab did not
implement the scheme as it was not viable.
3.4 Organisational Mismatches
The Scheme was organised with a four-tier structure going down
vertically from the programme implementing Ministry of the Central
Government to the town or mohalla level. Organisationally, the Scheme
did not contemplate a network at the rural level presumably on the
assumption that the practice of scavenging was not predominately a
rural phenomenon. The 'Rural Sanitation Programme', however,
addressed itself to the liberation of scavengers. Thus, it was necessary
to have a rural link down the line below the district level, which was not
available in the Scheme. The District became the control unit with the
towns and mohallas integrated to the structure of implementation and
the District Collector the key functionary in the structure. It was through
the Collector that interaction with banks, urban local bodies, Scheduled
Castes Development Financial Corporation, training institutes and the
Sainitary
Mart Scheme
proved, to be
a failure,
despite
release of Rs.
130.05 crore.
Organisational
mismatches
were noticed
at implemen-
tational level
of the
scheme.

66
monitoring committees was sought to be achieved. It is also through
the district authority that the interfaces with other development schemes
can be worked out. it was, however, seen in audit that the role of the
district administrative head was confined largely to survey and
identification and that too not in all cases. Day to day implementation
of the Scheme was transferred to theScheduled Castes Development
Financial Corporations. It is for this reason that consolidated figures
were often not available with the District Collector and information had
to be collected from Scheduled Castes Development Financial
Corporations. This resulted in a lack of coordination in the operation of
the Scheme. There was no evidence in the test checked districts of any
initiative taken by the District Authorities in identification of training
institutes and development of a protfolio of vocations. The State
Governments passed on funds directly to the Scheduled Castes
Development Financial Corporations and the District Collector had not
role to play.
Coordination between the District collector and the nodal department of theState
was insignificant except that periodic reports were generated at the Collectorates on
the basis of information obtained from Scheduled Castes Development Financial
Corporations. In many cases, the district level monitoring committees under the
Chairmanship of collectors were not formed. There was no coordination between the
Secretary of the implementing department at the State level withtheState Departments
handling urban Development, Rural Development, Labour and Technical Education,
as required. The Central Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment also had no
coordination with the Ministries of urban Development  and rural Development. Its
relationship with  the National Safai Karamcharies Finance Development Corporation
was only visible in the  area of Sanitary Marts.
These organisational mismatches and failure in coordination adversely affected the
implementation of the Scheme.
3.5 Deficiencies in Financial Management
3.5.1 Flow of Funds
During the Eighth Plan period, funds required for training and rehabilitation under
the Scheme were estimated at Rs.  563.80 coreos, whereas only Rs. 386.20 crore were
provided and expenditure of Rs. 384.67 crore incurred. Though the Scheme was to be
completed by the end of the Eighth Plan period, it continued during the Ninth Plan
period. Details of the fund allocations vis-a-vis the actual expenduture during the
Eighth and Ninth Plan periods are tabulated below:—
(Rupees in crore)
Reduction at
Year Budget Revised Revised Actual
Estimates Estimates Estimates Stage Expenditure
VIII Plan Period (1992—1997) 386.20 386.20 — 384.67
1997-1998 120.0 90.00 30.00 90.00
1998-1999 90.0 20.00 70.00 5.90
1999-2000 70.00 70.00 — 70.00
2000-2001 67.50 69.94 6.56 60.92
2001-2002 74.00 8.21 65.79 9.20
IX Plan Period (1997-02) 421.50 249.15 172.35 236.02
Grant Total 807.70 635.35 172.35 620.69

67
During the Ninth Plan period (1997-2002), the initial budgetary commitment of
Rs. 421.50 crore was scaled down to Rs. 249.15 crore which amounts to an overall
reduction of almost 41 per cent.
The Ministry attributed the reduction in  budgetary support to the Scheme in the
Revised Estimates to the amounts lying unspent with State Scheduled Castes
Development Financial Corporations and the disinclination of the Planning Commission
to revise the  Scheme in 2001-02.
3.5.2 Release of grant despite retention of heavy unspent balances
Scrutiny of the records in the Ministry revealed that grant-in-aid
was released to such Scheduled Castes Development Financial
Corporations which had heavy unspent balances. The utilization of
funds by them had been poor as would be evident from the details
contained in Annexure-II.
The Ministry stated (May 2002) that the State Government /
Scheduled Castes Development Financial Corporations were regularly
pursued for timely utilization of funds under the Scheme.
3.5.3 Rush of disbursements in March
A significant portion of the disbursements during the year was made in the last
quarter of the financial year as well as in the month of March as shown below:—
(Rupees in crore)
Total Disbursement Percentage of Disbursement Percentage of
Year disbursement during  last disbursement during March disbursement
during the quarter du ring last during March
year quarter
1997-1998 90.00 20.56 23 11.46 13
1998-1999 5.90 5.90 100 5.90 100
1999-2000 70.00 70.00 100 70.00 100
2000-2001 60.92 60.92 100 69.92 100
2001-2002 9.20 2.25 24 2.25 24
In the year 2000-01 and 2001-02, demand drafts for release of grants were despatched
to the implementing agencies in the subsequent financial years. Release of funds at
the fag end of the financial year was indicative of poor financial management and was
aimed to avoid lapse of budgetary grants.
The Ministry stated (May 2002)  that the approach paper on the concept of Sanitary
Marts inviting proposals from States/Scheduled Castes Development Financial
Corporations was circulated on 30 January 2000 and proposals were received in the
month of March for the year 1999-2000 and that sanction for 2000-2001 was delayed
due to delay in obtaining the approval of the Ministry of  Finance as some Scheduled
Castes Development Financial Corporations had huge unspent balances. The reply
furnished by the Ministry only reinforces the audit observation.
Funds were
released to
Scheduled
Caste Develop-
ment Financial
Corporations
despite huge
unspent
balances.

68
3.5.4 Utilisation of funds by State Governments/Scheduled Castes Development
Financial Corporations
State-wise position of funds released during 1997-2002 and expenditure incurred
there against is presented below:—
(Rupees in crore)
State Unutilised Funds as on
Sl. State/ Opening Central contri- T otal Funds spent 31.3.2002
No. Union Territory Balance release bution/ funds(1997—200) Amount Percentage
bank loan           available
NSKFDC
Loan
1. Andhra Pradesh 3.42 14.10 13.25 30.77 53.60 - Nil
2. Assam 1.65 3.72 1.93 7.30 1.70 5.60 77
3. Bihar 6.13 4.64 Nil 10.77 1.56 9.21 86
4. Delhi 4.70 Nil 0.33 5.03 1.80 3.23 64
5. Gujarat 0.42 20.51 Nil 20.93 3.28 17.65 84
6. Haryana 11.49 Nil 7.51 19.00 13.72 5.28 28
7. Jammu & Kashmir 1.51 0.35 1.96 3.82 1.88 1.94 51
8. Jharkhand Nil 10.85 Nil 10.85 _ 10.85 100
9. Karnataka 3.09 10.63 Nil 13.72 8.12 5.60 41
10. Kerala 0.42 Nil Nil 0.42 * 0.42 100
11. Madhya Pradesh 4.63 33.34 47.79 85.76 67.40 18.36 21
12. Maharashtra 7.89 21.35 7.33 36.57 9.20 27.37 75
13. Orissa 6.98 6.96 Nil 13.94 9.92 4.02 29
14.  Pondicherry 0.05 Nil Nil 0.05 0.01 0.04 80
15. Punjab 1.58 Nil Nil 1.58 0.61 0.97 61
16. Rajasthan 17.81 19.35 Nil 37.16 3.73 33.43 90
17. Tamil Nadu 23.55 22.53 7.82 53.90 18.38 35.52 66
18. Uttar Pradesh 36.89 44.46 3.06 84.41 65.46 18.95 23
19. West Bengal 4.51 Nil 0.37 4.88 1.50 3.38 69
        Total 136.72 212.79 91.35 440.86 261.87 201.82
*The expenditure in Kerala being negligible (Rs. 13,000) has been rounded off to zero.
As against funds aggregating to Rs. 440.86 crore available during
1997-2002, actual expenditure was only Rs. 261.87 crore. This constituted
59 per cent of the total funds available. Analysis of the State-wise
position revealed that more than 40 per cent  of the funds remained
unutilised in 14 States. The entire amount released to Kerala and
Jharkhand remained unutilised. The percentage of  unutilised funds in
Bihar, Gujarat, Pondicherry  and Rajasthan varied between 80 to 90 per
cent. The position of utilisation of funds was also dismal in Assam,
Delhi, Jammu & Kashmir, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Punjab, Tamil Nadu
and West Bengal as the percentage of unutilised funds in these States
In 14 States
more than 40
per cent of
funds were
not utilised.

69
 varied between 41 and 77. Underutilisation of funds was generally
attributed to the indifferent attitude  of banks in sanctioning loans to
scavengers, non-availability  of technical manpower, delay in finalisation
of projects, rejection of applications at the district level and  non-
vability of projects.
Scheduled Castes Development  Financial Corporations in the States
of Assam, Bihar,  Delhi, Haryana,  Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa,
Punjab and West Bengal utilised interest earnings of Rs. 16.43 crore to
meet expenditure on pay and allowances and establishment as detailed
below:-
(Rupees in crore)
State Amount
Assam 0.22
Bihar 3.45
Delhi 3.56
Haryana 4.03
Jharkhand 0.71
Madhya Pradesh 1.23
Orissa 0.26
Punjab 0.65
West Bengal 2.32
Total 16.43
3.5.5 Retention of Central assistance by State Governments
Central assistance of  Rs. 11.84 crore was retained by the State Governments without
being disbursed as under:
In Madhya Pradesh,  the State Government retained Central assistance of Rs. 9.29
crore during 1992-96 and the amount had not been transferred to the implementing
agency till March  2002. During  1997-2002, Madhya Pradesh Scheduled Castes
Development Corporation received Central assistance of Rs. 33.34 crore under the
Scheme. Had the State Government not retained Central assistance of Rs. 9.29 crore,
the requirement of funds by the Corporation would have been lesser by an equal
amount.
In Punjab, the State Government retained Central assistance of Rs. 2.55 crore released
during 1995-96 even as of March 2002. The Ministry had also not pursued the matter
with the State Government to obtain refund of the amount as of August, 2002.
3.5.6 Shortfall in Matching Contribution by State Governments
The margin money loan component of the financial package for rehabilitation was
to be funded in the ratio of 49:51 between the Centre and States/Union Territories. The

70
States' share of margin money loan was either not contributed or contributed short in
seven States as indicated below:
Sl. State Shortfall in contribution
No. (Rupees in lakh)
1. Assam 42.07
2. Madhya Pradesh 141.39
3. Maharashtra 313.08
4. West Bengal 27.64
5. Andhra Pradesh Not Contributed
6. Bihar Not Contributed
7. Karnataka Not Contributed
3.5.7 Outstanding Utilisation  Certificates
The Ministry released grants-in-aid for the implementation of the
Scheme to the agencies concerned through the State Governments up
to 1996-97, and thereafter grants were released directly to the agencies
themselves. State Governments and the Scheduled Castes Development
Financial Corporations were required to submit utilisation certificates
in respect of grants-in-aid released to them. However, it was observed
that as against release of grants-in-aid of Rs.642.43 crore during 1991-
2002, the Ministry had received utilisation certificates for Rs. 60.77
crore only (9 per cent of the total funds released). State-wise details of
pending utilisation certificates are contained in Annexure-III. These
certificates were due  in some cases since 1991-92.
3.6 Inadequate Monitoring
The Scheme provides for the setting up of a network of Monitoring
Committees: Central Monitoring Committee at the apex level, State-
level Monitoring Committees, supported  by District-level Monitoring
Committees and the Town Committees or Mohalla Committees at the
ground level. While the Central and State-level Committees were
required to meet quarterly, no periodicity was prescribed for District
and Town Committees. Audit scrutiny revealed that the Central
Committee met only once in February 1993 during 1992-2002, while it
should have met  at least forty times. The State-level Monitoring
Committees in some States (Assam, Gujarat, Haryana, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu  and  West Bengal) met less
than half the number of times required; they did not meet  even once in
other States where these Committees were constituted ( Jammu &
Kashmir  and  Orissa). In Bihar, Jharkhand, Kerala, and  Pondicherry,
no State-level Committees were set up. District-level Committees were
not set up in the States of Jammu & Kashmir, Kerala, Maharashtra
and Pondicherry.  In  Haryana, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Pondicherry
and Tamil Nadu no  Town or Mohalla Committees were set up. Records
of the proceedings of Committee meetings were not  maintained in most
cases.
The District-level, State-level and Central-level Monitoring Committees depended
on reports generated at the operational level for evaluating the Scheme. The linkage
theoritically was  such that reports generated at the town-level would feed the district-
Utilisation
Certificates
in respect of
91 percent of
total releases
were still
pending
Non-
constitution
of monitor-
ing commit-
tees/non-
functioning
of these
Committees
affected the
periodic
evaluation of
implimentation
of the
scheme.

71
level reports, the district-level reports would feed the State reports and finally the State
reports would feed the Central reports. Any breach in the channel would automatically
impair the  information chain. This  is exactly what happened: many of these committees
were not constituted. Even when these were constituted, they did not meet to review
progress and details of progress made could not be compiled even when some  of
these Committees met. Sporadic efforts  were made to evaluate  the Scheme at the post-
implementation stage, as in Orissa, Uttar Pradesh, Rajasthan and  Delhi, and the
findings, despite the absence of a comprehensive reporting standard, highlighted the
failure of the Scheme on many fronts: incorrect/incomplete identification  of beneficiaries,
non-identification of skill requirements, lack of monitoring mechanism, lack of awareness
among beneficiaries, lack of motivation for  self-help, and  misutilisation of cash
assistance by the beneficiaries. There was no evidence on record to suggest that any
of these evaluation findings  were considered at the appropriate levels to provide
corrective and remedial measures.
4. Conclusion:
Ø The Scheme began, and continues to remain until now, a prisoner of its own
statistics. Absence of credible baseline census of targeted  beneficiaries has
robbed the Scheme of its objectivity. Different sources have estimated the
number differently employing ad hoc  yardsticks and methods. The Scheme
visualised the rehabilitation of all the 4 lakh scavengers and their  dependents
estimated by the Task Force in March  1991 by the end of the Eighth Plan
period (1992-97). Against this, the Scheme claimed to have rehabilitated only
2.68 lakh. This did not, however, result in a reduction in the total number, as
subsequent surveys conducted between  1994-95 and 2001-02 estimated the
number  as 7.87  lakh necessitating upward revision of the targets.
Ø Loss of link between 'liberation' and 'rehabilitation' defocussed the scheme.
Liberation, interpreted to mean removal of the very cause and basis of manual
scavenging, thereby allowing the beneficiary release from the stigmatised
occupation, should have been the cornerstone of the Scheme as there could be
no rehabilitation without liberation. Lack of correspondence between 'liberation'
and 'rehabilitation' was vividly demonstrated by the fact that the Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment, the nodal Ministry for the scheme claimed to
have rehabilitated 4.71 lakh scavengers during 1992-2002 while the Ministries
of Urban and Rural Development projected that only 0.37  lakh scavengers
were liberated during the period. There was no evidence to suggest if those
liberated were in fact rehabilitated.
Ø The most serious lapse in the conceptualization and operationalisation  of the
scheme  was its failure  to employ the law that prohibited the occupation. The
law could have been invoked to ensure that the condition and circumstance of
occupational entrapment were not created. As a matter of fact, the law itself
expected that the schemes implemented by the both the State and Central
Governments would draw their strength from it. The law was rarely used.
Ø The Scheduled Castes Development Financial Corporations and banks which
were responsible for the implementation of income-generating rehabilitation
schemes failed to deliver as there was no clear definition of the path of
occupational change. Training in low  skill  alternative occupation was

72
inadequate, impractical   and  disoriented. Factors of habitation, cluster, aptitude,
gender and motivation were ignored for the staistically  visible loan-projects.
There too the rejection percentage was as high as 47 per cent  in  Maharashtra
and 74  per cent in Tamil Nadu.  To expect an illiterate and poor scavenger to
comply with the rigours of project-financing by commercial banks, was  to say
the least, unimaginative.
The matter was referred to the Ministry in October 2002, their reply was awaited as
of January 2003.

ANNEXURE-I
(Refers to Paragraph 2.2)
State-wise details of sample districts selected for audit
Sl. State/ No of Districts
No. Union Territories districts test- Name of districts test-checked
covered checked
1. Andhra Pradesh 23 7 Cuddapah, East Godavari,
Karimnagar, Krishna, Kurnool,
Nizamabad and Warangal
2. Assam 23 6 Kamrup, Sonitpur, dhubri,
Nagaon,
Dibrugarh, Tinsukia
3. Bihar 37 10 Bhagalpur, Gaya, Jehanabad,
Katihar, Motihari, Munger,
Muzaffarpur, Nalanda,
Nawada, Rohtas
4. Delhi 9 9 Central, South,South-
West,West, North-
West, North, North-East,
East, New Delhi
5. Gujarat 25 7 Ahmedabad, Godhra,
Himatnagar,
Jamnagar, Junagarh, Rajkot
and V adodara
6. Haryana 19 5 Gurgaon, Hissar, Jind, Karnal,
Yamuna Nagar
7. Jammu & Kashmir 6 4 Jammu, Kathua, Udhampur,
Srinagar
8. Jharkhand 18 5 Bokaro, Dhanbad, Hazaribag,
Jamshedpur, Ranchi
9. Karnataka 20 7 Bangalore (Rural), Gulbarga,
Raichur, Bellary, Shimoga,
Mysore and Mandya
10. Kerala 14 3 Tiruvananthapuram,
Kollam,Thrissur
11. Madhya Pradesh 45 11 Bhopal, Chhattarpur,
Gwalior, Indore,
Jabalpur, Khargone, Morena,
Rewa, Satna,
Shahdol, Ujjain
12. Maharashtra 31 6 Mumbai, Thane, Nasik, Dhule,
Pune, Aurangabad
13. Orissa 30 8 Khurda, Berhampur, Cuttack,
Koraput, Puri,
Balasore, Keonjhar,
Dhenkanal
73
APPENDIX  I

74
14. Punjab 17 7 Amritsar, Ferozepur,
Gurdaspur,
Hoshiarpur, Jalandhar,
Kapurthala,
Ludhiana
15. Rajasthan 32 8 Ajmer, Bhilwara, Churu,
 Jaipur, Jodhpur,
Nagaur, Pali, Sawai Madhopur
16. Tamil Nadu 30 6 Coimbatore, Cuddalore,
Kancheepuram,
Madurai, Thanjavur and
Vellore
17. Uttar Pradesh 63 10 Agra, Berailly, Bijnor,
Ghaziabad,
Kanpur
Nagar, Lucknow, Mathura,
Meerut,
Moradabad, Saharanpur
18. West Bengal 17 8 Howrah, Hooghly, 24-
Paraganas
(South),
24-Paraganas (North), Malda,
Uttar
Dinajpur, Jalapaiguri,
Darjeeling
19. Pondicherry 1 1 Pondicherry
Total 460 128
Sl. State/ No of Districts
No. Union Territories districts test- Name of districts test-checked
covered checked

ANNEXURE-II
(Refers to Paragraph 3.5.2)
(Rupees in crore)
Year Central assistance T otal Un spent
released expenditure grant
Gujarat
Opening Balance 0.42
1997-1998 8.90 0.65 8.67
1998-1999 - 0.57 8.10
1999-2000 11.61 0.84 18.87
2000-2001 - 0.79 18.08
2001-2002 - 0.43 17.65
Madhya Pradesh
Opening Balance 4.63
1997-1998 24.51 4.44 24.70
1998-1999 - 5.48 19.22
1999-2000 8.83 4.01 24.04
2000-2001 - 3.65 20.39
2001-2002 - 4.31 16.08
Orissa
Opening Balance 6.98
1997-1998 1.07 1.37 6.68
1998-1999 5.90 1.68 10.90
1999-2000 - 2.46 8.44
2000-2001 - 2.54 5.90
2001-2002 - 1.87 4.03
Rajasthan
Opening Balance 17.81
1997-1998 2.73 1.66 18.88
1998-1999 - 0.66 18.22
1999-2000 16.62 0.36 34.48
2000-2001 - 0.36 34.12
2001-2002 - 0.70 33.42
Tamil Nadu
Opening Balance 23.55
1997-1998 - 3.08 20.47
1998-1999 - 3.20 17.27
1999-2000 - 2.00 15.27
2000-2001 22.53 3.61 34.19
2001-2002 - 0.71 33.48
Uttar Pradesh
Opening Balance 36.89
1997-1998 44.46 19.22 62.13
1998-1999 - 15.07 47.06
1999-2000 - 16.12 30.94
2000-2001 - 11.33 19.61
2001-2002 - 00.66 18.95
75

ANNEXURE-III
(Refers to Paragraph 3.5.7)
State-wise position of outstanding UCs
Sl. State/ Total release Amount of Y ears for which UCs
Nos. Union Territories to State/ pending pending
SCDCs since UCs
1991-92 (Rs. in crore)
(Rs. in crore)
1. Andhra Pradesh 25.87 4.24 1992-93, 2001-02
2. Assam 5.87 5.87 1991-92, 1992-93, 2000-01
3. Bihar 11.26 11.26 1991-92, 1992-93, 1997-98
4. Delhi 5.28 4.31 1991-92, 1992-93, 1996-97
5. Gujarat 26.86 26.86 1991-92, 1992-93, 1993-94,
1997-98, 1999-2000
6. Haryana 18.37 18.37 1991-92, 1992-93, 1993-94,
1996-97
7. Jammu & Kashmir 1.03 1.03 1991-92, 1992-93
8. Karnataka 20.24 6.95 2001-02
9. Kerala 0.55 0.55 1991-92, 1992-93
10. Madhya Pradesh 116.52 116.52 1991-92, 1992-93, 1993-94,
1994-95, 1995-96, 1996-97,
1997-98, 1999-2000
11. Maharashtra 46.23 21.35 2000-01
12. Orissa 16.76 16.76 1991-92, 1992-93, 1993-94,
1995-96, 1996-97, 1997-98,
1998-99
13. Punjab 6.63 6.63 1991-92, 1992-93, 1995-96
14. Rajasthan 44.48 44.48 1991-92, 1992-93, 1993-94,
1995-96, 1996-97, 1997-98,
1999-2000
15. Tamil Nadu 57.80 57.80 1991-92, 1992-93, 1994-95,
1995-96, 1996-97, 1999-2000,
16. Uttar Pradesh 222.14 222.14 1991-92, 1992-93, 1993-94,
1994-95, 1995-96, 1996-97,
1997-98
17. West Bengal 5.62 5.62 1991-92, 1992-93
18. Pondicherry 0.07 0.07 1991-92, 1992-93
19. Jharkhand 10.85 10.85 2000-2001
Total 642.43 581.66
76

APPENDIX II
STATEMENT OF OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl.No. Para Ministry/ Observations & Recommendations
No. Department
12 3 4
1. 103 Social The Committee note that the 'National
Justice and Scheme of Liberation and  Rehabilitation
Empowerment of Scavengers and their Dependents'
mark the convergence of several public
initiatives over a period of four decades
preceding its introduction in 1992. It was
introduced by the Ministry of Welfare
(now Ministry of Social Justice &
Empowerment) on 22nd March, 1992 with
the objective to provide alternative,
dignified and viable occupation to them.
The Centrally Sponsored Scheme was
conceived to deal with three principal
issues. Firstly, the identification of
scavengers and their dependents
through a time bound survey; secondly,
imparting of training in their identified
trades; and thirdly, providing subsidy,
margin money and bank loan for their
rehabilitation. While bifurcating the
integrated scheme of Liberation and
Rehabilitation of Scavengers in 1991, the
liberation component was entrusted to
the Ministries of Urban and Rural
Development and the rehabilitation
component was entrusted to the then
Ministry of Welfare (now Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment) along
with the nodal responsibility for the
Scheme. Undoubtedly, the Scheme was
well intentioned with the objective to
provide an alternate, dignified and viable
occupation to scavengers and their
dependents in a stipulated time span.
However, the Committee are constrained
77

78
to point out that it has failed to implement
its operational parameters in a highly
stratified society resisting change from
a hereditary occupational structure even
after 10 years of its implementation
involving investment of more than
Rs. 620 crore. It is a matter of national
shame that anywhere between 5-8 lakh
manual scavenger remain unrehabi-
litated. The scheme failed to deliver its
social vision after ten years of
continuous but regrettably half-hearted
efforts. It failed in working out a
conherent strategy for policy initiatives
as it could not take advantage of an
existing law that prohibited employment
of Scavengers. Divorcing liberation from
rehabilitation was an error of judgement
that weakened the foundation of the
Scheme and led to uncoordinated efforts
without focus. It failed in enhancing or
re-orienting the skill-levels of the
beneficiaries necessary for change of
occupation. For the same reason, it failed
in its mission of replacing the hereditary
practice by skill-based choice of
profession. Absence of base-line survey,
non-involvement of district development
authorities, commercialisation of the
assistance patterns have led to a loss of
focus of the monitoring aspect of the
scheme.
2. 104 Social Justice The Committee observe that even at this
and  Empowerment  stage of its implementation, the Scheme
still continues to remain a prisoner of its
own statistics. Absence of creditable
database of targeted beneficiaries has
robbed the scheme of its objectivity. The
loss of links between liberation, training
and rehabilitation has derailed the
Scheme. The Scheme visualised the
rehabilitation of all the 4 lakh scavengers
and their dependents estimated by the
12 3 4

79
Task Force in March 1991 by the end of
the Eighth Plan period (1992—97).
Against this, the Scheme claimed to have
rehabilitated only 2.68 lakh. This did not,
however, result in a reduction in the total
number, as subsequent surveys
conducted between 1994-95 and 2001-
02 estimated the number as 7.87 lakh
necessitating upward revision of the
targets. Further, the Ministry of Social
Justice & Empowerment, which was the
then nodal Ministry for the Scheme,
claimed to have rehabilitated 4.71 lakh
scavengers during 1992—2002, while the
Ministries of Urban and Rural
Development projected that only 0.37
lakh scavengers had been liberated
during the same period. In addition to
this, there is no evidence to suggest the
actual number of those liberated and the
number which were in fact rehabilitated.
The Scheduled Castes Financial
Development Corporations responsible
for implementation of the scheme at the
State level have failed to deliver the
positive results, which can be
substantiated by the fact that there is
no clear-cut indication in the
occupational change of scavengers.
Besides, training imparted is inadequate,
impractical and disoriented. The
Committee is of the view that it is the
lack of purpose in aligning the
parameters of the Scheme and lack of
will in implementing it that led to the
Scheme floundering on its own
principles. The Committee's examination
of some of the important dimensions on
the issues reviewed by Audit highlights
the fact that the implementation of the
Scheme continues to be afflicted by
serious shortcomings which are summed
up in the succeeding paragraphs.
12 3 4

80
3. 105 Social Justice The major provision of the 'Employment
and Empowerment of Manual Scavengers and Construction
of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993,
states that State Government may by
notification, specify that no person shall
engage in or employ for and permit to be
engaged in or employed for any other
person for manually carrying human
excreta, or construct or maintain a dry
latrine. However, the Committee note that
the scheme suffered, because it was not
calibrated to relate its parameters to the
legal framework provided by the Act and
continued to operate in a persuasive
mode without the legal  means to
penalize for its violation. Although only
17 States have adopted this Act, yet its
implementation aspects left much to be
desired since these States have failed to
analyse and substantiate with facts for
its effective implementation. Some of the
States have not even adopted the Act
till date and the Ministry has neither
assessed the drawbacks in its
enforcement nor has taken concrete
steps to ensure its adoption and
implementation. The law that prohibited
the engagement of manual scavengers,
thus could have provided a powerful
instrument to the implementers of the
Scheme. By adopting this Central Law
and enforcing it in right earnest, the
States could have paved the way for the
successful implementation of the Scheme
and liberation of scavengers would have
progressed in tendem with rehabilitation
measures. The fact that this was not
adopted and implemented by all the
States is regretted. The Committee
recommend that the Ministry should
look into the grey areas experienced by
the States in enforcing the Act and bring
out clear cut steps to remove the
bottlenecks and corelate the legal
12 3 4

81
framework with the attainment of
objectives of the Scheme. The Committee
also hope that the Ministry will wake up
to their responsibility and ensure that
the Act is adopted by all the States
which are yet to adopt it and at the same
time, initiate urgent measures for its
implementation in all the States.
4. 106 Social Justice For the success of the scheme proper
and Empowerment identification of scavengers and their
dependents was vital. However, various
surveys for identification of Scavengers
and their dependents necessary to
locate, specify and to give particularized
training to the beneficiaries according
to their needs were often not
methodologically sound. The results
varied widely. Even the definition of
'Scavengers' was not settled which
resulted in the inclusion of ineligible
persons in the list of beneficiaries. Even
the Ministry of Welfare in 1996 received
references from various State
Governments about the exact definition
of a Scavenger. Thus the absence of
proper definition of 'Scavenger' led to
different surveys by different agencies.
As many as five different sets of figures
were in the Ministry's possession. The
Committee note that the baseline
surveys conducted in the States suffered
from a number of informities which
resulted in non-availability of any reliable
data with the Ministry even after a
decade on the number of scavengers
and their dependents which was
essential to estimate the fund
requirements to facilitate the preparation
of a well considered action plan. At this
stage, the Committee cannot but over
emphasise the need for fresh survey to
be undertaken immediately so as to
ensure the availability of a reliable data
of the number of scavengers to be
12 3 4

82
liberated and rehabilitated. For this, it is
also essential to define the boundaries
so as to make the out reach of the scheme
only to the potential beneficiaries i.e.
Scavengers as envisaged in the scheme
and not to all the Safai Karamcharies
engaged in cleaning and sweeping
occupation as extension of benefit to
them is construed as leakage of benefits
to ineligible persons.
5. 107 Social Justice The Scheme had envisaged that the
and Empowerment obnoxious occupation would come to
an end if all those who were engaged in
this occupation and their dependents
were rehabilitated in alternative and
dignified occupation. The liberation of
the scavengers was possible only when
the practice of using dry latrines was
eliminated. The Committee are
constrained to point out that the scheme
failed to provide the necessary linkages
amongst the implementing agencies and
the Ministries administering the scheme
encompassing the whole range of
operations. Instead, the Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment
confined itself only to the aspects of
identification, training and rehabilitation
leaving the liberation issues to the
Ministries of Urban Development and
Rural Development who, separately, and
independently implemented their own
schemes for liberation under the "Low
Cost Sanitation Scheme" and the "Rural
Sanitation Programme" respectively. The
Committee regret to observe that there
was no coordination amonst the three
Ministries nor had the scheme inter-
faces be mapped in any of the scheme
documents to avoid over-lapping and
asymmetries. Another disquieting fact
observed by the Committee is that the
Low Cost Sanitation Scheme carried out
12 3 4

83
by the then Ministry of Urban
Development for liberation of urban
scavengers was a failure as they did not
fix any physical or financial targets. The
Committee recommend that a single
national programme be formulated and
implemented by the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment as a mission
with the objective of eliminating this
scourge within the next four-five years.
6. 108 Social Justice The Committee find that the Integrated
and Empowerment Low Cost Sanitation Scheme was
implemented through Housing Urban
Development Corporation. The first
objective was to convert dry latrines into
twin pit pour flush units, and the second
objective was to construct new toilets
where no facility was available in order
to liberate the persons involved in
manual scavenging. The funding pattern,
according to the Ministry, under
Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme
is part subsidy and the part loan given
by the HUDCO. The loan is availed by
the Municipal Board or by the
concerned agency and the subsidy
element is taken away but the State
Governments are wary of taking loans
since HUDCO being a commercial
organization, insists on State guarantees.
The Committee also note that out of the
subsidy aggregating to Rs. 480.22 crore
sanctioned by the then Ministry of Urban
Development, only Rs. 246.68 crore had
been released upto 31 December, 2001
and loans aggregating to Rs. 583.51 crore
sanctioned, only Rs. 278.60 crore were
released and out of the 6 lakh identified
scavengers in urban areas only 37340
i.e. 6.2 per cent were liberated. The low
progreess made by this scheme has been
attributed by HUDCO to the time lag
between the sanction and release of
12 3 4

84
subsidy and loans to delays in
documentation, non-availability of
government guarantees, belated
submission of utilization certificates and
slow physcial progress. The Committee
are constrained to point out that there
was no evidence of the Ministry having
initiated any remedial measures aimed at
removal of these hurdles to enable the
successful implementation of the
scheme.
7. 109 Social Justice The Committee note that according to
and Empowerment  the Ministry of Rural Development, 20
States and Union Territories have no dry
latrines and no manual sanitation was
prevalent in rural areas. The Ministry
have contended that only Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Rajasthan
and Sikkim had reported the practice of
manual scavenging in rural areas. The
Committee note that the Ministry had
not fixed any targets for conversion of
dry latrines into water-borne flush
latrines, nor were separate allocations
made for the purpose. The State
Governments are stated to have been
directed by the Ministry of Rural
Development to utilise the funds
allocated under the Central Rural
Sanitation Scheme for conversion of dry
latrines into pour flush latrines. Further,
the 'Rural Sanitation Programme' had got
dovetailed into the 'Total Sanitation
Campaign' launched in 1999. The main
objectives of the Total Sanitation
Campaign was to accelerate the
sanitation coverage by creating the felt
need among the rural population about
sanitation and also impart hygiene
education to the people. It aimed at
attaining this objective by focusing on
intensive information, Education and
Communication and by providing cost
12 3 4

85
effective and appropriate technologies
through alternate delivery mechanism
such as the Rural Sanitary Marts or
Production Centres.
8. 110 Social Justice & At present Total Sanitation Campaign is
Empowerment being implemented in 426 districts of the
country, which is likely to be further
scaled up to cover all the remaining
districts in the country. According to the
Ministry, 100.13 lakh individual toilets,
1.14 lakh school toilets, 17,606 Balwadi
toilets and 3,862 community sanitary
complexes have been constructed. Prior
to launching of Total Sanitation
Campaign, under Central Rural
Sanitation Programme, 94.80 lakh
individual house hold toilets had been
constructed in rural areas. Concurrent
evaluation of the campaign is essential.
The Committee wishes that the Ministry
of Rural Development to place the
highest emphasis on this aspect.
9. 111 -do- The Committee feel that Liberation,
meaning removal of the very cause and
basis of manual scavenging, thereby
allowing the beneficiary liverate from the
stigmatised occupation, should have
been the cornerstone of the Scheme as
there could be no rehabilitation without
liberation. Some half-hearted measures
seem to have been taken in rural as well
as in urban areas to convert dry latrines
into wet latrines. A lot, however, needs
to be done to liverate all the scavengers.
For this, it is necessary that revised
stipulated targets are refixed for
conversion of dry latrines into wet
latrines for which a time bound
programme may be drawn up to achieve
the revised targets. Lack of requisite
funds should not come in the way of
successful achievement of the
objectives and therefore, the Ministry
12 3 4

86
accordingly should take timely and
effective steps to provide the necessary
funds. The Committee would also like
the Ministry to have close coordination
with HUDCO and other implementing
agencies in Urban as well as in Rural
areas to accomplish the task. For this,
proper monitoring of the physical and
financial targets should be carried out at
the highest level.
10. 112 Social Justice The Committee note that training to
& Empowerment identified scavengers and their
dependents, in the age group of 15 to 50
years, was expected to equip them with
the requisite skills and expertise to
successfully implement self-employment
projects. The Committee have been
informed that the scavengers are trained
in the institutes run by the Centre and
the State Governments and also by
reputed voluntary organizations as per
TRYSEM norms. The type of training
imparted depended upon the aptitude,
capability and inclination towards a
particular trade. However, to their utter
dismay, the Committee have found that
only 2.02 lakh beneficiaries out of 5.38
lakh eligible beneficiaries were trained
during the Eighth and Ninth Plan periods
(1992-2002). The Committee regret to
observe that targets for training were not
communicated by the Ministry to the
States which resulted either in targets
not being prescribed by the States or in
targets being determind only on ad hoc
basis. Consequently, shortfall in training
coverage was as high as 68 per cent and
targets set for the Eighth Plan were not
achieved even at the end of the Ninth
Plan. No special curriculum was
developed for training of scavengers
though it was recognized that
occupational shift in low-skill areas
would require special measures.
12 3 4

87
11. 113 Social Justice The Committee desire that the Ministry
& Empowerment should immediately lay down the
requisite targets for training purposes
of the scavengers liverated so that they
do not relapse into their hereditary
occupation. For this purpose, special
training scheme should also be designed
keeping in view their low skill level the
focus being on the creation and
upgradation of the skills for self-
employment. The Committee further feel
that the need for revitalizing the training
infrastructure should also be looked into
in greater depth. For this, the Ministry
should consider the feasibility of
involving Non-Governmental Organi-
sations, especially in certain selected
training activities to bring about a fruitful
training programme ensuring that their
attitudinal behaviour, aptitude and
educational standards are taken into
consideration for the rehabilitation
programme.
12. 114 -do- The Committee note the Rehabilitation
Programme under the Scheme
contemplated (i) a time bound survey to
identify scavengers and their
dependents and their aptitudes for
alternative trades; (ii) identification of
trades and preparation of a shelf of
projects; and (iii) the imparting of
training with stipend to identified
beneficiaries in the identified trades. The
Committee, however, note that against
the target of 5.20 lakh scavengers to be
rehabilitated from 1997-98 to 2001-2002,
only 2.03 lakh scavengers were
rehabilitated during this period. During
9
th Plan only 39 per cent of the target
could be met whereas in the 8th Plan 67
per cent of the targeted beneficiaries
were rehabilitated. Thus, the number
awaiting rehabilitated at the end of the
9
th Plan period was more than twice the
12 3 4

88
number at the close of the 8th Plan period.
The Committee, however, regret to
observe that more than 40 per cent of
the beneficiaries remained
unrehabilitated even after a decade of
the implementation of the scheme. This,
according to the Committee, was due to
the fact that the resources were neither
released nor applied judiciously, thereby
leading to accumulated unspent funds
and hasty release at the end of the
financial year. But absence of reliable
base-line data which could form the
basis of target setting, led to incorrect
projections and even more incorrect
conclusions in regard to the outcome of
the rehabilitation measures. The
Committee would however, also like to
point out that rehabilitation efforts were
characterized by misapplication of
resources, emphasis on low-cost
projects for availing of cash benefits
without income generation and
mismatches between skills and
occupations.
13. 115 Social Justice The Committee found that District
& Empowerment Collectors were to act as key
functionaries for coordinating with
training institutes, financial institutions
and various departments of State
Governments executing welfare
schemes. However, their role was
confined largely to survey and
identification of beneficiaries. The
responsibility of the Scheme was
transferred to Scheduled Castes
Development Financial Corporations,
which were not accountable to the
Disrict Collectors in the normal course
of their functioning. These
organisational mismatches adversely
affected the implementation of the
Scheme.
12 3 4

89
14. 116 Social Justice The Scheduled Castes Development
& Empowerment Financial Corporations and banks which
were responsible for the implementation
of income-generating rehabilitation
schmes failed to deliver  as there was no
clear indication of the path of
occupational change. Training in low
skill alternative occupation was
inadequate, impractical and disoriented.
Factors of habitation, cluster, aptitude,
gender and motivation were ignored for
the statistically visible loan-projects.
There too the rejection percentage was
as high as 74 per cent in Tamil Nadu and
47 per cent in Maharashtra. To expect
an illiterate and poor scavenger to
comply with the rigours of project-
financing by commercial banks, was to
say the least, unimaginative, instances
of banks rejecting a large number of
applications or adopting a cautious
approach was also indicative of the fact
that the implementing agencies and
Scheduled Castes Development
Financial Corporations did not exercise
sufficient care in the formulation of viable
projects that could be financed by the
banks. The Committee recommend that
Ministry of Urban Employment and
Poverty Alleviation should take up the
matter with the State Governments to
impress upon SCDCs that they should
formulate technically and commercially
viable projects to avoid rejection of loan
applications by the banks. The bank
should also be instructed through
Ministry of Finance to be more
compassionate while dealing with the
loan applications of the scavengers. The
Committee would like to be informed of
the precise steps taken in this regard.
15. 117 -do- The Committee have been given to
understand that against the budget
12 3 4

90
estimate of Rs. 807.70 crore, the actual
expenditure was Rs. 620.69 crore during
the years 1997-2002. The funds released
for the scheme during 2002-2003 and
2003-2004 have been Rs. 40.95 crore and
Rs. 24.27 crore respectively. Reduction
in funds released during the last two
years has been explained by the Ministry
by saying that this has been done due
to accumulation of the unspent balances
of the previous years with the State
Governments. They have contended that
the reduction in the flow of funds have
not affected the achievement of targets.
The Committee are constrained to point
out that there has not been proper
utilisation of funds by the State
Governments for this vital scheme which
is evident from the accumulation of the
huge unspent balances at the end of each
Financial Year. This in turn has
contributed to the tardy progress of the
implementation of the scheme. It is
obvious that the Ministry have not been
able to identify the precise reasons from
the State Governments for this financial
mismanagement. The Committee have
taken a serious view of this state of
affairs and would like to emphasise the
need to ensure full utilization of the funds
released for the scheme by the States.
The Committee would like the Ministry
to step up monitoring efforts for the
optimum utilization of funds by the
States on a regular basis and should
promptly take up the matter with that
States where there are instances of poor
utilization of allocated funds.
16. 118 Social Justice Another areas of concern in the financial
management that came to the notice of
the Committee is the failure on the part
of the State Governments and SCDCs to
submit the oustanding utilization
12 3 4
& Empowerment

91
certificate in 91 per cent of the total
grants-in-aid of Rs. 642.43 crore released
during 1991-2002 for the implementation
of the Scheme. The Committee are
constrained to point out that even after
a lapse of 12 years, the Ministry have
still not realized outstanding utilization
certificate from the defaulting State
Governments and the SCDCs. This
clearly is indicative of casual approach
and lack of urgency on the part of  those
State Governments and SCDCs in
effective utilisation of the funds. The
inordinate delay on the part of the
Ministry to evolve a viable and effective
mechanism for the realization of such a
huge financial corpus is unconscionable.
The Ministry could not explain the
reasons for non-submission of
utilization certificates by the State
implementing Agencies and have not
explained efforts being made by them in
this regard. The Committee expect the
Ministry to henceforth strictly monitor
the norms regarding submission of the
utilization certificates by the
implementing agencies and take prompt
measures at highest level to impress
upon the States to act swiftly in this
regard.
17. 119 Social Justice The Scheme provides for the setting up
& Empowerment of a network of Monitoring Committees
i.e. Central Monitoring Committee at the
apex level, State-level Monitoring
Committees, supported by District-level
Monitoring Committees and the Town
Committees or Mohalla Committees at
the ground level. While the Central and
State-level Committees were required to
meet quarterly, no periodicity was
prescribed for District and Town
Committees.
18. 120 -do- The Committee are surprised to note that
the Central Monitoring Committee met
only once in February 1993 during 1992-
12 3 4

92
2002, while it should have at least met 40
times. In some States, the State Level
Monitoring Committee have not even
met once.The Committee are also
unhappy to note that in some States,
the State Level Committee, District Level
and Town Level Committees have not
even been set up. Even the reporting
system is faulty leading to incorrect/
incomplete identification of beneficiaries,
non-identification of skill requirements,
lack of monitoring mechanism, lack of
awareness among beneficiaries, lack of
motivation for self-help and
misutilisation of financial assistance by
the beneficiaries. The Committee note
that it was through the District Collector
that interaction with banks, Urban Local
bodies, SCDCs, Training institutes and
Monitoring Committees was sought to
be achieved. It is however, noticed that
the role of the Collector was confined
largely to survey and identification and
that too not in all  cases. The day-to-day
implementation of the scheme was done
by SCDCs. The State Governments
passed the funds directly to the SCDCs
and District Collector had no role to play.
Hence, there was a lack of coordination
in the operation of the scheme. In many
cases, the District level Monitoring
Committees under the Chairmanship of
Collectors were not formed. There was
lack of coordination among the State
level Departments as well as among the
Central Ministries involved in the
Scheme. Therefore, the Committee
strongly recommend that the
applications of scavengers for loans
from the banks should be routed through
the District Collectors office so that they
can identify their needs and suggest
viable project, so that their loan
applications are not rejected by the
12 3 4

banks out rightly. Even if the Central
authority of loan disbursement remain
with the SCDCs, still the loans to the
individuals should be disbursed through
the District Collectors office so that the
role of District Collector become more
effective and the monitoring of training
and rehabilitation measures is done at
district level effectively. The Committee,
therefore, are inclined to conclude that
there is a major deficiency in the
monitoring system at all levels. They,
therefore, desire the Ministry to put in
place a suitable mechanism to ensure
that the Central Level Committee and the
Committees at the State Level must meet
regularly to ensure a high vigil over the
progress of the Scheme. As the scheme
is implemented through District level
officials, the District Collectors should
also be involved in finalisation of the
projects and disbursement of funds. The
Committee recommend that the Ministry
should strive to ensure threadbare
analysis of the reports submitted by the
different Monitoring Committees at
different levels. This would facilitate
identification of bottlenecks in the
implementation process for rectification.
The Committee also recommend that the
States, which are yet to set up various
monitoring Committees should be asked
to act immediately now.
12 3 4
93

94

94
PART II
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005) HELD ON 13TH OCTOBER, 2004
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1745 hrs. in Room No. 53, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Dr. R. Senthil
6. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
7. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
9. Shri R.K. Dhawan
10. Dr. K. Malaisamy
11. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
12. Shri Jairam Ramesh
13. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma                 — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin                 — Director
4. Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Anusua Basu — ADAI (RC)
2. Dr. A.K. Banerjee — Director General of A udit
(Central Revenue)

95
Representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment
1. Smt. Sarita Prasad — Secretary
2. Shri P. Narayana Murthy — Joint Secretary
3. Shri M. Sahoo — Joint Secretary & Finance Adviser
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation
1. Smt. Chitra Chopra — Secretary
2. Shri M.N. Mathur — Economic Adviser
3. Dr. P.S. Rana — CMD, HUDCO
4. Shri U.S. Pant — Chief Controller of Accounts
Representative of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Drinking
Water Supply)
Smt. Lalitha Kumar — Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers. The
Chairman informed the Members that the sitting has been convened to take oral
evidence of the representatives of the (i) Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment
(ii) Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation and (iii) Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Drinking Water Supply) on Chapter I of the Report of
C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March 2002, No. 3 of 2003, Union Government
(Civil—Performance Appraisals) relating to the "National Scheme of Liberation and
Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their Dependents."
3. Before, evidence, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption the
following draft reports:
(i) Action taken on the recommendations contained in the 36th Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha) relating to "Avoidable import of high capacity diesel
powered breakdown cranes"
(ii) Action taken on the recommendations contained in the 30th Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha) relating to  "Excesses over Voted Grants and Charged
Appropriations (1999-2000)"
4. The Committee adopted these draft Reports without any modifications/amend-
ments. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the draft Report in the light
of changes suggested by Audit through factual verification, if any, or otherwise and to
present the same to Parliament.
5. Thereafter, the Officers of the Office of C&AG of India briefed the Committee on
the specific points arising out of the Chapter I of the Audit Report No. 3 of 2003.
Thereafter, the representatives of the (i) Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment
(ii) Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation and (iii) Ministry of Rural
Development (Department of Drinking Water Supply) were called and the Committee
commenced the oral evidence. The evidence on the subject was not completed and the
Committee decided to continue it on 14th October, 2004.
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005) HELD ON 14TH OCTOBER, 2004
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1220 hrs. on 14th October, 2004 in Committee
Room  'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Dr. R. Senthil
6. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
7. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
8. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
9. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Dr. K. Malaisamy
12. Shri V . Narayanasamy
13. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
14. Shri Jairam Ramesh
15. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIA T
1.    Shri P.D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2.    Shri S.K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3.    Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4.    Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
5.    Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1.   Ms. Anusua Basu — ADAI (RC)
2.   Dr. A.K. Banerjee — Director General of Audit (CR)
96

97
Representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment
1. Smt. Sarita Prasad — Secretary
2. Shri P. Narayana Murthy — Joint Secretary
3. Shri M. Sahoo — Joint Secretary & Financial
Adviser
4. Shri Lalit Kohli — CMD, NSKFDC
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation
1. Smt. Chitra Chopra — Secretary
2. Shri M.N. Mathur — Economic Adviser
3. Dr. P.S. Rana — CMD, HUDCO
4. Shri U.S. Pant — Chief Controller of Accounts
Representatives of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Drinking Water Supply)
1. Shri V .K. Duggal — Secretary
2. Smt. Lalitha Kumar — Joint Secretary
2.  To begin with, the  Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, the
representatives of the (i) Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, (ii) Ministry
of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation and (iii) Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Drinking Water Supply) and the Officials of C&AG to the sitting of the
Committee.
3. As the evidence on the subject had remained inconclusive on 13 October 2004,
the Committee resumed oral evidence of the representatives of the (i) Ministry of
Social Justice & Empowerment, (ii) Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty
Alleviation and (iii) Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Drinking Water
Supply) on Chapter 1 of Report of the C&AG of India for the year ended March, 2002,
No. 3 of 2003, Union Government (Civil—Performance Appraisals) on the "National
Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their Dependents" and
other related matters in continuation to the evidence held on 13th October 2004. The
Secretaries and other representatives of the Ministries explained to the various points
and queries raised by the Members.
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2004-2005) HELD ON 18TH FEBRUARY,  2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hours to 1300 hours  on 18th February, 2005 in
Committee Room  'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Naveen Jindal
3. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
4. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
5. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
6. Dr. K. Malaisamy
7. Shri V . Narayanasamy
8. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
(i) Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Smt. Sudha Ragagopal — ADAI
2. Smt. K. Ganga — Pr. Director of A udit
(ii) Representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)
1. Shri R.K. Singh — Chairman Railway Board and
Ex-officio Principal Secretary to
the Government of India
2. Ms. Vijayalakshmi — Financial Commissioner
Viswanathan (Railway) & Ex-officio
Secretary to the GOI
3. Shri P.N. Garg — Member Mechanical &
Ex-officio Secretary to the GOI
4. Shri S.P.S. Jain — Member Engineering &
Ex-officio Secretary to the GOI
5. Shri S.C. Gupta — Member Electrical & Ex-officio
Secretary to the GOI
98

99
(iii) Representative of the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Shri Ajay Prasad — Secretary
(iv) Representative of Commission of Railway Safety
Shri G.P. Garg — Chief Commissioner of Railway Safety
2.  To begin with, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to
the sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee took up for consideration the Draft Report on Chapter I of Audit
Report No. 3 of 2003 (Civil-Performance Appraisal) relating to "National Scheme of
Liberation & Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their Dependents. The Committee
adopted the same with some modifications/amendments. The Committee authorised
the Chairman to finalise the Draft Report in the light of changes suggested by Audit
through factual verification, if any, or otherwise and to present the same to Parliament.
4. The Chairman informed the Members that the sitting has been convened to take
oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministries of Railways (Railway Board),
Civil Aviation and Commissioner of Railway Safety on Paragraph 5.3 of the Report of
C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March 1998, (No. 9 of 1999) relating to "Safety
Performance of Indian Railways". Thereafter, the officers of office of C&AG of India
briefed the Committee on the specific points arising out of the Audit Paragraph. Then
the representatives of the Ministries of Railways (Railway Board), Civil Aviation and
Commission on Railway Safety were called. The Committee commenced the oral evi-
dence on the subject. The Chairman, Railway Board gave an update of the implemen-
tation of various safety measures undertaken by the Ministry over the years. The
Members of the Committee sought various clarifications on the points arising out of
Audit Paragraph and information submitted by the Ministry of Railways. After
detailed discussion, the Hon'ble Chairman directed the Chairman, Railway Board,
Secretary of Ministry of Civil Aviation and Commission of Railway Safety to furnish
written information at the earliest on all the points raised by the Members.
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.
MGIPMRND—4470LS—2-3-2004.