14
ASSESSMENT OF PRIVATE
SCHOOLS, COLLEGES AND
COACHING CENTRES
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPTT. OF REVENUE)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2005-2006
FOURTEENTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIATE
NEW DELHI

FOURTEENTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
ASSESSMENT OF PRIV ATE SCHOOLS,
COLLEGES AND COACHING CENTRES
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
Presented to Lok Sabha on...........................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on..................................
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
July, 2005/Asadha, 1927 (Saka)

PAC No. 1777
Price: Rs. 30.00
© 2005 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2005-2006) . . . . . . . . . . . (iii)
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (v)
REPORT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1—36
APPENDICES
APPENDIX-I Chapter III of  the Report of the C&AG of India for the
 year  ended  31  March,  2003,  No.  13 of  2004,  Union
Government (System  Appraisals-Direct  Taxes)  (Para 3.17.1,
3.17.2, 3.17.3, 3.19 & 3.24.1)......................................... 37
A
PPENDIX-II Conclusions and Recommendations .......................... 47
               PART  II
Minutes of the sittings of Public Accounts Committee held on 20.01.2005
and 30.05.2005 ..................................................................................... 62
(i)

COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra—Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Dr. R. Senthil
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
12. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
13. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
14. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Dr. K. Malaisamy
19. Shri V . Narayanasamy
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
21. Shri Jairam Ramesh
22. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary —  Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin —  Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda —  Under Secretary
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee having been authorised by the
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this 14th Report relating to
“Assessment of Private Schools, Colleges and Coaching Centres” on Chapter-III of
the Report of C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March, 2003 (No. 13 of 2004), Union
Government (Direct Taxes - System Appraisal).
2. The Report of the C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March, 2003 (No. 13 of
2004), Union Government (Direct Taxes-System Appraisals) was laid on the Table of
the House on 13 July, 2004.
3. The Committee took the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Deptt. of Revenue) on the subject at their sitting held on 20th January, 2005.
The Committee considered and finalised this Report at their sitting held on 30 May,
2005. Minutes of the sittings form Part - II of the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommen-
dations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and
have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the Public Accounts
Committee (2004-2005) for taking evidence on the subject obtaining information thereon.
6. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the officers of the Minis-
try of Finance (Deptt. of Revenue) for the cooperation extended by them in furnishing
information and tendering evidence before the Committee.
7. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
3 June, 2005 Chairman,
13 Jyaistha, 1927 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

REPORT
ASSESSMENT OF PRIV ATE SCHOOLS, COLLEGES AND COACHING CENTRES
I. Introductory
Education plays a positive role in correcting social and regional imbalances and in
securing a rightful place for the disadvantaged and the minorities. The field of education,
either at primary level or higher level, has witnessed a sea change in the last decade
with the mushrooming of private educational institutions all over the country. The
Government, though remains the single largest provider of education, private
educational institutions are fast gaining a steady ground of late. There has been a
unanimous view that with the entry of private sector in this field, education has become
a money spinning business for most of these private institutions. The management of
these schools had been extorting hefty sums in the name of donations/capitation fee
and development fund etc. Consequently, it is essential to ensure that correct income
from this business is brought to tax by Government. The Income Tax Act provides the
methodology for assessment of income from these private educational institutions
and lays down responsibilities of the assessees engaged in such business.
2. With a view to encouraging the promotion and development of education, income
of such educational institutions which are established solely for the purpose of
education either on no-profit basis or run by charitable trusts has been exempted from
levy of income tax subject to certain conditions. However, a large number of private
schools, colleges and coaching centres have come up whose income is not so exempted
from levy of income tax. Therefore, it is required of the Income Tax Department to
ensure through the operation of the provisions contained in the Income Tax Act that
income of only genuine and eligible institutions are exempted from levy of income tax
and correct amount of tax is paid by all institutions not so exempt.
II. Tax Assessment Policy and laws for exemption of income of private educational
institutions
3. Income Tax Act, 1961, (the Act) provides for exemption of income of educational
institutions as given below:—
(a) Educational Institutions run by Trusts:
4. Sections 11, 12 and 13 of the Act, inter-alia deal with exemption in respect of
income of educational institutions run by charitable trusts. Section 2(15) defines
"Charitable purposes" to include relief of the poor, education, medical relief and the
advancement of any other object of general public utility.
(b) Educational Institutions run other than by Trusts
(i) Upto assessment year 1998-99
5. Income of educational institutions existing solely for educational purposes and
not for purposes of profit was exempted under section 10(22) of the Income Tax Act.
Such institutions could be run by any entity such as individual, Hindu Undivided
Server2/1240ls/1240ls.p65

2
Family, association of persons, firms, company and so on. No mechanism was, however,
prescribed under the Act through which the Income Tax Department could independently
ensure that the institutions exist soley for educational purposes and not for purposes
of profit. These were not required mandatorily to file returns of income till assessment
year 2003-04.
(ii) With effect from 1 April 1999
6. Since provisions for exemption u/s 10(22) were being widely misused due to
absence of any monitoring mechanism to check genuineness of these institutions,
these were omitted. New provisions under clause 10(23 C) were inserted with the
intention to strengthen and tighten the provisions of exemption from levy of tax to
income of educational institutions so that exemption could be availed only by those
institutions that exist solely for educational purposes and not for purposes of profit.
7. The following tax laws have been enacted from 1st April, 1999 for exemption of
income of educational institutions run other than by Trusts:
(i) An educational institution existing solely for educational purposes and
not for purposes of profit and which is wholly or substantially financed by the
Government was exempt from levy of tax, under section 10(23C) (iiiab).
(ii) An educational institution existing solely for educational purposes and
not for purposes of profit whose aggregate annual receipts did not exceed Rs. 1
crore was exempt, under section 10(23C) (iiiad).
(iii) An educational institution existing solely for educational purposes and
not for purposes of profit with annual receipts of more than Rs. 1 crore could
claim exemption of income after obtaining approval from the prescribed Income
Tax authority for a period not exceeding three assessment years at any one time
provided it applied its income exclusively to the objects for which it was
established, under section 10(23C) (vi).
(c) Coaching Centres
8. The Act does not separately deal with exemption of income of coaching centres
which do not fall into the category of educational institutions existing for charitable
purposes and thus, exemptions described above are not available to them. Their income
is to be taxed under the provisions applicable to normal business under Sections 15 to
59 of the Act.
9. Regarding new provisions under clause 10 (23C), it has been pointed out by
Audit that the purpose of insertion of new clause u/s (23C) may not have been served
and rather created more complications and infructuous work as detailed below:
(i) The institutions run by trusts are required to apply for registration u/s 12A
within one year from the date of creation of trusts and every order granting or
refusing registration shall be passed within six months after receipt of the
application of the institution. However, there is no such time limit laid down
for the institutions in applying for approval or passing the order by the
prescribed authority u/s 10(23C) (vi).

3
(ii) The institutions falling u/s 10(23C) (iiiab) & 10 (23C) (iiiad) are not required to
file the returns of income if these are not registered u/s 12A. In the absence of
return of income, no mechanism is available to ensure that these institutions
actually exist solely for educational purposes and not for purposes of profit.
Further, no verification is possible whether their annual receipt is less than
Rs. one crore in a particular year when they did not file the return.
III.  Audit Review
10. This Report is based on the Audit Review contained in Chapter-III of the Report
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 31 March 2003,
No. 13 of 2004 Union Government (Direct Taxes) relating to "Assessment of Private
Schools, Colleges and Coaching Centres" (Appendix-I). The Audit review covered
assessments of 5558 selected private educational institutions, schools, colleges and
coaching centres, run either by charitable trusts or by private management imparting
education in the fields of computer, banking, Civil Services, medicine, engineering,
higher education etc. completed during the period 1999-2000 to 2001-02.
IV. Objectives
11. Audit reviewed the efficiency of assessment of various educational institutions,
with a view to ascertaining:
(i) whether all private schools & colleges and coaching centres are on the records
of the Income Tax Department and are subject to assessments;
(ii) whether adequate steps have been taken by the department to bring all the
private schools & colleges and coaching centres into the tax net and results
of such efforts are quantified;
(iii) the extent of irregularities and  mistakes of commission and omission in the
assessments of the institutions;
(iv) whether there exists any machinery within the department to exercise adequate
and necessary checks in this area of potential and reported misuse; and
(v) whether tax laws have been enacted with clear, unambiguous and effective
provisions for their administration and for prevention of abuse or misuse.
12. The Audit review of the private schools, colleges and coaching centres has
revealed several irregularities in the assessments of the institutions which inter-alia
includes the following:
(i) Failure to evaluate the genuineness of exemption claimed by educational
institutions.
(ii) Exemption of income irregularly without obtaining requisite approval/
registration.
(iii) Income of coaching centres exempted irregularly.
(iv) Exemption of investments made in unspecified modes.
(v) Unexplained credits/donations/deposits in the name of sister concerns not
taxed.

4
(vi) Contributions/donations received without specific directions and capital gains
not taxed.
(vii) Weakness in administration of law.
V . Prescribed conditions to become eligible for availing exemption of income
13. The Committee desired to know the conditions needed for educational institutions
to become eligible for availing exemption of income tax. In reply, the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) stated in a note as under:
(i) "In respect of the institutions falling u/s 10(23C)(vi), existing solely for the
purpose of education, the income derived is exempt provided the following
conditions prescribed under the provisions of the Act are satisfied:
(a) The institutions should not be run for the purpose of profit.
(b) It should be approved by the prescribed authority [Director General of
Income-tax(DGIT) (Exemption) or Chief Commissioner of Income-tax
(CCIT)] if it is not wholly or substantially financed by the Government or
if its annual receipt exceeds Rs. 1 crore;
(c) The trusts/institutions applies its income, or accumulates for application,
wholly and exclusively to the objects for which it was established and in
a case where more than 15% of its income is accumulated on or after the
1st day of April, 2002, the period of accumulation of the amount exceeding
15% of its income shall in no case exceed five years;
(d) The institution does not invest or deposit its funds for any period during
the previous year otherwise than in any one or more forms or modes
specified in sub-section 5 of section 11 of the Act;
(e) The application for approval has to be made in form no. 56D and the
approval once issued shall be valid for a period not exceeding 3
assessment years.
(ii) For institutions entitled to exemption u/s 11, the following conditions have to
be satisfied:
(a) The income derived from the property held under trusts should be applied,
or accumulated to be applied, wholly for a charitable purpose (education);
(b) The income accumulated or set apart for application on educational
purposes in India, should not exceed 15% of the total income of the
institution. If it exceeds 15%, then it should be deposited/invested in
forms/modes specified in section 11(5) of the Act;
(c) In order to be eligible for availing exemption, such an entity should have
applied for and obtained registration from the prescribed authority u/s
12A".
14. The Committee enquired as to how it is ensured that the aforesaid conditions are
fulfilled by parties while claiming exemptions. Explaining in this regard, the Ministry
stated that violation of the conditions prescribed in the Act will entail withdrawal of
exemption and the income  of such entities should then be computed in accordance
with the provisions of the Act. The Ministry further conceded that wherever it is

5
noticed that the conditions are not being fulfilled, to example, non-availability of
registration u/s 12A or approval u/s 10 (23C) (vi); violation of the conditions prescribed;
contravention of the provisions of section 13; etc., action is being initiated against the
defaulting institution by scrutinizing the returns, denying the exemption wherever
warranted, and re-computing the income as per the provisions of law.
The Committee desired to know whether all private schools, colleges and coaching
centres are on the records of the Income tax Departments and are subject to assessments.
In reply, the Ministry stated as under:
"All private schools and colleges and Coaching Centres do not fall under the
taxable category, and, therefore, not subject to assessments as many of them are
not liable to file returns. Educational institutions covered by the provisions of
section 10(23C) (iiiab), 10(23C) (iiiad) or u/s 11, provided their income before
giving effect to sections 11 & 12 is below Rs. 50,000/-, are not liable to file
returns. Educational institutions having aggregate receipts of more than Rs. 1
crore and falling under the provisions of section 10(23C)(vi) are liable to file
returns.
There may be some private schools/colleges and all coaching centres, which are
not entitled for exemption for Income Tax. While such institutions running with
a profit motive fall under the taxable category and have to file returns of income
if they have taxable income, the Department is keeping a watch on all such
institutions. Surveys have also been carried out on some non-complaint
educational institutions to bring them under the tax net and to unearth
undisclosed income. In a few cases search & seizure action u/s 132 have also
been conducted. Such private schools, colleges and coaching centres who have
taxable income and are not filing regular returns are then brought under the tax
net."
VI.  Non-availability of a separate and exclusive database of educational institutions
15. It has been pointed out in the Audit para that there is no systematic and organized
approach in the department to ensure that all educational institutions which are required
to fulfill certain obligations under the Act are in fact doing so before claiming the
prescribed benefit or exemption. Though the Act has been amended through Finance
Act, 2003 making it obligatory on the part of educational institutions not working for
the purpose of profit to file the return, audit noticed that no specific guidelines or
monitoring mechanism have been introduced to ensure that amendment could be
given effect to by the assessing officers.
16. Out of the database of 62,279 educational institutions collected from different
sources, audit could locate only 10,376 institutions from the demand and collection
registers of 855 selected assessment units against the total existing 2110 assessment
units.
17. The Department had not made any effort to identify revenue potential in this
field by effective co-ordination and correlation with the state government or universities
or other regulatory authorities. The department could have effectively exercised control
over receipt of return by serving notices to the defaulting private schools/colleges
and coaching centres by keeping track through a proper control mechanism after

6
compiling the data themselves. Department started serving notices to the assessees
after audit requisitioned assessments for review.
18. When asked whether there was any centralised arrangement in the Ministry to
have an up-to-date database of private educational institutions, the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) stated as under:
"as per provision of Section 139(4A)/139(4C) educational institutions with no
profit motive and having income above Rs. 50,000/- have to file return of income.
Further educational institutions other than those which are wholly or
substantially financed by the Government and whose annual receipts are above
Rs. 1 crore, have to obtain approval from the CBDT, and now from Chief
Commissioners of Income-tax/Directors General of Income-tax (CCsIT/DsGIT)
w.e.f. 3.4.2001 in terms of the provisions of Section 10(23C) (vi). The institutions
exempt u/s 11 are granted registration u/s 12A by the Commissioners of Income-
Tax (CsIT). The data of only such institutions which were granted exemption
u/s 10(23C)(vi) are maintained in the ITA Section of the CBDT till 31.3.2001 and the
data of institution which are granted exemption u/s 11 by the Cs IT or u/s 10 (23C)
(vi) by CCsIT/DsGIT is maintained by the CsIT or the CCsIT/DsGIT concerned.
The CIB Section of the Income Tax Department is engaged in collection of
information and preparing a data base of private schools, colleges and coaching
centres as obtained from various sources. The database of assessees are
maintained as per their status as laid down in the Income-tax Act, viz. Individual,
Hindu Undivided Family, Firm, Association of Persons, Body of Individual,
Company, etc.  There is no separate status for schools, colleges and coaching
centres since such institutions can be run by individuals, HUFs, firms, AOPs,
Companies, etc. and therefore, no centralized separate database is maintained
by the Ministry."
19. In their vetting comments on the above reply, the audit stated that:
"CIB was not able to collect any information in respect of educational institutions
during the period 1999-2000 to 2001-2002, as the required "code" for private schools,
colleges and coaching centres was created by the Board only in October 2002."
20. The Secretary (Revenue) while deposing before the Committee also conceded:
"...........We do not have activity-wise data bases at present. This is of course
something which we do need and that is part of our computerisation programme
and we would like to develop it if we are to have a good harassment free taxation
system which at the same time ensured that information flows in so that every
year is covered"
21. The Committee desired to know the reasons for non-availability of such a
database despite spending crores of Rupees on computerisation of the Department.
The Committee also sought to know as to why more professionals/professional
agencies cannot be hired for developing a scientific database and retriving data. The
Ministry vide their written information stated as under:
"The computerisation process has just completed the third phase under which
all Officers and one staff member of each assessing Circle/Ward have been

7
provided with new PCs. This would speed up the work of processing of returns,
issuing of refunds, creating databank of different financial transactions to match
with returned incomes, etc. Presently 60 cities are on the network, and in the next
phase all the Income-tax officers, located at more than 500 towns and cities,
would be put on the national network and this would enhance information-
sharing and efficiency.
Once the filing of returns is made compulsory, they will have to obtain PAN and
then it would be easy to match the information with the returns, and other IT softwares."
22. On the question of involving professionals in building up a database, the Ministry
stated as follows:
"Moreover various projects are underway in the Directorate General of Income-
tax (Systems), which would help in building up a scientific database. The expertise
of professional agencies are being utilised in these areas, and more professionals/
professional agencies would be engaged in this exercise."
VII. Non-selection of assessments for scrutiny
23. As per Audit, the department completed 95.5 per cent of the assessments of
educational institutions selected by audit only in summary manner during the period
1999-2000 to 2002-03 as shown below:
Name of State No. of Total number No. of No.of Percen-
assessing of assess- scrutiny summary tage of
units ments made assess- assess- scrutiny
selected ments ments assess-
by audit ments
Delhi 59 690 78 612 11.3
Andhdra Pradesh 71 1242 130 112 10.5
Karnataka 63 334 27 307 8
Maharashtra 6 1 1242 47 1195 3.8
West Bengal 37 1142 44 1098 3.9
Rajasthan 61 564 14 550 2.5
Tamil Nadu 85 1640 23 1617 1.4
Punjab 60 290 1 289 0.34
Orissa 18 630 Nil 630 Zero
Total 515 7719 348 7719 4.5
24. Audit Scrutiny has revealed that the Department completed about 97 per cent of
all assessments in summary manner in 2000-01 and 2001-02. According to Audit, unless
cases involving fulfilment of special conditions for claiming exemption of income such
as the assessments of educational institutions are idenfified and adequate number are
selected for scrutiny, the Department has no means to ensure effective compliance of
law in such cases.
25. According to Audit, the Department was not in a position to ensure application
of the special provisions of the Act in respect of educational institutions in 95 per cent
of cases available with the assessing officers that were completed in summary manner.
Besides, no specific instructions were found to be issued by the Board for selection of

8
cases for scrutiny relating to the educational institutions during the period covered in
the Audit review. However, the Committee were informed by the Ministry during their
oral evidence that such instructions have been issued in this regard. Explaining the
position in this connection, the Chairperson (CBDT) stated as under:
"These instructions are generally issued every year for taking up cases for
guidelines for scrutiny because a large number of cases are not scrutinized.
About 98 per cent of cases are completed on the basis of the returns filed by the
assessee and about two per cent of the cases are picked up for scrutiny. Every
year these guidelines have been issued. In this year, these guidelines have been
issued on 20th September, 2004. According to these guidelines, all cases where
exemption is claimed under section 11 of the IT Act and the gross receipt exceeding
Rs. 5 crore will be picked up for scrutiny. So, these cases of exception will be
picked up under this category by the officers."
26. When asked by the Committee to elaborate as to why limit of Rs. 5 crore has
been fixed as gross receipt for selecting cases of charitable trusts for scrutiny, the
Ministry stated as follows:
"Since every charitable trust claims exemption under Section 11, it was felt that
only big trusts should be compulsorily scrutinised. Therefore, the lower limit of
Rs. 5 crore of gross receipt has been fixed for compulsory scrutiny. However, a
residual clause has been inserted to enable the field officers to select any other
case for scrutiny with the prior approval of the CCIT concerned."
27. The Public Accounts Committee undertook an on-the-spot visit to Southern
region in November, 2004 and at Thiruvananthapuram and Kochi and held informal
discussions with CCIT and other concerned officials of the Income Tax Department. It
was brought to the notice of the Committee that Audit have observed various
deficiencies in the assessments of Kuttukaran Foundation, Kochi, M/s Kalabhavan,
M/s. PMA Management Education Foundation and M/s Kerala Holy Cross Society
Pvt. Ltd. and M/s. Delta School Society, Darul Aman Islamic Complex and Shri Chitra
Thirunal College of Engineering, falling under Kerala Income Tax Commissionerates.
During the discussions held thereon, the Committee had expressed the opinion that
profit making institutions must not be allowed any tax exemptions and those cases
where exemptions are claimed should be selected for scrutiny assessments.
As regard the organisationsl structure of the Commissionerates, the Committee
were given to understand by the concerned officials that the Kerala region had an
acute shortage of officers/staff as all levels. For instance out of 243 posts of Income
Tax Insectors, 192 posts were lying vacant. Explaining the position for this shortage
the CCIT stated that the lack of willingness particularly on the part of officers to serve
in the region was the major factor behind such a glaring shortage of personnel to many
key posts. Morever, the vacancies at the level of Income Tax Officers and below could
not be filled for want of Recruitment Rules, delay in conducting departmental examination
etc. It was pointed out that shortage of staff had adversely affected the performance of
the region in terms of completion of assessments, appeals etc.

9
VIII. Widening the tax base by including educational institutions
28. Prevention of tax evasion and widening of the tax base are two most important
functions of the Department which could be achieved through an efficient performance
of the Central Information Branch as well as their Survey Operatins.
Central Information Branch (CIB)
29. In order to fulfil the above objects the Department had, with effect from 1 July
1997, commissioned Central Information Branch (CIB) under a Commissioner which
collects information about assessees from different sources with respect to their
potential for yielding income tax and passes it to the concerned assessing officers.
Thereafter, the assessing officers are required to initiate appropriate action under the
Act to call for returns and/or examine the specific information in assessments.
30. Audit noticed that CIB had not collected and passed on any information to the
assessing officers in respect of educational institutions of assessing units selected for
review, during the period 1999-2000 to 2001-2002. In Rajasthan, however, CIB collected
81 cases of educational institutions in Jaipur, Alwar, Udaipur, Ajmer and Kota charge of
which details in respect of 10 cases falling in Udaipur, Ajmer and Kota charges were
passed on to the assessing officers which were brought into the tax net. In other
charges, assessing officers stated that the above information could not be collected as
the required code for private schools/colleges and coaching centres was created by
the Board vide their instructions issued only in October, 2002.
31. Audit noticed that the Ministry had not taken effective/adequate steps for
widening the tax base of educational institutions through adequate and focussed
exercise of powers, which equip them to conduct surveys and investigations. When
asked to specify steps taken for widening the tax base of educational institutions, the
Ministry informed the Committee as follows:
"Steps have been initiated by the Assessing Officers by issuing notices
u/s 142(1) where returns are not being regularly filed by the existing assessees
and also in the cases of non-filers. Moreover, educational institutions generally
fall under the Proviso to section 139(1) due to ownership or lease of building or
buses/vehicles and are also covered by these provisions. Besides, search and
seizure operations and surveys are being conducted on such unscrupulous
educational institutions to bring them into the tax net."
IX. Survey Operations
32. The assessing officers are empowered under sections 133A & 133B of the Act to
survey the business premises of the taxpayer to locate assessees and unearth
unaccounted income.
33. Audit has examined in their review the records of CITs (Investigating Circles) to
see whether the Department had taken adequate steps to bring all the private schools,
colleges and coaching centres into tax net during the period 1999-2000 to 2001-2002
through the mechanism of survey and has pointed out that no surveys were conducted
in Mumbai, Thane, Pune, Aurangabad, Kolhapur and Nagpur. In Delhi charge, only
one CIT confirmed that no surveys were conducted and other 13 CITs did not furnish
reply. In Tamil Nadu charges, DIT (Exemption) and CIT-VIII, Chennai confirmed that no

10
such surveys were conducted and replies from 16 CITs were awaited. In Andhra
Pradesh, only one private educational institution in Visakhapatnam charge and 7 in
Vijayawada charge were brought into the tax net. In Rajasthan, the Department,
conducted 1138 surveys and only one educational institution was brought into tax
net. In other charges, no surveys were reported to be conducted.
34. On being asked as to whether any survey on the business premises of private
schools, colleges and coaching centres and to locate new assessees has been conducted
so far, the Ministry replied:
"A large number of surveys are conducted every year by the Department to
unearth undisclosed income and bring non-assessees into the tax net. Though
majority of educatinal institutions are exempt u/s 10(23C) (iiiab), (iiiad), (vi) or
u/s 11, some surveys have also been conducted on schools, colleges and coaching
centres. V arious field formations have reported about surveys conducted on
such institutions. For example, in Mumbai Region a survey u/s 133A was
conducted on 11.3.2002 on M/s Mahesh Tutorials which resulted in the detection
of undisclosed income of Rs. 50 lakhs on which additioanl tax of Rs. 17 lakhs has
already been collected. Similarly in two surveys conducted in Delhi, in the
financial year 2003-04, undisclosed income of Rs. 138 lakhs was detected and
additional tax of Rs. 50.29 lakhs has been collected."
X.  Procedural lapses/irregularities
A.Irregular exemptions without approval/registration from prescribed  Authority
35. According to Section (23C)(vi), inserted by the Finance (No. 2) Act, 1998, effective
from 1st April, 1999, an educational institution existing solely for educational purposes
and not for the purpose of profit and whose aggregate annual receipts exceed
Rs. one crore is required to obtain an approval from the prescribred authority for
claiming exemption of income. The assessee has to submit an application in the
prescribed form to the Board/DGIT for approval which shall have effect at any time for
a period not exceeding three years.
36. With effect from 1 April, 1997, every trust needs to obtain registration to become
eligible to claim exemption of income under sections 11 & 12. It is stipulated that the
assessee has to make an application for registration to the CIT either before 1 July 1973
or within one year from the date of creation of trust. If application is made after expiry
of the aforesaid period, the Commissioner on reasonable grounds may condone the
delay. Every order granting or refusing registration shall be passed before the expiry of
six months from the end of the month in which the application is received.
37. Audit has noticed that there is no mechanism in the Department to ensure that
exemption of income is granted only to those institutions who have obtained approval/
registration from prescribed authority.
38. Explaining the mechanism available by which the assessing officer could link
the approvals/registration granted to the educational institutions with the returns of
these institutions being processes in his charge, the Ministry, in their written note,
informed the Committee viz.:
"In most of the cases, the assessee either mentions the registration number and
the date of the certificate of the registration u/s 12A in the relevant column of the

11
return filed or files copies of the relevant certificate issued u/s 12A or 10(23C)
along with the return of income. In case the AO has any doubts about the
registration certificates, he cross checks with the relevant register maintained in
the office of the DIT (Exemption)/CIT. When even these particulars are not
available in the return of income filed or in the earlier returns, the AO requires the
assessee to furnish these particulars. This procedure generally eliminates wrong
claims for exemption."
39. As regards, the mechanism followed to see that educational institutions seeking
exeption from taxes are not running for profit and that they are not diversifying funds
for other/personal purposes, the Ministry stated:
"The system of giving approvals is rigid and meticulous. Every effort is made so
that only genuine and non profit-making institutions get approval. Morever,
scrutiny of cases is also a deterrent for errant institutions. Besides, the other
suggestions under consideration are:
(a) A clause may be inserted in Section 10(23C) so as to provide for mandatory
audit of accounts and enclosing the audit report with the return of income
every  year.
(b) Penalty u/s 271B may be made applicable to audit u/s 10(23C) and 12A.
(c) Institutions should apply to the Assessing Officer in the specified form
and specify the purpose for accumulation irrespective of the fact whether
the accumulation is 15% or more.
(d) Form No. 3A should be modified so as to,
(i) include the nature of activity in the Return. If this information is not
given, the return may be treated as defective u/s 139(9), and
(ii) include a column for number & date for aproval u/s 10(23C).
(e) Restructuring of field organisations to deal with exempt cases more
comprehensively.”
40. The audit have cited a number of cases which revealed delays in grant or
rejection of approvals under section 10(23C) (vi) of the Act.
B. Pendency of approvals under Section 10(23C)(vi)
41. As per the provisions, the educational institutions run either by non trusts or
trusts could claim exemption of their income under both the senctions 10(23C)(vi)/
11&12 according to their convenience as these sections are not mutually exclusive in
operation. There is no mechanism in the Department to ensure that exemption of
income is granted only to those institutions who have obtained approval/registration
from prescribed authority.
42. Audit has also noticed during the review that there is no time-limit for granting
approval or rejection under Section 10(23C) (vi). Also there is no specific provision for
dealing with cases whose applications are pending for approval for any reason.
Moreover, the assessing officer is not competent to grant exemption of income in such
cases without approval of prescribed authority.

12
43. As regards the fixation of time-limit for granting approval under 23C(vi), the
Secretary (Revenue) stated during evidence:
"It would be useful from the Department's point of view if we have a time-limit.
We would like to see whether we can put in a year or so during which approval
can be cleared."
44.  With regard to steps initiated by the Department to fix the time-limit for granting
approval by prescribed authority, the Ministry in a note furnished subsequently to the
Committee stated that the proposal to fix the time-limit is under active consideration.
C. Exemption of income without approval of prescribed authority (paragraphs 3.17.1,
3.17.2 and 3.17.3)
Paragraph 3.17.1
45. The Audit Paragraph 3.17.1 has highlighted that in Karnataka, Bangalore charge,
assessments of Desheeya Vidhyashala Samithi, Shimoga and Education Society of
Sisters of St. Joseph of Cluny, Bangalore for the assessment years 1999-00 to 2001-02
were completed in a summary manner between January 2000 and March 2002. Audit
scrutiny revealed that though the annual aggregate receipts of these institutions
crossed Rs. one crore, yet they did not either get themselves approved by the prescribed
authority under section 10(23C) (vi) or get recognized under section 12A of the Act.
However, the assessing officer exempted the income though he was not competent to
do so. Non-compliance of either of the provisions viz. sections 10(23C)(vi) or 12A of
the Act required withdrawal of exemption. Failure to disallow the exemption resulted in
under assessment of income totalling Rs. 81.32 lakh with consequent non-levy of total
tax and interest of Rs. 30.51 lakh.
46. The Ministry, when asked to comment on the audit observations, have stated as
follows:
"In the case of Desheeya Vidhyashala Samithi, the objection raised by the C &
AG has not been accepted by the AO, as the assessee had applied to the
competent authority in prescribed form No. 56D for registration of the institution
and apparently no omission has taken place. However, remedial action u/s 148
has been initiated as a measure of abundant precaution and the assessment is to
be finalized shortly. In the case of Education Society of the Sisters of St. Joseph's
of Cluny, the relevant returns were processed u/s. 143(1) only. Since w.e.f. 1/6/99
the AO had no powers to make any adjustments to the returned income
u/s 143(1), necessary remedial action was initiated u/s 148 subsequent to
processing u/s 143(1), and the assessments are to be finalized."
47. In response to a query as to wether the asessees have applied for approval from
prescribed authority, the Ministry have informed that in the first case, the assessee
had applied to the competent authority for registration on 15/10/2001 which was pending
at the time of processing u/s 143(1). In the second case, the assessee did not apply to
the competent authority.
*If any tax or interest is found due on the basis of such return, after adjustment of any tax deducted
at source, any advance tax paid, any tax paid on self-assessment and any amount paid otherwise by
way of tax or interest, then, without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (2), an intimation
shall be sent to the assessee specifying the sum so payable, and such intimation shall be deemed to
be a notice of demand issued under section 156 and all the provisions of this Act shall apply
accordingly.

13
48. The Ministry further informed that in the instant cases, the procedure for granting
of approvals could not be followed as the cases were summarily assessed u/s 143(1).*
49. Regarding remedial steps taken to withdraw the exemption of income granted to
those institutions and to recover the tax due from them, the Ministry submitted that
the proceedings u/s 148/147 has been initiated in both the cases and are likely to be
completed by 31.03.2005. The tax demand and the interest thereon, will be recovered
expeditiously thereafter.
50. Elaborating upon the measures proposed by them in order to ensure that such
lapses are not repeated in future, the Ministry stated as follows:
"Though no adjustment is possible at the summary assessment stage, necessary
instructions have been issued to the Assessing Officers to ensue that such
cases should be selected for scrutiny u/s 143(2). The Ministry (CBDT) has
issued guidelines, vide Instruction No. 10/2004, to compulsorily select those
cases for scrutiny where the exempt income exceeds Rs. 2 lakhs; and where
exemption is claimed u/s 11 and the gross receipts exceed Rs. 5 crore. Thus, with
the selection of these cases for scrutiny, the mistakes would be eliminated/
restricted from Assessment Year 2003-04 onwards."
Paragraph 3.17.2
51. The Audit paragraph 3.17.2 states that in Tamil Nadu Charge, seven cases of
educational institutions run by trusts were noticed where there was no evidence
available in the records regarding submission of application for approval under section
10(23C) (vi) by the assessees. In six other cases, though the institutions had submitted
applications, yet approvals of the prescribed authority granting exemption were not
available on record. However exemption was allowed by the assessing officer in these
cases without approval from prescribed authority. These cases attracted levy of tax
amounting to Rs. 6.73 crore.
52. Responding to the Committee's query on aforesaid Audit observation, the
Ministry, in a written note, stated as under:
"The audit's observation is misplaced because the exemption was allowed u/s 11
and not u/s 10(23C)(vi). Though the registration u/s 10(23C)(vi) had not been
sought for in 7 cases and had not been granted in 6 other cases, the institutions
were registered u/s 12A and were eligible for exemption u/s 11. Under section
10(23c)(vi) of the Income Tax Act, any income of an Educational Institution
existing solely for educational purposes, and not for purposes of profit, is exempt
if such educational institution is approved by the Director General of Income Tax
(Exemption). Section 11 exempts the income of any institution derived from
property held for charitable or religious purposes and section 2(15), which defines
charitable purpose, includes education also. It is at the option of the institution
to seek exemption u/s 10(23C)(vi) or u/s 11 of the Income Tax Act, and the
exemptions under these two section are, therefor, not mutually exclusive."
53. The Audit have responded on the aforesaid reply as under:
"Annual receipts of the institutions exceeded thd prescribed limit of Rs. one
crore and they were required to get approval u/s 10(23C)(vi). Out of 13 cases, six
assessees had applied for approval u/s 10(23C)(vi) which were pending and
assessing officers were granting exemption u/s 11&12."

14
54. The Committee desired to know as to how the assessing officer ensured that
requisite approvals had been obtained by those institutions before claiming the
exemption of income. In reply, the Ministry stated:
"As  the exemption was granted u/s 11 of the Act, the fact that registration u/s
10(23C)(vi), wherever applicable, was either not sought for or not granted was
not relevant for the assessing officer. The officers have allowed the exemption
u/s 11 after due verification."
55. The Ministry further stated that the approval u/s 10(23C)(vi) has since been
granted in the case of Hindu Educational Organisation in November 2003.
..........Necessary instructions have been issued to all field formations to be careful in
allowing exemptions, and select all such liable cases for scrutiny assessment.
Paragraph 3.17.3
56. The Audit Paragraph 3.17.3 reveals that in Delhi, DIT (Exemption) charge, the
assessing officer completed the assessments of three educational institutions, viz.
Oberio Educational Society, St. Joseph Academy and M/s DAV College Trust and
Management Society, which are run by trusts, for the assessment years 2000-01 to
2002-03 in summary/scrutiny manner after allowing exemption under section 10(23C)(vi).
Audit scrutiny further revealed that DGIT/DIT (Exemption), Kolkata, the competent
authority, had rejected the assessees' applications on 30 August, 2000, 19 June, 2002
and 18 July, 2002, for grant of approval under section 10(23C)(vi) on the grounds that
the purpose of the institutions was not solely educational. However, the assessing
officer irregularly granted exemption of income without approval of DGIT/DIT which
resulted in non-levy of tax of Rs. 23.35 lakh, Rs. 16.35 lakh and Rs. 29.36 crore respectively
for the three assessment years.
57. The Committee desired to know as to why the assessing officer did not take into
account the rejection of the applications submitted by the assessees for grant of
approval by DGIT/DIT (exemption), Kolkata. The Committee also desired to know the
basis on which the assessing officer granted exemption of income to these institutions
without such approval. The Ministry in their written note, stated as follows:
"The assessees being educational institutions registered u/s 12A of the Income-
tax Act, 1961, their income was exempt u/s 11 of the Income-tax Act irrespective
of the fact that their applications u/s 10(23C)(vi) were pending for approval.
1. 
Oberoi Educational Society: In this case, the Assessing Officer had submitted
a report on assessee's application for grant of exemption u/s 10(23C)(vi) recom-
mending the same, which was forwarded to the then DGIT (Exemption). In this
case the application u/s 10(23C)(vi) for A.Y . 2000-01 was received on 14.10.1999
and the then DGIT (Exemption), Kolkata forwarded the report to CBDT on 30th
August 2002 recommending rejection. As per existing procedure, all the applica-
tions received up to 31.3.2001 are to be processed for grant of exemption by the
CBDT. However, in respect of applications received after 1.4.2001, the DGIT
(Exemption) himself is empowered to grant exemption u/s 10(23C)(vi).
In the case of the assessee for the A.Y. 2002-03, notice u/s 143(2) has already
been issued and the case is under scrutiny. For A.Y. 2000-01 and 2001-02, in

15
which audit has raised an objection, remedial action has been taken by issue of
notices u/s 148 of the I.T. Act, 1961.
2. St. Joseph Academy: In this case,  for A.Y. 1999-00, 2000-01 & 2001-02 the
Assessing Officer had submitted a report on assessee's application for grant of
exemption u/s 10(23C)(vi) recommending the same, which was forwarded to the
then DGIT (Exemption). However, the then DGIT, vide his letter dated 19.6.02,
forwarded the report to CBDT recommending rejection of the same. As per
existing procedure, all the applications received up to 31.3.2001 are to be pro-
cessed for grant of exemption by the CBDT. However, in respect of applications
received after 1.4.2001, the DGIT (Exemption) himself is empowered to grant
exemption u/s 10(23C)(vi) of the I.T. Act, 1961.
For A.Y . 2001-02, in which audit has raised an objection, remedial action has been
taken by issue of notice u/s 148 of the I.T. Act.
3. 
D.A.V. College Trust & Management Society: In this case, audit has raised
objections for A.Y. 2000-01, 2001-02 & 2002-03 saying that the accounts submit-
ted with the return were not correct. The notes on the accounts submitted along
with the audited balance sheet pointed out certain infirmities in the accounts of
the assessee and the objections raised by the audit was accepted as correct.
Since all these cases were processed u/s 143(1)(a) of the Income-tax Act, it was
not within the scope of the section to make adjustments. This fact was already in
the knowledge of the then A.O. and notice u/s 148 of the Income-tax Act for A.Y.
2000-01 was issued on 26.11.02. Notices u/s 143(2) were issued for A.Y. 2001-02
and 2002-03 for scrutinizing the cases.
As per the Ministry, these cases were subsequently referred for statutory audit
u/s 142(2A) and after receipt of the reports of the Special Auditor, assessments
were completed for A.Y. 2000-01 & 2001-02 raising a demand of Rs. 16.61 crore
and 24.12 crore respectively. Assessment for A.Y. 2002-03 is still pending for
disposal".
58. In reply to a query whether requisite approvals had been subsequently granted
by the prescribed authority in all those cases, the Ministry stated as under:
"The approval u/s 10(23C) in the first two cases, where the audit objection was
on this issue, have not yet been given as the matter is still being examined. Even
in the third case, the approval is yet to be given. However, all the three institu-
tions are registered u/s 12A and are claiming exemption u/s 11 and 12 of the
Income-tax Act."
59. As regards the steps taken/initiated to recover the pending revenues in the
cases highlighted by the Audit, the Ministry informed in a note as follows:
"There is no loss of revenue in the first two cases as the exemptions were
correctly allowed u/s 11 and 12 of the Act. However, remedial steps have been
initiated as a measure of abundance precaution. In the third case, there is no loss
of revenue due to any mistake on behalf of the AO as he was not empowered to
make any adjustments in the income u/s 143(1). However, the objection was
accepted on its merits and remedial action has already been taken in assessment

16
years 2000-01 and 2001-02, which have resulted in the creation of demand of
Rs. 16.61 crore and 24.12 crore respectively. A sum of Rs. 1.5 crore has been
collected so far and the assessee's appeal is pending with the CIT (appeal)."
60. When asked to suggest a remedy to overcome such situation in future, the
Ministry stated:
"All the three cases had been completed u/s 143(1), which does not allow the AO
to make any adjustments in the income declared by the assessees. However, to
enable the assessing officers to have a deeper look into such cases, CBDT has
issued guidelines, vide Instruction No. 10/2004 dated 20.9.2004, to compulsorily
select those cases for scrutiny assessment where the exempt income exceeds
Rs. 2 lakhs; and where exemption has been claimed u/s 11 and the gross receipts
exceed Rs. 5 crore."
D. Exemption granted without registeration (Para 3.19)
61. Audit has noticed the 37 cases in Assam, Bihar, Kerala, Maharashtra, Madhya
Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal charges where educational
institutions run by trusts had not obtained registration under section 12A of the Act,
the assessing officers allowed exemption under sections 11 & 12 without registration,
resulting in non-levy of tax of Rs. 3.54 crore as shown below:—
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl. Name of assessee and Assessment Gist of mistakes T ax
No. CIT & CIT charge Y ear effect
12 3 4 5
1. Kuarmunda don BOsco 1998-99 to Assessees had claimed 94.80
Society Rourkela and 2001-02 exemption stating that
eight others, Orissa Summary they were registered but
registration numbers were not
mentioned. Copies of registration
were also not made available to
audit.
2. St. Francis of Assisi 1999-00 to Educational institutions run 93.26
Church, Lazmi and 14 2001-02 by the Trusts were neither
others, Jorhat and Summary registered nor had applied for
Dibrugarh, Assam registration but exemption was
granted by the assessing officer.
3. Computer Management 1999-00 & Trusts were granted exemption 89.70
Technical Education 2001-02 without obtaining registration.
Society, Trichy and 3 Summary
others Chennai, Tamil
Nadu
4. DAV Model School, CIT 1999-00 to Assessee claimed exemption 21.70
Durgapur, Kolkata 2001-02 under section 11 and granted
Summary by the assessing officer though
it was not registered under
section 12A.

17
5. Indian Institute of 2001-02 Assessee claimed exemption 18.50
Business and Manage- Summary under section 10(22) though it
ment, Patna, Bihar was not registered and being
coaching centre, provisions of
exemption were not applicable.
6. Our Lady of Nazerath 2001-02 In the absence of trust deeds, 12.28
School, Thane, Summary trust was not registered. The
Maharashtra assessing officer however
allowed exemption for income
of Rs. 40.95 lakh under section
11 without registration.
7. M/s Indo Friends 2000-01 Registration was granted with 7.39
Foundations Indore, Summary effect from assessment year
Madhya Pradesh 2001-02. Hence assessee was
not eligible for exemption
for assessment year 2000-01.
8. Ettumanoorappan 2000-01 Perusal of audited accounts 6.33
Educational Society, and 1995-96 to revealed that the assessees had
Pentecost Educational 1997-98 excess of income over expenditure.
Society, Kottayam, Kerala Summary Exemption under section 11 was
not admissible as registration
granted under section 12A
was effective from 1 April 2002.
9. Millat Education Society, 2001-02 Trust was not registered under 6.19
Patna, Bihar Summary section 12A. In addition, it
received voluntary contribution
of Rs. 15.30 lakh from different
sources without specific direction,
which was not taxed.
10. M/s Vinay Prakash Vidya 1996-97 Assessees were granted exemption4.27
Bhawan Society, Jodhpur Scrutiny under section 11 though they were
and one other at Ajmer, 1999-00 not registered under section 12A.
Rajasthan Summary
62. While commenting on the cases pointed out by the Audit, the Ministry stated:
"The objections have been mostly raised against orders u/s 143(1) and as such
are not acceptable as the assessing officers are not empowered to make any
adjustments in the declared income.  Even on merits, most of the objections have
been found to be misplaced and untenable.
For example, in Kerala region the audit has raised the objection that in cases
where Trusts had not obtained registration u/s 12A, the assessing officers had
12 3 4 5

18
allowed exemptions under section 11 and 12. The objections raised by the audit
is primarily on account of incorrect interpretation of the provisions in the In-
come Tax Act relating to exemptions available to educational institutions/trusts.
Exemptions to the educational institutions are available under section 11, sec-
tion 12 and also under sub clauses (iiiab), (iiiad) and (vi) of section 10(23C). As
per the provisions of the Act, registration u/s 12A is required only in cases
where exemption is claimed under section 11 & section 12 of the Income Tax Act.
The condition of obtaining registration u/s 12A is not required if the educational
instutution's income is claimed as exempt under sub clauses (iiiab), (iiiad) and
(vi) of section 10(23C). In the cases where the Audit has raised the objection, the
assessee Trusts have claimed their income as exempt u/s 10(22) (applicable upto
assessment year 1998-99) and u/s 10(23C) (iiiad) (applicable from A.Y . 1999-2000)
as they were existing solely for educational purposes and not for the purpose of
profit. The Supreme Court in the case of Adinar Educational Institution
(224 ITR 310) has held that if the object of the society is educational purposes
and not for the purpose of profit, the income of the assessee is exempt from tax.
Similar view has been taken by the Kerala High Court in Geetha Bhavan Trust
(213 ITR 297). Moreover, the CBDT's instruction No. 112 dated 29.10.1977 states
that where all the objects of the Trusts are educational and the surplus, if any
from running the educational institution is used for educational purposes only,
it can be held that the institution is existing solely for educational purposes and
not for prupose of profit. The objection raised by the audit is therefore not
correct and should be dropped.
There are only two cases reported under this para from Kerala. In the case of
M/s. Ettumanoorappan Educational Society, the audit observed that since the
Society was granted registration u/s 12A w.e.f. 31.3.2003, the income of the Society
for the assessment years 1999-2000 and 2000-2001 is taxable. The Audit objection
arises from the mistaken notion that the income of the society prior to the date of
registration u/s 12A is taxable. It may be mentioned that the income of the society
is totally exempt u/s 10(23C)(iiiad). Section 10(23C) (iiiad) reads as under:
"Any university or other educational institution existing solely for
educational purposes and not for purposes of profit if the aggregate annual
receipts of such university or educational institution do not exceed the
amount of annual receipts as may be prescribed or..." (The amount so
prescribed is Rs. 1 crore)
The Society satisfies all the conditions laid down in Section 10(23C)(iiiad) and
its income is totally exempt u/s 10(23C)(iiiad). Hence, even if registration has not
been granted to the Institution, it is not liable to be taxed. The objection raised
by the audit is not correct and hence, not acceptable.
The objection in the case of Pentecost Educational Society was raised on the
basis of incorrect interpretation of the Income Tax Act relating to exemption
available to educational institutions/trusts u/s 10(22). The audit is of the view
that since registration has been granted w.e.f. 1.4.99 only, the icnome of the
society is taxable for the assessment years 1995-96 and 97-98. The assessment
years mentioned by audit are 1995-96 to 1997-98 and during this period, section

19
10(22) was in existence. Section 10(22) as it stood at the relevant time reads as
under:—
"any income of a university or other educational institution, existing solely
for educational purposes and not for purposes of profit"
In this case the society existed to promote education on a charitable basis. The
Society runs a school and is existing solely for educational purposes. The audit
objections are therefore not acceptable and should be dropped.
Further, in Orissa region, the audit has pointed out in 8 cases that copy of
registration u/s 12A granted by the CIT was not made available to them. In 6
cases the objections have been found to be untenable on verification as the
registration certificates were either available on the records of the AO or the CIT.
In the other two cases remedial action has been initiated."
63. On being asked as to why the cases pointed out by the Audit were not noticed
by the Assessing Officers/Internal Audit Wing, the Ministry have stated that the
internal audit in summary cases is done only in 0.5% of the cases and most of the cases
never go through the audit scrutiny of the Internal Audit Wing.
64. As regards the present position of the cases highlighted in the Audit paragraph,
the Ministry have stated that in cases where the audit objection has been accepted,
the cases have been reopened by issuing notices u/s 148 of the Act. However, in most
of the cases the objection has not been accepted as the institutions were either already
registered u/s 12A or were not required to obtain such registration because their
incomes were otherwise exempt u/s 10(23C).
65. The Committee desired to know the remedial measures taken to ensure that
exemption of income is granted only to those institutions, who fulfilled the mandatory
requirement, as per the law, the Ministry, in their reply, stated as follows:
"The existing system of granting registrations is a regourous one in itself whereby
the scrutiny of applications made u/s 12AA and u/s 10(23C) (vi) in the office of
the DGIT/DIT & CCIT/CIT is made thoroughly and registration is granted only
after complete satisfaction by these statutory authorities. Wherever shortcom-
ings are noticed in confirming to statutory requirements, the applicants are
heard in detail and allowed full opportunity to remedy the same, failing which the
applications are rejected through a reasoned order.
In addition to the existing system, the finance Act, 2004 has now laid down a
condition w.e.f. 1.10.2004, u/s 12AA(3), that where a trust or institution has been
granted registration u/s 123A and subsequently the statutory authority is
satisfied that the activities of the trust or institution are not genuine or are not
being carried out in accordance with its objectives, he/she shall pass an order in
writing cancelling the registration. Such powers of cancellation of approval
granted u/s 10 (23C) is also available to the CCIT/DGIT if they are satisfied
subsequently that (i) such institution has not applied its income in accordance
with the provisions contained in clause (a) of the third proviso; or has not
invested/deposited its funds in accordance with the provisions contained in
clause (b) of the third proviso; or (ii) the activities of such an institutions are not
genuine; or are not being carried out in accordance with all or any of the condi-
tions subject to which it was approved.
Further, the Ministry (CBDT) has issued guidelines, vide Instruction No. 10/
2004 dated 20.9.2004, to compulsorily select those cases for scrutiny where the

20
exempt income exceeds Rs. 2 lakhs; and where exemption has been claimed
u/s 11 and the gross receipts exceed Rs. 5 crore."
E.  Exemptions granted without audited accounts and audit Report (Paragraph 3.24.1)
66. According to Audit paragraph, where the total income of the trust or institution
as computed under the Act without giving effect to the provisions of sections 11 & 12
exceeded Rs. 50,000 in any previous year, the accounts of such trusts or institutions
should be audited for such accounting year and audit report filed in Form 10B along
with the return of income for the relevant assessment year.
67. In paragraph 3.24.1, Audit has noticed the 25 cases in Gujarat, Jharkhand,
Maharashtra, Orissa and Rajasthan, where the educational institutions run by trusts
for the assessment years 1999-2000 to 2001-2002 claimed exemption without furnishing
audited accounts and audit report. Non-compliance of the above provision required
withdrawal of exemption in these cases and levy of tax of Rs. 1.86 crore as shown
below:—
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl. Name of assessee and Assessment Gist of mistakes T ax
No. CIT & CIT charge Y ear effect
1. Kheda Education 1997-98 Accounts  were  not  audited 64.65
Society, and 12 other to 2001-02 and  audit  cetificates  not  filed
cases, Gujarat Summary with  the  returns,  though  total
income of the institutions exceeded
Rs.  50,000  without  giving  effect
to the provisions of section 11 & 12.
2. Bhatkya Vimukta Jamati 1998-99 & Exemption   under   section   11 64.18
Shikshan Vikas, Pune 2002-03 was  allowed  even  though  the
and six at Kolhapur, Summary requisite  audit  report  was  not
 Aurangabad,Thane, furnished along with the return of
 Maharashtra income.
3. St. Stephen's School & 2000-01 Audit Reports in the prescribed 51.23
Indian Institute of to 2001-02 form No. 10B were not filed though
Science and Summary total  income  of  the  institutions
Management, exceeded   Rs.   50,000   without
Hazaribagh and Ranchi, giving  effect  to  the  provisions
Jharkhand of section 11 & 12
4. Gurunanak Public 1999-2000 Certified accounts were not filed 4.02
School, Sambalpur to 2001-02  along with returns of income.
Orissa Summary
5. M/s Sindhi Panchayat 1998-99 & Accounts    of    the    assessee 1.68
Education, Jaipur 1999-00 disclosed  that Rs. 3.55 lakh was
Rajasthan Summary transferred to another  institution,
MC Sindhi Panchayat Sr. Hr Sec-
ondary  School.  Taking  this  into
account,    prescribed    income
limit of Rs. 50,000 was exceeded.
Audit  Report  in  the  prescribed
form No.10B was not filed.

21
68. As regards the specific reasons for overlooking the aforesaid cases the Ministry
have stated that in most of the cases, the returns were processed u/s 143(1) of Income
Tax Act and the assessing officers have not powers to make adjustments in the incomes
declared by the assessees.
69. When the Committee sought to know the Ministry's position on having a
mechanism to identify the educational institutions claiming the exemption without
furnishing audited accounts and audit reports, the Ministry stated:
"Though there is no special mechanism to identify such errant educational
institutions, the existing system of scrutinising  returns is deterrent enough for
unscrupulous assessees to make such unlawful claims. The role of internal audit
is limited in these cases as the internal audit wing is required to see only 0.5% of
all the cases processed u/s 143 (1). As such, 99.5% of such ceses do not pass
through the audit scrutiny of the internal audit wing of the department".
70. The Committee pointed out that it was a mandatory requirement as per the Act
to submit the audited accounts. They, therefore, desired to know as to how the income
of educational institutions was being exempted in these  cases without audited accounts.
The Ministry replied as follows:
"Since most of the cases were completed in a summary manner u/s 143 (1), the
assessing officer had no power to adjust the declared income. Further, even on
merits, the audit objections are not acceptable in many cases. For example, in the
case of Indian School of Science and Management (A.Y. 2000-01), the total
income without   giving effect to the provisions of section 11 and 12 was Rs.
46,417/-. The assessee did not claim exemption u/s 11 or 12 of the Act. The
registration to the institution u/s 12A was only granted w.e.f. 1.4.2000 i.e.
relevant to the A.Y. 2001-02. As such, as per provisions of section 12A(b), audit
report in form 10B was not required to be filed. Thus is it seen that audit has
raised an objection that exemption was granted even though the assessee did
not file the audit report in form 10B whereas, the facts of the case show that the
assessee neither claimed any exemption nor was required to file audit report in
form 10B.
Wherever the mistakes have been found to be acceptable on merits, necessary
remedial action have been initiated/completed."
71. During oral evidence, when the Committee desired to know the Ministry's reaction
to the proposal that every educational institution should mandatorily be required to
submit audited accounts along with the returns of income within a year, the Secretary
(Revenue) stated that this would require an amendment of Section 139(4) (c) so that all
institutions, irrespective of monetary limits for receipt or whether financed by the
Government should also be brought under the requirements of mandatory submission
of audited accounts.
XI. Weakness in administration of law
Non-monitoring of filing of returns by educational institutions
72. Audit paragraph pointed  out that there is no central agency in the department
to monitor the filing of income tax returns by educational institutions. Consequently,

22
the department is not in a position to ensure that all private schools, colleges and
coaching centres file returns of income.
73. While providing category-wise details of the education institutions, which are
covered under the criteria of levy and non-levy of income tax, the Ministry stated as
under:
"Income of educational institutions are exempt u/s 10(23C) (iiiab) (iiiad) and 10
(23C) (vi) and educational institutions deriving income from property held under
trust are exempt u/s 11 of the Income-tax Act, 1961. While educational institu-
tions ahving aggregate receipts upto Rs. 1 crore neither have to apply for
approval nor have to file returns, those with aggregate receipts above Rs. 1 crore
have to apply for approval and have to file returns u/s 139(4C). All institutions
being Trusts and registered u/s 12A have to file returns u/s 139(4A).
However, educational institutions, which run with a profit motive, are liable for
levy of tax and are required to file their returns with their jurisdictional officer.
Such institutions may be constituted as Society or private enterprise including
Proprietary institutions. Besides, coaching centres are not covered under the
provisions of section 10(23C) or 11 and fall in the taxable category if their income
is above taxable limit."
74. When the Committee desired to know the mechanism devised by the Department
to exercise adequate and necessary checks on potential and reported misuse of these
provisions by the educational institutions, the Ministry stated as follows:
"The department has trust/AOP Circles/Wards for assessment of the majority of
educational institutions claiming exemption u/s 10(23) (vi) or 11. Section 139 (4C)
(e) makes it mandatory for educational institutions existing solely for the
purpose of education and not running with a profit motive, to file their returns if
their income exceeds Rs. 50,000/- Similarly, section 139(4A) makes it mandatory
for Trusts to file their returns if their income exceeds Rs. 50,000/-. While for
approvals u/s 10 (23C) (vi), audited accounts and any such other information
may be called from the applicant assessee by the Central Government/CCs
cencerned before granting approval, assessees who are granted registrations u/
s 12A have to enclose accounts with their returns. This ensures that the audited
accounts of a large number of institutions are available with the department
which are scrutinized  to bring unaccounted and/or unapplied income to tax and
to find diversion of profit for personal gains and/or violations in appropriation
and application of the receipts/income in accordance with the provisions of
Section 13 of the Act. Section 12AA (3) and the 11th proviso to Section 10(23C)
(vi) provide for cancellation of the registrations u/s 12A and rescinding the
notification or withdrawing the approval u/s 10(23C) (vi) respectively wherever
subsequently it is found that the institution is not genuine or the activities are
not being carried out in accordance with all or any of the objects and/or condi-
tions, or in a case where the application of income or investment/deposits are
found to be not in accordance with the provisions of Law."
75. The Committee further desired to know the methodology adopted by the
Ministry in order to ascertain that all the private schools/colleges and coaching centres

23
comply with the requirement of filing of return of income. The Ministry, in their written
note stated as follows:
"Sections 139 (1) and 139 (4A/(4C)  specifically provide for filing of returns by
certain categories of educational institutions. If returns are not filed within the
due date, notices u/s 142 (1) and/or 148 are issued, as the case may be. It is not
compulsory for all educational institutions to file returns of income. However,
the department is vigilant and the monitoring of defaulting institutions is an
on-going process wherein, surveys and searches are conducted selectively in
appropriate cases.
Further, where it is  subsequently found that the institution is not genuine or the
activities are not carried in accordance with the specified purpose/objects, the
notification/approval or registration u/s 10(23C) or 12A can be rescinded/with-
drawn or cancelled."
76. The Committee sought to know the details of the position of actual number of
private schools/colleges and coaching centres, those filing return of income and are
subject to assessment as well as those not filing return of income and are not on the
records of the Income Tax Department. In reply, the Ministry stated:
"Besides the institutions allowed exemption, there are private institutions, in
various status, who file their returns in their respective jurisdictional wards/
circles if they have taxable income. Thus, all educational institutions do not fall
under the taxable  entity and are not required to file their returns. The Depart-
ment does not have a comprehensive and separate data base on private schools,
colleges and coaching centers and, therefore, it is not possible to say as to how
many such educational institutions are actually filing their returns and how
many are not."
77. On being enquired as to what action has been taken against the non-filers of
returns, the Ministry informed the Committee that non-filers of returns are brought to
the tax net by issuing notices u/s 142 (1) and 148. They are also covered under surveys
and searches to bring their undisclosed income to tax.
78. The Ministry, in their written note, further  informed that the audit's
recommendation of mandatory filing of returns have been taken care of by inserting
sub-section 4C to section 139 w.e.f. 1.4.2003 in respect of educational institutions with
aggregate receipts above Rs. one crore.
79. During the course of oral evidence, the Committee expressed the view that all
educational institutions  should be asked to file their returns as this would result in
widening the tax base and also in better monitoring of such institutions. The Ministry,
in their reply, informed the Committee that the proposal to make filing of returns
compulsory for all educational institutions is under active consideration.
Non-verification of activities of educational institutions
80. According to Audit paragraph, it was judicially (Aditanar Educational Institution
Vs Addl. CIT 224ITR 310 (SC) held that availability of exemption should be evaluated
each year to ascertain whether the institution existed during the relevant year solely
for educational purposes and not for the purpose of profit. Finance Act, 1998, also

24
provided that exemption to educational institutions should be granted only after
ensuring that their activities were carried out according to their objectives.
81. Audit however, noticed that the assessing officers did not ensure whether the
institutions were in fact fulfilling the prescribed conditions.
82. Audit review has also revealed that the department has no effective and working
mechanism to evaluate the genuineness of exemption claimed by educational institutions
as maximum assessments had been finalized in summary manner, which has, in turn,
defeated the very purpose of tax policy decided in the Finance Act, 1998 to the effect
that exemption to educational institutions should be granted only after ensuring that
their activities were in accordance with their objectives.
XII. Inadequacies in law
83. According to Audit, two separate clauses providing exemption under Section
10(23C) and 11 and 12 of the Act overlap each other and are being misused by  private
educational institutions. Adit analysis of tax laws made from administration of tax
policy has also revealed the following inadequacies:
(i) The very purpose of abolition of automatic exemption provided earlier under
section 10 (22) of the Act has been defeated as new provisions enacted under
sections 10 (23C) (iiiab)/(iiiad) did not yet provide any monitoring mechanism for
checking the genuineness of activities. Such institutions are not required to file
returns.
(ii) Educational institutions that claim exemption under section 10(23C) (vi) are
required to obtain approval every three years from the prescribed authority
while in the case of trusts, registration once granted is not necessary to be
renewed further. There is no specific and clear-cut provision whether
educational institutions could claim exemption only under section 11 & 12 or
also under section 10 (23C) (vi) as both the sections are not mutually exclusive.
Educational institutions run by trusts, which are not obtaining requisite
approval under section 10 (23C) (vi), are now claiming exemption under sections
11 & 12 according to their convenience. There is no mechanism to ensure that
the institutions could claim exemption either only under section 11 & 12 or 10
(23C) (vi) of the Act.
(iii) There is no time limit for granting approvals under Clause 10(23C) (vi) and
nothing has been specified as to how in the absence of approval, exemption of
income during that period is to be regulated.
(iv) Trusts are required to furnish audited accounts with audit certificate alongwith
returns of income while there is no such provision in the case of exemption
under Section 10 23C) (vi) Hence, early evaluation of activities is difficult in
respect of educational institutions run by other than trusts.
(v) Under Section 11(5) of the Act, the unutilised surplus of the institutions is
required to be invested in specified investments for the specified period and
used for educational purposes only. However, no monitoring mechanism is in
place to monitor such investments".

25
84. While agreeing  to the aforesaid point raised in Audit paragraph, the Secretary
(Revenue) during evidence stated as follows:
"We have looked at that aspect. There is a loophole there which can be made use
of by some people. Whether we can make use of both the provisions or we
should synchronise it by merging the two and have a single provision, I think we
will have to study that a little more. That is because there are institutions under
Sections 11 to 13, which deal with not only education  but also with many other
purposes. They are multipurpose trusts. So, even if we say that all educational
institutions must come under section 10 (23C) (vi), we cannot also deny the
facility to register a multipurpose trust. So, how can these two be reconciled?...
We would really like to see how it could be synchronished. Probably, we need to
talk to Law Ministry and so on but we will certainly look at that provision in
greater detail."
XIII. Miscellaneous
(a) Income escaping assessment
85. According to the Audit para, it has been judicially (Unnikrishnan J.P. & Others
Vs State of Andhra Pradesh & Other, 1993 AIR 2178, SCR(1) 594) held that there cannot
be compromise on commercialization of education and the educational institutions
cannot charge more than the fees fixed by the Government in any form either as
donation or capitation fees.
86. Besides income from school activities, the private educational institutions earn
substantial income from donations in the name of building fund or by charging hefty
fees for availing facilities like swimming pool etc. Such institutions are understood to
have amassed huge wealth in the name of such funds/charges etc. The amount of
donation asked by well-known institutions even for admission into a nursery class,
reportedly range between Rs. 25,000 and Rs. 50,000.
87. During evidence, the Committee desired that the funds created by such
institutions should form a part of their income and thus should be appropriately taxed.
The Committee opined that exemption should not be allowed on such funds. In   this
connection, the Ministry agreed to consider the proposal and take necessary suitable
measures.
(b) Institutions run by different franchisees
88. During evidence, the Committee referred to the fact that a number of private
bodies run a number of educational institutions through different franchisees and
pointed out that they all should be considered as a single entity for the levy of
appropriate tax. Explaining the position in this regard, the Ministry informed that as per
existing provisions of law, and the accounting  standards prescribed by the Institute of
Chartered Accountants of India, this cannot be done as franchisees are separate
entities and cannot be merged with the parent institution. They have to be taxed
separately. However, individual branches of one parent institution  are not taxed
separately and their accounts are merged with that of the parent institution.
(c) Status of Computerisation
89. The Committee drew the attention of the witnesses to the fact that the Ministry
have not been able to prepare database despite the fact huge funds have been spent

26
over the past 5-6 years on computerisation. Explaining the position in this regard, the
Secretary (Revenue) deposed during evidence as follows:
"At present, we are using four software programmes. There is a problem of
compatibility between these software. We are trying to upgrade these software
to see that all the information flows in. We would also like to integrate the
income-tax information system with that of the excise and customs information
system and perhaps the VAT system so that information flows there. Once the
information flows in, we will go through a system of cross verification whether
the evasion is taking place and we can then make sure that the problem  of
evasion is handled effectively without creating too much of harassment in the
field. This is our objective and we are working towards it. Hopefully in a couple
of years we will try to bring all these systems together and we are giving very
high priority to it."
90. Supplementing in this regard, the Chairperson (CBDT) stated:
"Computerisation really started in 2001 and now we are in 2005. We have made a
lot of headway in many Departments."
91. She added:
"We have spent a lot of money on computers already. We have a number of
applications on which we are working. Each and every return is processed in the
computer and then we have a system by which we have PAN data also. There are
a number of applications, which are processed simultaneously and with passage
of time, we are updating our computers also."
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
92. The field of education has witnessed unprecedented change in the last decade
with the emergence of a large number of private educational institutions and coaching
centres all over the country. With a view to encouraging the promotion and development
of education, income of educational institutions established solely for the purpose of
education either on no-profit basis or run by charitable trusts has been exempted
from levy of income tax subject to certain conditions.
93. Income Tax Act, 1961, provides for exemption of income of educational
institutions. Sections 11, 12 and 13 of the Act, inter-alia deal with exemption in
respect of income of educational institutions run by charitable trusts. Section 2(15)
defines "Charitable purposes" to include relief of the poor, education, medical relief
and the advancement of any other object of general public utility. These institutions
are required to fulfill certain conditions to be eligible for availing exemption of
income.
94. Upto assessment year 1998-99 income of educational institutions existing
solely for educational purposes and not for purposes of profit was exempted under
section 10 (22) of the Income Tax Act. Such institutions could be run by any entity
such as individual, Hindu Undivided Family, association of persons, firms, company
and so on. These were not required mandatorily to file returns of income till
assessment year 2003-04.

27
95. The memorandum explaining the provisions in Finance Bill 1998, recognized
that section 10(22) was widely misused in the absence of any monitoring mechanism
for checking the genuineness of the activities of these institutions. This clause of the
section was therefore, omitted with effect from 1 April, 1999. It was made clear that
educational institutions, which are of charitable nature but not registered as trusts
might now claim exemption of income with certain conditions as applicable to
charitable trusts.
96. The following provisions under clause 10 (23C) were inserted w.e.f. 1st April,
1999 for exemption of income of educational  institutions:
(a) Section 10 (23C) (iiiab)—An educational institution, which is wholly or
substantially financed by the Government, was exempt from levy of tax under
this section.
(b) Section 10 (23C) (iii ad)—An educational institution,  whose aggregate
annual receipts did not exceed Rs. one crore, was exempt under this section.
(c) Section 10 (23C) (vi) : An educational institution with annual receipts of
more than Rs. one crore could claim exemption of income after obtaining
approval from the prescribed Income Tax Authority for a period not exceeding
three assessment years at any one time provided it applied its income exclusively
to the objects for which it was established, under this Section.
(d) The Act does not separately deal with exemption of income of coaching
centres. Coaching Centres are not educational institutions existing for
charitable purposes falling within the ambit of sections 10, 11 and 12 of the Act.
As such, exemptions described above are not available to them. Their income is
to be taxed under the provisions applicable to normal business under sections
15 to 59 of the Act.
97. The Committee's examination of the subject is based on the Audit review,
which sought to ascertain the efficiency of the Income Tax Department to assess
various educational institutions. The objectives of the Audit review included whether
all private educational institutions are on the records of the Income Tax Department
and are subject to assessments whether adequate steps have been taken by the
department to bring all the private educational institutions into the tax net whether
there exists any machinery in the department to exercise adequate and necessary
checks in this area and whether tax laws have been enacted with clear, unambiguous
and effective provisions for their administrations and for prevention of abuse of misuse.
While it is required of the Income Tax Department to ensure through the operation of
the Income Tax Act that incomes of only genuine and eligible institutions  are exempted
from levy of income tax and correct amount of tax is paid by all institutions not so
exempt, the Committee during their examination of the subject, noticed a number of
inadequacies in the system as well as deficiencies in the proper implementation of tax
laws which has resulted in substantial revenue loss to the Government. These facts
have been discussed in the succeeding Paragraphs.
98. The Committee note that a large number of private schools, colleges and
coaching centres have come up whose income is not so exempt from levy of income
tax. The Committee are concerned to note that there exists no database in the

28
Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, in respect of such private educational
institutions and coaching centres. The Committee regret to observe that there is no
systematic and organised approach in the Department to ensure that all educational
institutions, which are required to fulfill certain obligations under the Act to claim
the exemptions are, in fact, doing so before claiming the tax benefit. The Secretary
(Department of Revenue) conceded during evidence that at present they do not have
activity-wise databases. The Committee are constrained to point out that the Ministry
of Finance, with large resources at their command have not made any effort to identify
the total assessees in the country by having effective co-ordination with the State
Governments/Universities/other regulatory authorities which has resulted in
substantial revenue loss to the exchequer. The Committee understand that various
projects are underway in the Directorate General of Income-tax (Systems), which
would help in building up a scientific database and for this the expertise of professional
agencies is proposed to be utilised by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue).
The CIB Section of Income Tax Department is also stated to be engaged in collection
of information and preparing a database of schools, colleges and coaching centres as
obtained from various sources. The Committee would like the Ministry to undertake
these proposed measures expeditiously with a view to creating a reliable database
within four months of the presentation of this Report. The database, once prepared,
should be updated periodically so that  none of the potential assessees escape the
scrutiny of Income Tax Department.
99. The Committee note that the bulk of assessments of private schools, colleges
and charitable trusts are by and large completed in a summary manner, which is not
desirable. The Committee would like to point out that unless cases involving
assessments of educational institutions are identified and adequate number are
selected for scrutiny, the department will have no means to ensure effective compliance
of tax laws in such cases. The Chairperson, CBDT conceded during evidence that
98 per cent of cases are completed on the basis of returns filed by the assessees and
about two per cent of the cases are picked up for scrutiny. The Committee have now
been informed that guidelines have been issued on 20.09.2004 to pick up all the cases
where exemption is claimed under section 11 of the Income Tax Act and the gross
receipt exceeds Rs. 5 crore for scrutiny assessment. Besides, a residual clause has
been inserted to enable the field officers to select any other case for scrutiny with the
prior approval of the Chief Commissioner of Income Tax (CCIT) concerned. The
Committee would like to point out that the Ministry should have considered these
steps prior to being pointed out by Audit. Considering the very fact that large revenue
potential exist in assessment of all eligible private educational institutions, the
Committee recommend that not only the guidelines issued by the Department in this
regard should be followed scrupulously but discretion should also be allowed to the
assessing/supervisory officers to randomly pick up cases for scrutiny so as to prevent
these institutions from evading the payment of their legitimate dues to the Government.
100. The Committee's examination of the subject reveals that so far the Department
has not been able to widen the tax base by identifying such private educational
institutions run by trusts or other than trusts which earn huge sums of money by
functioning in a not-so charitable manner. The Committee feel that in order to
discourage the practice of claiming exemption by ineligible institutions under the

29
existing provisions of the Income Tax Act, it is high time that the Department applies
the provisions of tax exemptions with utmost care and only to genuine and eligible
institutions. For this, it is essential that the Department should prepare and monitor
a comprehensive database of all such institutions and make it mandatory for them to
file their annual income tax returns. The Committee have already emphasised the
need for creating a reliable database earlier in this Report.
The Committee note that Section 139 (4C) (e) makes it mandatory for educational
institutions that exist solely for the purpose of education and not running with the
profit motive, to file their returns in case their income exceeds Rs. 50,000. The
Committee, however, understand that there is no central agency in the Department to
monitor the filing of income tax returns by educational institutions. Consequently,
the Department is not in a position to ensure that all private schools, colleges and
coaching centres file their returns of income. It is, therefore, not clear to the
Committee as to how the income of educational institutions could be assessed correctly
in the absence of complete information about potential assessees. In response to the
Committee's view that every educational institution should be mandatorily required
to file returns, it has been informed by the Ministry that this has been taken care of
by inserting Sub-section (4C) to Section 139  w.e.f. 1st April, 2003 in respect of
educational institutions with aggregate receipts above Rs. 1 crore. The Committee
have also been informed that the proposal to make filing of returns compulsory for
educational institutions is under active consideration of the Department. The
Committee hope that an early decision will be taken in the matter. They recommend
that a foolproof mechanism may be evolved to ensure that all the private educational
institutions (as per the databases to be created) which have assessable income file
their returns regularly and the defaulters are brought to book.
The Committee note that another tool for unearthing undisclosed income available
with the Department is Section 133A and 133B of the Income Tax Act that empower
the assessing officers to survey the business premises of taxpayers to locate new
assessees. However, they feel that adequate steps have not been taken by the concerned
authorities to bring all the private schools, colleges and coaching centres into the tax
net through adequate and focussed use of the said power to conduct surveys. The
Committee note that no surveys were conducted in Bombay, Thane, Pune, Aurangabad,
Kolhapur and Nagpur during the period 1999-2000 to 2001-2002. In Delhi, only one
CIT confirmed to Audit that no survey was conducted and other 13 CITs did not
furnish a reply. In Tamil Nadu charge, DIT (Exemption) and CIT-VIII, Chennai
confirmed that no surveys were conducted. In Andhra Pradesh, only one private
educational institution in Visakhapatnan charge and 7 in Vijayawada charge were
brought into tax net. In Rajasthan, the Department had conducted 1138 surveys and
only one educational instituion was brought into tax net. In other charges, no surveys
were reported to be conducted. The Ministry have asserted that a large number of
surveys are conducted every year and that various field formations have reported
about surveys being conducted on such institutions. The Committee find it
incomprehensible as to how in the absence of any reliable database (as commented
earlier), it is possible for the assessing officer to use the power of survey efficiently.
Moreover, the aforesaid argument does not seem to carry weight as the Ministry have

30
not supported their contention by furnishing exact figures of the number of surveys
conducted by them during last 2-3 years and the number of assessees identified as a
result thereof. The Committee would like to be apprised of the details of the cases
which were brought under the tax net during the preceding two years, as a result of
the efforts initiated by them alongwith the number of new assessees that have been
brought to tax net and the amount of additional revenue realised from them. The
Committee hope that with creation of a reliable database of private educational
institutions, the Department would instruct the assessing officers to use the powers
available with them under relevant provisions of the Act judiciously to identify potential
taxpayers and progressively wipe out the widening gap between taxpaying and
tax-evading educational institutions.
101. The Committee note that an educational institution existing solely for
educational purposes and not for the purpose of profit and whose aggregate annual
receipts exceed Rs. one crore is required to obtain an approval from the prescribed
authority for claiming exemption of income. With effect from 1 April, 1997, every
trust needed to obtain registration to become eligible to claim exemption of income
under sections 11&12. The assessee has to make an application for registration to
the CIT either before 1 July, 1973 or within one year from the date of creation of
trust. If application is made after expiry of the aforesaid period, the Commissioner on
reasonable grounds may condone the delay. Every order granting or refusing
registration shall be passed before the expiry of six months from the end of the month
in which the application is received. These provisions indicate that educational
institutions run either by non trusts or trusts could claim exemption of their income
under both the sections 10(23C)(vi) and 11&12 according to their convenience as
these sections are not mutually exclusive in operation.
The Committe are constrained to point out that there is no system in the Department
at present to ensure that exemption of income is granted only to those educational
institutions which have obtained approval/registration from prescribed authority. In
support of this inadequacy a number of instances have been cited by the Audit in the
Paragraphs under review. The Committee are, therefore, not convinced by the plea of
the Department that the system of giving approvals is rigid and meticulous and that
every effort is made so that only genuine and non-profit making institutions get
approval. The Committee have also been given to understand that a number of
suggestions under  consideration of the Ministry in this regard are that: (i) a clause
may be inserted in Section 10(23C) so as to provide for mandatory audit of accounts
and enclosing the audit report with the return of income every year; (ii) Penalty
u/s 271B may be made applicable to audit u/s 10(23C) and 12A; and (iii) Institutions
should apply to the Assessing Officer in the specified form and specify the purpose
for accumulation irrespective of the fact whether the accumulation is 15% or more.
According to the Ministry, Form No. 3A should also be modified so as to include the
nature of activity in the Return. If this information is not given, the return may be
treated as defective u/s 139(9) and include a column for number & date for approval
u/s 10(23C). Needless to say that these measures now proposed by the Ministry
should have been taken much earlier. The Committee expect the Ministry to finalise
these proposals and implement the same expeditiously.

31
102. The Committee note that prior approval of prescribed authority is required
for claiming exemption of income by an educational institution existing solely for
educational purposes and not for the purpose of profit and whose aggregate annual
receipts exceed Rs. one crore. However, there is no time limit for granting such
approval or rejection under Section 10 (23C) (vi) and there is no specific provision for
dealing with cases where applications are pending for approval for some reason.
The assessing officer is not competent to grant exemption of income in such cases
without approval of prescribed authority. Citing the examples of delay in or rejection
of approvals, the Audit noticed in Maharashtra charge, that as on 31 March 2003, 103
cases were pending approval for exemption. Out of 103 cases, 88 were pending with
DIT(Exemption) Mumbai alone. Out of 88 pending cases, 24 were pending for more
than two years, 33 were pending for more than one year and institutions were claiming
exemption under section 10 (23C)(vi) without approval of prescribed authority. Thus
the objective of introducing the new provision 10(23C)(vi) for grant of approval after
examination of the genuineness of the activities of such institutions has not been
served. Keeping in view these shortcomings, the Committee feel that there is no
reason as to why appropriate legal provisions could not be incorporated in the Act so
as to specify a fixed time limit for disposal of such applications. The proposal to fix the
time limit is now stated to be under active consideration of the Ministry. The Ministry
have also assured to put the names of the institutions, that have been granted
registration/approvals, on their website. The Committee would like to be informed of
the precise steps taken in this regard. They cannot but over emphasised that there
should be an inbuilt system in the Department to review these shortcomings noticed
from time to time so as to suomoto take suitable remedial measures without any
delay.
103. Chapter-III of the Audit Report on Assessment of Private Schools, Colleges
and Coaching Centres has highlighted the cases relating to exemption of income
without approval of prescribed authority in paras 3.17.1, 3.17.2 & 3.17.3; exemption
granted without registration in para 3.19; and exemptions granted without audited
accounts and audit reports in Para 3.24.1. In para nos. 3.17.1 to 3.17.3, two cases in
Karnataka region, thirteen cases in Tamil Nadu and three cases in Delhi region have
been reported which attracted non-levy of tax and interest of Rs. 36.79 crore. Similarly
in para 3.19, 37 cases in Assam, Bihar, Kerala, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh,
Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal charges have been identified where
the exemption of income without registration resulted in non-levy of tax of Rs. 3.54
crore. In case of para 3.24.1, exemptions were reportedly granted without audited
accounts in 24 cases in Gujarat, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Orissa and Rajasthan,
that led to non-levy of tax of Rs. 1.26 crore.
In respect of Para 3.17.1, the Committee note that failure on the part of the
Department to disallow exemption in the case of two assessees in Karnataka, Bangalore
Charge, viz. Desheeya Vidyashala Samithi, Shimoga and Education Society of Sisters
of St. Joseph of Cluny, Bangalore resulted in under assessment of income totalling
Rs. 81.32 lakh with consequnet non-levy of total tax and interest of Rs. 30.51 lakh.
Althoug the annual aggregate receipts of the institutions crossed Rs. one crore, they
did not get themselves approved by the prescribed authority under Section 10(23C)

32
(vi) or get recognised under Section 12A of the Act. Moreover, the assessing officer
exempted the income though he was not competent to do so. The Committee feel that
mere application u/s 10(23)(vi) does not entitle an assessee to exemption which can be
allowed only on receipt of approval from competent authority. The Ministry have
explained that in these cases, the procedure for granting of approvals could not be
followed as the cases were summarily assessed u/s 143(1). Regarding remedial steps
taken to withdraw the exemption of income granted to those institutions and to recover
tax due from them, the Committee have been informed that the proceedings u/s 148/
147 have been initiated in both the cases which are likely to be completed by 31.03.2005.
The tax demand and the interest thereon according to the Ministry will be recovered
expeditiously thereafter. The Committee regret to point out that the proceedings
were made to wait till 31st March, 2005 for completion, when the cases were already
more than 3 years old. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should put in
place a suitable mechanism for completion of remedial action on priority basis in
similar cases, instead of waiting till the last day of the Financial Year, so that the
revneue could be realised faster.
104. In Tamil Nadu charge, seven cases of educational institutions run by trusts
were noticed, where no evidence was available in the records regarding submission of
application by the assessees for approval under section 10(23C)(vi). In six other
cases, the concerned institutions had submitted applications, but the approvals of the
prescribed authority granting exemption were not available on record. However,
exemption was allowed by the assessing officer in these cases without approval from
prescribed authority. These cases attracted levy of tax of Rs. 6.73 crore. Further,
annual receipts of the institutions exceeded the prescribed limit of Rs. one crore and
they were required to get approval u/s 10(23C) (vi). Out of 13 cases, six assessees had
applied for approval u/s 10(23C) (vi), which were pending and assessing officers were
granting exemption u/s 11 & 12. The Ministry have now informed the Committee that
the approval u/s 10(23C)(vi) has since been granted in the case of Hindu Educational
Organisation in November, 2003. According to the Ministry the notification u/s
10(23C)(vi)  was issued in the aforesaid case, though the income was exempted u/s 11
of the Act. The Committee would like to point out that the principle issue here is
availability of alternate provisions, namely Sections 11/12 and Section 10(23C) (vi),
in the statute to the assessees and the resultant redundancy of section 10(23C) (vi),
when assessees could end up avoiding the rigours of detailed examination and
prolonged procedure contemplated under Section 10(23C) (vi) of the Act. The
Committee feel that since two separate Clauses providing exemption under Sections
10(23C), 11 and 12 overlap each other, these are being misused by educational
institutions, apart from creating flaws in their tax assessments. They, therefore,
recommend that this deficiency should be suitably resolved by necessary amendments
in the provisions or by introducing a single section/clause for exemption of educational
institutions, whether run by trusts or other than trusts. They further urge the Ministry
to strive in order to ensure that institutions flouting the legal requirement with
impunity should be dealt sternly.
105. The Committee are distressed to find that irregular grant of exemption
without approval of DGIT/DIT in case of three educational institutions Oberoi
Educational Society, St. Joseph Academy and M/s DA V College Trust and Management

33
Society, run by trusts in Delhi DIT (Exemption) charge, resulted in non-levy
of tax of Rs. 23.35 lakh, Rs. 16.35 lakh and Rs. 29.36 crore respectively for the
assessment years 2000-01 to 2002-03. In case of Oberoi Education Society, the
Department took almost three years to process the application under section
10(23C)(vi), which was ultimately not approved. It was also found that the
approval u/s 10(23C) (vi) in all the cases has not yet been given and in the first
two cases the matter is still being investigated. The Committee are surprised
that the Department took three years to decide for grant of exemption under
section 10(23)(vi) and rejection by DG (IT), Kolkata in the case of Oberoi
Education Society. Oberoi Education Society is a peculiar case when the
department took almost three years to process the application under section
10 (23C)(vi) which was ultimately not approved. Whereas, there is no
compulsion on the assessee to avail the exemption as it is free to invoke section
11/12, being a trust, there is also no compulsion on the department to finally
decide applicability of section 10(23C)(vi), a provision that was specifically
introduced to ensure rigorous application of provisions for exemptions. What
has surprised the Committee is the fact that there is no mechanism available
within the department to identify or link the cases of trusts and those seeking
exemption of section 10(23C)(vi). The combined effect of all these shortcomings
is that a significant provision of the act, introduced with specific purpose, is
not enforced. The Committee feel that this needs to be seriously examined and
suitable time limit fixed for deciding cases of application u/s 10(23C)(vi) and
penalizing such institutions which do not follow the requirement instead of
routinely allowing exemption u/s 11/12A. From the foregoing, the Committee
are constrained to observe that loopholes in enforcement of significant
provisions of the Act need to be seriously examined and suitable time limit
fixed for deciding cases of application u/s 10(23C)(vi). They feel that the very
purpose of having a law is defeated, if it is not implemented earnestly. The
Committee, therefore, desire that as and when such cases of illegal or irregular
exemptions come to the notice of the Department, suitable punitive action
should be taken expeditiously against the erring officials without fear or favour,
in order to prevent consequential loss to the exchequer.
106. With effect from 1st April, 1997, every trust is required to obtain
registration to become eligible to claim exemption of income u/s 11 and 12.
The test checks by Audit has revealed that in 37 cases falling in Assam, Bihar,
Kerala, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West
Bengal charges, where educational institutions run by trusts had not obtained
registration u/s 12A of the Act; the assessing officers allowed exemption under
sections 11 and 12 without registration resulting in non-levy of tax of Rs. 3.54
crore. In their response, the Ministry have stated that most of the cases were
completed u/s 143(1), wherein the Assessing Officer could not have disturbed
the declared income. Moreover, in few cases, the institutions had approvals
under the relevant clauses of section 10(23C) and, thus there was no
requirement to be registered u/s 12A. The Ministry have taken the stand that
these sections are not mutually exclusive and are applicable to educational
institutions at the option of the assessee applicant. While the Committee desire

34
that the Assessing Officers must ensure that eligible assessees get registrered
before claiming any exemption, they also feel that cases of trusts must be
processed u/s 11 & 12 that exclusively deal with exemption in respect of
educational institution run by Charitable Trusts and not under section 10(23C)
or 143(1) which do not bind them to get themselves registered before claiming
exemptions. The Committee are also not impressed by the assertion of the
Ministry that the existing system of granting registrations is a rigorous one
and registration is granted only after complete satisfaction of the statutory
authorities, as the Ministry themselves have admitted that they have reopened
the cases where the audit has objected that the educational institutions run by
trusts were allowed exemptions without registration. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that it should be ensured that trusts that claim tax
exemptions for running educational institutions invariably get themselves
registered. Besides, they desire that all cases where exemptions have been
granted wrongly or illegally must be probed with a view to fixing
responsibility. The Committee would like to be intimated about precise steps
taken in this direction.
107. Where the total income of the trust or institution as computed under
the Act without giving effect to the provisions of Sections 11 and 12 exceeded
Rs. 50 thousand in any previous year, the accounts of such trusts or institutions
should be audited for such accounting year and audit report filed in Form
10B alongwith the return of income for the relevant assessment year. The
Committee note that  in 25 cases falling in Gujarat, Jharkhand, Maharashtra,
Orissa and Rajasthan charges, the educational institutions run by the trusts
for the assessment years 1999-2000 to 2001-2002 claimed exemption without
furnishing audited accounts and audit reports. According to the Committee
non-compliance of the above provision required withdrawal of exemptions in
these cases and levy of tax of Rs. 1.26 crore. In most of the cases according to
the Ministry, the returns were processed under Section 143(1) of the Income
Tax Act and the assessing officers have no powers to make adjustments in the
income declared by the assessees. The Ministry have admitted that there is no
special mechanism to identify such errant educational institutions, the existing
system of scrutinising returns is deterrent enough for unscrupulous assessees
to make such unlawful claims. The role of internal audit is limited in these
cases as the internal audit wing is required to see only 0.5% of all the cases
processed u/s 143(1). As such, 99.5% of such cases do not pass through the
audit scrutiny of the internal audit wing of the Department. The Committee
are not aware whether the aforesaid cases have been selected for scrutiny by
the concerned authorities subsequent to the issue of audit observation. As the
Ministry have themselves admitted that there is no special mechanism in place,
the Committee need to be satisfied as to how the Ministry consider the existing
system of scrutinising returns as adequate. The Committee would like to be
informed, if any, measures are contemplated to strengthen the system in this
regard.
108. From the foregoing it is evident that the laws providing tax exemption
to educational institutions suffer from various inadequacies, for example, the

35
new provisions enacted under Section 10(23C)(iiiab)/(iiiad) do not yet provide
any monitoring mechanism for checking the genuiness of activities of
institutions claiming exemptions. There is no mechanism to ensure that the
institution could claim expemption only under sections 11 and 12 or 10(23C)
(vi) of the Act. Also, there is no time limit for granting approvals under clause
10(23C) (vi) and nothing has been specified as to how in the absence of approval,
exemption of income during that period is to be regulated. Besides there is
not provision in the case of exemption under Section 10(23C) (vi) to furnish
the audited accounts with audit certificate alongwith returns of income and
finally, no monitoring mechanism currently is available to monitor the
investment of unutilised surplus of the institutions u/s 11(5) of the Act. While
conceding that there exists a loophole, the Secretary (Revenue) informed the
Committee during evidence that they will have to study a little more to see if
they can make use of both the provisions [(Sections 11, 12 and 10 (23C) (vi)] or
synchronise it by merging the two and have a single provision. The Committee
are also of the view that the purpose of insertion of new Clause under Section
(23C) may not have been yielded the desired results and had rather created
more complications and infructuous work. While observing that the existing
tax laws are already very complex, the Committee feel that it is imperative
that the law is made simpler and clearer to avoid any misinterpretation/misuse
of the same. They, therefore, desire that the Department of Revenue should
undertake such an exercise expeditiously in consultation with the Ministry of
Law as well as the Audit and the lacunae, in the law be plugged suitably.
109. The Committee are of the view that apart from earning income from
educational activities, several private institutions earn income by asking for
donations/contributions from their wards in the name of building fund,
swimming pool charges, calamity fund, poor fund etc. although it has been
judicially held in case of Unnikrishnan J.P. & Others Vs State of Andhra Pradesh
& Others, 1993 AIR 2178, SCR(1) 594 that the educational institutions cannot
charge more than the fees fixed by the Government in any form, either as
donation or capitation fees. The Committee are convinced that there is no
dearth of cases where big amount as donations are taken before allowing
admission of children in various schools. During evidence the Committee had,
therefore, desired that these funds should form a part of the income of such
institutions and be taxed and exemption should not be allowed on such funds.
The Ministry have subsequently agreed to consider the proposal and take
necessary suitable measures. The Committee would like to be intimated of
the precise steps taken in this regard.
110. The Committee further find that certain educational institutions are
earning substantial income by lending their premises for commercial
activities and that there is no restriction made by the Ministry on conducting
such unspecified/commercial activities in the premises of educational
institutions. In response to the Committee's desire that educational institutions
should be discouraged to use its premises for this purpose, the Ministry had
also promised to consider the proposal and take necessary suitable measures.

36
The Committee would like to be apprised of the outcome of the steps taken in
this regard in due course of time.
111. During their study visit to Kerala region on the subject in November, 2004,
the Committee were given to understand by the concerned Income Tax Officials that
the performance of the region was not up to the mark in respect of the completion of
assessments, appeals etc. The main reason attributed by them was the shortage of
staff. Out of 243 posts of Income Tax Inspectors, 192 posts were stated to by lying
vacant. It may just be possible that other regions might also be experiencing similar
problems. The Committee, therefore recommend that urgent steps are needed to
assess the staff requirements in all the regions so as to take prompt steps to fill up
the requisite vacancies wherever needed, expeditiously so that the work, at least on
this account, does not suffer. The Committee also desire that the Department of
Revenue should explore the feasibility of delegating some powers to Chief
Commissioners/Commissioners of Income Tax to recruit officials in Group “C” and
“D” cadres to facilitate speedy recruitment and early filling up of vacancies. As a
long time measure, the Ministry/CBDT should undertake a detailed exercise of the
overall manpower requirement in all the regions so as to ensure optimum number of
persons at all levels with a view to ensuring smooth functioning.

APPENDIX I
CHAPTER III OF AUDIT REPORT NO. 13 OF 2004 (DIRECT TAXES) ON
“ASSESSMENT OF PRIVATE SCHOOLS, COLLEGES & COACHING
CENTRES” (PARAGRAPHS 3.17.1, 3.17.2, 3.17.3, 3.19 & 3.24.1)
3.1 Introduction
With a view to encouraging the promotion and developpment of education, income
of educational institutions established solely for the purpose of education either on
no-profit basis or run by charitable trusts has been exempted from levy of income
tax subject to certain conditions. A large number of private schools, colleges and
coaching centres have also come up whose income is not so exempted from levy of
income tax. It is required of the Income Tax Department to ensure through the
operation of the Income Tax Act. That incomes of only genuine and eligible
institutions are exempted from levy of income tax and correct amount of tax is paid
by all institutions not so exempt.
3.2 Tax Policy and laws
Income Tax Act, 1961, (the Act) provides for exempton of income of educational
institutions as given below.
3.2.1 Educational Institutions run by Trusts
Sections 11, 12 & 13 of the Act, inter alia deal with exemption in respect of
income of educational institutions run by charitable trusts. Section 2(15) defines
"Charitable purposes" to included relief of the poor, education medical relief and the
advancement of any other object of general public utility. These institutions are
required to fulfill certain conditions to be eligible for availing exemption of income
as given below:
Table 1: Prescribed conditions to be eligible for availing exemption of income
Sl. Section Subject Prescribed conditions
No. of the Act
1 11(1) Application of Institution is permitted to set apart and accumulate
income 15* percent of income for 5 years for application
to educational purposes and such amount will be
exempt from tax.
2 11(5) Investment of Accumulated funds are required to be invested in
accumulated the specified modes such as post office, national-
income ised banks, public companies etc.
3 12A(a) Registration Educational institution is required to obtain registra-
tion from CIT within one year from the date of itscreation.
4 12A(b) Audited Educational institution is required to enclose audited
accounts accounts and audit report with the return of income
if income exceeds Rs. 50,000  in previous year
without giving effect to sections 11& 12 of  the Act.
37
•Prior to assessment year 2002-03, the institution was permitted to accumulate 25 percent of income for 10 years.

38
3.2.2 Educational Institutions run other than by Trusts
• Upto assessment year 1998-99
Income of educational institutions existing solely for educational purposes and not
for purposes of profit was exempted under section 10(22) of the Income Tax Act. Such
institutions could be run by any entity such as individual, Hindu Undivided Family,
association of persons, firms company and so on. No mechanism was however
prescribed under the Act through which the Income Tax Department could
independently ensure that the institutions exist solely for educational purposes and
not for purposes of profit. These were not required mandatorily to file returns of
income till assessment year 2003-2004.
• With effect from 1 April 1999
The memorandum explaining the provisions in Finance Bill 1998, recognized
that section 10(22) was reported to be widely misused in the absence of any
monitoring mechanism for checking the genuineness of the activities of these
institutions. This clause of the section was therefore, omitted. It was clarified that
educational institutions, which are of charitable nature but not registered as trusts
may now claim exemption of income with certain conditions as applicable to charitable
trusts. In appropriate cases, Central Government may also grant exemption by issuing
a notification.
3.2.3 Following tax laws have been enacted:
• An educational institution existing solely for educational purposes and not for
purposes of profit and which is wholly or substantially financed by the Government
was exempted from levy of tax, under section 10 (23C) (iiiab).
• An educational institution existing solely for educational purposes and not for
purposes of profit whose aggregate annual receipt did not exceed Rs.1 crore was
exempted under section 10(23C) (iiiad).
• An edcuational institution existing solely for educational purposes and not for
purposes of profit with annual receipts of more than Rs.1 crore could claim
exemption of income after obtaining approval from the prescribed Income Tax
authority for a period not exceeding three assessment years at any one time
provided it applied its income exclusively to the objects for which it was
established, under section 10(23C) (vi).
3.2.4 Coaching Centres
The Act does not separately deal with exemption of income of coaching centres.
It has been judicially (Bihar Institute of Mining and Surveying Vs CIT (208 ITR 608)
(Patna), and Aditanar Education Institutions Vs Addl. CIT in 224 ITR 310 and Lok
Siksha Trust Vs CIT in 10 ITR 234 (Supreme Court) held that coaching of students
for particular examination does not amount to imparting education and such coaching
institute is not a charitable institution within the meaning of section 2(15) of the
Act. Accordingly, coaching centres are not educational institutions existing for
charitable purposes falling within the ambit of sections 10, 11 and 12 of the Act. As
such, exemptions described above are not available to them. Their income is to be
taxed under the provisions applicable to normal business under sections 15 to 59 of
the Act.

39
3.2.5 Salient features of changes in law after 1 April 1999
• Educational institutions run other than by trusts, could accumulate upto 25 percent
of income with effect from assessment year 2000-01 which could be applied to
educational purposes within a period of ten years in line with the facility available
to educational institutions run by charitable trusts.
• Finance Act, 2002 reduced the percentage of accumulation of income from 25
percent to 15 percent and the period of 10 years to 5 years and these changes
have been made applicable to educational institutions run both by trusts and other
than trusts with affect from assessment year 2002-03.
• Finance Act, 2003 inserted section 139(4C) which provided that if the total
income of any educational institution not working for the purpose of profit
exceeded the taxable limit without giving effect to provisions of section 10(23C)
(vi), such institution shall furnish its return of income failing which penalty of
Rs. 100 can be imposed for each day of default under section 272A(2)(e) of the
Act. However educational institutions covered under section 10(23C) (iiiab) &
(iiiad) have been left out of the purview of filling returns of income under this
provision.
• It has also been provided that where the educational institutions are approved
under section 10(23C) (vi) and the prescribed authority is not satisfied about
genuineness of their activities or whose activities are not being carried out in
accordance with the conditions subject to which these were approved, it may
after giving a reasonable opportunity, withdraw the approval.
3.3 Objectives
Audit reviewed the efficiency of assessment of various educational institutions,
with a view to ascertaining:
3.3.1 whether all private schools & colleges and coaching centres are on the
records of the Income Tax Department and are subject to assessments;
3.3.2 whether adequate steps have been taken by the department to bring all the
private schools & colleges and coaching centres into the tax net and results of such
efforts are quantified;
3.3.3 the extent of irregularities and mistakes of commission and omission in the
assessments of the institutions:
3.3.4 whether there exists any machinery within the department to exercise
adequate and necessary checks in this area of potential and reported misuse; and
3.3.5 whether tax laws have been enacted with clear, unamiguous and effective
provisions for their administration and for prevention of abuse or misuse.
3.4 Scope of review
Review covered assessments of selected private educational institutions, schools,
colleges and coaching centres run either by charitable trusts or by private management
imparting education including in the fields of computer, banking, civil services,
medical, engineering, higher education etc. completed during the period 1999-2000
to 2001-2002. Some cases pertaining to earlier assessment years have also been
selected to assess the efficiency of administration of the exemptions claimed under
section 10(22) of the Act.

40
3.5 Audit methodology
Audit prepared a database of 62,279 private schools, colleges and coaching centres
which were other than those funded by Government, from different sources such as
advertisements appearing in newspapers and magazines, Directorates of Education,
telephone directories etc. These educational institutions were thereafter classified
CIT wise based on their addresses/geographical location and separate lists were
prepared. Such lists were forwarded to the respective CITs during January 2003 and
February 2003 for confirmation of receipt of returns or otherwise from these
institutions. No response was received from the CITs confirming receipt of return
of these institutions. Audit thereafter, could locate assessments of 10,376 educational
institutions from the demand and collection registers of selected assessing units.
3.6 Sample size
There were 2110 assessing units (524 offices of DCITs/ACITs and 1586 offices
of ITOs) in the audit jurisdiction located in 17 States namely, Andhra Pradesh, Assam,
Bihar, Delhi,  Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Kerala, Karnataka, Madhya
Pradesh, Maharashtra, Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu, West Bengal and Uttar
Pradesh.
3.6.1 Audit covered 50 percent offices of DCITs/ACITs and 25 percent offices of
ITOs in metro cities and 75 percent offices of DCITs/ACITs and 25 percent offices
of ITOs in other cities. 100 percent of assessments completed after scrutiny were
selected. 50 percent of assessments completed in summary manner were selected
in metro cities and 25 percent in other than metro cities.
3.6.2 Based on the above sample size, audit selected 855 assessment units (322
offices of DCITs/ ACITs and 535 offices of ITOs) and examined assessments in
respect of 5,558 educational institutions out of 10,376 educational institutions found
recorded in the selected assessment units.
3.7 Constraints
The department does not maintain any separate database of educational institutions.
Audit had to collect details of assessments in respect of educational institutions by
referring to demand and collection registers of selected assessment units and
experience of previous audits.
3.7.1 The department did not produce requisitioned assessment records to audit
as shown below:
Table 2: Non production of records by the department
Name of State No. of records No. of records not Percentage of non
called for by audit produced to audit production
Kerala 1050 946 93
Orissa 79 30 38
Jharkhand 259 159 57
Rajasthan 290 58 20
Tamil Nadu 336 84 24
West Bengal 1209 67 6
Delhi 1090 721 66
Gujarat 1911 1160 61
Total 2392 1344 56

41
3.7.2 Assessing officers generally stated that records were not produced because
of non existence of separate and exclusive database of such institutions and also
dislocation of records consequent to restructuring of the department. It was, however,
essential that department should have maintained data of such institutions for
exercising control over receipt of returns of income and ensuring compliance with
the Act. Further, more than two years had elapsed after restructuring of the department
within which time assessment records should have been handled, stored and
documented properly.
3.7.3 Draft audit reviews of effectiveness of assessments of private schools, colleges
and coaching centres were forwarded to the respective CCITs/CITs (Audit) by the
field audit offices between July 2003 to September 2003 for their comments Review
report was issued to Ministry on 18 November 2003. Reply was awaited.
3.8 Database of educational institutions
There is no systematic and organized approach in the department to ensure that all
educational institutions which are required to fulfil certain obligations under the Act
are in fact doing so before claiming the prescribed benefit or exemption. Though the
Act has been amended through Finance Act, 2003 making it obligatory on the part of
educational institutions not working for the purpose of profit to file the return, audit
noticed that no specific guidelines or monitoring mechanism have been introduced to
ensure that amendment could be given effect to by the assessing officers.
3.8.1 Out of the database of 62,279 educational institutions collected from
different sources, audit could locate only 10,376 institutions from the demand and
collection registers of 855 selected assessment units against the total existing 2110
assessment units.
3.8.2 The department had not made any effort to identify revenue potential in this
field by effective co-ordination and correlation with the State government or
universities or other regulatory authorities. The department could have effectively
exercised control over receipt of  return by serving notices to the defaulting private
schools/colleges and coaching centres by keeping track through a proper control
mechanism after compiling the data themselves. Department started serving notices
to the assessees after audit requisitions assessments for review.
3.9 Non selection of assessments for scrutiny
The department completed 95.5 percent of the assessments of educational
institutions selected by audit only in summary manner during the period 1999-2000
to 2002-03 as shown below:—
Table 3: Selection of cases for scrutiny assessments
Name of state No. of Total number No. of No. of Percentage
assessing of scrutiny summary scrutiny
units selected assessments assessments assessments assessments
by audit made
1 2 345 6
Delhi 59 690 78 612 11.3
Andhra 71 1242 130 112 10.5
Pradesh
Karnataka 63 334 27 307 8

42
1 2 345 6
Maharashtra 61 1242 47 1195 3.8
West Bengal 37 1142 44 1098 3.9
Rajasthan 61 564 14 550 2.5
Tamil Nadu 85 1640 23 1617 1.4
Punjab 60 290 1 289 0.34
Orissa 18 630 Nil 630 Zero
Total 515 7719 348 7719 4.5
3.9.1 In Maharashtra charge, all 402 assessments of educational institutions in
Thane, Kolhapur, Nagpur, Aurangabad charge during the years 1999-2000 to 2001-
2002 were completed in summary manner.
3.9.2 The department completed about 97 percent of all assessments in summary
manner in 2000-01 and 2001-02. Unless cases involving fulfilment of special
conditions for claiming exemption of income such as the assessments of educational
institutions are identified and adequate number are selected for scrutiny, the
department will have no means to ensure effective compliance of law in such cases.
3.9.3 Audit scrutiny revealed that the department was not in a position to ensure
application of the special provisions of the Act in respect of educational institutions in
95 percent of cases available with the assessing officers that were completed in summary
manner. Board have not issued any specific instruction for selection of cases for scrutiny
relating to the educational institutions during the period covered in this review.
3.10 Widening the tax base of educational institutions
Prevention of tax evasion and widening of the tax  base are two of the most
important functions of the department and could be achieved through  the
performance of  Central Information Branch and survey operations.
3.11 Central Information Branch (CIB)
In order to fulfil the above objects the deparment had, with effect from 1 July
1997, commissioned Central Information Branch (CIB) under a Commissioner which
collects information about assessees from different sources with respect to their
potential for yielding income tax and passes it to the concerned assessing officers.
Thereafter, the assessing officers are required to initiate appropriate action under
the Act to call for returns and/or examine the specific information in assessments.
3.11.1 Audit noticed that CIB had not collected and passed on any information to
the assessing officers in respect of educational institutions of assessing units selected
for review, during the period 1999-2000 to 2001-02. In Rajasthan,  however, CIB
collected 81 cases of educational institutions in Jaipur, Alwar, Udaipur, Ajmer and
Kota charges of which details in respect of 10 cases falling in Udaipur, Ajmer and
Kota charges were passed on to the assessing officers which were brought into the
tax net. In other charges, assessing officers stated that the above information could
not be collected as the required code for private schools/colleges and coaching centres
was created by the Board vide their instructions issued only in October 2002.
3.12 Survey operations
The assessing officers are empowered under sections 133A & 133B of the Act to
survey the business premises of the taxpayer to locate assessees and unearth
unaccounted income.

43
3.12.1 Audit examined the records of CITs (Investigating Circles) to see whether
the department had taken adequate steps to bring all the private schools, colleges and
coaching centres into tax net during the period 1999-00 to 2001-02 through the
mechanism of survey.
3.12.2 Audit noticed that no surveys were conducted in Mumbai, Thane, Pune,
Aurangabad, Kolhapur and Nagpur, In Delhi, only one CIT confirmed that no surveys
were conducted and other 13 CITs did not furnish reply. In Tamil Nadu charges, DIT
(Exemption) and CIT-VIII Chennai confirmed that no such surveys were conducted
and replies from 16 CITs were awaited. In Andhra Pradesh, only one private educational
institution in Visakhapatnam charge and 7 in Vijayawada charge were brought into
the tax net. In Rajasthan, department conducted 1138 surveys and only one educational
institution was brought into tax net. In other charges, no surveys were reported to be
conducted.
3.12.3 Department should utilise powers of survey operations effectively and
efficiently to widen the tax base in respect of educational institutions.
3.13 Results of examination of assessments of educational institutions
Audit noticed 650 cases involving tax effect of Rs.174.18 crore relating to
procedural lapses/irregularities, incorrect application of income, diversion of funds
for non charitable purposes, income escaping assessment and non-levy of penalty
for non filing of returns and other omissions during examination of assessments of
private schools & coaching centres, as narrated below.
3.14 Procedural Lapses/irregularities
3.15 Irregular exemptions without approval/registration from prescribed
authority
An educational institution existing solely for educational purposes and not for
the purpose of profit and whose aggregate annual receipts exceed Rs.one crore is
required to obtain an approval from the prescribed authority for claiming exemption
of income. The assessee has to submit its application in the prescribed form to the
Board/DGIT (with effect from April 2001 to CCIT/DI (Exemption) for approval
which shall have effect at any time for a period not exceeding three years.
3.15.1 With effect from 1 April 1997, every trust needed to obtain registration to
become eligible to claim exemption of income under sections 11&12. The assessee
has to make an application for registration to the CIT either before 1 July, 1973 or
within one year from the date of creation of trust. If application is made after expiry
of the aforesaid period, the Commissioner on reasonable grounds may condone the
delay. Every order granting or refusing registration shall be passed before the expiry
of six months from the end of the month in which the application is received.
3.15.2 Above provisions indicate that educational institutions run either by non
trusts or trusts could claim exemption of their income under both the sections
10(23C)(vi)/11&12 according to their convenience as these sections are not mutually
exclusive in operation. There is no mechanism in the department to ensure that
exemption of income is granted only to those institutions who have obtained approval/
registration from prescribed authority. Further there is not time limit for granting
approval or rejection under section 10(23C) (vi) and there is no specific provision
for dealing with cases whose applications are pending for approval for any reason.
The assessing officer is not competent to grant exemption of income in such cases
without approval of prescribed authority.

44
PARAGRAPHS UNDER EXAMINATION
Exemption of income without approval of prescribed authority (paragraphs 3.17.1,
3.17.2 & 3.17.3)
3.17.1 In Karnataka,Bangalore charge, assessments of Desheeya Vidyashala
Samithi, Shimoga and Education Society of Sisters of  St. Joseph of  Cluny, Bangalore
for the assessment years 1999-00 to 2001-02 were completed in a summary manner
between January 2000 and March 2002. Audit scrutiny revealed that though the annual
aggregate receipts of the institutions crossed Rs. 1 crore they did not either get
themselves approved by the prescribed authority under section 10 (23C) (vi) or get
recognized under section 12 A of the Act. However, the assessing officer exempted
the income though he was not competent to do so. Non-compliance of either of the
provisions viz. sections 10 (23C) (vi) or 12A of the Act required withdrawal of
exemption. Failure to disallow the exemption resulted in under assessment of income
totalling Rs.81.32 lakh with consequent non levy of total tax and interest of Rs.30.51
lakh.
3.17.2 In Tamil Nadu charge, seven cases of educational institutions run by trusts
were noticed where there was no evidence available in the records regarding
submission of application for approval under section 10 (23C) (vi) by the assessees.
in another six cases, the institutions had submitted application but approvals of the
prescribed authority granting exemption were not available on record. However
exemption was allowed by the assessing officer in these cases without approval from
prescribed authority. These cases attracted levy of tax of Rs.6.73 crore.
3.17.3 In Delhi, DIT (Exemption) charge, the assessing officer completed the
assessments of three educational institutions, Oberoi Educational Society, St. Joseph
Academy and M/s DAV College Trust and Management Society run by trusts for the
assessment years 2000-01 to 2002-03 in summary/scrutiny manner after allowing
exemption under section 10 (23C) (vi). Audit scrutiny revealed that DGIT/DIT
(Exemption), Kolkata the competent authority had rejected the assessees' applications
on 30 August 2000, 19 June 2002 and 18 July 2002, for grant of approval under
section 10 (23C) (vi) on the grounds that the purpose of the institutions was not
solely educational. However the assessing officer irregularly granted exemption
of income without approval of DGIT/DIT which resulted in non-levy of tax of
Rs.23.35 lakh, Rs. 16.35 lakh and Rs.29.36 crore respectively for the three assessment
years.
Exemption granted without registration (paragraph 3.19)
Audit noticed 37 cases in Assam, Bihar, Kerala, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh,
Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal charges where educational institutions
run by trusts had not obtained registration under section 12A of the Act. The assessing
officers allowed exemption under sections 11 & 12 without registration resulting in
non levy of tax of Rs. 3.54 crore as shown in Appendix-6 at serial numbers 10 to 19.
Exemptions granted without audited accounts & audit report (paragraph 3.24.1)
Audit noticed 25 cases in Gujarat, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Orissa and Rajasthan
were  the educational institutions run by trusts for the assessment years 1999-2000 to
2001-02 claimed exemption without furnishing audited accounts and audit report. Non-
compliance of the above provision requried withdrawal of exemption in these cases
and levy of tax of Rs. 1.26 crore as shown in Appendix-6 at serial numbers 25 to 29.

 APPENDIX  6
Chapter III
Assessment of Private Schools, Colleges & Coaching Centres
(Rs. in lakh)
Sl. Name of assessee and Assessment Gist of mistakes Tax
No. CIT & CIT charge year effect
12 3 4 5
Supplement to Para 3.19
10. Kuarmunda don Bosco 1998-99 to Assessees had claimed exemption stating
Society Rourkela and 2001-02 that they were registered but registration
eight others, Orissa Summary numbers  were not  mentioned. Copies of
registration were also not made available
to audit. 94.80
11. St. Francies of Assisi 1 999-2000  to Educational institutions run by the Trusts
Church, Lazmi and 2001-02 were neither registered nor had applied for 93.26
14 others, Jorhat and Summary registration but exemption was granted by
Dibrugarh, Assam the assessing officer.
12. Computer Management 1999-2000 & Trusts were granted exemption without 89.70
Technical Education 2001-02 obtaining registration.
Society, Trichy and Summary
3 others Chennai,
Tamil Nadu
13. DA V Model School, CIT 1999-2000 to Assessee claimed exemption under section 21.70
Durgapur, Kolkata 2001-02 and granted by the assessing officer thought it
Summary was not registered under section 12A.
14. Indian Institute of 2001-02 Assessee claimed exemtption under section 18.50
Business and Summary 10(22) thought it was not registered and
Management, Patna, being coaching centre, provisions of
Bihar  exemption were not applicable
15. Our Lady of Nazerath 2001-02 In the absence of trust deeds, trust was not
School, Thane, Summary registered. The assessing officer however 12.28
Maharashtra allowed exemption for income of Rs.40.95
 lakh under section 11 without registration.
16. M/s Indo Friends 2000-01 Registration was granted with effect from 7.39
Foundations Indore, Summary assessment year 2001-02. Hence assessee
Madhya Pradesh was not eligible for exemption for assessment
 year 2000-01.
17. Ettumanoorappan 2000-01 Perusal of audited accounts revealed that the
Educational Society, and 1995-96 to assessees had excess of income over 6.33
Pentecost Educational 1997-98 expenditure. Exemption under section 11
Society, Kottayam, Summary was not admissible as registration granted
Kerala under section  12A was effecive from
April 2002.
18. Millat Education Society, 2001-02 Trust was not registered under section 12A. In
Patna, Bihar Summary addition, it received voluntary contribution of 6.19
Rs. 15.30 lakh from different sources without
specific direction, which was not taxed.
45

46
19. M/s Vinay Prakash Vidya 1996-97 Assessees were granted exemption under
Bhawan Society, Jodhpur Scrutiny section 11 thought they were not registered 4.27
and one other at Ajmer, 1999-2000 under section 12A.
Rajasthan Summary
25. Supplement to Para 3.24.1 1997-98 to Accounts were not audited and audit certificates
Kenda Education Society, 2001-02 not filed with the returns, though total income of
and 12 other cases Summary the in stitutions exceeded Rs. 50,000 without 64.65
Gujarat giving effect to the provisions of section 11 & 12.
26. Bhatkya Vimukta Jamati 1998-99 & Exemption under section 11 was allowed even 64.18
Shikshan Vikas, Pune and 2002-03 thought the requisite audit report was not
six at Kolhapur, Summary furnished along with the return of income.
Augrangabad, Thane,
Maharashtra
27. St. Stephen's School & 2000-01 to Audit Reports in the prescribed form No. 10B
Indian Institute of Science 2001-02 were not filed thought total income of the 51.23
and Management Hazari- Summary institutions exceeded Rs.50,000 without giving
bagh and Ranchi effect to the provisions of section 11 & 12.
Jharkahand
28. Gurunanak Public school, 1999-2000 Certified accounts were not filed along with
Sambalpur Orissa to 2001-02 returns of income. 4.02
Summary
29. M/s Sindhi Panchayat 1998-99 & Accounts of the assessee disclosed that Rs. 3.55
Education, Jaipur 1999-2000 Lakh was transferred to another institution, MC
Rajasthan Summary Sindhi Panchayat Sr. Hr. Secondary School.
Taking this into account, prescibed income limit
of Rs. 50,000 was exceeded. Audit Report in the
prescibed form No. 10B was not filed. 1.68
12 3 4 5

APPENDIX II
STATEMENT  OF  OBSERV A TIONS  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations and Recommendations
No. No. Deptt.
12 3 4
1. 92 Finance The F ield of education has withnessed unprecedented
(Revenue) change in the last decade with the emergence of a large
number of private educational institutions and coaching
centres all over the country. With a view to encourging
the promotion and development of education, income of
educational institutions established solely for the purpose
of education either on no-profit basis or run by charitable
trusts has been exempted from levy of income tax subject
to certain conditions.
2. 93 -do- Income Tax Act, 1961, provides for exemption of income
of educational institutions. Sections 11, 12 & 13 of the
Act, inter-alia deal with exemption in respect of income
of educational institutions run by charitable trusts.
Section 2(15) defines "Charitable purposes" to include
relief of the poor, education, medical relief and the
advancement of any other object of general public utility.
These institutions are required to fulfil certain conditions
to be eligible for availing exemption of income.
3. 94 Finance Upto assessment year 1998-99 income of educational
institutions existing solely for educational purposes and
not for purposes of profit was exempted under
section 10(22) of the Income Tax Act. Such institutions
could be run by any entity such as individual, Hindu
Undivided Family, association of persons, firms, company
and so on. These were not required mandatorily to file
returns of income till assessment year 2003-04.
4. 95 -do- The memorandum explaining the provisions in Finance Bill
1998, recognized that section 10(22) was widely misused in
the absence of any monitoring mechanism for checking
the genuineness of the activities of these institutions. This
clause of the section was therefore, omitted with effect
from 1 April 1999. It was made clear that educational
institutions, which are of charitable nature but not registered
as trusts might now claim exemption of income with certain
conditions as applicable to charitable trusts.
47
(Revenue)

48
5. 96 Finance The following provisions under clause 10(23C) were
(Revenue) inserted w.e.f. 1st April, 1999 for exemption of income
of educational institutions:
(a) Section 10(23) (iiiab)—An educational Institution,
which is wholly or substantially financed by the
Government, was exempt from levy of tax under this
section.
(b) Section 10(23C) (iiiad) — An educational Institution,
whose aggregate annual receipts did not exceed Rs. one
crore, was exempt under this section.
(c) Section 10(23C) (vi) — An educational Institution
with annual receipts of more than Rs. one crore could
claim exemption of income after obtaining approval from
the prescribed Income Tax Authority for a period not
exceeding three assessment years at any one time provided
it applied its income exclusively to the objects for which
it was established, under this Section.
(d) The Act does not separately deal with exemption of
income of coaching centres. Coaching Centres are not
educational institutions existing for charitable pruposes
falling within the ambit of sections 10, 11 and 12 of the
Act. As such, exemptions described above are not available
to them. Their income is to be taxed under the provisions
applicable to normal business under sections 15 to 59 of
the Act.
6. 97 -do- The Committee's examination of the subject is based on
the Audit review, which sought to ascertain the efficiency
of the Income Tax Department to assess various
educational institutions. The objectives of the Audit review
included whether all private educational institutions are
on the records of the Income Tax Department and are
subject to assessments; whether adequate steps have been
taken by the department to bring all the private educational
institutions into the tax net; whether there exists any
machinery in the department to exercise adequate and
necessary checks in this area and whether tax laws have
been enacted with clear, unambiguous and effective
provisions for their administration and for prevention of
abuse or misuse. While it is required of the Income Tax
Department to ensure through the operation of the Income
Tax Act that incomes of only genuine and eligible
12 3 4

49
institutions are exempted from levy of income tax and
correct amount of tax is paid by all institutions not so
exempt, the Committee during their examination of the
subject, noticed a number of inadequacies in the system
as well as deficiencies in the proper implementation of
tax laws which has resulted in substantial revenue loss to
the Government. These facts have been discussed in the
succeeding Paragraphs.
7. 98 Finance The Committee note that a large number of private schools,
(Revenue) colleges and coaching centres have come up whose
income is not so exempt from levy of income tax. The
Committee are concerned to note that there exists no
database in the Department of Revenue, Ministry of
Finance, in respect of such private educational institutions
and coaching centres. The Committee regret to observe
that there is no systematic and organised approach in the
Department to ensure that all educational institutions,
which are required to fulfil certain obligations under the
Act to claim the exemptions are, in fact, doing so before
claiming the tax benefit. The Secretary (Department of
Revenue) conceded during evidence that at present they
do not have activity-wise databases The Committee are
constrained to point out that the Ministry of Finance, with
large resources at their command have not made any effort
to indentify the total assessees in the country by having
effective co-ordination with the State Governments/
Universities/other regulatory authorities which has
resulted in substantial revenue loss to the exchequer. The
Committee understand that various projects are underway
in the Directorate General of Income-tax (Systems),
which would help in building up a scientific database and
for this the expertise of professional agencies is proposed
to be utilised by the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue). The CIB Section of Income Tax Department is
also stated to be engaged in collection of information
and preparing a database of schools, colleges and coaching
centres as obtained from various sources. The Committee
would like the Ministry to undertake these proposed
measures expeditiously with a view to creating a reliable
database within four months of the presentation of this
Report. The database, once prepared, should be updated
periodically so that none of the potential assesses escape
the scrutiny of Income Tax Department.
12 3 4

50
8. 99 Finance The Committee note that the bulk of assessments of
(Revenue) private schools, colleges and charitable trusts are by and
large completed in a summary manner, which is not
desirable. The Committee would like to point out that
unless cases involving assessments of educational
institutions are identified and adequate number are
selected for scrutiny, the department will have no means
to ensure effective compliance of tax laws in such cases.
The Chairperson, CBDT conceded during evidence that
98 per cent of cases are completed on the basis of returns
filed by assessees and about two per cent of the cases are
picked up for scrutiny. The Committee have now been
informed that guidelines have been issued on 20.09.2004
to pick up all the cases where exeption is claimed under
section 11 of the Income Tax Act and the gross receipt
exceeds Rs. 5 crore for scrutiny assessment. Besides, a
residual clause has been inserted to enable the field
officers to select any other case for scrutiny with the prior
approval of the Chief Commissioner of Income Tax
(CCIT) concerned. The Committee would like to point out
that the Ministry should have considered  these steps
prior to being pointed out by Audit. Considering the very
fact that large revenue potential exist in assessment of all
eligible private educational institutions, the Committee
recommend that not only the guidelines issued by the
Department in this regard should be followed scrupulously
but discreation should also be allowed to the assessing/
supervisory officers to randomly pick up cases for
scrutiny so as to prevent these institutions from evading
the payment of their legitimate dues to the Government.
9. 100  -do- The Committee's examination of the subject reveals that so
far the Department has not been able to widen the tax base
by identifying such private educational institutions run by
trusts or other than trusts which earn huge sums of money
by functioning in a not—so charitable manner. The
Committee feel that in order to discourage the practice of
claiming exemption by ineligible institutions under the
existing provisions of the Income Tax Act, it is high time
that the Department applies the provisions of tax
exemptions with utmost care and only to genuine and
eligible institutions. For this, it is essential that the
Department should prepare and monitor a comprehensive
database of all such institutions and make it mandatory
12 3 4

51
for them to file their annual income tax returns. The
Committee have already emphasised the need for creating
a reliable database earlier in this Report.
The Committee note that Section 139 (4C) (e) makes its
mandatory for educational institutions that exist solely
for the purpose of education and not running with the profit
motive, to file their returns in case their income exceeds
Rs. 50,000. The Committee, however, understand that
there is no central agency in the Department to monitor
the filing of income tax returns by educational institutions.
Consequently, the Department is not in a position to ensure
that all private schools, colleges and coaching centre file
their returns of income. It is, therefore, not clear to the
Committee as to how the income of educational
institutions could be assessed correctly in the absence of
complete information about potential assessees. In
response to the Committee's view that every educational
institution should be mandatorily required to file returns,
it has been informed by the Ministry that this has been
taken care of by inserting Sub-section (4C) to Section
139 w.e.f. 1st April, 2003 in respect of educational
institutions with aggregate receipts above Rs. 1 crore. The
Committee have also been informed that the proposal to
make filing of returns compulsory for educational
institutions is under active consideration of the
Department. The Committee hope that an early  decision
will be taken in the matter. They recommend that a
foolproof mechanism may be evolved to ensure that all
the private educational institutions (as per the databases
to be created) which have assessable income file their
returns regularly and the defaulters are brought to book.
The Committee not that another tool for unearthing
undisclosed income available with the Department is
Section 133A and 133B  of the Income Tax Act that
empower the assessing officers to survey the business
premises of taxpayers to locate new assessees. However,
they feel that adequate steps have bot been taken by the
concerned authorities to bring all the private schools,
colleges and coaching centres into the tax net through
adequate and focussed use of the said power to conduct
surveys. The Committee note that no surveys were
conducted in Bombay, Thane, Pune, Aurangabad, Kolhapur
and Nagpur during the period 1999-2000 to 2001-2002.
12 3 4

52
In Delhi, only one CIT confirmed to Audit that no survey
was conducted and the other 13 CITs did not furnish a
reply. In Tamil Nadu charge, DIT (Exemption) and CIT-
VIII, Chennai confirmed that no surveys were conducted.
In Andhra Pradesh, only one private educational institution
in Visakhapatnan charge and 7 in Vijayawada charge were
brought into tax net. In Rajasthan, the Department had
conducted 1138 surveys and only one educational
institution was brought into tax net. In other charges, no
surveys were reported to be conducted. The Ministry have
asserted that a large number of surveys are conducted every
year and that various field formations have reported about
surveys being conducted on such institutions. The
Committee find it incomprehensible as to how in the
absence of any reliable database (as commented earlier),
it is possible for the assessing officer to use the power
of survey efficiently. Moreover, the aforesaid argument
does not seem to carry weight as the Ministry have not
supported their contention by furnishing exact figures of
the number of surveys conducted by them during last 2-3
years and the number of new assessees identified as a
result thereof. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the details of the cases which were brought under the
tax net during the preceeding two years, as a result of the
efforts initiated by them alongwith the number of new
assessees that have been brought to tax net and the amount
of additional revenue realised from them. The Committee
hope that with creation of a reliable database of private
educational institutions, the Department would instruct
the assessing officers to use the powers available with
them under relevant provisions of the Act judiciously to
identify potential taxpayers and progressively wipe out
the widening gap between taxpaying and tax-evading
educational institutions.
10. 101 Finance The Committee note that an educational institution existing
(Revenue) solely for educational purposes and not for the purpose
of profit and whose aggregate annual receipts exceed Rs.
one crore is required to obtain an approval from the
prescribed authority for claiming exemption of income.
With effect from 1 April 1997, every trust needed to
obtain registration to become eligible to claim exemption
of income under sections 11 & 12. The assessee has to
make an application for registration to the CIT either
12 3 4

53
before 1 July, 1973 or within one year from the date of
creation of trust. If application is made after expiry of
the aforesaid period, the Commissioner on reasonable
grounds may condone the delay. Every order granting or
refusing registration shall be passed before the expiry of
six months from the end of the month in which the
application is received. These provisions indicate that
educational institutions run either by non trusts or trusts
could claim exemption of their income under both the
sections 10(23C)(vi) and 11 & 12 according to their
convenience as these sections are not mutually exclusive
in operation.
The Committee are constrained to point out that there is
no system in the Department at present to ensure that
exemption of income is granted only to those educational
institutions which have obtained approval/registration
from prescribed authority. In support of this inadequacy a
number of instances have been cited by the Audit in the
Paragraphs under review. The Committee are, therefore,
not convinced by the plea of the Department that the
system of giving approvals is rigid and meticulous and
that every effort is made so that only genuine and non-
profit making institutions get approval. The Committee
have also been given to understand that a number of
suggestions under consideration of the Ministry in this
regard are that: (i) a clause may be inserted in Section
10(23C) so as to provide for mandatory audit of accounts
and enclosing the audit report with the return of income
every year; (ii) Penalty u/s 271B may be made applicable
to audit u/s 10(23C) and 12A; and (iii) Institutions should
apply to the Assessing Officer in the specified form and
specify the purpose for accumulation irrespective of the
fact whether the accumulation is 15% or more. According
to the Ministry, Form No. 3A should also be modified so
as to include the nature of activity in the Return. if this
information is not given, the return may be treated as
defective u/s 139(9); and include a column for number &
date for approval u/s 10(23C). Needless to say that these
measures now proposed by the Ministry should have been
taken much earlier. The Committee expect the Ministry
to finalise these proposals and implement the same
expeditiously.
12 3 4

54
11. 102 Finance The Committee note that prior approval of prescribed
(Revenue) authority is required for claiming exemption of income
by an educational institution existing solely for
educational purposes and not for the purpose of profit
and whose aggregate annual receipts exceed Rs. one crore.
However, there is no time limit for granting such approval
or rejection under Section 10(23C) (vi) and there is no
specific provision for dealing with cases where
applications are pending for approval for some reason.
The assessing officer is not competent to grant exemption
of income in such cases without approval of prescribed
authority. Citing the examples of delay in grant or
rejection of approvals, the Audit noticed in Maharashtra
charge, that as on 31 March 2003, 103 cases were pending
approval for exemption. Out of 103 cases, 88 were
pending with DIT(Exemption) Mumbai alone. Out of 88
pending cases, 24 were pending for more than two years,
33 were pending for more than one year and institutions
were claiming exemption under section 10 (23C)(vi)
without approval of prescribed authority. Thus the
objective of introducing the new provision 10(23C)(vi)
for grant of approval after examination of the genuineness
of the activities of such institutions has not been served.
Keeping in view these shortcomings, the Committee feel
that there is no reason as to why appropriate legal
provisions could not be incorporated in the Act so as to
specify a fixed time limit for disposal of such
applications. The proposal to fix the time limit is now
stated to be under active consideration of the Ministry.
The Ministry have also assured to put the names of the
institutions, that have been granted registration/approvals,
on their website. The Committee would like to be
informed of the precise steps taken in this regard. They
cannot but over emphasised that there should be an inbuilt
system in the Department to review these shortcomings
noticed from time to time so as to suomoto take suitable
remedial measures without any delay.
12. 103 -do- Chapter-III of the Audit Report on Assessment of Private
Schools, Colleges and Coaching Centres has highlighted
the cases relating to exemption of income without approval
of prescribed authority in paras 3.17.1, 3.17.2 & 3.17.3;
exemption granted without registration in para 3.19; and
exemptions granted without audited accounts and audit
12 3 4

55
reports in Para 3.24.1. In para nos. 3.17.1 to 3.17.3 two cases
in Karnataka region, thirteen cases in Tamil Nadu and three
cases in Delhi region have been reported which attracted
non-levy of tax and interest of Rs. 36.79 crore. Similarly in
para 3.19, 37 cases in Assam, Bihar, Kerala, Maharashtra,
Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West
Bengal charges have been identified where the exemption
of income without registration resulted in non-levy of tax
of Rs. 3.54 crore. In case of para 3.24.1, exemptions were
reportedly granted without audited accounts in 24 cases in
Gujarat, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Orissa and Rajasthan,
that led to non-levy of  tax of Rs. 1.26 crore.
In respect of Para 3.17.1, the Committee note that failure on
the part of the Department to disallow exemption in the
case of two assessees in Karnataka, Bangalore Charge,
viz. Desheeya Vidyashala Samithi, Shimoga and Education
Society of Sisters of St. Joseph of Cluny, Bangalore
resulted in under assessment of income totalling Rs. 81.32
lakh with consequent non-levy of total tax and interest of
Rs. 30.51 lakh. Although the annual aggregate receipts of
the institutions crossed Rs. one crore, they did not get
themselves approved by the prescribed authority under
Section 10(23C) (vi) or get recognised under Section 12A
of the Act. Moreover, the assessing officer exempted the
income though he was not competent to do so. The
Committee feel that mere application u/s 10(23C)(vi)
does not entitle an assessee to exemption which can be
allowed only on receipt of approval from competent
authority. The Ministry have explained that in these cases,
the procedure for granting of approvals could not be
followed as the cases were summarily assessed u/s
143(1). Regarding remedial steps taken to withdraw the
exemption of income granted to those institutions and to
recover tax due from them, the Committee have been
informed that the proceedings u/s 148/147 have been
initiated in both the cases which are likely to be
completed by 31.03.2005. The tax demand and the interest
thereon according to the Ministry will be recovered
expeditiously thereafter. The Committee regret to point
out that the proceedings were made to wait till 31st
March, 2005 for completion, when the cases were already
more than 3 years old. The Committee recommend that
the Ministry should put in place a suitable mechanism for
12 3 4

56
completion of remedial action on priority basis in similar
cases, instead of waiting till the last day of the Financial
Year, so that the revenue could be realised faster.
13. 104 Finance In T amil Nadu charge, seven cases of educational
(Revenue) institutions run by trusts were noticed, where no evidence
was available in the records regarding submission of
application by the assessees for approval under section
10(23C)(vi). In six other cases, the concerned institutions
had submitted applications, but the approvals of the
prescribed authority granting exemption were not available
on record. However, exemption was allowed by the
assessing officer in these cases without approval from
prescribed authority. These cases attracted levy of tax of
Rs. 6.73 crore. Further, annual receipts of the institutions
exceeded the prescribed limit of Rs. one crore and they
were required to get approval u/s 10(23C) (vi). Out of 13
cases, six assessees had applied for approval u/s 10(23C)
(vi), which were pending and assessing officers were
granting exemption u/s 11 & 12. The Ministry have now
informed the Committee that the approval u/s 10(23C)
(vi) has since been granted in the case of Hindu
Educational Organisation in November, 2003. According
to the Ministry the notification u/s 10(23C) (vi) was
issued in the aforesaid case, though the income was
exempted u/s 11 of the Act. The Committee would like to
point out that the principle issue here is availability of
alternate provisions, namely sections 11/12 and Section
10(23C) (vi), in the statute to the assessees and the
resultant redundancy of Section 10(23C) (vi), when
assessees could end up avoiding the rigours of detailed
examination and prolonged procedure contemplated under
Section 10(23C) (vi) of the Act. The Committee feel that
since two separate Clauses providing exemption under
Sections 10(23C), 11 and 12 overlap each other, these
are being misused by educational institutions, apart from
creating flaws in their tax assessments. They, therefore,
recommend that this deficiency should be suitably
resolved by necessary amendments in the provisions or
by introducing a single section/clause for exemption of
educational institutions, whether run by trusts or other
than trusts. They further urge the Ministry to strive in order
to ensure that institutions flouting the legal requirement
with impunity should be dealt sternly.
12 3 4

57
14. 105 Finance The Committee are distressed to find that irregular
(Revenue) grant of exemption without approval of DGIT/DIT in case
of three educational institutions Oberoi Educational
Society, St. Joseph Academy and M/s DAV College Trust
and Management Society, run by trusts in Delhi DIT
(Exemption) charge, resulted in non-levy of tax of Rs.
23.35 lakh, Rs. 16.35 lakh and Rs. 29.36 crore
respectively for the assessment years 2000-01 to
2002-03. In case of Oberoi Education Society, the
Department took almost three years to process the
application  under section 10(23C) (vi), which was ultimately
not approved. It was also found that the approval u/s
10(23C) (vi) in all the cases has not yet been given and in
the first two cases the matter is still being investigated.
The Committee are surprised that the Department took three
years to decide for grant of exemption under section 10(23C)
(vi) and rejection by DG (IT), Kolkata in the case of Oberoi
Education Society. Oberoi Education Society is a peculiar
case when the department took almost three years to
process the application under section
10 (23C)(vi) which has ultimately not approved. Whereas,
there is no compulsion on the assessee to avail the
exemption as it is free to invoke section 11/12, being a
trust, there is also no compulsion on the department to
finally decide applicability of section 10(23C)(vi), a
provision that was specifically introduced to ensure
regorous application of provisions for exemptions. What
has surprised the Committee is the fact that there is no
mechanism available within the department to identify or
link the cases of trusts and those seeking exemption of
section 10(23C)(vi). The combined effect of all these
shortcomings is that a significant provision of the Act,
introduced with specific purpose, is not enforced. The
Committee feel that this needs to be seriously examined
and suitable time limit fixed for deciding cases of
application u/s 10(23C) (vi) and penalizing such
institutions which do not follow the requirement instead
of routinely allowing exemption u/s 11/12A. From the
foregoing, the Committee are constrained to observe that
loopholes in enforcement of significant provisions of the
Act need to be seriously examined and suitable time limit
fixed for deciding cases of application u/s 10 (23C) (vi).
They feel that the very purpose of having a law is defeated,
if it is not implemented earnestly. The Committee,
therefore, desire that as and when such cases of illegal or
12 3 4

58
irregular exemptions come to the notice of the Department,
suitable punitive action should be taken expeditiously
against the erring officials without fear or favour, in order
to prevent consequential loss to the exchequer.
15. 106 Finance With effect from 1st April, 1997, every trust is required
(Revenue) to obtain registration to become eligible to claim
exemption of income u/s 11 and 12. The test checks by
Audit has revealed that in 37 cases falling in Assam, Bihar,
Kerala, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan,
Tamil Nadu and West Bengal charges, where educational
institutions run by trusts had not obtained registration
u/s 12A of the Act; the assessing officers allowed
exemption under sections 11 and 12 without registration
resulting in non-levy of tax of Rs. 3.54 crore. In their
response, the Ministry have stated that most of the cases
were completed u/s 143(1), wherein the Assessing Officer
could not have disturbed the declared income. Moreover,
in few cases, the institutions had approvals under the
relevant clauses of section 10(23C) and, thus, there was
no requirement to be registered u/s 12A. The Ministry
have taken the stand that these sections are not mutually
exclusive and are applicable to educational institutions at
the option of the assessee applicant. While the Committee
desire that the Assessing Officers must ensure that eligible
assessees get registered before claiming any exemption,
they also feel that cases of trusts must be processed
u/s 11 & 12 that exclusively deal with exemption in respect
of educational institution run by Charitable Trusts and not
under 10(23C) or 143(1) which do not bind them to get
themselves registered before claiming exemptions. The
Committee are also not impressed by the assertion of the
Ministry that the existing system of granting registrations
is a rigorous one and registration is granted only after
complete satisfaction of the statutory authorities, as the
Ministry themselves have admitted that they have reopened
the cases where the audit has objected that the educational
institutions run by trusts were allowed exemptions without
registration. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
it should be ensured that trusts that claim tax exemptions
for running educational institutions invariably get
themselves registered. Besides, they desire that all cases
where exemptions have been granted wrongly or illegally
must be probed with a view to fixing responsibility. The
12 3 4

59
Committee would like to be intimated about precise steps
taken in this direction.
16. 107 Finance Where the total income of the trust or institutions as
(Revenue) computed under the Act without giving effect to the
provisions of Sections 11 and 12 exceeded Rs. 50
thousand in any previous year, the accounts of such trusts
or institutions should be audited for such accounting year
and audit report filed in Form 10B alongwith the return
of income for the relevant assessment year. The
Committee note that in 25 cases falling in Gujarat,
Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Orissa and Rajasthan charges, the
educational institutions run by the trusts for the
assessment years 1999-2000 to 2001-2002 claimed
exemption without furnishing audited accounts and audit
reports. According to the Committee non-compliance of
the above provision required withdrawal of exemptions
in these cases and levy of tax of Rs. 1.26 crore. In most
of the cases according to the Ministry, the returns were
processed under Section 143(1) of the Income Tax Act
and the assessing officers have no powers to make
adjustments in the income declared by the assessees. The
Ministry have admitted that there is no special mechanism
to identify such errant educational institutions, the existing
system of scrutinising returns is deterrent enough for
unscrupulous assessees to make such unlawful claims.
The role of internal audit is limited in these cases as the
internal audit wing is required to see only 0.5% of all the
cases processed u/s 143(1). As such, 99.5% of such cases
do not pass through the audit scrutiny of the internal audit
wing of the Department. The Committee are not aware
whether the aforesaid cases have been selected for
scrutiny by the concerned authorities subsequent to the
issue of audit observation. As the Ministry have themselves
admitted that there is no special mechanism in place, the
Committee need to be satisfied as to how the Ministry
consider the existing system of scrutinising returns as
adequate. The Committee would like to be informed, if
any, measures are contemplated to strengthen the system
in this regard.
17. 108 -do- From the foregoing it is evident that the laws providing
tax exemption to educational institutions suffer from
various inadequacies, for example, the new provisions
enacted under Section 10(23C)(iiiab)/(iiiad) do not yet
12 3 4

60
provide any monitoring mechanism for checking the
genuineness of activities of institutions claiming
exemptions. There is no mechanism to ensure that the
institution could claim exemption only under section 11
and 12 or 10 (23C) (vi) of the Act. Also, there is no time
limit for granting approvals under clause 10(23C)(vi) and
nothing has been specified as to how in the absence of
approval, exemption of income during that period is to be
regulated. Besides there is no provision in the case of
exemption under Section 10(23C) (vi) to furnish the
audited accounts with audit certificate alongwith returns
of income and finally, no monitoring mechanism currently
is available to monitor the investment of unutilised surplus
of the institutions u/s 11(5) of the Act. While conceding
that there exists a loophole, the Secretary (Revenue)
informed the Committee during evidence that they will
have to study a little more to see if they can make use of
both the provisions [(Sections 11, 12 and 10(23C)(vi)]
or synchronise it by merging the two and have a single
provision. The Committee are also of the view that the
purpose of insertion of new Clause under Section (23C)
may not have been yielded the desired results and had
rather created more complications and infructuous work.
While observing that the existing tax laws are already very
complex, the Committee feel that it is imperative that the
law is made simpler and clearer to avoid any
misinterpretation/misuse of the same. They, therefore,
desire that the Department of Revenue should undertake
such an exercise expeditiously in consultation with the
Ministry of Law as well as the Audit and the lacunae, if
any, in the law be plugged suitably.
18. 109 Finance The Committee are of the view that apart from earning
(Revenue) income from educational activities, several private
institutions earn income by asking for donations/
contributions from their wards in the name of building
fund, swimming pool charges, calamity fund, poor fund
etc. although it has been judicially held in case of
Unnikrishnan J.P. & Others Vs State of Andhra Pradesh &
Others, 1993 AIR 2178, SCR(1) 594 that the educational
institutions cannot charge more than the fees fixed by the
Government in any form, either as donation or capitation
fees. The Committee are convinced that there is no dearth
of cases where big amount as donations are taken before
allowing admission of children in various schools. During
12 3 4

61
evidence the Committee had, therefore, desired that these
funds should form a part of the income of such institutions
and be taxed and exemption should not be allowed on such
funds. The Ministry have subsequently agreed to consider
the proposal and take necessary suitable measures. The
Committee would like to be intimated of the precise steps
taken in this regard.
19. 110 Finance The Committee further find that certain educational
(Revenue) institutions are earning substantial income by lending their
premises for commercial activities and that there is no
restriction made by the Ministry on conducting such
unspecified/commercial activities in the premises of
educational institutions. In response to the Committee's
desire that educational institutions should be discouraged
to use its premises for this purpose, the Ministry had also
promised to consider the proposal and take necessary
suitable measures. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the outcome of the steps taken in this regard
in due course of time.
20. 111 -do- During their study visit to Kerala region on the subject
in November, 2004, the Committee were given to
understand by the concerned Income Tax Officials that
the performance of the region was not up to the mark in
respect of the completion of assessments, appeals etc.
The main reason attributed by them was the shortage of
staff. Out of 243 posts of Income Tax Inspectors, 192
posts were stated to be lying vacant. It may just be possible
that other regions might also be experiencing similar
problems. The Committee, therefore, recommend that
urgent steps are needed to assess the staff requirements
in all the regions so as to take prompt steps to fill up the
requisite vacancies wherever needed, expenditiously so
that the work, at least on this account, does not suffer.
The Committee also desire that the Department of Revenue
should explore the feasibility of delegating some powers
to Chief Commissioners/Commissioners of Income Tax
to recruit officials in Group "C" and "D" cadres to facilitate
speedy recruitment and early filling up of vacancies. As a
long time measure, the Ministry/CBDT should undertake
a detailed exercise of the overall manpower requirement
in all the regions so as to ensure optimum number of
persons at all levels with a view to ensuring smooth
functioning.
12 3 4

PART-II
MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2004-2005) HELD ON 20 JANUARY , 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1230 hrs. on 20 January, 2005 in Committee
Room "E", Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Dr. R. Senthil
6. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
7. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
8. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
9. Kunwar Revati Raman Singh
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
12. Shri R.K. Dhawan
13. Shri V . Narayanasamy
14. Shri Jairam Ramesh
15. Prof. R.B.S. V erma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Officers of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri M.S. Shekhawat — ADAI
2. Shri P. Sesh Kumar — Pr. Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue)
1. Shri K.M. Chandrasekhar — Secretary (Revenue)
2. Smt. Shobha Majumdar — Chairperson (CBDT)
3. Shri M.S. Darda — Member (A & J)
4. Shri Satish Chandra — Addl. Secretary (R)
62

63
2. At the outset, Chairman welcomed the Members and the officers of the Office of
C&AG of India. The officers from the office of the C&AG of India briefed
the Committee on specific points arising out of Chapter-III of Audit Report No. 13
of 2004 (Direct Taxes) relating to "Assessment of Private Schools, Colleges and
Coaching Centres" (Paragraph Nos. 3.17.1, 3.17.2, 3.17.3, 3.19 & 3.24.1). Thereafter,
representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) and the Central
Board of Direct Taxes were called and the Committee took their oral evidence. After
some discussion, Hon'ble Chairman directed the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Revenue) to furnish written information on all the points relating to the subject,
which were raised by the Members of the Committee during the evidence, at the
earliest.
3. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2005-2006) HELD ON 30TH MAY, 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hours to 1140 hours on 30th May, 2005 in Committee
Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
3. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
4. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
5. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri R.K. Dhawan
7. Dr. K. Malaisamy
8. Prof. R.B.S. Verma
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
2. Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Representatives of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Mamta Kundra — Pr. Director of Audit (Direct Taxes)
2. Mrs. Sumedha Verma Ojha — Director of Audit (Direct Taxes)
2. To begin with, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to
the sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee took up for consideration of the following Draft Reports:
(i) Original Report on Chapter III of C&AG's Report No. 13 of 2004 relating to
"Assessment of private schools, colleges and coaching centres" (Paras
3.17.1, 3.17.2, 3.17.3, 3.19 and 3.24.1).
(ii) Action Taken Report on 55th Report (13th Lok Sabha) on Chapter V of
C&AG's Report No. 12A of 2002 relating to "Refunds under Income Tax Act
of 1961".
4. The Committee adopted the same without any modifications/amendments and
authorised the Chairman to finalise the Draft Reports in the light of changes suggested
by Audited through factual verification, if any, or otherwise and to present the same to
Parliament in the next session.
*** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
64
MGIPMRND—1240LS—01-07-2005.