81
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE
OF AN AIRCRAFT FLEET IN THE
INDIAN AIR FORCE
MINISTRY  OF  DEFENCE
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2008-2009
EIGHTY-FIRST REPORT
FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

EIGHTY-FIRST REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF AN AIRCRAFT
FLEET IN THE INDIAN AIR FORCE
(MINISTRY OF DEFENCE)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.02.2009
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.02.2009
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
January, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka)

PAC No. 1883
Price :  Rs. 97
© BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the rules of procedure and conduct of business in
Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2008-2009) ....................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................. (v)
REPORT ........................................................................................................... 1
PART  I
BACKGROUND  ANALYSIS
I. Introductory ................................................................................... 1
II. Audit Review .................................................................................. 2
III. Operation and Utilization of Aircraft ............................................... 3
IV . Repairs and Maintenance ............................................................... 34
PART  II
RECOMMENDATIONS  AND  OBSERVATIONS
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2008-09) held
on 06.06.2008.................................................................................. 62
II. Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2008-09) held
on 09.01.2009.................................................................................. 65
III. Chapter-I of C&AG's Report No. 5 of 2007, Union Govt. Defence
Services—Air Force and Navy (Performance Audit) relating to
Operation and Maintenance of an Aircraft Fleet in Indian
Air Force ......................................................................................... 67
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-09)
**Shri Santosh Gangwar — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Furkan Ansari
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
***9. V acant
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
*11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Sita Ram Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
15. Shri Arun Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Raashid Alvi
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Prof. P.J. Kurien
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar — Committee Officer
*Elected w.e.f.  17th December, 2008  vice Shri Brajesh Pathak ceased to be a Member of
Committee consequent upon his election to Rajya Sabha.
**Elected w.e.f. 17th December, 2008 vice Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh resigned his seat in
Lok Sabha on 11th November, 2008.
***Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra resigned his seat in Lok Sabha w.e.f. 18th December, 2008.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Eighty-first Report relating to "Operation and Maintenance of an Aircraft
Fleet in the Indian Air Force" on Chapter I of the Report of C&AG of India for the year
ended 31 March 2006 (No. 5 of 2007), Union Government (Defence Services—Air
Force and Navy) Performance Audit.
2. The Report of the C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March, 2006 (No. 5 of
2007), Union Government (Defence Services—Air Force and Navy) Performance
Audit was laid on the Table of the House on 14th May, 2007.
3. The Committee took the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Defence on the subject at their sitting held on 6th June 2008. The Committee consi-
dered and finalised this Report at their sitting held on 9th January, 2009. Minutes of the
sittings form Part II of the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommen-
dations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the officers of the
Ministry of Defence for the cooperation extended by them in furnishing information
and tendering evidence before the Committee.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the
Committee.
N
EW DELHI; SANTOSH GANGWAR,
28 January, 2009 Chairman,
8 Magha, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

REPORT
“OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF  AN AIRCRAFT  FLEET  IN INDIAN
AIR FORCE”
PART I
BACKGROUND  ANALYSIS
I. INTRODUCTION
The Indian Air Force (IAF) contracted for procurement of 118 Aircraft 'A' (AN-32
Aircraft) and 64 spare engines at an aggregated cost of Rs. 495 crore between 1981 and
1987. These Aircraft are Medium Tactical Transport Aircraft (METAC) primarily used
for transport of troops and cargo, para-trooping, supply dropping and casualty
evacuation. They were inducted into squadron service between 1984 and 1991 to
replace aging Dakota, Caribu and Packet aircraft. Since then, they have been the
workhouse of the IAF's transport fleet, performing varied roles and operating in all
terrain conditions. They have also been  extensively employed to provide timely
response both for military and civil requirements. Over the years it has been reported
that thirteen aircrafts were lost in flying accidents and presently IAF is holding an
inventory of 105 Aircraft  'A'. They are being operated from different locations through
six IAF squadrons, one para trooping school, one Air Force Station and Training
School.
2. The aircraft consists of aero engines and airframe, which require maintenance
and overhaul at prescribed intervals. Airframe of Aircraft 'A' had an initial calendar life
of 15 years/20000 flying hours/ 15000 landings and Time Between Overhaul (TBO) was
6 years/4000 flying hours/3000 landings. As Total Technical Life (TTL) of airframes,
both in terms of landing and flying hours were not fully utilized, the technical life of the
Airframe was extended indigenously from 15 to 18 years in January 1999 and again
from 18 to 25 years in November 2001. However, the Air HQ (June 2006) had approached
the designer of the Aircraft 'A' for life extension of airframe further to 25 years for which
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM) had made a proposal. The service life of aero
engines was 3000 flying hours and the Time Between Overhaul (TBO) was 1000 hours.
In 1994-95, the service life of engine was extended from 3000 to 4000 flying hours and
TBO was increased from 1000 to 2000 flying hours. In 2003 and 2005, contracts have
been entered into with the OEM for full overhaul alongwith extension of life of the
engines up to 6000 hours. However, the OEM has not agreed to transfer the technology
for the same to IAF.
3. The flying task fixed by Government/Ministry of Defence is 66 hours per
month per aircraft. The maximum and minimum payload of the aircraft is 6700 kg. and
3000 kg. respectively. The passenger carrying capacity of the aircrat is 40 to 50. The
aircraft has a range of 1000 km. and is capable of landing and taking off from semi-
prepared advanced landing grounds. The operating squadrons/wings are responsible
for carrying out the first and second line servicing of the aircraft. Third and fourth line

2
repair/overhaul of airframes and aero engines are undertaken at Kanpur Base Repair
Depot and at Chandigarh Base Repair Depot respectively. The annual installed capacity
for overhaul of airframes is 18 at BRD Kanpur. No new facility for repair/overhaul of
aero engines of Aircraft 'A' was created at BRD Chandigarh. The facilities already
existed at BRD Chandigarh created for aero engines of Aircraft 'B' was utilised with
some additions and modifications.
II. AUDIT  REVIEW
4. Performance Review was conducted by Audit between June and October 2006
covering the period 2001-02 to 2005-06. The review focused on the aspects of operation
and utilisation of aircraft  such as flying tasks, assigned role, serviceability and Aircraft
on Ground (AoG). Adequacy of facilities for repair and maintenance and their use were
also examined by Audit.
5. The broad objectives of Audit were to seek an assurance whether:—
(i) The operational squadrons of Aircraft 'A' functioned efficiently achieving
their assigned tasks;
(ii) The aircraft were used in an economic and efficient manner for bona fide
role;
(iii) The serviceability of aircraft was maintained as per laid down standards to
minimize aircraft on ground;
(iv) Facilities for aircraft repair and overhaul were timely set up and are adequate
to meet the needs of the fleet;
(v) Servicing and maintenance of  Aircraft 'A' was carried out efficiently, without
delay, in a cost effective manner; and
(vi) Internal control systems were effective.
6. The findings of Audit can be classified into two broad categories — (i) Operation
and Utilization of aircraft (ii) Repair and Maintenance facilities. Audit review revealed
certain serious shortcomings in the operation and maintenance of Aircraft 'A' Fleet in
Indian Air Force. These are enumerated as under:—
(i) The serviceability levels achieved by the aircraft fleet were low and the
percentage of Aircraft on Ground (AoG) was high indicating low efficiency
of operation of the fleet;
(ii) Aircraft were predominantly used for routine and miscellaneous tasks at the
expense of primary air maintenance and training tasks;
(iii) Eight aircraft were modified for "VIP Role" without approval of Government
thereby diverting them from their operational tasks;
(iv) Moreover, the modification lacked justification as a separate specialised
communication squadron with adequate aircraft for use by VIPs already
existed;
(v) In the Para-trooping School and in a training centre set up to impart training,
most of the courses showed shortfall in achievement of targeted output;

3
(vi) There were delays in conducting overhauls and repair both by the engine
and airframe overhaul facilities;
(vii) Base Repair Depot at Chandigarh failed to complete a large number of allotted
repair and overhaul tasks during the last 5 years due to shortage of spares
which had resulted from delayed and inadequate provisioning;
(viii) There were delays in completing second line servicing in a significant
percentage of cases due to shortage of spares; and
(ix) Though, indigenisation of mandatory and non-complex spares at BRDs has
made significant progress, commercial exploitation has been limited.
These along with other issues have been discussed in detail by the Committee in
the succeeding paragraphs.
III. OPERATION  AND  UTILISATION  OF  AIRCRAFT
(Para 1.6.1)
7. Audit examination in relation to operation and utilization of aircraft mainly
focused on (i) achievement of prescribed norms for aircraft serviceability and targets
specified for flying tasks; (ii) efficiency of utilisation of aircraft in terms of payloads;
(iii) levels of AOG as these have a critical bearing on aircraft serviceability and also
reflects on the adequacy and effeciency of support and maintenance facilities;
(iv) utilisation of aircraft for bona fide roles; and (v) deplyoment of operational manpower
in various squadrons.
A . UTILISATION RATES, SERVICEABILITY AND AIRCRAFT ON
GROUND  (AOG)  LEVELS
(Para 1.6.1.1)
8. Audit examination revealed that the efficiency of operaton and utilization of
the Aircraft 'A' fleet was low due to high rate of Aircraft on Ground (AoG), low
serviceability and less achievement in flying tasks. The year-wise position with regard
to serviceability, AoG and flying task achievement of Aircraft 'A' for 2002-2005 is given
in the following Table:
Y ear Percentage of State of Flying task
serviceability AOG (Hours per month per aircraft)
percentage
Achieved Short- Authorised Achieved Percentage
fall achieved
2002* 50.98 32.06 23.94 66.66 20.06 30.09
2003 49.46 34.06 29.96 66.66 33.86 50.79
2004 48.77 34.98 32.26 66.66 30.04 45.06
2005 46.94 37.42 33.29 66.66 33.04 49.56
* For the year 2002, data in respect of flying hours was available for last quarter only. Air HQ
stated in June, 2006 that during the year 2002 most of the hours had been exhausted in flying for
Operation Parakaram.

4
9. Audit scrutiny has revealed that as against the serviceability level of 75 per
cent assumed by the Ministry at the time of procurement, actual serviceability rates of
aircraft ranged between 47 and 51 per cent during last four years. The number of AOG
was also high and increased from 23.94 per cent in 2002 to 33.29 per cent in 2005. Actual
flying tasks performed using aircraft 'A' therefore, fell significantly short of the flying
task norm of 66.66 hours per month per aircraft prescribed by the Government. The
shortfall ranged from 49.21 to 54.94 per cent during the period 2003-05.
10. In their explanation to the aforesaid Audit observation, the Air HQ stated
(June 2006) that during 2002-05 the rate of flying tasks achieved was more than the rate
of 30 hours per month per aircraft prescribed by it in 1995. It was further stated that
they had lowered the flying task in 1995 to conserve life of engines and airframes and
on account of lower availability of serviceable aircraft and pilots. However, Audit felt
that the reduction in authorized flying task was done without the approval of the
Government and the flying tasks had to be reduced due to constraints on account of
aircraft availability and shortage of pilots.
11. The Committee desired to know about the reasons for high rate of Aircraft on
Ground, low serviceability and less achievements in flying task of Aircraft 'A'. In
response, the Ministry of Defence stated in a note as under:
“The facility for repair and overhaul of aircraft at BRD, Kanpur was delayed
due to non-availability of specialist from Ex-USSR (Ukraine) to set up the
aggregates repair facilities. Hence, the critical aggregates were required to
be sent abroad for repair. In doing so that lead time increased, which
resulted in reduced/delayed availability. Hence the down time of aircraft
increased.’’
12. When asked about the number of times as well as the time duration for which
Aircraft 'A' were grounded during 2007 for want of spares and rotables, the Ministry in
a written reply stated as under:
"During mid 1990's the IAF undertook in house overhaul of Aircraft 'A' at
1 BRD. During the Transfer of Technology phase many problems were
faced and the first aircraft rolled out in 1996. With the breakdown of erstwhile
USSR, the supply lines virtually dried up, the problem got compounded as
both major Original Equipment Manufactures (OEMs) i.e. M/s Aviant for
Airframe and M/s Motor Sich for Aeroengine were in Ukraine. Since all
protocols etc. were linked with Russia and the location of OEM being in
other country (Ukraine), the situation further aggravated. During the year
2007, there were 14 aircraft on AOG for want of spares rotables, which has
now reduced to 10 aircraft in year 2008 against 24 aircraft on AOG during
Audit period."
13. On being enquired about the remedial measures that were taken to streamline
the system so as to avoid delays in overhaul of aircraft for want of spares in future, the
Ministry in a note stated as under:
"Adequate steps were initiated for timely indenting of the spares, by way of
detailed provisioning reviews. Detailed guidelines were also issued by
Ministry of Defence/Air HQ on all aspects of provisioning. The indenting

5
action was done in time, but the vendor response was found wanting.
Thus, the main reason of delay was limited product support, since vendors/
suppliers of spares spread all over CIS countries including Russia were
not able to honour the commitments on time due to their internal problems
with the designer and OEM located in Ukraine. Hence, as a remedial measure,
Air Attache element was created at Ukraine (CIS country) in year 1995 in
addition to Russian mission. This provided a medium to establish liaison
with suppliers. Also, the concept of decentralized procurement was
introduced by Ministry of Defence, wherein the financial powers were
enhanced  in  July, 2006 for imports Rs. 30 crore, for indigenous procurement
except on PAC basis where limit is Rs. 10 crores."
14. When asked whether IAF has taken any steps to improve the serviceable
state of the aircraft, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:
"The following steps have been taken by the Indian Air Force to improve the
serviceable state of the aircraft (i) The introduction of IMMOLS (Integrated
Material Management On-Line System) has given an entire asset visibility
to Air HQ and Command HQ. Hence, the AOG item if available anywhere in
the country is been diverted. The provisioning module of IMMOLS is also
functional, which will ultimately mean real time on line procurement of all
deficient item reducing the administering lead time drastically. The same is
being used quite often, and has resulted in reducing the number of AOG;
(ii) the annual firm task of all repair agencies was ehnanced to liquidate the
available Cat Ds so that serviceability state of the aircraft can be improved.
Contracts were initiated and concluded for ROH abroad of Nose Landing
Gears, TG-16M Turbo Generator & GS-24A-3S DC Generator. Also long
term contract of 05 years for ROH abroad of seven critical aggregates was
initiated and for six aggregates contract has already been concluded. The
contract for seventh aggregate is under finalisation. These steps have
improved the serviceable state of the aircraft. The percentage of
serviceability and AOG state of Aircraft 'A' fleet during the year 2006 are
63.87 per cent and 18.49 per cent respectively and for the year 2007 it was
66.26 per cent and 15.55 per cent respectively."
15. Enumerating the initiatives that have been taken to minimise the time period
of grounding the Aircraft, the Ministry stated in a note as under:
"Delegation of financial power has been revised and issued vide Government
of India/Ministry of Defence letter No Air HQ/95378/1/Fin P/2431/US(RC)/
Air-II/06 dated 14 June 2006. As per this order, the financial power to
procure items against AOG has been increased to Rs. 50 lakh through Air
Attache placed in the respective Embassies of India. The same is being
used quite often and has resulted in reducing the number of aircraft on
ground. Ministry of  Defence has also approved the long term contract of
03 years for ROH abroad of aero-engines which is one of the critical
aggregates due to which aircraft were on ground."

6
16. To a specific query whether the IAF are going to achieve the stage of providing
spares on demand by Base Repair-Depots and Units to bring down the AOG to less
than five per cent, the Ministry stated in a note as under:
"................After the CIS countries got their act together and when our
indigenization efforts started bearing fruit, AOG started reducing. The
current AOG levels have been brought down to below 10 per cent, and
keeping in view the high inventory carrying cost and other factors trying
to achieve an AOG level below 5 per cent, is neither achievable nor desirable.
The Ministry has taken suitable corrective actions. Thus the concept of
long term ROH contracts was evolved. Following are the details of contracts
signed:
Item Contract details
(a) ROH of Aero-engines over three 1323/658-EO6-158-IN356
years for Qty 105. dated 16th Oct. 2006.
(b) ROH of six critical aggregates over STE-1-54-K/KE-07
five years.  dated 18 May 2007.
(c) ROH of RPM governor over five 356/07571160/77003
years for Qty 95. dated 14 Dec. 2007."
17. The Committee enquired about the steps that have been taken to ensure
timely repair and maintenance service to increase the utilisation rates and serviceability
of Aircraft 'A' fleet. In response, the Ministry in a written reply stated as under:
"The data of aircraft and aero engines are being closely monitored at Unit,
Command and Air HQ. The arising of aircraft, aero-engine and aggregates
are calculated as per the approved Rate of Effort (RoE). Accordingly,
task and induction plan for overhaul and major servicing are being issued
by Air HQ to respective repair agencies. This helps in ensuring the
maximum availability and serviceability of Aircraft 'A'. The action has
been taken by Air HQ to ensure the maximum availability and serviceability
of Aircraft 'A' aircraft are: (i) The introduction of IMMOLS has given an
entire asset visibility to Air HQ and Command HQ. The AOG item if
available anywhere in the country is been diverted. The provisioning
module of IMMOLS is also functional, which will ultimately mean real
time on line procurement of all deficient item reducing the admin lead
time drastically. The same is been used quite often and has resulted in
reducing the number of aircraft on ground; and (ii) Delegation of new
financial power issued vide GOI/MoD letter No. Air HQ/95378/Fin P/
2431/US(RC)/Air.II/06 dated 14th June 2006 to procure items against
AOG has been increased Rs. 50 lakh through Air Attache, placed in the
respective Embassy of India. The same is been quite often and has
resulted in reducing the number of aircraft on ground."
18. When asked as to why the Ministry failed to take the prior approval of the
Government before reducing the flying tasks. In response, the Ministry in a note explained

7
their position as under:
"The maximum authorised flying hours as stipulated by the Government of
India (GoI) is 66 hours per month per aircraft. Considering sustained low
serviceability of the fleet, low aircraft availability and actual flying done
by the units over the last few years, the task was revised to 360 hours per
aircraft per year (30 hours/aircraft/month) in July 1995 under delegated
powers. The miscellaneous tasks are included in the tasks of the operational
units. These are fully authorized tasks and are essential for sustaining and
maintaining combat readiness of the units. These encompass multifarious
tasks and cannot be forecasted in advance specially missions of aid to
civil power like Casevacuation, airlift of sensitive cargo, specialist teams,
equipment, flood relief, earthquake relief etc."
19. As regards the steps taken to increase the availability of pilots, the Ministry
informed the Committee as under:
"(i) To overcome the shortage of pilots in IAF, recently Government has
sanctioned Short Service Commission Scheme for men and women in
the Flying branch of Indian Air Force. The term of engagement has
been revised from 10+4 years to 14 years. The inductions under this
scheme will commence from January 2008. It is envisaged that more
number of young men would opt for SSC with exit after 14 years rather
than Permanent Commission, where they are committed to service in
IAF until retirement; (ii) A proposal to increase the Short Service
Commission (SSC) cadre (upto 30 per cent in flying branch) has also
been submitted to Ministry of Defence as part of Ajay Vikram Singh
Committee (AVSC) proposals. Considering the growing economy and
improved market conditions, it is felt that SSC could present an attractive
option to the youth thereby increasing inductions; (iii) In order to
improve the pay structure and living conditions, and to adequately
compensate for the risks and hazards the armed forces men face in the
line of duty, a joint proposal on enhancement of pay and allowances of
Armed Forces are being progressed with VI Central Pay Commission
(CPC). Favourable implementation of the proposal would go a long
way in addressing the concern over filling up of vacant posts with
quality individuals; (iv) Concerted efforts have been undertaken by
the IAF to carry out a proactive publicity campaign in order to reach
the target group of talented youth across the country to join the Indian
Air Force. The following steps have been taken towards this aim:
(a) Publicity awareness Campaigns are being conducted at low
response areas. These include Air shows, Band Concerts, Recruitment
Publicity Stalls, Sky Diving shows, Projecting documentaries on IAF;
(b) Participation in Career Fairs and Exhibitions to enhace one-on one
interaction; (c) Conduct of Fast track Selection on the lines of campus
placement being undertaken by the civil agencies; (d) Advertisements
in Print and Electronic media including Recruitment and Career related
articles; (e) Motivational lectures in schools/colleges; (f)  Distribution

8
of creative and eye catching publicity material/promotional material
amongst the target groups; (g) Catchy display of advertisements for
recruitment of officers in various branches namely Flying, Technical
and Ground Duties; (h) visuals/Signage at  vantage points all over the
country in a phased manner at strategic locations; (i) Establishment of
Publicity Cells at Command HQ and all Air Force Stations."
20. Asked about the steps taken to carry out a comprehensive review regarding
effective utilization of aircraft, the Ministry stated in a note as under:
"The following steps have been taken to carry out a comprehensive review
regarding the effective utilization of aircraft: (i) The tasking and utilization
of all the aircraft is closely monitored at unit level (by Cos), at Wing level
(by COOs), at Command level (by Air-II) and at Air HQ (by Date of
Operations T&H); (ii) The planned itinerary is received at each monitoring
node in advance: and (iii) Dove tailing/re-scheduling is done to ensure
optimum utilization of the airborne platforms."
21. When asked whether the Indian Air Force have been able to bring the
utilization of the aircraft closer to the flying task fixed by the Government, the Ministry
in their reply have stated as under:
"Consistent efforts are in place to improve aircraft serviceability and
availability in the IAF. It is submitted that the flying task as stipulated
by Government of India of 66 hours/month per aircraft and this is the
maximum flying that is permitted to be under taken in  peace time
operations. Based on the actual flying hours achieved and the number
of aircraft available in the fleet, the rate of effort is calculated for the
year for a particular type of aircraft. Thereafter, the task per aircraft is
revised to a realistic and achievable figure by the VCV AS under his
delegated powers as per Government of India letter Air HQ/95378/1/
Fin P/2431/US(RC)/Air-II/06 dated 14th July, 2006. Against the revised
authorized flying task of 29160 hrs./year, the Aircraft 'A' fleet has
achieved the task in all the preceding years. The details are: 2001-02—
28973 hrs.; 2002-03—28404 hrs.; 2003-04—28969 hrs.; 2004-05—
30022 hrs.; 2005-06—30164 hrs.; and 2006-07—33667 hrs. It is pertinent
to note that whenever the need has arisen like Tsunami  and other
emergent situations, the aircraft utilization has been closed to the initial
proposed rate.  For example, the fleet flew 1100 hrs. in 60 days towards
Tsunami disaster relief operations. All this bears testimony to the fact
that despite the reduction in approved task, the operational
preparedness  of the fleet has continued to be good. Also, the fleet
Aircraft 'A'  is ageing and is nearing its end of 25 years of TTL. To
sustain 100 per cent serviceability on such an old platform is practically
not feasible. It would thus not be in order to perceive shortfall with
respect to the maximum authorized flying of 66 hours/month/aircraft.
The IAF has been achieving all its authorized tasks and also other
unforeseen tasks of aid to civil authorities in terms of HA/DR etc. on
all occasions whenever it has been tasked."

9
B. UNDERUTILISATION  OF  PAYLOAD  CAPACITY
(Para 1.6.1.2)
22. According to Audit, the maximum payload capacity of the Aircraft 'A' is
6700 kg. The payloads carried in the sorties undertaken during the period 2001-2006
are analysed in the following Table:
Y ear Total Percentage of sorties as compared to total sorties
sorties Less Between Between Between More
than 1000 Kg. 2000 Kg. 3000 Kg. than
to to to
1000 Kg. 2000 Kg. 3000 Kg. 4500 Kg. 4500 Kg.
2001-02 10664 37.30 12.59 15.66 30.71 3.74
2002-03 12600 28.42 13.11 20.30 34.91 3.26
2003-04 12192 29.72 12.10 20.19 35.10 2.89
2004-05 12766 29.29 15.23 20.12 31.54 3.82
2005-06 12680 33.69 14.11 17.66 31.05 3.47
23. From the aforesaid Table, it would be seen that during the period 2001-2006, the
percentage of sorties in which payloads carried were less than the 3000 kg. (less than 50
per cent of the maximum capacity) ranged between 61.83 per cent and 65.64 per cent. As
such not only were the Aircraft underutilised in terms of flying hours, these were also
underutilized in terms of payloads carried. Thus, high capacity aircraft were used for
carrying low loads although smaller  aircrafts and other modes of transport were available
at lower cost. The utilisation of these aircraft was not made in a cost effective manner.
24. While taking cognizance of the aforesaid Audit observation, the Committee
sought an explanation from the Ministry for under utilisation of aircraft  in terms of
both flying hours and pay loads. In response, the Ministry stated in a note as under:
"A transport aircraft carries payload as per the fuel and payload combination.
For this type of aircraft, this is 9000 Kgs. The fuel carried depends upon
mission flying time which in turn decides the maximum payload that can be
carried. The aircraft payload capacity also depends upon combination of
Weight, Altitude & Temperature (WA T) limitations. At Leh airfield during
winter months when temperature is sub-zero, 'A' fleet aircraft carry 30 passenger
whereas, during summer months, when temperature is between 15-25
0C, aircraft
can carry only 10 to 5  passengers and beyond 25 0C temperature aircraft
operations to Leh and Thoise airfield have to be completely suspended. Tasking
is done by Air HQ/Commands to ensure optimal loading of aircraft, however,
on certain occasions like special missions like carriage of sensitive cargo of
various defence/research agencies, etc., and missions on aid to civil power
involving airlift of specialist teams, equipment, casualty evacuation, etc. this
is not feasible. The option of using smaller aircraft is always considered but at
times due to limitation in performance, in speed and cruise altitudes, it is not
operationally feasible. During HA/DR missions often the civil authorities  are
not able to position requisite load in time."

10
25. Enquired whether IAF has reviewed the use of high capacity aircraft for
carrying low loads keeping in view the high operating cost of the aircraft and availability
of other smaller transport and other modes of aircraft, the Ministry in their note stated
as under:
"The option of using smaller aircraft is always considered but at times due to
limitation in performance, in speed and cruise altitudes, Aircraft 'A' fleet
aircraft have to be used for example where terrain is very high as in case of
Leh, Thoise , etc. and carriage of specialist cargo, teams, causality
evacuation, etc. Wherever feasible, operationally viable, smaller aircraft
are also utilized to undertake the allotted task. It is  stated that any transport
aircraft carries payload as per fuel and payload combination. To carry
maximum payload say 6700 kgs, the aircraft would carry a minimum fuel of
2300 kgs. This would entail a maximum flying duration of 30 minutes only.
Such a mission with maximum load but minimum fuel would entail numerous
landings/refueling halts leading to shear wastage of flying hrs. and aircraft
landing apart from additional wear/tear. Thus, it would not be in  order to
have a comparison of payload lifted to the max certified payload on all
missions. Tasking is done by Air HQ/Commands to ensure optimal loading
of aircraft, however on certain occasions like special missions like carriage
of sensitive cargo of various civil/DRDO/Defence agencies and missions
on and to civil power involving airlift of specialist teams equipment and
casualty evacuation, this is not practically feasible."
26. Asked about the amount of financial loss that have been incurred on account
of under utilization of aircrafts in term of low pay load carried, the Ministry in a note
submitted as under:
"Tasking is done by Air HQ/Commands to ensure optimal loading of aircraft
on all occasions. Dovetailing of task is an essential ingredient in mission
planning to ensure aircraft payload capability is fully utilised unless the
mission demands otherwise. On tasks involving carriage of sensitive cargo
of DRDO/Defence agencies, casualty evacuation, airlift of rescue teams,
specialist equipment for disaster relief etc. it is not feasible to combine
other low priority pay loads on the same task as it would entail  additional
landings/refueling halts and delay the task completion. Thus, it would not
be in order to have comparison on pay load lifted to the maximum  certified
payload on all missions. Wherever, feasible airlift demands are combined
to ensure utilisation of aircraft payload to its full  capacity. Alternatively,
the option  of tasking smaller aircraft is utilised."
27. Explaining the corrective measures that have been taken to ensure that the
utilization of Aircraft 'A' is done in a cost-effective manner and put to optimum use, the
Ministry in a note stated as under:
"Air Maintenance demands from various agencies are vetted at Ministry
level once a year in the month of January and the air maintenance task
allocated appropriately. Air HQ, thereafter, sub allocates the task to the
concerned Air Commands depending on their area of operations. The
Commands further task the units as appropriate. The progress of the air

11
maintenance task is reviewed every quarter by Ministry of Defence and
the task allocated earlier in the beginning of the year is revised
appropriately, if the situation so demands. Air lift demands of civil, para
military and ministries and Government of India ( i.e. other than Air
maintenance) are vetted and authorized at Ministry of Defence level. Air
lift demands ( i.e. other than Air maintenance) Armed Forces for airlift
utilizing aircraft of   'A' fleet are received at respective Commands/Air
HQrs. The demands are vetted at Command level by Air Branch and
Directorate of Operations (T&H) at Air HQs and accorded priority as per
the requirements of the task at these levels. The demands from all the
various users, thereafter, are consolidated date-wise. Similar loads are
grouped together and various tasks dovetailed to ensure optional
utilisation of air assets. Depending on the volume of the payload, the
quantity of aircraft of fleet  'A' required to accomplish the task are identified
and the operating unit closest to the place of origin of the airlift demand is
tasked. The movement of the aircraft, thereafter, is closely monitored at
Unit, Command/Air HQ levels to ensure that utilisation of the aircraft  is
done optimally in a cost effective manner at all stages."
C. DEPLOYMENT OF AIRCRAFT IN V ARIOUS ROLES
(Para 1.6.1.3)
28. In 1995, Air HQ fixed flying tasks for each existing squadron/unit and also
prescribed flying hours for each role  assigned to the aircraft. Audit examination revealed
that Air HQ had fixed flying tasks for each unit that was far below the task fixed by the
Government for Aircraft 'A'. Besides, Air HQ allocated flying tasks into three categories
i.e. Routine Transport Role (RTR), Air Maintenance and training. Air Maintenance
tasks cover the designated primary role of the aircraft viz., troops and cargo carrier and
also includes para trooping training. Detailed analysis of flying  tasks allotted for
various roles and actual achievement by six squadrons/units test checked is given in
the Table below:
(in flying hours)
Role Task Task T ask actually achieved Percentage
allotted allotted with reference to flying Shortfall in
by by Air hours fixed by task achieve-
Govern-  HQ Government ment with
ment reference to
Air HQ targets
Flying Percentage (+) excess/
Hours of total (—) shortfall
achievement
RTR 97440 41400 47583 48.83 (+)14.93
A M 78960 33600 19150 24.25 (—) 43.01
Training 79600 43800 18382 23.09 (—)58.04
Misc. NIL NIL 29398 All excess All excess
Total 256000 118800 114513 44.73 (—) 3.61

12
29. It may be seen from the above that while there was an overall shortfall of
55 per cent in achievement of flying task, targets fixed by the Government, the shortfall
against targets fixed by Air HQ was only 4 per cent. Audit, however, observed that the
aircraft were used for routine and miscellaneous tasks by diverting them from their
primary roles of air maintenance and training. Of the total 114513 flying hours utilized,
only 33 per cent were used for primary role of air maintenance and training,  and the
balance 67 per cent  were spent for routine tasks and miscellanceous duties. This
resulted in serious shortfall of 43 per cent in achieving air maintenance task and 58 per
cent in training with reference to the reduced targets fixed by Air HQ. It was also noted
by Audit that 25 per cent of total flying hours utilized were spent on miscellaneous
duties though no task for such duties were allocated either by the Ministry or by the
Air HQ.
30. In this regard, the Air HQ had informed the Audit  (December 2006) that
"miscellaneous tasks" are fully authorised and essential for maintaining operational
readiness of the squadron. However, Audit contested the reply of Air HQ as the orders
issued in 1995 have never been revised creating this  category and authorizing flying
hours under it. Further, the nature of tasks stated to be included in this category does
not justify such a high utilization.  In respect of  training, Air HQ stated that exclusive
continuous training sorties are launched only when necessary. The training requirements
of the unit are thus always achieved by combining training with other tasks, which
leads to savings in  operational expenditure. However, Audit contended that this reply
is not acceptable as in the case of operational squadrons flying hours allocated for
continuous training have been kept at very low levels. Besides, training in course of
normal flying limits the effectiveness of such training and also compromises flight
safety.
31. Further, Audit review of the performance of squadrons showed that the
annual flying tasks are not being prepared in advance based on any assessment of
load and projections of tasks. Instead sorties and flights are planned on the basis of
messages/signals received from Air HQ and Commands which are sent only a few days
in advance. Thus, aircraft utilisation is not a planned exercise but is mostly requisition
driven and not amenable to control and monitoring with reference to approved flying
tasks for various roles.
32. Asked about the reasons for the low allocation of flying hours for air
maintenance, the Ministry in a note stated as under:
"The routine flying task comprise majority of transport aircraft operations
under common terminology called Route Transport Role (RTR) which entail
airlift of men and material from one place to another. Whereas air
maintenance or Transport support Role (TSR) is a another task which is
specifically carried out in support of Army and other agencies requiring to
be maintained by air to places not connected by road transport means due
to terrain, weather or geography. Similarly, training of aircrew is required at
all stages to maintain continuity and proficiency. Thus training  is integral
to any aircraft fleet type and cannot be considered as primary role. Other

13
roles include Para-trooping, supply drop, casualty evacuation, HA/DR
operations, etc. Thus, it may be noted that 'air maintenance' does not
correspond to primary role but is one of the many roles assigned to the
aircraft. 'A' Fleet aircraft are capable of performing all such roles. Hence,
IAF utilises these aircraft in different roles depending upon area of
deployment. These are appended below:—
Areas Primary Task Secondary Tasks
Chandigarh Transport Support Route Transport Role (RTR)
Role (air and all other task as defined
maintenance) above.
Jorhat Transport Support RTR and all other task as
Role (air defined above.
maintenance)
Agra Para Bombing Para Training and all other
R TR task as defined above.
Sulur RTR (courier flights to RTR and all other task as
A & NC) defined above.
Yelahanka Ab-initio training RTR and all other task as defined
above.
33. On being asked whether the low air maintenance task is due to the fact that
sufficient requirement of air maintenance does not exist in the IAF as well as in Army
and Navy, the Ministry in their note stated as under:
"The air maintenance requirements are solely dependent on the demands
projected by user agencies. The location of the squadron also dictates the
roles assigned to the Squadron. In case of missions of aid to civil manpower,
the provision of timely relief at short notice is of a prime concern. Hence,
to preclude wastage of flying hours and ensure optimum utilization of
aircraft, squadron involved in air maintenance on regular basis are also
tasked for other roles."
34. Enquired whether the Ministry have examined the reasons for difference in
the projections of shortfall in achivement of flying task targets fixed by the Government
and that of AIR HQ which is about 51 per cent, the Ministry in their note stated as
under:
"The maximum authorised flying hours as stipulated by the Government of
India is 66 hours, per aircraft, per month, which corresponds to 792 hrs. per
month for squadron strength of 12 aircraft. This however, is the maximum
permissible authorization and has been visualized to be utilised only during
emergent situations. During peace time operations the utilization rate may

14
be limited due to emphasis on utilisation of alternate/cheaper means
of transportation (other than air) for routine missions, periodic
servicing and maintenance inspections, rectifications, aircraft
deployment away from base due to operational requirements etc.
There are certain other constraints imposed on flying due to
weather, airspace closures and certain operational and
administrative imperatives. Considering the above mentioned
factors and based on actual  flying done by the units over the
years during peace time, the task was revised to a 360 hrs, per
aircraft, per year  i.e. 30 hours/aircraft/month. This rate of effort is
also revised every year in order to forecast requirement of rotables
and spares for the aircraft. This ensures that the flying task is
always maintained within the Government authorization without
any extra cost to the exchequer with optimum utilisation of the
valuable air assets and retaining the capability for higher utilisation
under emergencies like war etc."
35. To a query as to when did the Ministry of Defence noticed this difference
and what action was taken to reconcile the same, the Ministry in their reply stated as
under:
"..... Air assets are a very precious resource of a Nation and are
inherently expensive in utilization. Hence, for routine peace time
operations, the aircraft utilization is lower than the maximum
authorized due to emphasis on utilisation of alternate/cheaper
means of transportation (other than air). Also, during peace time
tasking, aircraft utilization is lower than maximum authorized due
to servicing and maintenance activities, lack of spares due to
procurement delays, whether constraints, airspace closures and
operational requirements etc. The country faced a severe crisis in
1994-05 where in the foreign exchange resources had depleted and
there was a need to adopt austerity measures and one, was, to
reduce the flying task. Considering the above and in order to ensure
that the flying  carried out by the operations unit and the fleet is
always maintained within the task as authorized by the Government,
the task was revised to a realistic and achievable figure of 30 hours
per aircraft/month without incurring any additional cost to the
State. Thus, the task revision ensures optimum utilisation of the
valuable air assets while retaining the capability for increased
utilisation when required in mobilization and war like si tuations etc.
To this effect, the Rate of Effort as indicated every year is monitored and
adhered to at all levels."
36. The Ministry further added:
"With respect to air maintenance, the allocated task was always achieved
during the period under Audit. A review of the task allotted for air

15
maintenance for Northern & Eastern sector for this period is given below:
Year Northern Sector Surplus/ Eastern Sector Surplus/ Reason
Deficient Deficient for short-
Allotted Achieved North- Allotted Achieved Eastern fall
ern Sector Sector
01-02 19601T 20862T +1192T 2258T 963T –1295T*
02-03 21174T 23089T +1915T 1805T 1052.913T –752.087T*
03-04 24187T 24362T +175T 1347T 915T –432T*
04-05 24943T 27505T +2562T 1550T 894T -659T*
05-06 23500T 24171T +671T 1810T 132 6.7T -483.3T*
Initial
allotment
23030T.
Thereafter,
30 Tonnes
transferred
to J & K
Govt. and
1000 T
surrendered.
There has always been over achievement of the allocated task in the Northern
sector. The shortfall in the Eastern sector has been mainly due to non provision of load
by intending agencies (certificates of surrender available with Air HQ)".
37. Elaborating further, the Ministry stated that:
"The training when carried out exclusively as pure training is indicated as
continuation training and is logged under the training head. However, IAF
to ensure optimum utilisation of every sortie, most of the training is done
as on the job training. The on job training thus carried out is indicated
under the heads like Route Transport Role (RTR), air maintenance etc. but
not as training. The operation preparedness of the fleet is thus maintained
with a judicious mix of On Job Training and pure training. To provide more
definite instruction for recording flying under various heads like training,
Route Transport Role (RTR), On the Job Training (OJT), air maintenance
etc., IAF has ordered a study to standardize the flying returns of all the
units of the transport fleet. This web based application once implemented
would provide uniformity and greater details of task achievement including
OJT, pure training etc. The tasks listed under 'Miscellaneous tasks' would
also be formalized into appropriate categories."
38. The Committee sought to know as to how the inclusion of miscellaneous task
in the flying programme is justified. In response, the Ministry in a note stated as under:
"Miscellaneous tasks are fully authorized tasks which are essential for
maintaining operational readiness of the squadron. Since this encompasses
multifarious tasks, these are thus marked as miscellaneous tasks and are
(a) Positioning flights for couriers, air maintenance, staging flights, Route
Transport Role (RTR) missions. (b) Ferry flights to and from overhaul
*Load not
provided
by
Indenting
agencies

16
agencies where no payload carriage is permitted. (c) Special missions like
carriage of sensitive cargo of various defence/research agencies etc.
(d) Missions on aid to civil power involving airlift of specialist teams,
equipment, casualty evacuation etc. (e) Air Tests, calibration sorties, aircrew
test sorties, system check sorties."
39. Explaining the reasons for diversion of tasks of aircrafts from their primary
roles of air maintenance and training to routine and miscellaneous task which resulted
in serious shortfall of 43 per cent in achieving air maintenance task and 58 per cent in
training, the Ministry in a note stated as under:
"The routine flying task comprise majority of transport aircraft operations
under common terminology called Route Transport Role (RTR) which entail
airlift of men and material from one place to another. Whereas air
maintenance to Transport Support Role (TSR) is another task which is
specifically carried out in support of Army and other agencies requiring to
be maintained by air to places not connected by road transport means due
to terrain, weather or geography. Similarly, training of aircrew is required at
all stages to maintain continuity and proficiency. Thus training is integral
to any aircraft fleet type and cannot be considered as primary role. Other
roles include para trooping, supply drop, casualty evacuation, Humanitarian
Assistance/Disaster Relief (HA/DR) operations, etc. Thus it may be noted
that 'air maintenance' does not correspond to primary role but is one of the
many roles assigned to the aircraft. 'A' Fleet aircraft are capable of performing
all such roles. Hence, IAF utilizes these aircraft in different roles depending
upon area of deployment. These are appended below:-
Areas Primary Task Secondary Tasks
Chandigarh Transport Support Role Route Transport Role and
(air maint) all other task as defined above.
Jorhat Transport Support Role Route Transport Role and
(air maint) all other task as defined above.
Agra Para Bombing Para Trooping and all
Route Transport Role other task as defined above.
Sulur Route Transport Role Route Transport Role and
(courier flights to all other task as defined
Andamand & Nicobar above.
Islands)
Yelahanka Ab-initio Training Route Transport Role and
all other task as defined above.
40. When asked to explain the reasons for non-planning of the flying task well in
advance, the Ministry in a note stated as under:
"The flying tasks are generally planned well in advance. However, the
demands of the user agencies which include civil agencies constantly
vary as per the requirement of the situation and hence, at times, do not

17
adhere to the planned tasks. To retain operational effectiveness and to
provide timely relief (in case of aid to civil agencies), this method is
adopted."
41. Asked as to why the planning process does not include exigencies such as
aid to Civil Agencies, situation analysis etc., the Ministry in their reply stated as under:
"Aid to civil agencies, humanitarian assistance, disaster relief, casualty
evacuation etc. are all need driven missions and due to their inherent
unpredictable nature. Despite advances in modern science, it is not
feasible to predict their scale, location and frequency. No amount of
proactive forecasting can predict such requirement which have
innumerable variables like scale, location of the affected area from the
nearest rail/road/air head, the accessibility of the area, the state of the
existing disaster management machinery, the prevalent weather
conditions etc. which vary largely with the prevalent situation. Tsunami,
the Jammu & Kashmir issue and Bihar floods stand testimony to the
complexity of such relief missions. The category of  'Miscellaneous tasks'
was thus created to plan for such tasks."
42. Enquired whether the Ministry have now evolved a system of periodical
review regarding utilization of aircrafts so as to ensure their fuller utilization and also
be enable for carrying out their primary role, the Ministry in their written reply stated as
under:
"A system of monthly review of task achieved by the units has been in place
for the Aircraft 'A' fleet ever since the aircraft became fully operational
(1984-85) in the IAF. The details of flying carried out by each unit of 'A'
fleet in the IAF is scrutinized every month at wing/command and finally at
Air HQs levels. These returns contain data on aircrew and technical
manpower availability, aircraft and spares availability, servicing cycles
and flying task achieved etc. Flying hours achieved viz-a-viz payload
airlifted as projected in these returns are analyzed critically to ensure
effective task accomplishment within available resources. Any anomalies,
if observed are suitably addressed. All commands/wings have been
instructed to ensure that the demand of all user agencies are vetted at
appropriate levels, prioritized and dovetailed with other taks like RTR,
training etc. to ensure optimum utilisation of air lift capability."
D. SHORTFALL IN UNDERTAKING TRAINING TASKS AT TRAINING
CENTRES (Para 1.6.1.4)
Para-trooping School
43. As per the Audit, one of the primary tasks of the Aircraft 'A' fleet is para
trooping and to achieve this task, a Paratroopers Training School (PTS) was set up
with 12 aircraft. The school is required to operate a combination of two types of
courses i.e. one type deploying six aircraft for para-trooping and medical Para Course
Basic (PCB) training (Flight 'A'), and another type using the balance six aircraft for
conducting conversion course (Flight 'B').

18
44. However, Audit examination showed that even though the primary task
of the PTS was training, 53 per cent of flying tasks were allotted for RTR with
allocation for para-trooping being only 18 per cent . Even this low allocation for
para-trooping training was utilised only to the extent of 51-67 per cent  during the
past five years. Audit examination also disclosed that except for basic para-
trooping course, there was shortfall with respect to annual targets in each year
for all other Flight "A" courses. Besides, the school was required to conduct
Medical PCB and refresher courses and aircrew para ground training courses on
"as required" basis. However, during the period no such courses were conducted.
In the case of Flight "B" courses, for which six aircraft were earmarked, it was
seen that none of the envisaged courses  i.e.  FA Controller Courses, Air Crew
Paratrooping Courses and Air Crew Conversion Courses were conducted in the
last five years. The facilities and aircraft earmarked for Flight "B" courses remained
totally unutilised.
45. The details of para-trooping training courses sand conversion courses
envisaged and actually held, actual output and shortfall against envisaged output
during the period 2001-06 are given in the following Table:
FLIGHT 'A'
Sl. Course Output Actual output Shortfall in percentage
No. as per 01-02 02-03 03-04 04-05 05-06 01- 02- 03- 04- 05-
policy 02 03 04 05 06
page
1. Basic 1250 1401 1342 1357 1447 1403 -----
2. Refresher 11700 8153 912410067 8275 9572 30 22 14 29 18
3. Basic FF 100 100 77 - 01 13 23 100 100 99 87
4. Refresher FF 800 63 80 48 14 29 92 90 94 98 96
5. Path Finder 12 - 06 - 06 10 100 50 100 50 17
6. Jump Master 72 - 24 - 44 55 100 67 100 39 24
7. PJI Course As re- 10 09 08 07 07 Shortfall not known as
quired output not specified in
policy page
8. Medical As re- 100 per cent shortfall due to non-allotment of task by Air HQrs.
PCB quired
9. Medical As re- 100 per cent shortfall due to non-allotment of task by Air HQrs.
PC Refesher quired
10. Aircrew As re- 100 per cent shortfall due to non-allotment of task by Air HQrs.
Para quired
Ground
Training
Courses

19
FLIGHT 'B'
Sl. Course Duration No. of Intake per Output as Actual
No. (Days) courses course per policy output
to be con- page
ducted in a
year
1. FA Controller On required — On required — NIL
Airborne basis basis
Course
2. Aircrew para-trooping course
A. Basic 28 12 08 96 NIL
B. Refresher 07 24 12 288 NIL
C. Jump Master 07 — — 72 NIL
3. Aircrew conversion course
A. Captain conversion course 120 03 10 30 NIL
B. Second pilots 120 03 08 24 NIL
conversion course
C. Navy pilots 120 03 09 27 NIL
conversion  course
D. Flight Engineer 120 03 09 27 NIL
conversion course
46. In their explanation to aforesaid Audit observation, Paratroopers Training
School stated that the shortfalls were on account of the Army not detailing troops for
para-trooping courses and non-allotment of tasks by Air HQ for the other types of
courses. Air HQ had informed the Audit that medical courses were disbanded in 1999.
47. Asked about the reasons for non-utilisation of the facilities and aircraft
earmarked  for flight 'B' course, the Ministry stated in a note as under:
"Due to conversion course training being reassigned to Yelahanka, six aircraft
of Para Training School (PTS) were now utilised more for RTR and as a
result there is quantum increase in this role over the years. Due to central
location of the unit, these aircraft have been utilised in quick relief missions
during natural calamities etc. This ensures optimum utilisation of aircraft
and precludes wastage of flying hours. Therefore, it would be incorrect to
say that the 'A' fleet aircarft of PTS have been diverted from their primary
task of para-trooping and training. In fact while fulfilling the critical
capabilities of para trooping these aircraft have been optimally utilised for
other assigned roles. In 1987, the ab initio conversions training of pilots
were relocated to 414 Air Force Stations from PTS. Only Flight Engineers
conversion course is now being held at PTS on a regular basis. The unit
has conducted 12 Flight Engineers courses since 2001 training about
110 aircrew and hence there is not shortfall in training tasks."

20
48. When asked about the rationale behind assigning only 18 percent of the
tasks for the purpose of para-trooping inspite of its being a primary task, the Ministry
stated in a note as under:
"The 'A' Fleet aircraft are capable of performing many operational roles.
Para- trooping is a role which is specifically carried out in support of Army
and other agencies as per the requirements projected by them. The other
roles of the aircraft are supply drop, casualty evacuation, routine transport
operation, aid to civil power and humanitarian and disaster relief. Thus,
Para-trooping is one of the many roles assigned to the aircraft. All the
requirements of the user agencies for Para trooping have always been met.
The number of hours allocate for each task for the last 5 years is as
follows:—
Y ear Unit Y early Achieved
Planned R TR TRG/MISC TSR
2001-02 PTS, AF 3480 Hrs 2451 Hrs 741 Hrs 487 Hrs
2002-03 PTS, AF 3480 Hrs 2373 Hrs 784 Hrs 720 Hrs
2003-04 PTS, AF 3480 Hrs 2368 Hrs 785 Hrs 803 Hrs
2004-05 PTS, AF 3480 Hrs 2610 Hrs 833 Hrs 776 Hrs
2005-06 PTS, AF 3480 Hrs 2507 Hrs 903 Hrs 792 Hrs”
49. The Committee sought to know as to whether the Ministry have examined
the reasons for allocation of 53 per cent of flying tasks for Routine Transport Role
(RTR) instead of the primary task of training by the Para-trooping School. In response,
the Ministry in their reply stated as under:
"The plan for indigenization of all the parachutes in the inventory of the
Army was taken up in the eighties. The Ordinance Parachute Factory
(OPF) was tasked to produce these parachutes by using reverse
engineering. There were initial teething problems on the prototypes during
the trial jumps by the Para Jump Instructors which had to be sent back for
modification to the manufacturer. There was delay in the manufacture and
production of these parachutes. The shortfall of parachutes however,
could not be met by the indigenous support and alternatives had to be
looked into, without curtailing the training of paratroopers of the Brigade
and Special Forces. A decision was taken in 1985 to reduce the jumps of
Refresher Course from 04 descents to 02 descents for utilizing the limited
parachutes available in the training stock at PTS, AF. The flying task had
automatically reduced and the aircraft hours were put to use for important
roles of causalty evacuation, disaster relief roles without hampering the
para commitment role. There has been no delay in the completion of the
courses except during inclement weather. In fact Para task gets priority
over the routine training sorties during day to day flying at Agra. It is also
pertinent to mention that the number of injuries is the least as compared to

21
any other training institution which conducts Para-trooping on such a
large scale, because of which there are frequent courses at PTS, AF for
trainees from various friendly countries."
50. Asked about the specific reasons for Army not detailing troops for para-
trooping courses and non-allotment of task by Air HQ for the other type of courses,
the Ministry stated in a note as under:
"For the shortfall in detainment of troops by the Indian Army, the matter is
being taken up with their Head Quarters. Besides this, army units (Para
BAns) deployed in operational Areas were unable to spare manpower due
to operational commitments. However to ensure their para training currency,
teams of Para Jump Instructors, SEWs and parachutes from PTS are
regularly sent to operational locations to conduct in situ Para training.
The reasons for shortfall in detailment of troops by the Indian Army is as
follows: (i) Adequate number of trainees not being sponsored by the
Army for training: The shortfall highlighted is due to non-detailment of
troops by the Indian Army, which may be resolved with their Head Quarters.
Besides this, inability projected by the army units (Para Btns) deployed in
operational areas to spare manpower due to operational commitments.
However, in-situs para refresher courses are conducted on regular basis
by team of Para Jump Instructors, SEWs and parachutes from PTS, to
ensure their para training currency at operational locations. During Para
Year 2006-07, a total of 1,380 trainees were trained in basic para course and
11,648 were given refresher training. Improvement in achieving para training
targets can be seen from the data on troops trained by PTS since 2001 as
given below:
Sl. Para Year Planned No. of Trainees
No. Basic/Refresher Basic/Refresher
(a) 2000-2001 1250/11700 1369/8095
(b) 2001-2002 1250/11700 1401/8153
(c) 2002-2003 1250/11700 1342/9124
(d) 2003-2004 1250/11700 1357/10067
(e) 2004-2005 1250/11700 1447/8275
(f) 2005-2006 1250/11700 1403/9572
(g) 2006-2007 1250/11700 1380/11468
(h) 2007-2008 1320/11700 981/9751
(upto 30 April, 2008)
Excess  training is Basic by 130 personnel and shortfall in ref. course by
232 personnel: (i) Free Fall Training : The revised training syllabus in
respect of basic free fall and refresher course has been finalized. However,
due to non-availability of combat free fall parachutes and further delay in

22
procurement of  700 free fall parachutes from OPF Kanpur, by Army HQ
has led to shortfalls in subscribing basic as well refresher CFF courses. As
per Army HQ, procurement procedure is under progress and indent is yet
to be placed. Despite this limitation, free fall basic course for Indian Navy
personnel and free fall basic/refresher courses for the Army is in progress
at present. It may be noted that there is no separate infrastructure created
nor was any additional manpower posted for free fall training at PTS;
(ii) Presently, courses for both Pathfinder and Jump Master are being
conducted at PTS after the revision of requisite syllabus by AATS and
PTS. In case of PJIs, selection for the course is done as per the requirement;
(iii) There has been no shortfall in medical basic and refresher course as
No. 1 and 2 teams of Medical paratroopers Flight have been dispended as
per FOI letter No. Air HQ/S 18158/Plans/1/1109/U.S.(L)/D(Air. III) dated
14th July, 1999 and these flights are non-existent; and (iv) Air crew Para
Ground Training Course is being regularly conducted at the training
establishment.”
51. The Ministry further stated:
"Due to shortage of free fall parachutes and delay in procurement of
parachutes by Army HQ the task related to free fall training of Army
personnel has not been achieved. Despite this limitation free fall conversion
course for Indian Navy personnel has been carried out and free fall basic
courses for the Indian Army and Navy are in progress at present. Also
there has been no shortfall in Medical Basic and Refresher Courses as
No. 1 and No. 2 teams of Medical Paratroopers Flight have been disbanded
as per GOI letter No. Air HQ/S 18158/Plans/1/1109/US(L)/D(Air-III)
dated 14 July, 99 and these flights are now non-existent. Apart from this,
Aircrew para ground training courses are being regularly conducted at the
training establishments."
52. When asked about the steps taken to improve the utilization of the capabilities
of para-trooping school in consultation with user agencies, the Ministry stated in a
note as under:
"In order to enhance training imparted at Para Trooping School, AF, new and
meaningful apparatus/infrastructure is in the process of being provided.
Recently, a Para Training simulator has been installed to train paratroopers,
aircraft-in-flight drills. This simulator includes an Aircraft 'A' fuselage
complete with para role modifications. Also statement of cases have been
forwarded for the modernization of apparatus/infrastructure at Ground
Training Faculty (GTF), Para-Trooping School (PTS)."
Training Centre at an Air Force Station
53.  As per Audit, this training facility was created for training pilots on Aircraft
'A' with a UE of eight aircraft. The unit held one excess aircraft during 2001-02 and two
during 2002-06 attributing the excess to additional training and other unspecified
commitments. Details of flying task, allotted by Air HQ, and achievements against the
same showed that against the allotted task of 5400 hours for training, achievement
ranged between 2109 hours and 3459 hours showing a utilization rate which ranged
from 39 per cent to 64 per cent. The unit also used aircraft for "miscellaneous and other
tasks" for 1643 hours to 2174 hours, which was not authorized. Simultaneously, audit

23
also observed shortfalls ranging from 20 to 82 per cent in training of pilots which is
illustrated in the table given below:
Y ear Output per year as Actual output per Percentage
per policy page year of shotfall
(Number of pilots) (Number of pilots)
2001 44 17 61.37
2002 44 21 52.28
2003 44 27 38.64
2004 44 08 81.82
2005 44 35 20.46
Total 220 108
54.  Audit pointed out that in the context of the shortfalls in achieving targets for
training of pilots, underutilization of aircraft on core training tasks was not justified.
55. When asked as to how the Air HQ can justify the excess use of 3 aircraft
during the period 2001-02 and 2002-06 for additional training when in reality the actual
achievement of flying tasks ranged between 2109 hrs. and 3459 hrs. against the allotted
task of 5400 hrs., the Ministry in their written reply stated as under:
"Training is a complex time bound activity which requires concurrent use of
available assets for timely completion of task. The training task also varies
as per the intake of trainees of each course. Mid course relegations,
suspensions, medical down gradations of trainees also vary the training
tasks to a large extent. On review of monthly flying task at Air HQ, at times
it is evident that air effort at the training station would have to be augmented
to expedite the planned training so that the training targets are achieved
without delay. On such occasions, Air HW resorts to increment of aircraft
resources at the air station. Instructors from operational units are also
attached to assist  in accomplishment of planned training. The flying
training of all the trainees was completed  successfully as planned by the
air station during the period 2001-2002 and 2002-2006. All the pilot/
navigator trainees of Aircraft 'A' have successfully completed their training
as planned. Break down of flying task achieved against planned task of air
station is as follows:—
Y ear Planned Achieved Achieved T otal
task (Training) (Other task) Achieved
2001-02 4500 2118 1926 4044
2002-03 4500 2109 2174 4283
2003-04 4500 3032 1643 4675
2004-05 4500 2828 1860 4688
2005-06 4500 3459 1965 5424

24
It is evident from above that the flying task as planned has always been achieved.
The variation in task achieved has been mainly due to the factors mentioned earlier
and as enumerated in subsequent paragraphs."
The Ministry further stated:
"Aircraft of 'A' fleet of the IAF are capable of performing various roles such
as para-trooping, supply dropping causalty evacuation, aid to civil power,
disaster relief and humanitarian assistance etc. In case of emergent situation
like causalty evacuation, disaster relief, Humanitarian assistance, movement
of specialist cargo, airlift of rescue teams, timely relief is of paramount
importance. Depending on the geographical location of the unit, the
operational role of the unit, number of aircraft, aircrew available with the
unit, Air HQ allots such tasks to the nearest located transport unit. Air
Station at Yelahanka is the only other transport unit in Southern India. The
unit thus was tasked to provide succour in times of Latur earthquake, Bhuj
earthquake and Tsunami. The training required was carried out as On Job
Training but could not be reflected under training task as only exclusive
training sorties are logged under training head. To retain operational
effectiveness, the training staff is also  required to have currency in various
other roles of the aircraft and hence the aircraft of the training station are
also tasked for air borne exercises, target dropping, supply dropping etc.
The training task thus achieved by  the air station includes a judicious mix
of On Job Training and pure training. As mentioned earlier ……………a
study has been ordered by the IAF to issue definite instructions on the
methodology of recording each kind of flying activity undertaken by various
operating units of the IAF. A  preliminary review was submitted by the
team in end of Aug 08. Field trials of this application would commence
once Air Force Net is fully operational at unit levels. Once implemented,
the new pattern of flying returns would provide greater details of task
accomplishment including OJT, pure training etc."
56. When asked whether any measures which have been taken for reducing the
shortfall in achieving the targets for training of pilots, the Ministry in their written
reply stated as under:
"In 1987, the ab-initio conversion training of pilots and navigators was
reassigned from PTS  Agra to Yelahanka. However, conversion course for
Fight Engineers continues to be conducted at PTS Agra on required basis.
The unit has trained a total of 91 trainees in 10 courses conducted since
2001. A course for 14 Flight Engineers is being conducted presently. The
training of pilots is being effectively carried out as per schedule at
Air Force Station, Yelahanka and there is no shortfall in the training of
pilots."
57. To a specific query as to why the aircraft held by the training school/centers
been significantly used for Routine Transport Role and miscellaneous tasks, the
Ministry in their reply stated as under:
"Once the conversion training was reassigned to Yelahanka, the aircraft on
the strength of the training school were now utilized more for RTR and

25
other operationally necessary miscellaneous tasks and as a result there is
quantum increase in this role over the years. The unit is located in central
location from where it is possible to provide airlift at relatively shorter duration
of time in relief missions during natural calamities, casualty evacuation etc.
This ensures optimum utilization of aircraft and precludes wastages of flying
hours. In fact while fulfilling the critical capabilities of para trooping these
aircraft have been optimally utilized for other assigned roles."
E . Modification and Utilization of Aircraft 'A' for VIP use
(Para 1.6.1.5)
58. During 2001-03, Air HQ modified six Aircraft 'A' for VIP use. It had earlier
modified two aircraft for VIP use between 1992-99. Audited scrutiny revealed that the
modification and utilization of eight aircraft was not only irregular but also lacked
justification on account of the following reasons:—
(i) IAF did not have adequate number of serviceable Aircraft 'A' for its primary
role of air maintenance, as a result the flying tasks assigned had to be
reduced considerably. Therefore, diversion of such large number of aircraft
(20 per cent of the total serviceable aircraft with IAF) for VIP use showed an
unexpected indifference to its primary role;
(ii) the modification involved change in the rule of the aircraft from what had
been approved by the Government. Hence the modification required approval
of the Government . In December, 1995, however, approval for modification
of Aircraft 'A' was denied by the Government. Despite this, the IAF continued
modifying aircraft and altered their role irregularly;
(iii) a specialized Communications Squadron consisting of two Boeings, four
executive jets, seven Avros and six helicopters, exists for use by VIPs,
Government orders issued in 1981 regulate use of these aircraft by VIPs i.e.,
the President, the Vice-President and the Prime Minister who are the only
personages ordinarily entitled to use the aircraft in this squadron. Other
entitled personages (OEP)  including senior service officers can use aircraft
of the Communications Squadron, if it is essential to do so and aircraft are
available. Given the existence of a specialized and dedicated squadron with
adequate number of aircraft for flying VIPs and OEPs, diverting eight Aircraft
'A' for VIP/OEP use was not justified;
(iv) during 1999-2004, the Avro fleet in the Communications Squadron was used
only to the extent of 3.9 per cent by the three entitled personages and 46.9
per cent by OEPs. It was thus evident that existing aircraft in the specialized
Communications Squadron were underutilized. This further diluted the
justification for modifying Aircraft 'A' for VIP/OEP use; and
(v) if there was unfulfilled demand for aircraft for VIP/OEP use, increase in the
holding of the existing Communications Squadron should  have been
considered instead of designating Aircraft 'A' for this purpose outside of
the Communications Squadron. Earmarking aircraft for VIP role outside the
Communications Squadron also led to dilution of control on use of service
aircraft by VIPs and OEPs.

26
59. In their explanation to the aforesaid Audited observation, the Ministry stated
that the modification of aircraft for VIP role is temporary and it does not change the role
of the aircraft for which it has been fixed. The modification does not impact the
functioning of the IAF as commanders and senior officers undertake tours and
inspections necessary for upkeep of operational readiness and morale of the troops.
Military Commanders are authorized to travel in service aircraft on inspection tours to
areas under their jurisdiction as per provisions Paras 3 to 7 of AFI 9/83 (duly approved
by Ministry of Defence). Further, that these aircraft are utilized for their assigned roles
which include communication duties to mountainous regions like Leh, Srinagar, Kargil
and Advanced Landing Grounds in Northern Eastern regions.
60. Asked about the reasons for the modification and utilization of Aircraft 'A' by
the Air HQ for VIP use especially when a specialized Communications Squadron with
adequate number of aircraft already existing for this purpose, the Ministry in a note
stated as under:
"……….This is the only aircraft capable of operating out of Advanced
Landing Grounds and high altitude airfields and have been employed on
communication duties for the entitled military commanders to such areas.
Thus these aircraft are utilized for their assigned roles which include
communication also."
61. Enquired about the present position of modification of Aircraft 'A' for VIP
use, the Ministry informed the Committee that all the temporarily modified VIP aircraft
have been de-modified to freighter role last year itself and the role in/roll out
modifications would be available for future use if the situation so demands.
62. The Committee asked whether the Ministry would agree that diversion of
such large number of aircraft i.e. 20 per cent of the total serviceable aircraft with IAF for
VIPs showed an unexpected indifference of IAF to its primary role. In response, the
Ministry in their reply stated as under:
"…………..the primary roles of the ac comprise majority of transport aircraft
operations under common terminology called Route Transport Role (RTR)
which entail airlift of men and material from one place to another, Air
maintenance or Transport Support Role (TSR) which is specifically carried
out in support of Army and other agencies requiring to be maintained by
air to places not connected by road transport means due to terrain, whether
or geography, para-tropping, supply drop, casualty evacuation,
Humanitarian Assistance/Disaster Relief (HA/DR) operations, etc. Being
temporary easy to role in/roll out modifications, these aircraft are
de-modified whenever they are inducted for servicing and the modification
shifted to another aircraft if so required. Being temporary modification,
these aircraft were de-modified during disaster relief operations and utilized
for carrying cargo along with the service commanders, dignitaries, press
teams, rescue teams etc. Thus, the aircraft has been performing all its
assigned primary roles."
63. when enquired about the details of the total expenditure incurred in respect
of each of the eight aircraft, the Ministry submitted in a note as under:

27
"A total expenditure of Rs. 56 lakh has been incurred for modification of the
eight aircrafts. The details are as follows:-
Sl. Aircraft Date of Modified Unit Command
No. No.
(a) K-3065 Apr. 1992 43Sqn EAC
(b) K-2758 May 1999 12 Sqn CAC
(c) K-2715 Aug. 2001 33 Sqn SAC
(d) K-2721 Prior to Nov. 2001 48 Sqn WAC
(e) K-2717 Mar. 2002 43 Sqn EAC
(f) K-2744 10 May 2002 48 Sqn WAC
(g) K-2677 F eb. 2003 33 Sqn SAC
(h) K-2750 Aug. 2003 12 Sqn CAC
The expenditure incurred on modification of VIP role was intimated vide Air HQS
letter No. Air HQ/82897/1/BM-2/Eng. D 3(T) dated 13th September 2007. However,
towards de-modification of VIP aircraft Nil expenditure was incurred."
64. In their Post Evidence Reply, the Ministry stated as under:
"A total expenditure of Rs. 56 lakhs had been incurred for modification of
these 08 aircraft. However, towards de-modification of VIP aircraft nil
expenditure was incurred. Air HQ had approved modification using
delegated power for revenue expenditure. The de-modification was ordered
by Air HQ."
65. The Committee specifically asked as to how the Ministry would explain as
well as account for the expenditure of Rs. 56 lakh for temporary modification of the
aircraft; and also whether any explanation had been sought from the concerned officials
for this un-authorised modification of aircraft. In response, the Ministry in a note
stated as under:
"The total expenditure of Rs. 56 lakh was arrived at, by extrapolating the
amount spent for modification of one aircraft, which is Rs. 7 lakh as per
records available at the Air HQ. The modifications were temporary i.e. roll-
in/roll-out type and did not effect the basic freighter role of aircraft. The
benefit of modification is for movement of Army Commanders and other
service dignitaries to certain airfields and advance landing grounds where
only Aircraft 'A' aircraft can be operated. It was an organisation decision
and not any individual. Hence, no explanation was asked from any
individual."

28
66. Asked about the details of passengers who used modified aircraft indicating
name of passengers, destination and duration of flying, the Ministry stated in a note
as under:
"The Civilian VIPs are flown based on their entitlement/clearance by
appropriate authority. Serving senior officers fly on duty related missions
due operational necessity based on existing instructions. The details of
flying undertaken during last five years for various VIP tasks undertaken
by Aircraft 'A' aircraft category-wise exclusive of positioning hours are as
follows:
Y ear Service Dignitaries VIP/OEPs
2002 180 84:10
2003 377:30 133:40
2004 821:30 29:05
2005 718:00 37:20
2006 608:15 02:15
Total 2705:15 286:30"
67. Audit scrutiny further disclosed that the modified aircraft were not used by
any of the three VIPs and were instead predominantly utilised by OEPs such as senior
officers of the Services, AFW A/AWW A Presidents and their accompanying staff.
AFW A/AWW A Presidents are not even covered under the category of OEPs.
Expenditure on use of these aircarft by OEPs amounted to Rs. 75 crore since their
modification. Further, after modification, the payload and the passenger carrying
capacity of the modified aircraft was significantly reduced to 1800 kg. and 19 persons
respectively. Test check by Audit regarding the use of a modified aircraft during one
year showed that it carried an average of three passengers and 2 kg. payload per sortie
as against the passenger carrying capacity of 40-50 persons and load carrying capacity
of 6700 kg. of the aircraft.
68. When asked as to how the Ministry can justify use of the modified aircarft by
the unauthorised/OEPs, the Ministry in a note stated as under:
"No unauthorized personnel have been allowed to use these aircraft.
Commanders and senior officers undertake tours and inspections necessary
for upkeep of operational readiness and morale of the troops. Military
commanders along with their spouse are authorised to travel in service
aircraft on inspection tours to areas under their jurisdictions as per
provisions of Para 3 to 7 of AFI 9/83 which is duly approved by Ministry
of Defence."
F.  DEPLOYMENT OF OPERATIONAL  PERSONNEL
69. Audit review has further revealed that there was surplus/deficiency in
operational manpower in eight operational units/squardron of Aircraft 'A' during the

29
peirod 2001-06. the details of which are given as under:
Percentage of surplus/deficiency
Y ear Pilot Navigator Flight Engineer
2001-02 - 22 +13 +10
2002-03 - 19 +1 +14
2003-04 - 18 +13 +25
2004-05 - 14 +5 +27
2005-06 - 13 +28 +34
70. It may be seen from the above that the Aircraft 'A' squardrons/units had
serious shortages of Pilots but surplus of Flight Navigators and Flight Engineers. The
deficiency in the number of Pilots, however, declined from 22 per cent in 2001-02 to
13 per cent in 2005-06. In the case of Flight Engineers, the surplus manpower increased
substantially from 10 per cent in 2001-02 to 34 per cent in 2005-06. According to Audit,
deficiency in pilot strength would have adverse impact on the rate of utilization of the
aircraft. In fact, Air HQ, while justifying lowring the flying task from 66.66 hours to
30 hours per month in 1995, attributed this, inter-alia, to shortage of pilots. Further,
deficiencies in pilot strength along with surplus in the strength of navigators and
engineers indicates imbalance in deployment of operational manpower in these
squardrons/units.
71. Audit scrutiny further disclosed that two squardron/unit held surplus pilots
over authorisation, six other squardrons/units faced deficiencies. Air HQ had stated
that additional manpower was being provided in the units entrusted with Air
Maintenance role. However, Audit contested the reply of the Ministy as according to
them significant shortages of pilots existed in three squardrons and in PTS which had
critical Air Maintenance and para-trooping training role.
72. Further, the Air HQ. also justified excess manning in the two units on account
of increase in task. However, Audit scrutiny disclosed that the tasks acheived in these
two units, have not shown any significant variation. Audit stated that no explanation
as given by the HQ. for holding surplus Navigators and Flight Engineers in most of the
units especially in view of significant shortage of pilots in some of the units.
73. Asked about the reasons for holding surplus navigators and flight engineers
in  most of the squardrons/units, the Ministry in their reply stated as under:
"Excess Navigators and Flight Engineers: The Government of India authorised
induction of navigators is 24 per year. Induction is through the pool of
Flying (Pilot) training who are suspended from flying training. After ab-
intio training at Navigation Training School (NTS) and 414 AFS, young
navigators are posted to 'A' fleet units to build up competency. The manning
of Navigators and Flight Engineers for the period of report was marginally
in excess of the Norms fixed (01 per aircraft for navigators and 1.25 per
aircraft for Flight Engineer). This was done to cater for the overall
qualificaton status of the units under reference. There was no induction
into the Flight (Navigator) cadre from 1984 to 1988. Thereafter the induction

30
of  Flight (Navigator) officers has been satisfactory, which led to a younger
seniority profile of the Flight (Navigator) cadre from 1990 till date. If statistics
were to be compared, 348 experienced navigators exited the Indian Air
Force between 1990 and 2000. During this period, a total of 260 navigators
were inducted. This translates to an average of 32 exists and 24 entries per
year for the period. This led to a reduction of fully qualified nagivators in
the Indian Air Force. If the Aircraft - 'A' units were to be manned as per
norms, the overall qualification status of the unit would have been sub-
optimal. Thus the units were manned marginally in excess. This ensured
availability of adequate Fully Operations navigators in units. Further, going
by the relatively lower seniority of the Under Trainee (U/T) navigator,
they could not have been employed elsewhere and thus need the necessary
training. There was also a requirement of training adequate navigators for
new aircraft inductions planned between 2005 and 2011. This was a
transitory phase which addressed issues of Operational potential of 'A'
fleet units and future requirement. At present, 'A' fleet units have achieved
necessary optimal Operational status and are in a position to reduce the
manning numbers of navigators. Navigators are also begin posted to
Su-30 units as WSOs and as UA V/SAGW/Aerostat Operational Crew.
This would eventually result in reduction of navigators in 'A' fleet units.
The situation of manning imbalance would gradually get stabilized. A
similar situation occurred in respect of Flight Engineers. The 'A' fleet had
a sizeable number of senior Flight Engineers who were due to exit active
flying duties w.e.f. 2006. To address the requirement of manpower overlap
and to ensure that the new entrants become fully operational prior to
departure of senior Flight Engineers, the manning of Flight Engineers was
maintained above norms. The same would stabilize w.e.f. 2007."
74. When aksed how would the Ministry explain for imbalance in the manpower
deployed in the Aircraft 'A' squardrons/units were there is shortage of pilots vis-a-vis
surplus of Flight Navigators and Flight Engineers, the Ministry explained their position
in a note as under:
"Shortfall of Pilots: The Ministry of Finance had placed a ban on creation of
new posts in 1984. Since 1984, a large number of new Aircraft/Equipment
were inducted into the IAF and many existing systems were upgraded.
However, manpower for these new systems was not sanctioned due to the
Ban. Thus, all new inductions had to be manned by pulling out manpower
from the existing units. This led to under manning of a large number of
units in order to serve the overall operational requirement of the IAF,
which also resulted in pilot shortfalls in the 'A' fleet. During the period of
Audit, the IL 78 Air to Air Refueller (AAR) and Embrare executive aircraft
were also inducted. Qualified manpower from existing transport fleets
(including 'A' fleet) was diverted for the same. However, this lower manning
could be sustained due to lower serviceability status of the 'A' fleet. The
Government of India had sanctioned additional posts in 2006 in waiver of
the Ban so as to make good manpower shortages in the IAF. Effort is on to

31
enhance induction of pilots so as to fill up the recently sanctioned posts
over a 5-7 year period. The manning status of pilots in 'A' fleet has
shown a significant improvement in the last two years. Excess of
Navigators and Flight Engineers: A total of 348 experienced navigators
existed the IAF between 1990 and 2000. These navigators had been
employed on duties that included flying, ground weapons and
administration. The average induction of navigators for this period was
24 per annum. These navigators were all posted to flying units
(predominantly 'A' Squadrons) towards achieving flying proficiency.
There was also a requirement of training adequate navigators for new
aircraft inductions planned between 2005 and 2011. Thus the 'A' fleet
went through a transitory phase of over manning of Navigators. A similar
situation existed for Flight Engineers. This over manning was primarily
towards addressing the operational training of these young aircrew and
their preparation for future fleet inductions. Imbalance: the transitory
excess manning of navigators and Flight engineers did not affect the
operational functioing of the 'A' fleet."
75. When asked whether the position of operational manning in units has been
reviewed in consonance with tasks allocated to units, the Ministry stated in their reply
as under:
"The position of operational manning in units has been reviewed in
consonance with tasks allocated to units. There are certain units that are
assigned specific roles. These roles require aircrew to possess specific
experience and competency levels. Further, training for such roles involves
time. For example, certain 'A' Fleet units have air maintenance as primary
role, while other could have para-trooping or overseas couriers as primary
task. Manning of respective units is based on the above requirements.
76. Enquired whether any fresh study has been conducted to assess the
manpower requirement in the squadrons/units, the Ministry in a note stated as under:
"The TBM Boards conducted regularly (annually/every two years), work
out the minimum manpower requirement for evey unit in the IAF. These
boards are necessitated so as to cater for the manpower shortfall in the
service, wherein the available manpower is optimally distributed across
units in the IAF.The TBM Board caters for the following parameters:
(i) Branch wise and system-wise establishment of manpower; (ii) The bare
minimum manpower requirement per unit to ensure acceptable operational/
functional potential. This would be based in the operational imperatives
of the particular unit; (iii) Envisaged tasking/workload for the unit for the
next one year; (iv) Available effective manpower excluding those on
deputations and long courses; and (v) Manpower training issues for future
requirement. The TBM Board draws inputs from filed units, Command
HQs, Specialist Directorates at Air HQ before deliberating the final unit
based manning figures. Once finalized, the TBM figures are circulated to
all Command HQrs for ratification prior to implementation."

32
The Ministry added:
"TBM Board 2008 for the 'A' Fleet: The TBM Board conducted in January
2008 included deliberations on the manning requirement for the 'A' Fleet.
The tangibles considered were: (i) The forecast aircraft distribution between
units in the 'A' Fleet; (ii) The forecast operational and training flying task
for 'A fleet units; (iii) The forecast number of fresh trainees expected in the
fleet; (iv) Air Force Standing Establishment Committee (AFSEC) manning
norms for the 'A' Fleet; (v) Overall availability of 'A' fleet qualified aircrew;
(vi) Forecast requirement for diverting qualified aircrew for other advanced
transport ac fleets (eg. AW ACS, BBJ and Embraer); (vii) Per capita flying
for an individual aircrew; and (viii) Forecast number of 'A' fleet aircrew on
Low Medical Category, long courses and deputations. Based on the above,
the TBM manpower figures for the 'A' fleet were worked out. It would be
ensured that the actual manning of the unit is maintained at/above these
values (but at/below establishment/AFSEC norms values). The following
facts emerge: (i) The TBM value of 'A' fleet pilots has been increased in
2008 compared to 2007, thus bringing it closer to AFSEC norms; (ii) The
TBM value of 'A' fleet navigators has been reduced in 2008 as compared
to 2007, bringing its closere to AFSEC norms; and (iii) The above also
addresses a few observations by the CAG Report.
Aircraft 'A' Fleet Aircrew manning Statistics
Unit Pilots Navigators
TBM 2007 TBM 2008 Change TBM 2007 TBM 2008 Change
12 Sqn 24 28 4 16 14 -2
PTS 25 28 3 16 14 -2
25 Sqn 16 14 -2 8 8 0
48 Sqn 26 28 2 16 14 -2
33 Sqn 26 26 0 15 14 -1
43 Sqn 24 28 4 16 14 -2
49 Sqn 24 28 4 16 14 -2
Total 165 180 15 103 92 -11"
77. To a query regarding the corrective action taken to ensure that sufficient
number of staff are deployed in all the squadrons/units, the Ministry stated in a note
as under:
"The manning level of pilots and navigators has shown an increment from
2007 onwards. This has been an outcome of improved induction and
controlled exits of manpower. The TBM Board makes an assessment of
optimal distribution of these aircrew between various squadrons/units.
The units are presently optimally manned. Each unit in the 'A' fleet has

33
specified roles assigned. SOPs exist which amplify the crew composition
and qualification for undertaking these roles. These SOPs are factored in
the TBM Board when arriving at a final optimal manning figures for a
paricular 'A' fleet unit. The TBM figures ensure that the unit is capable of
undertaking its assigned operational task."
G . DEFICIENCIES IN RECORDS MAINTAINED FOR TRANSPORT OF
PASSENGERS AND CARGO
78. Audit scrutiny of flight recordes held by two squadrons pertaining to six
different months during the peirod 2004-06 disclosed the following inadequacies:
(i) a manifest of a flight provides details of passengers/cargo carried in the
aircraft. Proper accounting of the manifests is essential to ensure that no
unauthorised passenger/cargo is carried in the service aircraft. Audit
observed that the manifests of Aircraft 'A" did not carry any serial or control
number to ensure proper identification and accounting of the manifests.
Manifests were also not entered into any control register by squadrons/
unit providing airlift;
(ii) entries in the passenger manifests were altered without unauthorisation of
the competent authorities. Further, operational requirement for airlifts and
movement of cargo is oftern not brought out in the manifests; and
(iii) Unauthorised cargo such as personal belongings and other non-operational
stores have been included in the manifests.
Therefore, Audit concluded that the inadequate noticed disclose dilution of
internal controls and increased risk of unauthorised use of aircraft.
79. Asked about the reasons for maintenance of manifests without serial and
control numbers, the Ministry informed the Committee that the Aircraft 'A' is used for
air transportation of cargo/personnel from various airfields spread across the length
and breadth of the country. Manifests are issued by various user agencies based on/
near these airfields with their own control numbers. The Flight Engineers on reaching
back to their parent bases documents these manifests with unit level serial number.
80. On being asked whether the Ministry would agree that it is a control failure
which facilitated carriage of unauthorised passengers and cargo in Aircraft 'A' flights,
the Ministry contended that flight authorising officers at the unit level and supervisors
at squadron, wing, command and AHQ ensure that only authorised frieght/passengers
are carried in the aircraft.
81. When asked about the improvements that have been made in maintaining
flight details and in recording and contorl of flight manifests, the Ministry stated that
the units maintain and record the flight details as stipulated by IAF publication IAP-
3314. The inspection teams of commands, Air HQs and the Aircrew Examination Board
scrutinise these documents in their periodic visits to the operating units.
82. As regards the initiatives that have been taken to review the operational
manning units to ensure that they are in consonance with tasks allocated to units, the
Ministry informed the Committee that the task allotted and task achieved are closely
monitores periodically at various levels in the Indian Air Force so as to ensure that the
operational manning is in consonance with tasks allocated to units.

34
IV . REPAIRS  AND  MAINTENANCE
(Para 1.6.2)
83. In view of the complexity of aircrft systems, their utilisation and serviceability
is critically dependent on the timely availability of supporting repair and maintenance
infrastructure and services. Aircraft 'A' have now been in service for a period of 15-19
years and the need for effective repair and maintenance is now greater so that operational
advantages do not get reduced with the age of the aircraft. It is in this background that
Audit examined the availability of repair and maintenance facilities and their utilization
and also studied repair and maintenance activities, including procurement and
indigenisation, to assess, if these were efficient and promoted economy.
ADEQUACY  OF  REPAIR  AND  MAINTENANCE  FACILITIES
A. DELAYS AND INADEQUACIES IN CREATION OF FACILITIES FOR
OVERHAUL   AND REPAIR OF AIRFRAMES  AT BRD—KANPUR
(Para 1.6.2.1)
84. Audit has pointed out that since Aircraft 'A' were inducted by IAF during
1984-1991, therefore, facilities for overhaul and repair of airframes should have been
set up by 1990 to carry out first major overhaul due in that year. However, the facilities
were established substantially only in 2002 i.e. after a delay of 12 years. The delays in
setting up of these facilities and the resultant requirement of sending airframes abroad
for overhaul at a cost of Rs. 69.56 crore were reported earlier in Paragraph No. 3 of
Audit Report No. 8 of 1998. Further audit examination showed that items supplied by
the OEM for creating the repair and overhaul facilities consisted of 116 test rigs used
for testing of aggregates during overhaul of airframes. Out of 116 test rigs procured
between 1995-2000, 11 test rigs were yet to be installed as of October 2006 due to
defects and deficiencies.
85. Asked about the reasons for the inordinate delay in establishment of facilities
for overhauling and repairing of airframes, the Ministry explained in a note as under:
"A Protocol for inter-governmental technical assistance was signed between
India and USSR in year 1985. The setting up of overhaul line with assistance
of General Tech Department (GTD) of erstwhile USSR was thus agreed
upon for a contract was signed in 1987. However, this contract for setting
up overhaul line at BRD, Kanpur was of general nature without DPR and
prices. As DPR wise break down list of test rigs and items required for the
overhaul line were not covered in the contract subsequently, a
supplementary agreement was signed in year 1991 with the list of DPRs
and the total cost of project. Thereafter, due to break up of  USSR the firm
changed hands from GTD to Rosvooronzhenie and later to Rosobornexport
(ROE). The ROE was located in Russia where as the Designer and OEM of
the Aircraft 'A' aircraft were in Ukraine. Hence M/S ROE was unable to
muster sufficient support from the Ukrainian firms for setting up facilities
at BRD Kanpur. This delayed the process of identifying and finalizing
agreement for items and test rigs to be supplied and setting up of the
overhaul facility of Aircraft 'A'. First aircraft K-2671 under the Plot Project
passed out after major overhaul on 01 January 1996. As seen above, the

35
major contribution for the delay in setting up facilities was the break up of
USSR & the uncertainties thereafter in that region."
86. When asked as to why the Ministry did not take any corrective action inspite
of Audit pointing out earlier in Para No. 3 of Audit Report No. 8 of 1998 regarding
delays in setting up facilities for overhauling and repairing of airframes resulting in
sending airframe abroad for overhauling at a cost of Rs. 69.56 crore, the Ministry in a
note stated as under:
"Delay took place due to break-up of erstwhile USSR. As a result when
aircraft were due for overhaul, the facility had still not been set up. However,
our continuous effort resulted in setting up complete overhaul facilities
by year 1996. The OEM had initially assigned calendar TBO life of only
6 years for the airframe. Thus, before the facilities were fully set up certain
aircraft fell due for overhaul on calendar basis. Thus 46 airframes were
required to be sent to OEM for overhaul at an average cost of Rs. 1.5 crore
per aircraft, resulting in a total expenditure of Rs. 69.56 crore. However, no
airframe has been sent abroad after year 1998 and BRD Kanpur has been
consistently undertaking overhaul since then. Also, a payment of Rs. 7.88
crore was with held from vendors, since all the contractual obligations
were not honoured in time."
87. Enquired about the present position of installation of remaining 11 test rigs,
the Ministry in a note stated as under:
"The detailed status on the 11 test rigs (05 in Aircraft and 06 in Rotable
division) are Aircraft Division: (a) 01 test rig fully serviceable (DPR 037);
and (b) 04 test rigs that were installed with indigenous efforts are
unserviceable due to lack of know-how. (DPR 126, 3577,010 & 2447). Rotable
Division: (a) 01 test rig serviceable (DPR 2384); (b) 01 test rig (Balancing
Machine for Turbo cooler overhaul) replaced by an Indian made (DPR
1653); (c) o1 test rig partially serviceable (DPR 4531); and (d) 02 test rigs
commissioned but unserviceable due to vintage components/spares
(ex flow-meter etc.) not available at any source. (DPR 502, 504 & 1329). The
balance of the task is either carried out in-situ or taken to external agency
(IIT Kanpur).
88. As a consequence of the delay in setting up complete overhaul capabilities
and non-availability of essential spares, Audit found that 32 overhauls undertaken at
BRD-Kanpur between 2002 to 2006 were cleared by Air HQ with a number of 'deficiencies/
concessions'. These concessions were on account of non-replacement of mandatory
spares and deviatons from provisions of bulletins relating to modifications and non-
testing for leaks in fuel tanks till next overhaul. This was a deviation from the requirement
as rules permit clearing aircraft with concession for only three months followed by a
review.
89. Audit has also pointed out that despite Main Landing Gear (MLG) and Nose
Landing Gear (NLG) being critical airframe aggregates, however, the in-house capability
for undertaking overhaul of MLGs remained limited due to non-availability of some
equipment. As a result, overhaul of MLGs were being cleared with deviations. In the

36
case of NLGs, BRD Kanpur stated that it had set up necessary facilities for overhaul by
June 2003 using available resources. However, it continued to rely on other BRDs and
HAL for certain critical tasks. Due to delayed and incomplete establishment of overhaul
facilities and shortage of non-mandatory spares, overhaul of 20 NLG had to be entrusted
to the OEM in April 2005 at a total cost of USD 252000 (Rs. 1.12 crore).
90. When asked about the total expenditure incurred on setting up facilities for
repair/overhaul of airframes, the Ministry replied in a note as under:
"As per the records available total expenditure incurred on setting up facilities
for overhaul of airframe is Rs. 29.58 crores. Details are (a) Ground Equipment,
Tools, Test Eqpt.: Rs. 19.40 crores Machinery, Instrument etc.; and
(b) Work Services: Rs. 10.18 crores."
91. Enquired whether the facilities for overhaul of airframes have now been fully
set up, the Ministry in a note stated that:
"The facilities have been fully set up since July 2003. However, few "Type
A" concessions are being given due to non-availability of spares. These
are dynamic in nature and are being removed from time to time as per the
periodicity or availability of spares whichever is earlier."
92. Enumerating the steps that have been taken to ensure that all spares are
available to facilitate full repair/overhauling of airframes, the Ministry in a note stated
that:
"As discussed earlier the indigenisation is a key area and 97-98 per cent of
the mandatory items required for overhaul of airframe are available within
India. Also, regular provisioning reviews are done to ensure that the spares
are available in time."
B. DELAY IN SETTING UP REPAIR AND OVERHAUL FACILITIES FOR
TURBO GENERATORS
(Para 1.6.2.2)
93. The repair facilities for TG-16M Turbo Generators fitted on Aircraft 'A' which
are used for running of air conditioners in the aircraft were set up at BRD Chandigarh
in 1995-96. Based on a feasibility study conducted by Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
(HAL), Koraput Division, Government sanctioned the project in January 2001 for
establishing overhaul facility for these geneators at a total cost of Rs. 10.42 crore with
a probable date of completion of July 2003. Following Government sanction for creation
of overhaul facilities at HAL, the existing repair facility at BRD-Chandigarh was
dismantled and drawings/spares etc. were handed over to HAL in 2001-02.
94. Audit scrutiny further revealed that the overhaul facility, which was scheduled
to be set up by July 2003 was yet to be established as of August 2006 even though
alternative repair facilities were not available in the country. Further, only Rs. 2.42 crore
out of the Rs. 10.42 crore sanctioned had been spent by HAL upto December 2005
indicating only 25 per cent progress of work in setting up the repair and overhaul
facilities. Air HQ failed to monitor the creation of facilities and called for reasons for
delay from HAL only in August 2006. Air HQ stated in August 2006 that the expected
date of establishment of overhaul facilities of HAL was September 2006 but these were
yet to be established as of October 2006.

37
95. As a result of the aforesaid delay in setting up overhaul facilities, IAF got
57 TG-16M generators overhauled aborad at a total cost of USD1862190 (i.e. Rs. 8.38
crore) under two contracts signed in September 2004 and November 2005. Besides, a
contract for overhaul of 62 number of GS-24A generators (an aggreate of TG-16M
generator) was signed in July 2004 at a total cost of USD188145 (i.e. Rs. 0.85 crore).
Had the indigenous overhaul facility been set up in time i.e. by July 2003, the generators
along with their aggregates could have been overhauled at a cost of Rs. 11.25 lakh
(after considering escalation over cost estimated in 1999) per generator. The additional
cost due to offloading of overhaul task worked out to be Rs. 4.82 lakh per generator.
This resulted in extra expenditure of Rs. 2.75 crore on overhaul of 57 numbers of
TG-16M generator. These generators would continue to be sent abroad for overhaul
till the facilities are set up.
96. When enquired about the status of establishment of the overhaul facilities as
on June 2007, the Ministry in a note stated as under:
"Y es, the overhaul facilities have been established at HAL, Koraput for
repair and overhaul of TG-16M Turbo Generator as of June 2007, It is
submitted that the reported contents on file that overhaul facilities for
Turbo Generators have been established as on June 2007 was based on
HAL(KPT) confirmation received and not the views of Air HQrs.
Accordingly, long term contract was signed for overhaul abroad due to
more arising and availability of Cat 'D' as production of HAL and not
stabilized. It is expected that it will take 2-3 years. Before going for long
terms contract HAL(KPT) was approached by Air HQ on whether they will
be able to take up the task of following from you or else Air HQ will go for
overhaul abroad. After the consent of HAL(KPT) only Air HQ has gone
for a long term contract. The visit of Air HQ team to HAL(KPT) for
finalization of Fixed Price Quotes and examine the facilities established of
HAL(KPT), so far is appended below:
Task Task Production Rem arks
Year
2004-05 05 04  Carry forward task of Qty-01
2005-06 10 02 Oty-01 produced against Task
Year 2004-05
2006-07 05 09 Qty-01 produced against Task
Year 2005-06 & Nil production
against Task Year 2006-07
2007-08 05 03 Against Task Year 2006-07"
97. Asked whether the generators are still being sent abroad for overhauling, the
Ministry in their reply stated as under:
"Yes, the Turbo Generators are being sent abroad due to the capacity
constraints of HAL (Koraput). The stabilisation of overhaul facilities will
take another 2-3 years. Therefore, to meet arising of Cat 'D' Turbo generators,

38
a long term contract has been signed for next four years as per the following
rates: 2008-19,800 USD, 2009-20, 460 USD, 2010-21,200 USD and
2011-21,900 USD. The cost of overhaul in India as per the budgetary
quotes forwarded by the HAL (KPT) is Rs. 38.32 lakh. Fixed Price Quotes
of Rs. 29.62 lakhs for overhaul of TG-16M Turbo Generator has been
received from HAL (KPT) and is under consideration."
98. The Committee desired to know about the capacity constraints of HAL due
to which Turbo Generators are still being sent abroad for overhauling. In response, the
Ministry in a note stated as under:
"Turbo Generators were sent abroad for overhauling to meet requirements of
field units since the facility for the overhaul was required to be set up
indigenously at HAL Koraput. This involved tooling and development of
test rigs by reverse engineering especially the facility for two of its main
rotables viz. DC Generators and Fuel Flow Regulator. The same are set up
and are under trial at HAL Koraput since June 2007. By the time large number
of Cat 'D' had already piled up and HAL could handle only Qty. 10 per year."
99. When asked whether Indian Air Force have taken any steps to identify the
causes for delay and also fixed responsibility for the same, the Ministry in note stated
as under:
"Air HQ has asked HAL (KPT) the reasons for delay in setting up of facilities
to fix the responsibilities for the same for which following reasons were
forwarded by HAL (KPT): (a) HAL (KPT) had to prepare specification of
many new test rigs and develop them with indigenous sources; (b) During
the progress of overhaul it was found that many new tools were required to
complete the overhauling and and HAL had to design and fabricate/procure
these tools; and (c) The division had to indigenously develop many
mandatory/non-mandatory spare of TG-16M and its aggregates with the
help of  Cat 'A' samples as no drawing were available. The non-availability of
such Cat 'A' samples delayed the development of such spares. Even with
the above contraints, HAL(KPT) Division completed the first overhaul of
TG-16M in October 2004. Now HAL has completed the setting up of facilities
needed for overhaul of TG-16M unit and as of 31 March 2007 HAL(KPT)
has completed repair and overhaul of Qty. 15 Turbo Generators. Fixed prices
quotes of Rs. 29.62 lakh for overhaul of TG-16M Turbo Generator has been
received from HAL (KPT) and is under consideration".
100. As regards the measures taken to remove the capacity constraints so as to
enable HAL to undertake overhaul/repair of generators indigenously, the Ministry in
a note stated that HAL has so far completed overhaul/repair of 17 Turbo Generators
indigenously and the firm and forecast task is as follows:
Type of Task Firm Task Forecast Task
2008-09 2009-10 2010-11 2011-12 2012-13
ROH 10 15 20 20 20"

39
101. Asked about th e initiatives that have been taken by Air HQ to ensure
completion of the project, the Ministry in a note stated as under:
"Air HQ is continuously monitoring the progress of setting up of facilities at
HAL (KPT) and the progress of task allotted to them. A meeting was held
with HAL representatives at Air HQ on 19 July 2006 on the review of
setting up of facilities of TG-16M Turbo Generator at HAL (KPT)."
102 When asked about the total expenditure incurred on setting up facilities for
repair/overhaul of airframes, the Ministry stated as under:
"HAL, Koraput is established for overhaul/repair of Turbo Generator only.
For the purpose a Govt. sanction was accorded for Deferred Revenue
Expenditure amounting to Rs. 1042 lakh. The HAL, Koraput has already
commenced overhauling of Turbo Generators."
103. Enquired whether the HAL, Koraput have been able to develop indigenously
mandatory/non-mandatory spare of RG-16M, the Ministry in a note replied in
affirmative.
104. Asked about the manner in which the projects are being monitored, the
Ministry stated that all the projects are monitored by the concerned agencies regularly
and the delay, if any, is being raised to the highest level accordingly.
C. INDIGENISATION  OF  AIRCRAFT  'A'  SPARES
(Para 1.6.2.5)
105. Another important aspect relates to indigenisation of spares which is critical
to reducing reliance on foreign suppliers for spares. As such, this was an important
task to be undertaken in the context of Aircraft 'A' where problems were being faced in
sourcing spares from the OEM/foreign suppliers. Audit examination revealed that in
BRD-Kanpur till March 2006, 3202 mandatory and Automatic Replenishment System
(ARS) items of non-complex design had been indigenised for which supply orders
valued at Rs. 11 crore for 335 lines of spares were placed on various private firms. As
of June 2006, of the orders placed, 197 lines of spares valued at Rs. 3.62 crore ordered
during 2003-06 were yet to be received. The task allotment for indigenisation of spares
had progressively decreased. This was because initially only items of non-complex
design were undertaken and thus these progressed on a fast track. During later years,
as the remaining items were complex in nature, indigenisation exercises were need
based.
106. When enquired about the present position with respect to indigenization of
197 lines of spares at BRD-Kanpur, the Ministry in a note stated as under:
"The outstanding amount for 197 lines is reflected as Rs. 3.62 crores in the
Test Audited Party report. However, it is seen that the amount is only
Rs. 1.92 crores. The prese
nt status of outstanding indigenised contracts

40
with number of lines as brought out in the Performance Audit Report is as
follows:
Y ear No. of No. of No. of No. of lines Amount
Indents contracts contracts outstanding in Rs.
outstanding
2001-02 13 13 Nil Nil Nil
2002-03 16 16 Nil Nil Nil
2003-04 08 08 01 01 14,016
2004-05 07 07 01 01 15,288
2005-06 13 13 04 05 18,18,363
Total 57 57 06 07 18,47,667"
107. In this regard, the Committee asked as to why the Ministry did not point out
the difference in the outstanding amount for 197 lines to Audit, at the draft para stage
itself, well before the subject was selected by the Committee for examination. In response,
the Ministry in a note explained their position as under:
"Initial observation of the test Audit party report was—As of June 2006, of
the orders placed above (197 lines), spares valued at Rs. 3.62 crore ordered
during 2003-06 were yet to be received. The anomaly regarding outstanding
amount for 197 lines was revealed only after detailed examination, hence,
it could not be pointed out at the draft para stage. However, on receipt of
questionnaire, it was replied that the amount for 197 lines was wrongly
mentioned as Rs. 3.62 crore, instead  of Rs. 1.92 crore."
108. Audit examination also revealed that in BRD-Chandigarh as against the
indigenisation target of 1900 spares set up during 2001-06, BRD-Chandigarh had
indigenised 2011 spares. Full information on supply orders placed for indigenized
spares was provided only for the years 2004-05  and 2005-06. It was seen that in
2004-05, 78 orders covering 86 items were placed of which 48 orders were yet to
materialise. In 2005-06, 395 orders covering 436 items were placed of which 341 orders
were yet to materialize.
109. When asked whether the remaining 48 orders (2004-05) and 341 orders
(2005-06)  placed on BRD-Chandigarh have been materialized, the Ministry in a note
stated that all the 48 orders that were pending in year 2004-05 have been materialized
and in 2005-06, out of 341 pending orders, 294 have been materialized and remaining
orders are at various stages of supply.
EFFICIENCY  AND  ECONOMY  IN  REPAIR  AND  MAINTENANCE  ACTIVITIES
D. DELAY IN SECOND LINE SERVICING  AT  OPERATING UNITS
(Para 1.6.2.6)
110. As per the extant practice/procedure for aircraft maintenance, the first and
second line servicing of Aircraft 'A' is carried out in operating squadrons/units. The
stipulated downtime for carrying out servicing at 300 hours is 13 working days and for

41
servicing at the end of every 900 hours it is 22 working days. A total of 110 cases
pertaining to three units comprising 89 cases pertaining to 300 hours servicing and
21 cases pertaining to 900 hours were examined in Audit. It was seen that in 65 cases
(59 per cent) the time taken for servicing exceeded the prescribed days as per details
given in the Table below:
Extent of delay in days Total
Type of Within 1 to 10 11 to 25 26 to 50 51 to No. of
servicing 24 days days days 100 cases
hours days
300 Hours NIL 17 23 04 01 45
900 Hours NIL 07 11 02 02 20
111. In the exit conference it was explained that the aforesaid delays were often
caused due to non-availability of spares or detection of snags during servicing.
However, according to Audit in two units there were also shortages in maintenance
personnel which could have also contributed to delay. These delays cause aircraft to
become Aircraft on Ground.
112. The Committee desired to know as to why the task allotment for indigenisation
of spares progressively decreased. In response, the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
"1 BRD: The task allotment for indigenisation of spares progressively
decreased because items indigenised initially were of simpler technology,
low cost and high volume (mandatory and ARS items). About 98 per cent
items have already been indigenised. Remaining 2 per cent are of high
technology, high value and low quantity items and the response from
vendors were poor. This was due to complex spares which require research
and development work. The hindrance in indigenisation of such high
value items is non-availability of raw material and particular technology;
and 3 BRD: Indigenisation task is never decreased. The depot has
indigenised 260 items in the year 2006-07. The achievement in the year
2006-07 is 265. Out of the 661 mandatory items of Aircraft 'A' the depot has
indigenised 604 items. Status of balance items is as (i) Items in various
stages of indigenisation-13; (ii) Items of complex nature (declared NINF)-
36; and (iii) Stock available more than MPE-08."
113. When asked whether steps have been taken to improve the
commercialisation and productionisation of indigenous items, the Ministry responded
in a note as under:
"Yes, further initiative has been taken up to improve the commercialisation
and productionisation of indigenous items. 1 BRD: From high valued
electrical items total of 22 lines and from ground equipments total 6 lines
have been indigenised. In addition about 52 lines have been indigenised
for Aircraft 'A' fleet. Effort has been taken to attract wider vendor base by
conducting display during Aero India shows, Exhibitions and Seminars.
Also in-house training programme has been conducted for improving
knowledge on indigenisation process, materials and engineering aspects;
and 3 BRD: High value high technology items Qty. 33 of NINF nature were

42
displayed at Aero India and CII meet. This attracted the best firms of
aviation industry in the country. RFPs were given to potential vendors on
the spot, as a special case. Response has been received from vendors for
25 items and these items are under development."
114. Asked about the steps taken to ensure that indigenisation plans are
adequately supported with funds/resources and followed up with adequate commercial
exploitation, the Ministry in a note stated as under:
"Ministry has taken up further initiatives for improving the commercialisation
and production of indigenous items. Adequate funds are allotted under code head
753/01 (IND) specifically for indigenous efforts to meet base requirements. out of the
total projection of 3.05 crore, 1.9 crore have already been allotted for indigenisation
and the additional allotment is expected soon. Out of this, 25 lakh have been allotted to
1 BRD and 15 lakh fo1r 3 BRD in the current financial year for indigenisation activities."
E . DELAY  IN  MEETING  AIRCRAFT  ON  GROUND  DEMANDS
(Para 1.6.2.7)
115. Audit further noted that Aircraft on Ground (AOG) demands for spares and
rotables are required to be met within 24 hours so that incidents of AOG and their duration
are minimised. However, a large number of aircraft remained AOG for inordinate periods on
account of non-availability of spares and rotables as shown in the table below:
Number of aircraft on AOG
Y ear 1 to 6 6 to 12 12 to 18 18 to 24 More than
months months months months 24 months
2001-02 39 7 — — —
2002-03 47 10 — 2 —
2003-04 30 11 — — 1
2004-05 42 12 — 1 —
2005-06 26 17 3 — —
116. Satisfaction levels with regard to AOG demands at operating units is given
in the following Table:
Satisfaction level with regard to AOG demands at operating units
Demand satisfaction level
Y ear Total Between Between Between More Demand
No. of 1-15 days 16-30 days 31-180 days than 180 pending/
demand days Cancelled
raised
2001-02 2476 462(19%) 862(35%) 848(34%) 143(6%) 161(6%)
2002-03 1880 306(16%) 541(29%) 871(46%) 142(8%) 20(1%)
2003-04 4612 996(22%) 1131(25%) 2018(44%) 350(7%) 117(2%)
2004-05 5359 1316(25%) 1387(26%) 2161(40%) 291(5%) 204(4%)
2005-06 6238 1517(24%) 1491(24%) 2326(38%) 272(4%) 632(10%)

43
117. An analysis of satisfaction levels with regard to AOG demands at operating
units disclosed that only 48 per cent of AOG demands could be met within 30 days
whereas 34-46 per cent of the demands took one to six months to be met. This indicates
deficiencies in provisioning and procurement of spares and rotables.
118. When asked about the remedial measures that have been taken to minimize
the deficiencies in provisioning and procurement of spares and rotables, the Ministry
stated in a note as under:
"Vide the delegation of financial power newly issued vide Government of
India/Ministry of Defence letter No. Air HQ/95378/1/Fin./P2431/US(RC)/
Air-II/06 dated 14 Jun. 06, the amount has been increased to Rs. 50 lakh to
procure items against AOG through Air Attache, placed in the respective
Embassy of India. The same is being used quite often, and has resulted in
reducing the number of aircraft on ground. The introduction of IMMOLS
has given an entire asset visibility to Air HQ and Command HQ. Hence,
the AOG item if available any where in the country is being diverted. The
provisioning module of IMMOLS is also functional, which will ultimately
mean real time on line procurement of all deficient item reducing the
administering lead time drastically. Hence, by incorporating all the above
factors tangible gains are expected in the near future."
F . SHORTFALL IN  ACHIEVEMENT OF  ANNUAL OVERHAUL TASK AND
OFFLOADING  OF  AERO ENGINES  ABROAD FOR OVERHAUL
(Para 1.6.2.8)
119. Despite having a capacity to undertake 30 overhauls each year, yet BRD
Chandigarh failed to achieve annual targets both for overhaul and repair tasks fixed
during the period 1999-2005 as shown in the Table below:
Task alloted Task achieved Percentage of
Y ear Achievement
Overhaul Repair Overhaul Repair Overhaul Repair
1999-00 45 10 36 100
2000-01 30 30 12 16 40 53
2001-02 30 30 05 15 17 50
2002-03 30 30 08 26 27 87
2003-04 15 30 09 26 67 87
2004-05 27 26 20 18 74 69
2005-06 10 20 14 21 100
120. It may be seen from the above that in 2005-06, targets fixed were achieved
largely due to the drastic reduction in the target for the tasks itself. However, Audit

44
examination revealed that failure to achieve tasks was on account of non-availability
of spares due to incorrect assessment of requirement and delay in procurement as
discussed below:
(i) Air HQ issued the forecast task for repair/overhaul of aero-engines of Aircraft
'A' for the production years 1999-2003 and 2000-2004 in August 1997 and in
August 1998 respectively. BRD Chandigarh, however, finalized the
requirement of spares for undertaking servicing and repairing of engines
during 1999-2004 after a delay of more than two years i.e. between May and
September 2000. This led to delay in initiating procurement action for required
spares. Air HQ concluded contracts of procurement of 157 lines of spares in
January 2002 of which 121 spares were received only in April/June 2003.
The delay in supply of 115 lines of spares was due to inordinate delay in
opening LOC and in deciding on the question of waiver of LD. Thus, spares
required for the production year 1999-2004 were received 49 to 51 months
after the start of task of production period 1999-2004.
(ii) Due to the combined allotment of tasks upto 1999-2000 without fixing tasks
separately for repairs and overhauls, the BRD undertook a disproportionately
large number of repairs and few overhauls. As such estimates of requirement
of spares for overhaul were understated and led to supplies that proved to
be inadequate when tasks were separately fixed for overhauls and repairs.
This further compounded the problem of shortage of spares; and
(iii) There was an accumulation of large number of Cat 'D' engines at BRD for
repair and overhaul due to non-availability of spares as shown in the Table
below:
Y ear Overhaul Capacity Overhaul Overhaul Awaiting
due of BRD at BRD Abroad Overhaul
2000-01 17 30 12 40 63
98* + =80
2001-02 48 30 05 40 66
2002-03 84 30 08 40 102
2003-04 19 30 09 40 72
2004-05 45 30 20 — 97
2005-06 45 30 14 43 85
*Carry forward Cat 'D' from previous year.
121. Audit pointed out that as a consequence of the failure of the BRD to meet
overhaul targets as also to fully utilise available capacities, 120 engines had to be sent
abroad between 2000 and 2002 for overhaul at an aggregate cost of US$ 14,160,000
(Rs. 64.12 crore). According to Audit had timely action been taken to procure the
required spares, 120 aero engines sent abroad could have been overhauled in India at
a total cost of Rs. 27 crore (Cost computed based on average overhaul cost of Rs. 22.36
lakh per aero-engine at BRD Chandigarh during 2000-01 to 2002-03) with a possible

45
saving of Rs. 37 crore. Further, indigenous production and maintenance facilities also
remained under-utilised during the period. Shortfalls in achievements of overhaul
tasks owing to non-supply of spares by the OEM and consequent offloading of
overhauls tasks to the OEM was highlighted in paragraph 3 of Audit Report 8 of 1998.
Even after a lapse of seven years such shortfalls in execution of overhaul tasks persist.
122. Enumerating the reasons for shortfall in achievement of task in overhaul of
aero engines by 3 BRD, the Ministry in a note stated that the main reason for the Depot
not meeting its task of production is due to non-availability of critical spares from
OEM. Supply of spares even against concluded contracts had been poor. Probable
dates of supply of most of the spares had expired leading to non-availability of spares
and hold up of production. This has led to dispatch of engines for overhaul at OEM
plant to clear back log of engines awaiting overhaul. During overhaul at OEM the
engines were reviewed with the life of 6000 hours also.
123. The Committee desired to know as to why the allotment of the task upto
1999-2000 were fixed as a combined task for repair and overhaul. In response, the
Ministry in their note stated as under:
"The allotment of task is being given to BRDs as per IAP 1541 (Section
leaflet 30) in which 75 per cent task is for overhaul and maximum of 25 per
cent is for repair. However, upto year 1999-2000 were fixed as a combined
task for repair and overhaul in which Air HQ later realised that better
appreciation for the task of overhaul and repair cannot be done in the
combined task. Hence from year 2000-01 onwards separate task for Overhaul
and Repair is being issued to 3 BRD after Ministry of Defence approval."
124. Asked about the action taken for repair of Cat-D engines by 3 BRD Chandigarh,
the Ministry informed the Committee that depending upon the defect, repair of Cat D
engines are being undertaken by 3 BRD on priority so that availability of serviceable
engines are there at operating units are aircraft is not on ground for want of engines.
During 2006-07 against a repair task of 30 engines, 31 engines were repaired and
produced by 3 BRD.
G  . PREMATURE  WITHDRAWAL  OF  INDIGENOUSLY  OVERHAULED  ENGINE
(Para 1.6.2.9)
125. Audit review pointed out that during the period 2001-2006, BRD Chandigarh
overhauled 56 aero engines. Of these, 13 engines were withdrawn prematurely within
500 hours. Out of the 13 engines, seven were prematurely withdrawn due to major
defects. An expenditure of Rs. 58 lakh had to be additionally incurred on the repair of
twelve of the 13 aero engines withdrawn prematurely. One aero engine withdrawn
prematurely was still under repairs (October 2006). The failure  rate of  25 per cent with
regard to overhaul is indicative of deficiencies in the quality and standard of overhaul
task carried out by BRD.
126. When asked whether premature withdrawal of indigenously overhauled
engines has been investigated byAir HQ, the Ministry in a note stated as under:
"Yes, premature withdrawals of indigenously overhauled engines are being
investigated by Air HQ also and depending upon the recommendations of

46
the defect Investigation Report, remedial measures are being implemented
at Overhaul agency/operating units as per the case. Also in case of
requirement, OEM of the engine is being approached for reasons of
pemature wihdrawal of engine and remedial measures to avoid such failures
in future."
H . DELAY IN RECEIPT OF SPARES DUE TO LACK OF PROPER
MONITORING  OF  PROCUREMENT
(Para 1.6.2.13)
127. In January 2002, Air HQ concluded a contract for supply of spares with a
foreign firm at a cost of USD 368049. This was based on a "most critical maintenance/
production hold up" requirement projected by BRD 'Y' for the year 2001-02. These
items were supplied in two lots in August 2002 and November 2002. Payment was
released to the supplier against shipping and other  documents in terms of the contract.
Though documents showed that the first lot of spares consisting of 19 lines contained
in nine cases, only one case consisting of 14 lines was received and the remaining
eight cases containing five lines valued at USD 329343 (Rs. 1.61 crore) were not received.
Non-receipt of these items, however, came to the notice of Air HQ only in August 2003
i.e. after one year. Air HQ took up the matter with the firm which accepted the
discrepancy and despatched the balance spares in January 2004. Out of the five lines
not supplied, two lines were required for replacement of blades in 10 Aircraft kept
dismantled at BRD since 2001-02. As such, spares due for supply to the BRD in April,
2001, were received only in December 2003 thereby delaying critical overhaul tasks.
This reflects poor management of procurement and inadequate monioring of purchases
by Air Force authorities and Ministry of Defence even in cases of spares identified as
"most critical" by user units. The long period of one year taken to detect short supply
is indication of failure of internal controls and holds considerable risk of fraud and
misappropriation of Government money.
128. When asked about the reasons due to which Air HQ took a year to notice
non-receipt of eight cases containing five lines valued at USD 329343 (Rs. 1.61 crore),
the Ministry in a note replied as under:
"In the instant case, the AWB/customs documents etc. pertained to shipment
of complete consignment. However, only partial consignment was shipped.
After protracted correspondence, the balance items were traced and
reshipped after reprocessing customs documents/AWB etc. The firm
expressed its ignorance of the real situation regarding short supply and
regretted the error. To avoid recurrence of similar nature all the major
consignments are now directly flown from OEM (M/S MSE) to 3 BRD."
129. On being asked whether the factors behind inadequate monitoring of
purchases even in cases of spares identified as 'most critical' by user units have been
analysed, the Ministry in a note replied as under:
"The response from the vendors was not very prompt and there were not
many suppliers available. The introduction of stringent regulations like
PBG/LD clause etc. has improved the response to a great extent. Now,
Ukrainian and Russian vendors in general are meeting their contractual

47
obligation. The last 02 years supply percentage against concluded contract
is fairly encouraging. The under-mentioned status proves the same:—
Y ear No. of Contracted Supplied Remarks
contracts amount amount
Mn USD Mn USD
2006-07 64 7.05 6.66 Around 90 per cent fill rate
2007-08 74 31.43 13.10 also covers long PDS items like
AE's
The orders are monitored regularly, especially for items causing AOG/hold-
up at Air HQ end."
130. The Committee sought details regarding (i) number of Annual Review of
Demands (ARDs) finalised for Aircraft 'A' aircraft spares during the last five years
showing the date of finalisation; (ii) number of indents raised against each of the
ARDs finalised; (iii) details of contracts concluded against each of the indents issued;
and (iv) details of contracts for which supply are yet to be completed during the last
five years from 2001-02 to 2005-06. The Ministry in a written reply furnished the details
as under:—
"There are two major depot providing support to Aircraft 'A' i.e. 29 ED and
3 BRD. The last five years data of both the depots as received is indicated
in the tabular form:—
Period No. Date of finalisation No. of No. of No. of
ARD between Indents Contracts contract yet
concluded to be
completed
2002-03 11 Jul. 03-Dec. 03 16 05 01
2003-04 24 Dec. 03-Mar. 04 27 18 01
2004-05 12 Mar. 04-Sept. 04 25 21 08
2005-06 12 Sep. 04-Jan. 05 25 20 12
Details of contracts for which supply are yet to be completed are given below:
Sl. Contract No. Date of contract
No.
1. 84/682/06-356 11 May 06
2. 356/07571160/34348 22 Mar. 05
3. 356/07571160/35322 26 Apr. 05
4. 356/07571160/35323 12 Apr. 05
5. 70-05/35602-04 24 May 05
6. 70-06/35603-15 26 May 06

48
 7. 70-06/35603-15 26 May 06
 8. 70-06/35603-15 26 May 06
 9. 76-0606/3562118 31 Oct. 06
10. 76-0604/3562108 30 Mar. 05
11. 76-0604/3562118 21 Apr. 05
12. AHQ/AOG/NMO/92310/9090/200426503/FPW/PUR 30 Aug. 05
13. AHQ/NMO/92310/9170/200526505 17 Feb. 06
14. AHQ/NMO/AN32/92310/9388/200525602/FPW/PUR 19 Dec. 06
15. 76-0605-3562110 19 Sept. 05
16. C: 356/07571160/0732,92310/9463/200625/588/ 23 May 07
FPW/PUR
17. AHQ/NMO/AN32/92310/9389/200525557/FPW/PUR 13 Dec. 06
18. C:70-06/35602-51/AHQ/NMO/AN32/92310/9428/ 06 Mar. 07
200525557/FPW/PUR
19. 1323.658/E06-137-IN356 30 Aug. 06
20. 356/07571160/36328 11 Aug. 06
21. 76-0606/3562115 24 Nov. 06
22. 1323/658/E06-257-IN356 22 Dec. 06"
Sl. Contract No. Date of contract
No.

PART-II
RECOMMENDATIONS  AND OBSERV ATIONS
131. The Aircraft 'A' was procured by the Indian Air Force (IAF) through a
contract with the erstwhile Soviet Union at an aggregated cost of Rs. 495 crore between
1981 and 1987. During this period the IAF procured 118 aircraft and 64 spare engines
of the aircraft. The procurement of this aircraft was primarily for its Medium Tactical
Transport Aircraft (METAC) role which focus on transport of troops and cargo, para
troopping, supply dropping and casualty evacuation. These aircraft were inducted into
squadron service between 1984 and 1991 to replace the aging Dakota, Caribu and
Packet aircraft. Since, then, these Aircraft have been the workhouse of the IAF's
transport fleet and performing varied roles and operating in all terrain conditions.
They have also been extensively employed to provide timely response both for military
and civil requirements. Over the years the IAF have, so far lost 13 aircraft in flying
accidents and as of date IAF are holding 105 Aircraft 'A' aircraft in their inventory.
Notwithstanding their valuable contribution to the operational requirement of IAF, the
Committee's examination of the subject has revealed that several technical and
maintenance problems have affected the performance of the aircraft which have
drastically limited the serviceability of the fleet.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 1]
132. Audit conducted a performance review of the operation and maintenance of
aircraft fleet in Indian Air Force between June and October, 2006 covering the period
2001-02 to 2005-06. The review was focused on the aspects of operation and utilisation
of aircraft such as flying tasks, assigned role, serviceability and Aircraft on Ground
(AOG) as well as adequacy of facilities for repair and maintenance and their use.
Audit examination inter-alia revealed that the serviceability levels achieved by the
aircraft fleet were low and the percentage of Aircraft on Ground (AOG) was high
indicating low efficiency of operation of the fleet. It was also highlighted that the
aircraft were predominantly used for routine and miscellaneous tasks at the expense
of primary air maintenance and training tasks. Eight aircraft were modified for "VIP
Role" without approval of Government thereby  diverting them from their primary
and operational tasks. Moreover, the modification lacked justification as a separate
specialised communication squadron with adequate aircraft for use by VIPs already
existed. Analysis of the performance of the Paratrooping School and a training centre
set up to impart training revealed that most of the courses showed shortfall in
achievement of targeted output. There were delays in conducting overhauls and repair
both by the engine and airframe overhaul facilities. The Base Repair Depot at
Chandigarh failed to complete a large number of allotted repair and overhaul tasks
due to shortage of spares, on account of delayed and inadequate provisioning. Although
indigenisation of mandatory and non-complex spares at BRDs has made significant
progress, however, commercial exploitation was still found to be wanting. Actual
49

50
utilization both in terms of flying hours and payload carried were much lower than
that was fixed by the Government there were also deviations from the basic Medium
Tactical Transport Aircraft (METAC) role of the aircraft and the predominant use of
the aircraft for routine transport assignments and other tasks at the expense of air
maintenance role. These alongwith other issues arising out of the Committee's
examination of the subject have been discussed at length in the succeeding paragraphs.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 2]
133. The Committee are concerned to note that as against the serviceability
level of 75 per cent assumed by the Ministry at the time of procurement, actual
serviceability rates of Aircraft 'A' ranged between 47 and 51 per cent during the
period 2002-2005. The number of Aircraft on Ground (AOG) was also high and
increased from 23.94 per cent in 2002 to 33.29 per cent in 2005 and as a result the
actual flying tasks performed by using Aircraft 'A', fell significantly short of the
flying task norm of 66.66 hours per month per aircraft as prescribed by the
Government, which ranged between 49.21 to 54.94 per cent during the period 2003-
05. In a note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry contended that there has been
a decline in AOG as it reduced to 10 aircraft in 2008 from 14 in 2007 and from 24
during the Audit period, the percentage of serviceability and AOG state of Aircraft
'A' during the year 2006 stood at 63.87 per cent and 18.49 per cent respectively and
for the year 2007 it was 66.26 per cent and 15.55 per cent respectively. the Committee
were assured that with the commissioning of Integrated Material Management On-
Line System (IMMOLS) the administering lead time will drastically reduce and
ultimately it would result in reducing the number of AOG. Further, a long term
contract of 5 years for Repair and Overhauling (ROH) abroad for the seven critical
aggregates have been initiated and is under finalisation and in respect of six aggregates
including ROH abroad of aero-engines, which is one of the critical aggregates
contracts have already been concluded. The Ministry have claimed that these steps
have improved the serviceability of Aircraft and in reduction of AOG. However the
Ministry have pointed out that AIRCRAFT 'A' is ageing and is nearing its end of
25 years of Total Technical Life (TTL) and to sustain 100 per cent serviceability on
such an old platform is practically not feasible. The Committee are not convinced with
the reply of the Ministry as the efforts made by them are far from satisfactory and had
only led to marginal increase in the percentage of serviceability from a range of
47 and 51 per cent during 2002-2005 to 66.26 per cent in 2007, which is far below the
75 per cent stipulated at the time of procurement. Further, the reduction in AOG to
15.55 per cent in 2007 was also not very significant. The Committee, therefore, urge
upon the Ministry to take corrective steps so as to increase the serviceability of
aircraft and minimize AOG . The Committee also stress the need for close interaction
and coordination between top functionaries of HAL and IAF in resolving differences
on the technical matters if any, with a view to improving the serviceability of aircraft
and in reducing AOG by ensuring timely repair and maintenance service combined
with availability of essential spares. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress made in the functioning of Integrated Material Management Online-System
and also the progress made in finalisaing the contract for seven critical aggregates
and their impact in enhancing the serviceability of the aircraft and reduction of
Aircraft on Ground.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 3]

51
134. The Committee note that as against the maximum payload prescribed
capacity of 6770 kg. the percentage of sorties in which payloads carried by Aircraft
'A' during the period 2001-2006, were less than  3000 kg (less than 50 per cent of
the maximum capacity) and ranged  between 61.83 per cent and 65.64 per cent. The
high capacity aircraft were used for carrying low loads although smaller aircrafts
and other modes of transport were available at lower cost. This shows that these
aircraft were not utilized in a cost effective manner. The Ministry informed the
Committee that the payload capacity of this type of aircraft is 9000 kg. The aircraft
payload capacity depends upon combination of Weight, Altitude & Temperature (WAT)
limitations and the tasking is done by Air HQ/Commands to ensure optimal loading
of aircraft. However, on certain special missions like carriage of sensitive cargo of
various  defence/research agencies, etc., and missions on aid to civil power involving
airlift of specialist teams, equipment, casualty evacuation, etc, this is not feasible.
The option of using smaller aircraft has always been considered but at times due to
the limitation in performance, speed and cruise altitudes, they are not operationally
feasible. The Ministry also informed that to carry maximum payload say 6700 kgs,
the aircraft would carry a minimum fuel of 2300 kgs. and this would entail a maximum
flying duration of 30 minutes only. Such a mission with maximum load but minimum
fuel would entail numerous landings/refueling halts leading to sheer wastage of
flying hours and aircraft landing, apart from additional wear and tear. The Ministry
contended that it would not be in order to have a comparison of payload lifted to the
maximum certified payload on all missions. The Committee are not convinced with
the explanation given by the Ministry as they are of the view that the limitations
pointed out should have been considered/studied by the concerned authorities well in
advance before signing the contract with the foreign firm. The Committee recommend
that necessary steps should be taken at the earliest for suitably upgrading the avionics
equipment on the aircraft so that the underutilization in terms of payloads carried
are minimal. The Committee also recommed that IAF should review the use of high
capacity aircraft for carrying low loads especially keeping in view their high operating
cost and availability of other smaller transport aircraft and other mode of aircraft.
[Recommedation Sl. No. 4]
135. The Committee note that in 1995, Air HQ had fixed the flying tasks for
each existing squadron/unit and has also prescribed the flying hours for each role
assigned to the aircraft. However, Audit examination revealed that the flying tasks
fixed by the Air HQ for each unit was far below the task fixed by the Government.
Apart from this Air HQ had categorised the flying tasks into three categories i.e.
Routine Transport Role (RTR), Air Maintenance and Training. Air Maintenance
tasks cover the designated primary role of the aircraft viz., troops and cargo carrier
and also includes para trooping training. While there was an overall shortfall of
55 per cent in achievement of flyingtask, against the targets fixed by the Government,
the shortfall against targets fixed by Air HQ was only 4 per cent. The Committee are
concerned to note that the aircraft were used for routine and miscellaneous tasks by
diverting them from their primary roles of air maintenance and training. Out of the
total 114513 flying hours utilized, only 33 per cent were used for primary role of air
maintenance and training, and the balance 67 per cent were spent for routine tasks

52
and miscellaneous duties. As a result of this there was serious shortfall of 43 per cent
in achieving air maintenance task and 58 per cent in training with reference to
the reduced targets fixed by Air HQ. The Committee are dismayed to find that 25
per cent  of the total flying hours utilized were spent on miscellaneous duties
though no task for such duties were allocated either by the Ministry or by the Air
HQ. In this regard, the Ministry have informed the Committee that the maximum
authorised flying hours as stipulated by the Government of India is 66 hours, per
aircraft, per month, which corresponds to 792 hours per month for squadron
strength of 12 aircraft. However, this is the maximum permissible authorization
and has been visualized to be utilised only during emergent situations and during
peace time operations the utilization rate may be limited due to emphasis on
utilisation of alternate/cheaper means of transportation (other than air) for routine
missions, periodic servicing and maintenance inspections etc. Besides, there are
certain other constraints imposed on flying due to weather, airspace closures and
certain operational and administrative imperatives. Considering these factors
and based on actual flying done by the units over the years during peace time,
the task was revised to a 360 hours, per aircraft , per year i.e. 30 hours/aircraft/
month. This rate of effort is also revised every year in order to forecast
requirement of rotables and spares for the aircraft to ensure that the flying task
is always maintained within the Government authorization without any extra cost
to the exchequer with optimum utilisation of the valuable air assets and retaining
the capability for higher utilisation under emergencies like war etc. The Ministry
stated the miscellaneous tasks are fully authorized tasks which are essential for
maintaining operational readiness of the squadron. Since they encompass
multifarious tasks, they are marked as "miscellaneous tasks". The Ministry
further stated that the routine flying task comprises majority of transport aircraft
operations under common terminology called Routine Transport Role (RTR) which
entail airlift of men and material from one place to another . The air maintenance
or Transport Support Role (TSR) is another task which is specifically carried
out in support of Army and other agencies requiring to be maintained by air to
places not connected by road transport. Similarly, training of aircrew is required
at all stages to maintain continuity and proficiency, and is, therefore integral
part to any aircraft fleet type and cannot be considered as primary role. Thus
according to the Ministry, air maintenance does not correspond to primary role
but is one of the many roles assigned to the aircraft. The Committee are of the
view that though the bench mark set up  by the Government with regard to flying
tasks is maximum permissible limit and which is not possible to achieve in the
peace time operations, nevertheless, the fact remains that the flying tasks fixed
by the AIR HQ should not be very low so that it may lead to gross under-utilisation
of the Aircraft capacities and capabilities and scaling down of the flying tasks
assigned for the primary role viz . Air Maintenance and Training. The Committee
recommend that there is an urgent need for comprehensive review of the
utilization of aircraft with a view to enhance their capacity utilization and as far
as possible bring it closer to the flying tasks fixed by the Government. Further
the allocation of the flying task hours for each role needs to be reviewed so as to
ensure that the flying tasks invariably correspond closely to the primary role of

53
the aircraft especially in respect of air maintenance and training role of the
Units. The Committee may be furnished about the monitoring aspects of this task
and the achievements thereof.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 5]
136. The Committee are concerned to note that even though the primary task
of the Para Trooping School (PTS) was training, 53 per cent of flying tasks were
allotted for Routine Transport Role (RTR) whereas the allocation for paratrooping
was only 18 per cent . Even this low allocation for paratrooping training was utilised
only to the extent of 51-67 per cent. It was further revealed that except for basic para
trooping course, there was shortfall with respect to annual targets in each year for
all other Flight "A" courses. The Committee also note that though PTS was
required to conduct Medical Para Course Basic (PCB) and refresher courses and
aircrew para ground training courses on "as required"  basis, however, no such
courses were conducted. In the case of Flight "B" courses, for which six aircraft
were earmarked, it has been observed that none of the envisaged courses i.e. FA a
controller Courses, Air Crew Para Trooping courses and Air Crew Conversion
Courses was conducted. The facilities and aircraft earmarked for Flight "B" courses
had, therefore, remained totally unutilised. The Ministry informed the Committee
that Aircraft 'A' are capable of performing many operational roles and para trooping
is one of the many roles assigned to the aircraft and all the requirements of the
user agencies for Para Trooping have always been met. As regards, allocation of
53 per cent of flying tasks for RTR, the Ministry informed the Committee that the
plan for indigenization of all the parachutes was taken up in the eighties and the
Ordinance Parachute Factory (OPF) was tasked to produce these parachutes by
using reverse engineering. However, there were initial teething problems and hence
they had to be sent back for modification to the manufacturer. As the shortfall of
parachutes could not be met by the indigenous support, this led to a decision to
reduce the jumps of Refresher Course from 04 descents to 02 descents. Therefore,
the flying task had to be automatically reduced and the aircraft hours were put to
use for other miscellaneous task without hampering the para commitment role.
The Ministry, however, claimed that there has been no delay in the completion of the
courses except during inclement weather. The Ministry have further informed the
Committee that in order to enhance training imparted at Para Trooping School
recently, a Para Training simulator has been installed to train paratroopers, aircraft
in-flight drills. Further, the statement of cases has been forwarded for the
modernisation of apparatus/infrastructure at Ground Training Faculty (GTF), Para
Trooping School (PTS). The Committee regret to point out that if the increasing
trend of human error accidents in recent years, is any indication, the remedial
steps taken so far in this regard appears to be inadequate. The lacunae in the
training infrastructure and equipment further substantiate that IAF really has to
toil hard to equip and fine tune the training programme to avoid any further loss of
human lives due to inadequacy in training. The Committee recommend that proactive
steps should be taken to improve utilisation of the capabilities of Para-Trooping
School in consultation with user agencies.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 6]

54
137. The Committee are concerned to note that in spite of the non-approval of
the Government in 1995, Air HQ had modified six Aircraft 'A' during 2001-03 for
VIP use and prior to this, they had also modified two of the aircraft between 1992-99
for the same purpose. What has surprised the Committee is the revelation that not
only the modification and utilization of eight aircraft was irregular but also lacked
justification owing to the fact that IAF did not have adequate number of serviceable
Aircraft 'A' due to which their assigned flying tasks had to be reduced considerably.
The Committee are of the opinion that diversion of such large number of aircraft (20
per cent of the total serviceable aircraft with IAF) for VIP use showed an unexpected
indifference to its primary role. What was more disturbing to the Committee was the
fact that despite the disapproval of modification of aircraft by Government in 1995,
the IAF had continued modifying aicraft and altered their role irregularly in spite of
having a specialized Communications Squadron consisting of two Boeings, four
executive jets, seven Avros and six helicopters for the use by VIPs. Fruther, as per the
Government orders issued in 1981, these aircraft can  be used by VIPs i.e., the
President, the Vice President and the Prime Minister. Besides, the other Entitled
Personages (OEP) including senior service officers can also use this aircraft if it is
essential to do so and if aircraft and available. However, the Committee's examination
revealed that during 1999-2004, the Avro fleet in the Communications Squadron was
used only to the extent of 3.9 per cent by the these entitled personages and 46.9 per cent
by OEPs. It was thus evident that existing aircraft in the specialized Communications
Squadron were underutilized which further diluted the justification for modifying
Aircraft 'A' for VIP/OEP use. The Committee strongly feel that if there was unfulfilled
demand for aircraft for VIP/OEP use, increase in the holding of the existing
Communications Squadron should have been considered instead of designating
Aircraft 'A' for this purpose. Earmarking of aircraft for VIP role outside the
Communications Squadron also led to dilution of  control on use of service aircraft by
VIPs and OEPs. The Ministry have informed the Committee that the modification of
the aircraft for VIP role is temporary and it does not change the role of the aircraft for
which it has been fixed. It also does not  impact the functioning of the IAF as military
commanders and senior officers undertake inspection tours necessary for upkeep of
operational readiness and morale of the troops. The Minsitry also stated that this is
the only aircraft capable of operating out of Advanced Landing Grounds and high
altitude airfields and have been employed on communication duties for the entitled
military commanders to such areas. The Committee are not satisfied with the reasons
given by  the Ministry regarding the modification of the aircraft especially in view of
overall shortfall in achievement of the flying task fixed by the Government with
respect to Aircraft 'A'. Therefore, the Committee would like to know about the
circumstances that have compelled the modification of Aircraft in spite of the
Government refusal for the same way back in 1995. They would also like the Ministry
to furnish the details of the number of flights/sorties undertaken by these modified
Aircraft for use by OEPs alongwith the purpose during 1999-2004. While expressing
their serious concern over the unjustified modification of the Aircraft which had led
to reduction in the assigned flying task, the Committee expect that the IAF would now
wake up to their responsibility and take earnest steps to utilise the aircraft only for
the purpose for which they have been procured. They also recommend that in future

55
IAF should desist any move for the diversion of Aircraft 'A' from operational squadron
for the use of VIP/OEPs.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 7]
138. The Committee are amazed to note that the modified aircrafts were not
used by any of the three entitled VIPs but they were predominantly utilised by Other
Entitled Persons (OEPs) such as senior officers of the Services, AFWA/AWWA
Presidents and their accompanying staff. What is surprising to the Committee is the
fact that even though AFWA/AWWA Presidents are not covered under the category
of OEPs, they were included in this particular category. Expenditure on use of these
aircraft by OEPs amounted to Rs. 75 crore since their modification. Further, after
modification, the payload and the passenger carrying capacity of the modified aircraft
was significantly reduced to 1800 kg and 19 persons respectively. The Audit review
revealed that the use of a modified aircraft during one year showed that it carried an
average of three passengers and 2 kg payload per sortie as against the passenger
carrying capacity of 4050 persons and load carrying capacity of 6700 kg of the
aircraft. The Ministry have informed the Committee that no unauthorized personnel
have been allowed to use these aircraft. Commanders and senior officers undertake
tours and inspections necessary for upkeep of operational readiness and morale of
the troops. Military commanders along with their spouse are authorised to travel in
service aircraft on inspection tours to areas under their jurisdictions as per provisions
of Para 3 to 7 of AFI 9/83 which is duly approved by Ministry of Defence. However, the
reply of the Ministry is conspicuously silent with regard to travel of AFW A/AWWA
Presidents who are not entitled to travel by the modified Aircraft. While expressing
their apprehension over the reported misuse of modified Aircraft by the non-entitled
personnel such as AFWA/AWWA Presidents, the Committee recommend that the
Ministry should thoroughly investigate into the matter including gross under-
utilisation of the aircraft in terms of persons carried and payload and submit a report
to them specifying the steps taken to prevent such misuse in future within 3 months
from the presentation of the Report to the Parliament. The Committee would like to
be informed about  the amount spent on carrying the non-entitled passengers by
Aircraft 'A' during the last 10 years. The Committee further recommend that Ministry
should examine the feasibility of formulating detailed guidelines specifying the rank
of the officers who shall be eligible for travelling in the Aircraft and the purpose for
which the travel is undertaken with a view to prevent misuse of the Aircraft.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 8]
139. The Committee are concerned to find that the Aircraft 'A' squadrons/
units had serious shortages of pilots but surplus of flight navigators and flight
engineers. The deficiency in the number of pilots, however, declined from 22 per cent
in 2001-02 to 13 per cent in 2005-06. In the case of flight engineers, the surplus
manpower increased substantially from 10 per cent in 2001-02 to 34 per cent in
2005-06. The Committee feel that deficiencies in pilot strength along with surplus in
the strength of navigators and engineers indicates imbalance in deployment of
operational manpower in these squadrons/units. What is most surprising is the fact
that Air HQ had justified excess manning in the two units on account of increase in

56
task. However, Audit scrutiny disclosed that the tasks achieved in these two units,
have not shown any significant variation. No explanation has been provided by Air HQ
for holding surplus navigators and flight engineers in most of the units especially in
view of significant shortages of pilots in some of the units. Regarding shortfall of
pilots in the IAF, the Ministry informed the Committee that a large number of new
Aircraft/Equipment were inducted into the IAF and many existing systems were
upgraded, however, manpower for these new systems was not sanctioned due to the
ban imposed by the Ministry of Finance in 1984 on creation of new posts. Thus, all
new inductions had to be manned by pulling out manpower from the existing units,
which led to undermanning of a large number of units in order to serve the overall
operational requirement of the IAF, which also resulted in pilot shortfalls in the
Aircraft 'A' fleet. Presently, efforts are on to enhance induction of pilots so as to fill
up the recently sanctioned posts over 5-7 years period and the manning status of
pilots in aircraft 'A' fleet has shown a significant improvement in the last two years.
While taking note of the initiatives of the Ministry to overcome the shortfall of pilots
in IAF, the Committee would like to be apprised of the effectiveness of these steps on
the operational requirement/deployment of pilots in various squadrons/units. They
also desire to know whether the recently sanctioned posts have actually been filled up
and whether or not this has led to achievement of the stipulated target of the flying
task set by the Government. The Committee also recommend that in future the Air.
HQ/IAF should formulate a recruitment plan for filling up key posts well in advance
so that there is no shortfall of pilots/engineers in any of the squadrons/units of IAF.
Further, the present operational manning/deployment in squadrons/units should be
reviewed so that they are in consonance with the task allocated to units. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the progress made on this count.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 9]
140. Another area of concern relating to operation of aircraft 'A' is the
inadequacies in the flight records held by two squadrons in respect to six different
months during the period 2004-06. The Committee note that manifests of
Aircraft 'A' did not carry any serial or control number to ensure their proper
identification and accounting and these were also not entered in any control register
by squadrons/unit providing airlift. It was also found that the entries in the passenger
manifests were altered without authorisation by the competent authorities. Further,
operational requirement for airlifts and movement of cargo is often not brought out in
the manifests and unauthorised cargo such as personal belongings and other non-
operational stores have been included in the manifests. The Ministry have informed
the Committee that manifests are issued by various user agencies based on/near
these airfields with their own control numbers. The Flight Engineers on reaching
back to their parent bases, documents these manifests with a unit level serial number
and the units maintain and record the flight details as stipulated by IAF publication
IAP-3314. The inspection teams of commands, Air HQs and the aircrew Examination
Board scrutinise these documents in their periodic visits to the operating units. The
Committee are not satisfied with the Ministry's reply as it is conspicuously silent
with regard to the inadequacies in the maintenance of the manifests as pointed out by
Audit. The Committee are of the view that the inadequacies that were noticed disclose

57
the dilution of internal controls and consequent increase in the risk of unauthorised
use of aircraft. While underscoring the urgency for removal of inadequancies in
maintenance of flight records, the Committee recommend that all out efforts be made
to bring improvement in maintaining flight details and in recording and control of
flight manifests so as to ensure that no unauthorised passenger/cargo are carried in
the service aircraft. The Committee also recommend that in future suitable deterrent
action should be taken against all the officials who carry unauthorised cargo such as
personal belonging and other non-operational stores.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 10]
141. For enabling proper operation and maintenance of Aircraft, setting up
adequate overhaul facility is of vital importance. However, the Committee were dismayed
to note that the overhaul facility which was scheduled to be set up by July 2003 was yet
to be established as of August 2006 despite alternative repair facilities not available
in the country. Further, only Rs. 2.42 crore out of the Rs. 10.42 crore sanctioned had
been spent by HAL upto December 2005 indicating only 25 per cent progress of work
in setting up the repair and overhaul facilities. Further, Air HQ failed to monitor the
creation of facilities and called for reasons for delay from HAL only in August 2006.
As a result of this IAF got 57 TG-16M generators overhauled abroad at a total cost of
USD 1862190 (i.e. Rs. 8.38 crore) under two contracts signed in September 2004
and November 2005. Besides, a contract for overhaul of 62 numbers of GS-24A
generators (an aggregate of TG-16M generator) was signed in July 2004 at a total
cost of USD188145 i.e. Rs. 0.85 crore. Audit were of the view that had the indigenous
overhaul facility been set up in time i.e. by July 2003, the generators along with their
aggregates could have been overhauled at a cost of Rs. 11.25 lakh (after considering
escalation over cost estimated in 1999) per generator. The additional cost due to
offloading of overhaul task worked out to be Rs. 4.82 lakh per generator, which
resulted in avoidable extra expenditure of Rs. 2.75 crore on overhaul of 57 numbers
of TG-16M generator. The Ministry have informed the Committee that a long term
contract was signed for overhaul abroad of Turbo Generators due to more arisings
and availability of Cat 'D', as production of HAL had not stabilized and it was expected
that it will take another 2 to 3 years. It was only with the consent of HAL (KPT) that
Air HQ had gone for a long term contract. Air HQ is continuously monitoring the
progress of setting up of facilities at HAL (KPT) and a meeting was held with HAL
representatives at Air HQ on 19 July, 2006 to review the setting up of facilities of
TG-16 M Turbo Generator at HAL (KPT). HAL had since completed the setting up of
facilities needed for overhaul of TG-16M unit and as of 31st March, 2007 HAL (KPT)
has completed repair and overhaul of Qty 15 turbo Generators. Fixed prices quotes of
Rs. 29.62 lakh for overhaul of TG-16M Turbo Generator has been received from HAL
(KPT) and is under consideration. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of
the Ministry as apparently no concerted efforts have been made by the AIR HQ. to
ascertain the capacity constraints and other technological problems of HAL well in
advance, so that early corrective measures could have been taken for completion of
the stablisation of overhaul facilities at HAL, well in time. Obviously, there was lack
of planning and monitoring on the part of AIR HQ. to anticipate the overhaul needs of
its Aircraft and synchronise the same with that of setting up of the corresponding

58
facilities at HAL. The Committee recommend that AIR HQ. should impress upon
HAL to further upgrade their overhaul facilities by inducting State of Art technology
so that the Turbo Generators and other critical parts are overhauled well in time. The
Commitee would like to be apprised of the steps contemplated by Air HQ. to overcome
the capacity constraints and other operational limitations of HAL to make overhaul
facilities fully functional.
[Recommendation Sl. No.11]
142. Indigenisation of production of spares is critical to reducing reliance on
foreign suppliers for spares and this assumes importance in the context of Aircraft
'A' where problems were being faced in sourcing spares from the Original Equipment
Manufacture/foreign suppliers. Audit examination revealed that in BRD - X till
March 2006, 3202 mandatory and Automatic Replenishment System (ARS) items of
non- complex design had been indigenised for which supply orders valued at Rs. 11
crore for 335 lines of spares were placed on various private firms. The Committee
note that as of June 2006, out of the orders placed, 197 lines of spares valued at
Rs. 3.62 crore ordered during 2003—06 were yet to be received. Further, the task
allotment for indigenisation of spares had progressively decreased, because initially
only itmes of non-complex design were undertaken and thus these progressed on a
fast track. During later years, as the remaining items were complex in nature,
indigenisation exercises were need based. The Ministry have informed the Committee
that with respect to BRD-X the task allotment for indigenisation of spares
progressively decreased because items indigenised initially were of simpler
technology low cost and high volue (mandatory and ARS items). About 98 percent
items have already been indigenised and in respect of remaining 2 per cent which are
of high technology, high value and low quantity items, the response from vendors was
poor. This was due to complex spares which require research and development work
and the hindrance in indigenisation of such high value items is non-availability of raw
material and particular technology. Explaning the steps that have been taken to improve
the commercialisation and production of indigenous items the Ministry informed
that with respect to BRD-X from out of high valued electrical items, a total of 22 lines
and from ground equipments a total of 6 lines have been indigenised. In addition about
52 lines have been indigenised for Aircraft 'A' fleet. Earnest steps have been taken to
attract wider vendor base by conduction disply during Aero India shows. Exhibitions
and Seminars and also through in-house training programme conducted form proving
knowledge to indigenisation process, materials and engineering aspect. While
underscoring the urgency to complete the indigenisation of all spares including
those which are of complex nature by all BRDs within a time bound period, the
Committee recommed that all out efforts be made in this direction by Air HQ so that
all BRDs enter into an effective production phase. At the same time IAF should also
ensure to facilitate the fulfilment of base requirements so as to check further outflow
of precious foreign exchange.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 12]
143. The Committee further note that though the BRD-'Y' had a capacity to
undertake 30 overhauls each year, yet it failed to achieve annual targets both for
overhaul and repair tasks fixed during the period 1999-2005. However, in 2005-06,

59
targets fixed were achieved largely due to the drastic reduction in the target for the
tasks itself. Besides, there was failure to achieve tasks on account of non-availability
of spares due to incorrect assessment of requirement and delay in procurement.
Audit examination revealed that Air HQ issued the forescast task for repair/overhaul
of aero-engines of Aircraft 'A' for the production years 1999-2003 and 2000-2004 in
August 1997 and in August 1998 respectively. However, BRD 'Y' finalized the
requirement of spares for undertaking servicing and repairing of engines during
1999-2004 after a delay of more than two years i.e. between May and September 2000,
and as result there was delay in initiating procurement action for required spares.
Air HQ concluded contracts for procurement of 157 lines of spares in January 2002
of which 121 spares were received only in April/June 2003. The delay in supply of
115 lines of spares was due to inordinate delay in opening LOC and in deciding on the
question of waiver of LD. Thus, spares required for the production period 1999-2004
were received 49 to 51 months after the start of task of production period 1999-2004.
Further, due to the combined allotment of tasks upto 1999-2000 without fixing tasks
separately for repairs and overhuals, the BRD undertook a disproportionately large
number of repairs and few overhauls. As such estimates of requirement of spares for
overhauls were understated and led to supplies that proved to be inadequate when
tasks were separately fixed for overhauls and repairs which further compounded the
problem of shortage of spares. The Committee are further constrained to note that
there was an accumulation of large number of Cat 'D' engines at BRD for repair and
overhaul due to non-availability of spares. As a consequence of the failure of the BRD
to meet overhaul targets as also to fully utilise available capacities, 120 engines had
to be sent abroad between 2000 and 2002 for overhauls at an aggregate cost of
US$ 14,160,000 (Rs. 64.12 crore). The Committee's examination revealed that had
timely action been taken to procure the required spares, 120 aero-engines sent
abroad could have been overhauled in India at a total cost of Rs. 27 crore (cost computed
based on average overhaul cost of Rs. 22.36 lakh per aero-engine at BRD Chandigarh
during  2000-01 to 2002-03) with a possible saving of Rs. 37 crore. Further, indigenous
production and maintenance facilities also remained under-utilised during the period.
What perturbs the Committee most is the fact that the shrotfalls in achievement
of overhaul tasks owing to non-supply of spares by the Original Equipment
Manufacturer and consequent offloading of overhauls tasks to the OEM was
highlighted by Audit way back in paragraph 3 of Audit Report 8 of 1998. In spite of
this,even after a lapse of seven years such shortfalls in execution of overhaul tasks
still continue to persist which is regrettable. The Ministry have informed the
Committee that the main reason for the Depot not meeting its task of production is
due to non-availability of critical sapres from OEM and supply of spares even against
concluded contracts had been poor. Probable dates of supply of most of the spares had
expired leading to non-availability of spares and hold up of production. This has led to
dispatch of engines for overhaul at OEM plant to clear backlog of engines awaiting
overhaul. The Committee are perturbed to note that there have been inordinate delays
in execution of overhaul tasks of aero engines due to non-availability of critical
spares from OEM. The Committee recommend that the matter regarding non-
availability and non-supply of critical spares should be taken up with OEM at the
highest level, and if necessary in the interest of country's Air Surveillance and Air

60
Maintenance needs, appropriate clause for imposition of penalty should be incorporated
in the contract with OEM, so that in future such delays in supply of critical spares do
not recur. The Committee further recommend that effective steps to overcome the
problems associated with the overhaul facilities be taken in a time-bound manner so
as to achieve the annual target of the overhaul and repair task and enhance operational
efficiency of aircraft fleet. They also recommend that the bottlenecks in respect of
utilising the capacity of repair and maintenance facilities arising out of shortage of
spares should be suitably addressed through careful and prompt provisioning and
procurement.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 13]
144. The Committee note that Air HQ concluded a contract for supply of spares
with a foreign firm in January 2002 at a cost of USD 368049. This was based on a
"most critical maintenance/production hold up" requirement projected by BRD-‘Y’
for the year 2001-02. These items were supplied in two lots in August 2002 and
November 2002. Payment was released to the supplier against shipping and other
documents in terms of the contract. Though documents showed that the first lot of
spares consisting of 19 lines contained in nine cases, only one case consisting of
14 lines was received and the remaining eight cases containing five lines valued at
USD 329343 (Rs. 1.61 crore) were not received. Non-receipt of these items, however,
came to the notice of Air HQ only in August 2003 i.e. after one year. Air HQ took up
the matter with the firm which accepted the discrepancy and despatched the balance
spares in January 2004. Out of the five lines not supplied, two lines were required for
replacement of blades in 10 aircraft kept dismantled at BRD since 2001-02. As such,
spared due for supply to the BRD in April 2001, were received only in December 2003
thereby delaying critical overhaul tasks, reflecting poor management of procurement
and inadequate monitoring of purchases by Air Force authorities and Ministry of
Defence even in cases of spares identified as "most critical" by user units. The
Committee cannot but conclude that the long period of one year taken to detect short
supply is a clear indication of failure of internal controls and holds considerable risk
of fraud and misappropriation of Government money. The Ministry have informed the
Committee that in the instant case, the AWB/customs documents etc. pertained to
shipment of complete consignment. However, only partial consignment was shipped
and after protracted correspondence, the balance items were traced and re-shipped
after reprocessing customs documents/AWB etc. The firm expressed its ignorance
of the real situation regarding short supply and regretted the error. To avoid
recurrence of similar nature all the major consignments are now directly flown from
OEM (M/S MSE) to 3 BRD. Regarding inadequate monitoring of purchases even in
cases of spares identified as 'most critical' by user units, the Ministry informed the
Committee that the response from the vendors was not very prompt and there were not
many suppliers available. The introduction of stringent regulations like PBG/LD
clause etc. has improved the response to a great extent and in the last 2 years supply
percentage against concluded contract is fairly encouraging. The Committee are not
convinced by the reasons adduced by the IAF/Ministry given the fact that it was
mandatory on the part of IAF to follow-up procurement process of spares with utmost
care. This shows that there was slackness and ineptitude on the part of the Air HQ. in

61
the contract management and procurement of critical spares. While expressing
concern over the inordinate delay in supply of critical spares by the foreign firm due
to their negligence, the Committee recommend that Air HQ should recover the interest
from the foreign firm on the amount paid. Considering the huge volumes of items of
defence that were to be procured, the Committee recommend that the Ministry of
Defence should streamline and simplify the procedures for procurement of critical
spares so that they are purchased/supplied without any delay. They would also like to
be apprised of the responsibility fixed against the concrened officials for the poor
contract management in procurement of spares from the various vendors.
[Recommendation Sl. No. 14]
N
EW DELHI; SANTOSH GANGWAR,
28 January, 2009 Chairman,
8 Magha, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-09)  HELD  ON  6TH  JUNE  2008.
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1750 hrs. on 6th June, 2008 in Committee
Room 'B' Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
5. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
9. Shri Sita Ram Singh
10. Shri Kharabela Swain
11. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Raashid Alvi
13. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
14. Shri Shanta Kumar
15. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary (SK)
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary (AM)
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director (SP&C)
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
\\SERVER5\F\REPORT 2009\1227LS
62
ANNEXURE-I

63
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Vinod Rai — C&AG
2. Shri Samar Ray — ADAI(RC)
3. Shri P.K. Kataria — PD(RC)
4. Shri R.B. Sinha — PD(AF&N)
Representatives of the Ministry of Defence
1. Shri Vijay Singh — Defence Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Rastogi — Spl. Secretary (R)
3. Shrimati H.K. Pannu — FA(DS)
4. Shri S.K. Sharma — DG (Acq.)
5. Shri Bimal Julka — Joint Secretaty (G/Air)
6. Shri R.K. Ghose — Joint Secretaty & AM (Air)
7. Shri S.N. Mishra — Joint Secretaty (Aero Space)
8. Shri Dalip Biswas — Addl. FA (D)
9. Smt. Arti Bhatnagar — Director (Air. III)
10. Shri Alind Rastogi — Director (Q)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members, Audit Officers to
the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman informed the Members that the sitting has
been convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of Ministry of Defence on
Chapter-I of C&AG's Report No. 5 of 2007 Union Government (Defence Services) Air
Force and Navy, Performance Audit relating to "Operation and maintenance of an
aircraft fleet in the Indian Air Force”.
3. Thereafter, C&AG of India briefed the Committee on the important points
arising out of aftoresaid Audit Report.
4. Then, the representatives of the Ministry of Defence were called in. The
Chairman read out the contents of the Direction 58 by the Speaker regarding secret
nature of the proceedings of the Committee.
5. The Secretary, Ministry of Defence after introducing the officers of the Ministry
to the Committee asked his officials to give a brief power-point presentation on the
corrective action taken by the Minisry on the Audit findings. The Secretary responded
to the various queries raised by the Members. To certain queries, for which the
witnesses could not give immediate replies, the Hon'ble Chairman directed the
representatives of the Ministry to furnish the information as desired by the Members
in writing at the earliest, particularly in regard to:
(i) reasons and circumstances for reducing flying task of AN-32;
(ii) rationality of using high capacity aircraft for carrying low pay load task;
(iii) explanation for modification of the aircraft for flying ineligible officials without
the approval of the Government;

64
(iv) reasons for modification of AN-32 inspite of having a separate specialized
communication squadron with adequate aircraft for use by VIPs;
(v) reasons for low aircraft serviceability and deficiency in spares provisioning;
(vi) ways to improve overhaul facilities for airframes; and
(vii) efforts for indigenisation of spares.
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2008-09) HELD ON 9TH JANUARY , 2009.
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1530 hrs. on 9th January, 2009 in Committee
Room 'B' Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Santosh Gangwar—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Furkan Ansari
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Prof. M. Ramdass
5. Shri Sita Ram Singh
6. Shri Kharabela Swain
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Raashid Alvi
9. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
10. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Director
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri R.B. Sinha — Principal Director of Audit (Air Force/Navy)
2. Smt. Prachi Pandey — Deputy Director (Air Force/Navy)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members to the siting of the
Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration of the Draft Report on
Chapter-I of C&AG's Report No. 5 of 2007, Union Government (Defence Services-Air
Force and Navy) relating to "Operation and Maintenance of an Aircraft Fleet in the
Indian Air Force" and adopted the same without any modifications/amendments and
authorized the Chairman to finalise and present the same to the Parliament in the light
of factual verification done by the Audit.
\\SERVER5\F\REPORT 2009\1227LS
65
ANNEXURE-II

66
3. Thereafter, the Chairman raised the matter regarding large scale pendency of
Remedial Action Taken Notes in respect of Audit Paragraphs contained in various
Reports of C&AG that were to be submitted by the concerned Departments/Ministries
to Public Accounts Committee. Committee were informed by PAC Secretariat officials
that the matter was discussed in September, 2008 by PAC and a letter was addressed to
Hon'ble Prime Minister by Chairman of PAC requesting that Ministries be asked to be
more responsive in this matter. After some deliberation on the issue, the Committee
decided that the Lok Sabha Secretariat should prepare a status report on the same for
consideration of the Committee.
4. The Committee decided to hold its next sitting on 19th January, 2009
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE-III
CHAPTER I
OPERA TION AND MAINTENANCE OF AN AIRCRAFT FLEET IN THE INDIAN
AIR FORCE
Highlights
Ø Efficiency of operation and utilization of Aircraft 'A' fleet was low on
account of low serviceability rate and high percentage of Aircraft on Ground
(AOG) indicating inadequacies in repair and maintenance support.
Payloads carried were also low as compared to the capacity of the aircraft.
(Paragraph 1.6.1.1 & 1.6.1.2)
Ø Aircraft were used for routine and miscellaneous tasks by diverting them
from their primary roles of air maintenance and training. Of the total flying
hours utilized by six squadrons/units, only 33 per cent  were used for
primary role of air maintenance and training, and the balance 67 per cent
were spent for routine tasks and miscellaneous duties resulting in shortfall
of 43 per cent in achieving air maintenance task and 58 per cent in training.
(Paragraph 1.6.1.3)
Ø In Para trooping school, most of the courses relating to para trooping
showed shortfall in achievement of target outputs. Envisaged Conversion
Courses, for which six aircrafts were provided, were not held at all in the
past five years.
(Paragraph 1.6.1.4)
Ø Eight aircrafts were modified for "VIP Role
1" without approval of the
Government. Modification of aircraft diverted them from operational tasks
and reduced their passenger and cargo carrying capacity. Such modification
also lacked justification as a separate specialized communication squadron
with adequate aircraft for use by VIPs already existed. Large scale diversion
of serviceable aircraft for VIP/Other Entitled Persons use affected
availability of aircraft for operation purposes.
(Paragraph 1.6.1.5)
Ø There was an overall shortage of pilots ranging from 13 to 22 per cent
during the period of review. At the same time there was an excess of
navigators and flight engineers. This indicates an imbalance in manpower
deployment with respect to norms fixed per Aircraft 'A'.
(Paragraph 1.6.1.6)
1VIP Role—For use by VIPs and other entitled persons.
\\SERVER5\F\REPORT 2009\1227LS
67

68
Ø There was considerable delay in setting up repair and overhaul facilities
for airframes at BRD 'X'. Deficiencies in the facilities still exist as some test
rigs could not be installed. Full capability for overhaul of landing gear did
not exist at the BRD, necessitating overhauls abroad.
(Paragraph 1.6.2.1)
Ø The project for creating a facility for overhaul of turbo-generators at HAL,
Koraput, conceived in 1999 and approved in 2001, is yet to be completed
as of October 2006. In the interim, generators continue to be sent abroad
for overhaul involving additional expenditure.
(Paragraph 1.6.2.2)
Ø Indigenisation of mandatory and non-complex spares at BRDs has made
significant progress. However, commercial exploitation has been limited.
(Paragraph 1.6.2.5)
Ø Servicing of aircraft at 300 hours and 900 hours took much longer than
periods of down time prescribed in a significant percentage of cases due
to shortage of spares.
(Paragraph 1.6.2.6)
Ø Satisfaction of AOG demands for spares and rotables were delayed in
most cases leading to a large number of aircraft remaining AOG for long
periods.
(Paragraph 1.6.2.7)
Ø Achievement with regard to engine overhauls and repairs at BRD 'Y',
during the last 5 years were considerably lower than tasks fixed. This was
due to shortage of spares. Audit examination revealed that these shortages
resulted from delayed and inadequate provisioning for the spares leading
to 120 engines being sent abroad to the OEM for overhauls at a cost of
Rs. 64.12 crore.
(Paragraph 1.6.2.8)
Ø Several cases of premature withdrawals of overhauled engines and
considerable delays in conducting overhauls and repair both by the engine
and airframe overhaul facilities provide evidence of inefficiencies in
operations.
(Paragraph 1.6.2.9 & 1.6.2.10)
Ø Inability to obtain technology for life extensions of engines beyond
4000 hours will make IAF completely dependent for overhauls on the
OEM. This will make the IAF's overhaul facilities redundant and weaken
IAF's position while negotiating charges and other terms for engine
overhauls.
(Paragraph 1.6.2.17)

69
Summary of recommendations
• Repair and maintenance services combined with spare availability need
improvement so that aircraft serviceability is increased and instances and
duration of AOG are reduced.
• Use of high capacity aircraft for carrying low loads would need review by
IAF keeping in view the high operating cost of the aircraft and availability
of other smaller transport aircraft and other modes of transport.
• Allocations of flying tasks should correspond closely to the primary roles
of the aircraft. This is especially for Air Maintenance and training role of the
units. Achievement of these tasks needs to be closely monitored.
• Proactive steps should be taken to improve utilization of the capabilities of
para trooping school in consultation with user agencies.
• Operational manning in units should be reviewed so that they are in
consonance with tasks allocated to units.
• Improvements may be brought about in maintaining flight details and in
control of flight manifests.
• Project management and monitoring should be accorded priority so that
facilities needed to support aircraft serviceability are created timely and are
designed to deliver full functionality.
• Bottlenecks on utilizing the capacity of repair and maintenance facilities
arising out of shortage of spares should be addressed through careful and
prompt provisioning and procurement.
• The quality of services and the level of efficiency in repair and maintenance
facilities should be stepped up to eliminate delays, instances of premature
withdrawals and use of man hours beyond norms.
1.1 Introduction
Aircraft 'A' are medium tactical transport aircraft (METAC) primarily used for
transport of troops and cargo; para trooping; supply dropping and casualty evacuation.
IAF contracted procurement of 118 Aircraft 'A' and 64 spare engines at an aggregated
cost of Rs. 495 crore between 1981 and 1987. These aircrafts were inducted into squadron
service between 1984 and 1991. Over the years thirteen aircrafts were lost in flying
accidents and the present inventory of IAF is 105 Aircraft 'A'. These are being operated
from different locations through six IAF squadrons, one para trooping school, one Air
Force Station and one Training School.
1.1.1 Total Service Life
The aircraft consists of aero engines and airframe, which require maintenance
and overhaul at prescribed intervals. Airframe of Aircraft 'A' had an initial calendar life
of 15 years/20000 flying hours/15000 landings and Time Between Overhaul (TBO) was
6 years/4000 flying hours/3000 landings. As Total Technical Life (TTL) of airframes,

70
both in terms of landing and flying hours were not fully utilized, the technical life of the
Airframe was extended indigenously from 15 to 18 years in January 1999 and again
from 18 to 25 years in November 2001. Air HQ (June 2006) stated that the designer of
the Aircraft 'A' had been approached for life extension of airframe further to 25 years for
which OEM has made a proposal, which is still under consideration.
The service life of aero engines was 3000 flying hours and the TBO was
1000 hours. In 1994-95, the service life of engine was extended from 3000 to 4000 flying
hours and TBO was increased from 1000 to 2000 flying hours. In 2003 and 2005,
contracts have been entered into with the OEM for full overhaul alongwith extension
of life of the engines up to 6000 hours. The OEM has, however, not agreed to transfer
the technology for the same to IAF.
1.1.2 Flying tasks, payloads and other capabilities
As per policy page, the flying task fixed by Government/Ministry of Defence
(MoD) is 66 hours per month per aircraft. The maximum and minimum payload of the
aircraft is 6700 kg. and 3000 kg. respectively. The passenger carrying capacity of the
aircraft is 40 to 50. The aircraft has a range of 1000 km. and is capable of landing and
taking off from semi-prepared advanced landing grounds.
1.1.3 Maintenance philosophy
The operating squadrons/wings are responsible for carrying out the first and
second line servicing of the aircraft. Third and fourth line repair/overhaul of airframes
and aero engines are undertaken at Base Repair Depot 'X' (BRD 'X') and at Base Repair
Depot 'Y' (BRD 'Y') respectively. The annual installed capacity for overhaul of airframes
is 18 at BRD 'X'. No new facility for repair/overhaul of aero engines of Aircraft 'A' was
created at BRD 'Y'. The facilities already existed at BRD 'Y' created for aero engines of
Aircraft 'B' was utilised with some additions and modifications.
1.2 Scope of Audit
The performance audit in regard to Operation and Maintenance of Aircraft 'A'
fleet in the Indian Air Force was conducted between June and October 2006 covering
the period 2001-06. The performance audit focused on aspects of operation and
utilisation of aircraft such as flying tasks, assigned role, serviceability and Aircraft on
Ground (AOG). During the audit, adequacy of facilities for repair and maintenance and
their use were also studied. Audit examination of the records at all operational wings,
squadrons, two BRDs and at Air HQ was carried out.
1.3 Audit Objectives
The aircraft operation and functioning of repair and maintenance facilities for
airframes and aero engines were examined in audit to seek an assurance that:
• The operational squadrons of Aircraft 'A' functioned efficiently achieving
their assigned tasks;
• The aircrafts were used in an economic and efficient manner for bona fide
role;

71
• The serviceability of aircraft was maintained as per laid down standards to
minimize aircraft on ground;
• Facilities for aircraft repair and overhaul were timely set up and are adequate
to meet the needs of the fleet;
• Servicing and maintenance of Aircraft 'A' was carried out efficiently, without
delay, in a cost effective manner; and
• Internal control systems were effective.
1.4 Audit Criteria
• Authorised flying task; flying duties assigned; prescribed payload;
authorised unit entitlement; and sanctioned establishment of operational
staff.
• Adequacy and efficiency of repair and maintenance facilities.
• Scheduled timelines for setting up of facilities at BRDs; requirement of
facilities as projected in project report and repair/overhauling capacity of
BRDs in comparison to requirement.
• Provision of manuals and directives with regard to first and second line
maintenance; targets set for overhauling tasks; achievement of TBO life;
savings anticipated in cost; procedure prescribed for provisioning and
procurement of spare and cost and quantity of spares procured locally
subsequent to indigenization.
1.5 Audit Methodology
An entry conference was held at Air HQ on 14 June 2006 wherein the scope and
objectives of audit and the broad compass of fieldwork planned were discussed with
the representatives of the auditee organisation. Subsequent audit examination consisted
of examination of documents and records at  Air HQ, concerned wings and squadrons
and at the BRDs; collection of information through issue of audit memos and
questionnaries; interaction with key personnel at Air HQ, Operation and Maintenance
units and examination of material collected in past audits.
While all squadrons/units were audited, focus was placed on two squadrons
holding 24 aircrafts for examination of aircraft use and working of first and second line
maintenance. Since overhauls of both airframes and engines carried out indigenously
were limited during the period, all such overhauls were examined. Besides 25 per cent
of other repair tasks were examined at both the BRDs. An exit conference was held on
6th December 2006 at Air HQ wherein the mainfindings of audit and related
recommendations were discussed.
1.6 Audit Findings
The audit findings are in two broad categories—(a) Operation and utilization of
aircraft, (b) Repair and Maintenance facilities.

72
1.6.1 Operation and utilization of aircraft
Aircraft 'A' are being used by IAF for transport of troops and cargo, para trooping,
supply dropping, casualty evacuation, training and VIP duties. Audit examination
focussed on:
• achievement of prescribed norms for aircraft serviceability and targets
specified for flying tasks;
• efficiency of utilisation of aircraft in terms of payloads;
• levels of AOG were also studied as these have a critical bearing on aircraft
serviceability and also reflect on the adequacy and efficiency of support
and maintenance facilities;
• utilisation of aircraft for bona fide roles;
• deployment of operational manpower in various squadrons.
The main findings that emerged from audit examination have been discussed in
the succeeding paragraphs.
1.6.1.1 Utilisation rates, serviceability and AOG levels
The efficiency of operation and utilization of the Aircraft 'A' fleet was low due to
high rate of AOG, low serviceability and less achievement in flying tasks. The year-
wise position with regard to serviceability, AOG and flying task achievement of Aircraft
'A' for 2002-2005 is given in the table below:
Y ear Percentage of State of Flying task
serviceability AOG (Hours per month per aircraft)
percen-
Achieved Shortfall tage Authorised Achieved Percentage
achieved
2002* 50.98 32.06 23.94 66.66 20.06 30.09
2003 49.46 34.06 29.96 66.66 33.86 50.79
2004 48.77 34.98 32.26 66.66 30.04 45.06
2005 46.94 37.42 33.29 66.66 33.04 49.56
* For the year 2002, data in respect of flying hours was available for last quarter only. Air HQ
stated in June 2006 that during the year 2002 most of the hours had been exhausted in flying for
Operation Parakaram.
Against the serviceability level of 75 per cent assumed by the Ministry at the
time of procurement, actual serviceability rates of aircraft ranged between 47 and
51 per cent during last four years. The number of AOG was also high and increased
from 23.94 per cent in 2002 to 33.29 per cent in 2005. This indicated that the required
number of aircraft were not in ready to fly condition affecting their availability to the
squadrons for use in assigned tasks. The high levels of un-serviceability and AOG of
aircraft also indicate the existence of inadequate repair and maintenance capabilities at
wings and repair depots.

73
Actual flying tasks performed using Aircraft 'A', therefore, fell significantly short
of the flying task norm of 66.66 hours per month per aircraft prescribed by the
Government. The shortfall ranged from 49.21 to 54.94 per cent during the period 2003-05.
Air HQ stated in June 2006 that during 2002-05 the rate of flying tasks achieved was
more than the rate of 30 hours per month per aircraft prescribed by it in 1995. Air HQ
further stated that it had lowered the flying task in 1995 to conserve life of engines and
airframes and on account of lower availability of serviceable aircraft and pilots. The
reply highlights that this reduction in authorized flying task was done without the
approval of the Government and flying tasks had to be reduced due to constraints on
account of aircraft availability and shortage of pilots.
1.6.1.2 Underutilisation of payload capacity
The maximum payload capacity of the Aircraft 'A' is 6700 kg. The payloads
carried in the sorties undertaken during the period 2001-2006 are analysed in the table
below.
Y ear Total Percentage of sorties as compared to total sorties
sorties Less Between Between Between More than
than 1000 Kg. 2000 Kg. 3000 Kg. 4500 Kg.
1000 to 2000 to 3000 to 4500
Kg. Kg. Kg. Kg.
2001-02 10664 37.30 12.59 15.66 30.71 3.74
2002-03 12600 28.42 13.11 20.30 34.91 3.26
2003-04 12192 29.72 12.10 20.19 35.10 2.89
2004-05 12766 29.29 15.23 20.12 31.54 3.82
2005-06 12680 33.69 14.11 17.66 31.05 3.47
It would be seen that the percentage of sorties in which payloads carried were
less than the 3000 kg. (less than 50 per cent of the maximum capacity) ranged between
61.83 per cent and 65.64 per cent. As such not only were the Aircraft underutilised in
terms of flying hours, these were also underutilised in terms of payloads carried. Thus,
high capacity aircrafts were used for carrying low loads although smaller aircrafts and
other modes of transport were available at lower cost. The utilisation of these aircrafts
was not made in a cost effective manner.
1.6.1.3 Deployment of aircraft in various roles
In 1995, Air HQ fixed flying tasks for each existing squadron/unit and also
prescribed flying hours for each role assigned to the aircraft. Audit observed that Air
HQ had fixed flying taks for each unit that was far below the task fixed by the Government
for Aircraft 'A'. Besides, Air HQ allocated flying tasks into three categories i.e. Routine
Transport Role (RTR), Air  Maintenance and training. Air Maintenance tasks cover the
designated primary role of the aircraft viz., troops and cargo carrier and also includes
para trooping training.

74
Detailed analysis of flying tasks allotted for various roles and actual achievement
by six squadrons/units test checked is given in the table below:
(in flying hours)
Role T ask allotted Task Task actually achieved Percentage
by allotted by with reference to Shortfall in
Government Air HQ flying hours fixed by task
Government achievement
with
reference to
Air HQ
targets
Flying Percentage (+)excess/(-)
Hours of total shortfall
achievement
RTR 97440 41400 47583 48.83 (+)14.93
A M 78960 33600 19150 24.25 (-)43.01
Training 79600 43800 18382 23.09 (-)58.04
Misc. Nil Nil 29398 All excess All excess
Total 256000 118800 114513 44.73 (-)3.61
While there was an overall shortfall of 55 per cent in achievement of flying task,
targets fixed by the Government, the shortfall against targets fixed by Air HQ was only
4 per cent. Audit, however, observed that the aircraft were used for routine and
miscellaneous tasks by diverting them from their primary roles of air maintenance and
training. Of the total 114513 flying hours utilized, only 33  per cent were used for
primary role of air maintenance and training, and the balance 67 per cent were spent for
routine tasks and miscellaneous duties. This resulted in serious shortfall of 43 per cent
in achieving air maintenance task and 58 per cent in training with reference to the
reduced targets fixed by Air HQ. Audit noted that 25 per cent of total flying hours
utilized were spent on miscellaneous duties though no task for such duties were
allocated either by the Ministry or by the Air HQ.
Air HQ stated (December 2006) that "miscellaneous tasks" are fully authorised
and essential for maintaining operational readiness of the squadron. The reply of Air
HQ is not acceptable, as the orders issued in 1995 have never been revised creating
this category and authorizing flying hours under it. Further, the nature of tasks stated
to be included in this category does not justify such a high utilization.
Regarding training, Air HQ stated that exclusive continuous training sorties are
launched only when necessasry. The training requirements of the unit are thus always
achieved by combining training with other tasks, which leads to savings in operational
expenditure. This reply is not acceptable as in the case of operational squadrons flying
hours allocated for continuous training have been kept at very low levels. Besides
training in course of normal flying limits the effectiveness of such training and also
compromises flight safety.
Audit at squadrons showed that the annual flying tasks are not being prepared
in advance based on any assessment of load and projections of tasks. Instead sorties

75
and flights are planned on the basis of messages/signals received from Air HQ and
Commands which are sent only a few days in advance. Thus, aircraft utilization is not
a planned exercise but is mostly requisition driven and not amenable to control and
monitoring with reference to approved flying tasks for various roles.
1.6.1.4 Shortfall in undertaking training tasks at training centres
Para-trooping School
One of the primary tasks of the Aircraft 'A' fleet is para trooping. To achieve this
task, a Paratroopers Training Schools (PTS) was set up with 12 aircraft. The school is
required to operate a combination of two types of courses i.e. one type deploying six
aircraft for para-trooping and medical PCB
2 training (Flight 'A'), and another type using
the balance six aircraft for conducting conversion course (Flight 'B').
Audit examination also showed that even though the primary task of the PTS
was training, 53 per cent of flying tasks were allotted for RTR with allocation for
paratrooping being only 18 per cent. Even this low allocation for paratrooping training
was utilized only to the extent of 51-67 per cent during the past five years.
Audit examination also disclosed that except for basic para-trooping course,
there was shortfall with respect to annual targets in each year for all other Flight 'A'
courses. Besides, the school was required to conduct Medical PCB and refresher
courses and aircrew para ground training courses on an "as required" basis. However,
during the period no such courses were conducted. In the case of Flight "B" courses,
for which six aircraft were earmarked, it was  seen that none of the envisaged courses
i.e. FA Controller Courses, Air Crew Paratrooping Courses and Air Crew Conversion
Courses were conducted in the last five years. The facilities and aircraft earmarked for
Flight "B" courses remained totally unutilized.
Details of paratrooping training courses and conversion courses envisaged and
actually held, actual output and shortfall against envisaged output during the period
2001-06 are given in Annexure I.
PTS stated that the shortfalls were on account of the Army not detailing troops
for paratrooping courses and non-allotment of tasks by Air HQ for the other types of
courses. Air HQ has informed that medical courses were disbanded in 1999.
Paratrooping and casualty evacuation are among the primary tasks assigned to
Aircraft 'A' for which a specialized school was set up with 12 aircraft. The
underutilization of these specialized facilities, created to equip armed forces with critical
capabilities, indicates inadequate attention in an important area.
Training Centre at an Air Force Station
This training facility was created for training pilots on Aircraft 'A' with a UE of
eight aircraft. The unit held one excess aircraft during 2001-02 and two during 2002-06
attributing the excess to additional training and other unspecified commitments. Details
of flying task, allotment by Air HQ, and achievements against the same showed that
against the allotted task of 5400 hours for training, achievement ranged between 2109
hours and 3459 hours showing a utilization rate which ranged from 39 per cent to 64
per cent. The unit also used aircraft for "miscellaneous and other tasks" for 1643 hours
to 2174 hours, which was not authorized. Simultaneously, audit also observed shortfall
2PCB-Para Course Basic
——————

76
ranging from 20 to 82 per cent in training of pilots which is illustrated in the table given
below:
Y ear Output per year as Actual output per Percentage
per policy page year shortfall
(Number of pilots) (Number of pilots)
2001 44 17 61.37
2002 44 21 25.88
2003 44 27 38.64
2004 44 08 81.82
2005 44 35 20.46
Total 220 108
In the context of the shortfall in achieving targets for training of pilots,
underutilization of aircraft on core training tasks was not justified.
1.6.1.5 Modification and utilization of Aircraft 'A' for VIP use
Air HQ modified six Aircraft 'A' during 2001-03 for VIP use. It had earlier modified
two aircraft for VIP use between 1992-99. The modification and utilization of eight
aircraft was not only irregular but also lacked justification on account of the following:
l IAF did not have adequate number of serviceable Aircraft 'A' for its primary
role of air maintenance, as a result the flying tasks assigned had to be
reduced considerably as discussed in paragraphs 1.6.1.1 of this report.
Therefore, diversion of such large number of aircraft (20 per cent of the total
serviceable aircraft with IAF) for VIP use showed an unexpected indifference
to its primary role.
l The modification involved change in the role of the aircraft from what had
been approved by the Government. Hence the modification required approval
of the Government. In December 1995, however, approval for modification
of Aircraft 'A' was denied by the Government. Despite this, the IAF continued
modifying aircraft and  altered their role irregularly.
l A specialized Communications Squadron consisting of two Boeings, four
executive jets, seven Avros and six helicopters, exists for use by VIPs.
Government orders issued in 1981 regulate use of these aircraft by VIPs i.e.
the President, the Vice President and the Prime Minister who are the only
personages ordinarily entitled to use the aircraft in this squadron. Other
Entitled Personages (OEP) including senior service officers can use aircraft
of the Communications Squadron if it is essential to do so and aircraft are
available. Given the existence of a specialized and dedicated squadron with
adequate number of aircraft for flying VIPs and OEPs, diverting eight Aircraft
'A' for VIP/OEP use was not justified.

77
l During 1999-2004, the Avro fleet in the Communications Squadron was
used only to the extent of 3.9 per cent by the three entitled personages and
46.9 per cent by OEPs. It was thus evident that existing aircraft in the
specialized Communications Squadron were underutilized. This further
diluted the justification for modifying Aircraft 'A' for VIP/OEP use.
l Besides, if there was unfulfilled demand for aircraft for VIP/OEP use, increase
in the holding of the existing Communications Squadron should have been
considered instead of designating Aircraft 'A' for  this purpose outside of
the Communications Squadron. Earmarking aircraft for VIP role outside the
Communications Squadron also led to dilution of control on use of service
aircraft by VIPs and OEPs.
Audit scrutiny also disclosed that:
l The modified aircraft were not used by any of the three VIPs and were
instead predominantly utilized by OEPs such as senior officers of the Services,
AFWA/AWWA Presidents and their accompanying staff. AFWA/AWWA
Presidents are not even covered under the category of OEPs. Expenditure
on use of these aircrafts by OEPs amounted to Rs. 75 crore since their
modification.
l Further, after modification, the payload and the passenger carrying capacity
of the modified aircraft was significantly reduce to 1800 kg and 19 persons
respectively.  Test check of use of a modified aircraft during one year showed
that it carried an average of three passengers  and 2 kg payload per sortie as
against the passenger carrying capacity of 40-50 persons and load carrying
capacity of 6700 kg of the aircraft.
The modification of eight aircrafts for VIP role was thus both irregular and
improper as it was a deviation from the aircraft's assigned role that had been fixed by
the Government. Further, assigning VIP role to additional aircraft was improper as a
specialized Communications Squadron with adequate number of aircrafts already existed
for this purpose, and the operational squadrons of IAF were facing serious shortage
of serviceable Aircraft 'A'.
1.6.1.6 Deployment of operational personnel
Details of surplus/deficiency in operational manpower in eight operational units/
squadron of Aircraft 'A' during the period 2001-06 were as under:
Percentage of surplus/deficiency
Y ear Pilot Navigator Flight
Engineer
2001-02 -22 +13 -10
2002-03 -19 +1 +14
2003-04 -18 +13 +25
2004-05 -14 +5 +27
2005-06 -13 +28 +34

78
The Aircraft 'A' squadrons/units had serious shortages of Pilots but surplus of
Flight Navigators and Flight Engineers. The deficiency in the number of Pilots, however,
declined from 22 per cent in 2001-02 to 13 per cent in 2005-06. In the case of Flight
Engineers, the surplus manpower increased substantially from 10 per cent in 2001-02
to 34 per cent in 2005-06. Deficiency in pilot strength would have adverse impact on
the rate of utilization of the aircraft. In fact, Air HQ, while justifying lowering the flying
task from 66.66 hours to 33 hours per months in 1995, attributed this,  inter-alia to
shortage of pilots. Further, deficiencies in pilot strength along with surplus in the
strength of navigators and engineers indicates imbalance in deployment of operational
manpower in these squadrons/units.
Audit examination further disclosed that two squadron/unit held surplus pilots
over authorisation, six other squadrons/units faced deficiencies. Air HQ stated that
additional manpower was being provided in the units entrusted with Air Maintenance
role. This is not acceptable as it was seen that significant shortages of pilots existed in
three squadrons and in PTS which had critical Air Maintenance and paratrooping
training role.
Air HQ also justified excess manning in the two units on account of increase in
task. Audit scrutiny, however, disclosed that the tasks achieved in these two units,
have not shown any significant variation. No explanation has been provided by Air
HQ for holding surplus Navigators and Flight Engineers in most of the units especially
in view of significant shortages of Pilots in some of the units.
1.6.1.7 Deficiencies in records maintained for transport of passengers and cargo
A scrutiny of flight records held by two squadrons pertaining to six different
months during the period 2004-06 disclosed the following inadequacies:
l A manifest of a flight provides details of passengers/cargo carried in the
aircraft. Proper accounting of the mainfests is essential to ensure that no
unauthorised passenger/ cargo is carried in the service aircraft. Audit
observed that he manifests of Aircraft 'A' did not carry any serial or control
number to ensure proper identification and accounting of the manifests.
Manifests were also not entered into any control register by squadrons/
unit providing airlift.
l Entries in the passenger manifests were altered without authorisation of the
competent authorities. Further, operational requirement for airlifts and
movement of cargo is often not brought out in the manifests.
l Unauthorised cargo such as personal belongings and other non-operational
stores have been included in the manifests.
The inadequacies noticed disclose dilution of internal controls and increased
risk of unauthorised use of aircraft.
Recommendations
l Air HQ should take effective steps to increase serviceability of aircraft and
minimize AOG by ensuring timely repair and maintenance services combined
with the availability of essential spares.

79
l Use of high capacity aircraft for carrying low loads would need review by
IAF keeping in view the high operating cost of the aircraft and availability
of other smaller transport and other modes of aircraft.
l Utilisation of aircraft requires comprehensive review so that strategies to
enhance utilisation and bring these closer to the flying task fixed for the
aircraft by the Government. Else, the Government should revise the flying
tasks based on ground realities.
l Allocations of flying tasks should correspond closely to the primary roles
of the aircraft especially in respect of air maintenance and training role of
the units. Achievement of these tasks needs to be closely monitored.
l Diversion of aircraft from operational squadrons for VIP/OEP use may be
discontinued to ensure increased availability of serviceable aircraft to the
operational units/squadrons for air maintenance and other primary roles.
l Proactive steps should be taken to improve utilisation of the capabilities of
paratrooping school in consultation with user agencies.
l Operational manning in units should be reviewed so that they are in
consonance with tasks allocated to units.
l Improvements may be brought about in maintaining flight details and in
recording and control of flight manifests.
1.6.2 Repairs and Maintenance
Aircrafts are complex systems and their utilisation and serviceability is critically
dependent on the timely availability of supporting repair and maintenance infrastructure
and services. Aircraft 'A' have now been in service for a period of 15-19 years and the
need for effective repair and maintenance is now greater so that operational advantages
do not get reduced with the age of the aircraft. It is in this background that audit
examined the availability of repair and maintenance facilities and their utilisation. Audit
also studied repair and maintenance activities, including procurement and
indigenisation, to assess if these were efficient and promoted economy. Findings in
this regard have been discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
Adequacy of repair and maintenance facilities
1.6.2.1 Delays and inadequacies in creation of facilities for overhaul and repair of
airframes at BRD 'X'
The Aircraft 'A' were inducted by IAF during 1984-1991 and therefore, facilities
for overhaul and repair of airframes should have been set up by 1990 to carry out first
major overhaul due in that year. The facilities were, however, established substantially
only in 2002 i.e. after a delay of 12 years. The delays in setting up of these facilities and
the resultant requirement of sending airframes abroad for overhaul at a cost of
Rs. 69.56 crore were reported earlier in Paragraph No. 3 of Audit Report No. 3of Audit
Report No. 8 of 1998.
Further audit examination showed that items supplied by the OEM for creating
the repair and overhaul facilities consisted of 116 test rigs used for testing of aggregates
during overhaul of airframes. Out of 116 test rigs procured between 1995-2000, 11 test
rigs were yet to be installed as of October, 2006 due to defects and deficiencies.

80
Audit further observed that as a consequence of the delay in setting up complete
overhaul capabilities and non availability of essential spares, 32 overhauls undertaken
at BRD 'X' between 2002 to 2006 were cleared by Air HQ with a number of  ‘deficiencies/
concessions’. These concessions were on account of non-replacement of mandatory
spares and deviations from provisions of bulletins relating to modifications and non-
testing for leaks in fuel tanks till next overhaul. This was a deviation from the requirement
as rules permit clearing aircraft with concession for only three months followed by a
review.
Futher, Main Landing Gear (MLG) and Nose Landing Gear (NLG) are critical
airframe aggregates. However, in-house capability for undertaking overhaul of MLGs
remained limited due to non-availability of some equipment. As a result, overhaul of
MLGs were being cleared with deviations. In the case of NLGs, BRD 'X' stated that it
had set up necessary facilities for overhaul by June, 2003 using available resources.
However, it continued to rely on other BRDs and HAL for certain critical tasks. Due to
delayed and incomplete establishment of overhaul facilities and shortage of non-
mandatory spares, overhaul of 20 NLG had to be entrusted to the OEM in April, 2005 at
a total cost of USD 252000 (Rs. 1.12 crore).
1.6.2.2 Delay in setting up repair and overhaul facilities for Turbo Generators
Turbo generators are used for running of air conditioners in the aircraft. Repair
facilities for TG-16M Turbo Generator fitted on Aircraft 'A' were set up at BRD 'Y' in
1995-96. Based on a feasibility study conducted by Hindustan Aeronautics Limited
(HAL), Koraput Division, Government sanctioned the project in January, 2001 for
establishing overhaul facility for these generators at a total cost of Rs. 10.42 crore with
a probable date of completion of July, 2003. Following Government sanction for creation
of overhaul facilities at HAL, the existing repair facility at BRD 'Y' was dismantled and
drawings/spares etc. were handed over to HAL in 2001-02.
Audit examination disclosed tha the overhaul facility, scheduled to be set up by
July, 2003 was yet to be established as of August, 2006 even though alternative repair
facilities were not available in the country. Further, only Rs. 2.42 crore out of the
Rs. 10.42 crore sanctioned had been spent by HAL upto December, 2005 indicating
only 25 per cent progress of work in setting up the repair and overhaul facilities. Air HQ
failed to monitor the creation of facilities and called for reasons for delay from HAL
only in August, 2006. Air HQ stated in August, 2006 that the expected date of
establishment of overhaul facilities at HAL was September, 2006 but these were yet to
be established as of October, 2006.
Due to delay in setting up overhaul facilities, "IAF got 57 TG-16M generators
overhauled abroad at a total cost of USD 1862190 ( i.e. Rs. 8.38 crore) under two
contracts signed in September, 2004 and November, 2005. Besides, a contract for
overhaul of 62 numbers of GS-24A generators (an aggregate of TG-16M generator)
was signed in July 2004 at a total cost of USD 188145 (i.e. Rs. 0.85 crore). Had the
indigenous overhaul facility been set up in time i.e. by July 2003, the generators along
with their aggregates could have been overhauled at a cost of Rs. 11.25 lakh (afte considering

81
escalation over cost estimated in 1999) per generator. The additional cost due to
offloading of  overhaul task worked out to be Rs. 4.82 lakh per generator. This resulted
in extra expenditure of Rs. 2.75 crore on overhaul of 57 number of TG-16M generator.
These generators would continue to be sent abroad for overhaul till the facilities are
set up.
1.6.2.3 Delay in commissioning of Test Rig in BRD 'Y'
For testing of fuel control units (FCUs) of aero-engines of Aircraft 'A', a supply
order was placed on HAL in September 1998 for manufacture and supply of the test rig
at a cost of Rs. 1.2 crore. the test rig was received in June 2001. However, the requisite
work services for installation of the test rig were sanctioned only in December 2002.
The work services were completed and the rig was commissioned in May 2005. As
such, benefits from an investment of Rs. 1.2 crore made in a critical facility could not be
obtained for almost four years after the equipment was received which indicated
inadequate project management.
1.6.2.4 Shortfall in manpower deployment at aero-engine facility at BRD 'Y'
There was a shortfall in the availability of manpower in the production line of
aero engine of Aircraft 'A' since 2001-02 as shown in table given in Annexure II. The
deficiency of airmen ranged from 66 to 90 during last five years constituting 45-53 per cent
of the authorised strength. BRD 'Y' stated in August 2006 that the shortfall was met by
working after normal hours and on holidays and that no extra manpower was diverted
from other units. However, as the facility consistently failed to meet targets for overhauls
and also failed to deliver products and services of acceptable standards, adverse fall
out of  manpower shortage on the capacity and  capability of the depot to undertake
core tasks cannot be ruled out.
1.6.2.5 Indigenisation of Aicraft 'A' spares
Indigenisation of spares is critical to reducing reliance on foreign suppliers for
spares. As such, this was an important task to be undertaken in the context of Aircraft  'A'
where problems were being faced in sourcing spares from the OEM/foreign suppliers.
Audit examination in this regard revealed the following:
BRD 'X'
l Till March 2006, 3202 mandatory and Automatic Replenishment System
(ARS) items of non complex design had been indigenised for which supply
orders valued at Rs. 11 crore for  335 lines of spares were placed on various
private firms. As of June 2006, of the orders placed, 197 lines of spares
valued at Rs. 3.62 crore ordered during 2003-06 were yet to be received.
l The task allotment for indigenisation of spares had progressively decreased.
This was because initially only items of non-complex design were undertaken
and thus these progressed on a fast track. During later years, as the remaining
items were complex in nature, indigenisation exercises were need based.
BRD 'Y'
l Against the indegenisation target of 1900 spares during 2001-06, BRD
indigenised 2011 spares. Full information on supply orders placed for

82
indigenised spares was provided only for the years 2004-05 and 2005-06. It
was seen that in 2004-05, 78 orders covering 86 items were placed of which
48 orders were yet to materialise. In 2005-06, 395 orders covering 436 items
were placed of which 341 orders were yet to materialise.
It would thus be seen that whereas substantial progress was made in both the
BRDs in indigenising mandatory spares, commercial exploitation had only met with
limited success. Thus the overall effectiveness of indigenisation efforts was diluted.
Recommendations
l Project management and monitoring should be accorded priority so that
repair and overhaul facilities needed to support aircraft serviceability are
created timely and are designed to deliver full functionality.
l Constraints on capabilities of facilities to deliver full services should be
addressed.
l Indigenisation of spares should be adequately supported with funds and
resources and followed up with adequate commercial exploitation.
Efficiency and economy in repair and maintenance activities
1.6.2.6 Delay in second line servicing at operating units
The first and second line servicing of Aicraft 'A' is carried out in operating
squadrons/units. The stipulated downtime for carrying out servicing at 300 hours is
13 working days and for servicing at the end of every 900 hours it is 22 working days.
A total of 110 cases pertaining to three units comprising 89 cases pertaining to 300
hours servicing and 21 cases pertaining to 900 hours were examined in audit. It was
seen that in 65 cases (59 per cent) the time taken for servicing exceeded the prescribed
days as per details given in the table below:
Extent of delay in days T otal
Type of Within 1 to 10 11 to 25 26 to 50 51 to 100 No. of
servicing 24 hours days days days days cases
300 Hours NIL 17 23 04 01 45
900 Hours NIL 07 11 02 02 20
It was explained in the exit conference that these delays were often caused due
to non-availability of spares or detection of snags during servicing. However, in two
units there were also shortages in maintenance personnel which could have also
contributed to delay. These delays cause aircraft to become AOG.
1.6.2.7 Delay in meeting AOG demands
AOG demands for spares and rotables are required to be met within 24 hours so
that incidents of AOG and their duration are minimised. However, a large number of

83
aircraft remained AOG for inordinate periods on account of non-availability of spares
and rotables as shown in the table below:
Number of aircrafts on AOG
Y ear 1 to 6 6 to 12 12 to 18 18 to 24 More than
months  months months months 24 months
2001-02 39 7 — — —
2002-03 47 10 — 2 —
2003-04 30 11 — — 1
2004-05 42 12 — 1 —
2005-06 26 17 3 — —
Satisfaction levels with regard to AOG demands at operating units were analysed
and the results are tabulated in the Annexure III. The analysis discloses that only
48 per cent of AOG demands could be met within 30 days whereas 34-46 per cent of the
demands took one to six months to be met. This indicates deficiencies in provisioning
and procurement of spares and rotables.
1.6.2.8  Shortfall in achievement of annual overhaul task and offloading of aero
engines abroad for overhaul
BRD 'Y' had a capacityd to undertake 30 overhauls each year. Yet it failed to
achieve annual targets both for overhaul and repair tasks fixed during the period
1999-2005 as shown in the table below:
Task allotted Task achieved Percentage of
Y ear achievement
Overhaul Repair Overhaul Repair Overhaul Repair
1999-00 45 10 36 100
2000-01 30 30 12 16 40 53
2001-02 30 30 05 15 17 50
2002-03 30 30 08 26 27 87
2003-04 15 30 09 26 67 87
2004-05 27 26 20 18 74 69
2005-06 10 20 14 21 100
In 2005-06, targets fixed were achieved largely due to the drastic reduction in the
target for the tasks itself. Audit examination showed that failure to achieve tasks was
on account of non-availability of spares due to incorrect assessment of requirement
and delay in procurement as discussed below:
l Air HQ issued the forecast task for repair/overhaul of aero-engines of Aircraft
'A' for the production years 1999-2003 and 2000-2004 in August  1997 and in

84
August 1998 respectively. BRD 'Y', however, finalized the requirement of
spares for undertaking servicing and repairing of engines during 1999-2004
after a delay of more than two years i.e. between May and September 2000.
This led to delay in initiating procurement action for required spares. Air HQ
concluded contracts for procurement of 157 lines of spares in January 2002
of which 121 spares were received only in April/June 2003. The delay in
supply of 115 lines of spares was due to inordinate delay in opening LOC
and in deciding on the question of waiver of LD. Thus, spares required for
the production year 1999-2004 were received 49 to 51 months after the start
of task of production period 1999-2004.
l Due to the combined allotment of tasks upto 1999-2000 without fixing tasks
separately for repairs and ovderhauls, the BRD undertook a
disproportionately large number of repairs and few overhauls. As such
estimates of requirement of spares for overhaul were understated and led to
supplies that proved to be inadequate when tasks were separately fixed for
overhauls and repairs. This further compounded the problem of shortage of
spares.
l There was an accumulation of large number of Cat 'D' engines at BRD for
repair and overhaul due to non-availability of spares as shown in the table
below:
Y ear Overhaul Capacity of Overhaul Overhaul A vaiting
due BRD at BRD Abroad Overhaul
2000-01 17 30 12 40 63
98* =80
2001-02 48 30 05 40 66
2002-03 84 30 08 40 102
2003-04 19 30 09 40 72
2004-05 45 30 20 — 97
2005-06 45 30 14 43 85
* Carry forward Cat 'D' from previous year.
As a consequence of the failure of the BRD to meet overhaul targets as also to
fully utilise available capacities, 120 engines had to be sent abroad between 2000 and
2002 for overhaul at an aggregate cost of US$ 14,160,000 (Rs. 64.12 crore). Had timely
action been taken to procure the required spares, 120 aero engines sent abroad could
have been overhauled in India at a total cost of Rs. 27 crore ( cost computed based on
average overhaul cost of Rs. 22.36 lakh per aero-engine at BRD 'Y' during 2000-01 to
2002-03) with a possible saving of Rs. 37 crore. Further, indigenous production and
maintenance facilities also remained under-utilised during the period.
Shortfalls in achievement of overhaul tasks owing to non-supply of spares by
the OEM and consequent offloading of overhauls tasks to the OEM was highlighted

85
in paragraph 3 of Audit Report 8 of 1998. Even after a lapse of seven years such
shortfalls in execution of overhaul tasks persist.
1.6.2.9 Premature withdrawal of indigenously overhauled engine
During the period 2001-2006, BRD 'Y' overhauled 56 aero engines. Of these, 13
engines were withdrawn prematurely within 500 hours. Out of the 13 engines, seven
were prematurely withdrawn due to major defects. An expenditure of Rs. 58 lakh had to
be additionally incurred on the repair of twelve of the 13 aero engines withdrawn
prematurely. One aero engine withdrawn prematurely was still under repairs (October
2006). The failure rate of 25  per cent with regard to overhaul is indicative of deficiencies
in the quality and standard of overhaul task carried out by BRD.
1.6.2.10 Premature withdrawal of aero engines before completion of TBO
TBO of the aero engine is 2000 hours. 70 aero engines consisting engines
overhauled both by BRD and the OEM were withdrawn during 2001-06 even before
TBO of 2000 hours was completed. While 34 engines overhauled at BRD were withdrawn
prior to completing TBO, 36 engines overhauled abroad were similarly withdrawn.
Considering that the OEM had overhauled almost four times more number of engines
than BRD this indicated inadequacies in overhauls being conducted in the BRD.
1.6.2.11 Delays in overhaul (third and fourth line serving) of aero-engines at BRD 'Y'
The average lead-time for overhaul of an aero engine at BRD is six months. Time
allowed under contracts  with the OEM for overhaul of aero-engines also ranges
between six to eight months. Analysis of overhaul records for 56 engines overhauled
at the BRD during 2001-06 disclosed that only one engine was overhauled within six
months and in case of the other 55 engines time taken for overhauls was far in excess
of the average lead-time of six months. Details of delays in case of these engines are
given in the table below:
Period Between Between Between Between More
taken for 6 to 12 12 to 24 25 to 36 37 to 48 than 48
overhaul months months months months months
No. of aero 3 17 12 12 11
engines
In the case of repairs of engines undertaken during 2001-06, delays were observed
in 23 out of a total of 106 cases of repairs. In 13 of the 23 cases delays were for a period
exceeding one year.
Thus not only were there shortfalls in carrying out overhauls and repairs with
respect to allotted tasks, these were carried out with delays indicating inefficiencies in
overhaul and repair carried out by the BRDs.
1.6.2.12 Delays in undertaking repair/overhauls of airframe and aggregates at BRD 'X'
The annual installed capacity for overhaul of airframe is 18 and prescribed turn
around time for overhaul of an airframe is six months. Analysis of overhaul records
maintained at BRD reveals that time taken for overhaul in 39 out of 42 overhauls done

86
during 2001-06 was in excess of the lead time of six months. The extent of delay is given
in the table below:
Excess time taken for overhaul of airframes
Upto 2 to 4 4 to 6
Period taken for 2 months months months
overhaul
12 18 9
Due to low level of arisings (6 to 10 airframes), tasks entrusted to BRD 'X' were
much less than the installed capacity of the Depot. Yet overhaul tasks were delayed
indicating lack of efficiency in undertaking these tasks. Excess  time taken resulted in
non-availability of the aircraft for operations.
Time taken for completing repair and overhauls of aggregates/rotables was
examined in a sample of 10 per cent of cases during 2002-06. Delays were computed
with reference to six months prescribed for conducting these tasks. It was seen that
delays were observed in around 10 per cent   cases in 2003-04, 15 per cent  cases in
2004-05 and 20 per cent cases in 2005-06.
1.6.2.13 Delay in receipt of spares due to lack of proper monitoring of procurement
Air HQ concluded a contract for supply of spares with a foreign firm in January
2002 at a cost of USD 368049. This was  based on a "most critical  maintenance/
production hold up" requirement projected by BRD 'Y' for the year 2001-02. These
items were supplied in two lots in August 2002 and November 2002. Payment was
released to the supplier against shipping and other documents in terms of the contract.
Though documents showed that the first lot of spares consisting of 19 lines contained
in nine cases, only one case consisting of 14 lines was received and the remaining
eight cases containing five lines valued at USD 329343 (Rs. 1.61 crore) were not received.
Non-receipt of these items, however, came to the notice of Air HQ only in August 2003
i.e. after one year. Air HQ took up the matter with the firm which accepted the discrepancy
and despatched the balance spares in January 2004. Out of the five lines not supplied,
two lines were required for replacement of blades in 10 Aircraft kept dismantled  at BRD
since 2001-02. As such, spares due for supply to the BRD in April 2001, were received
only in December 2003 thereby delaying critical overhaul tasks. This reflects poor
management of procurement and inadequate monitoring of purchases by Air Force
authorities and Ministry of Defence even in cases of spares identified as "most critical"
by user units. The long period of one year taken to detect short supply is indication of
failure of internal controls and holds considerable risk of fraud and misappropriation
of Government money.
1.6.2.14 Excess utilization of man hours on repair and overhaul of aero engine
The time taken by BRD 'Y' in overhaul and repair of aero engines was substantially
higher than the prescribed norms. For overhaul of a single aero engine, the standard
man-hours prescribed is 6050 hours per engine. BRD 'Y', however, took 8423 hours per
engine for overhaul of 51 aero engines during the period 2002-06. Similarly, 1400 hours
are prescribed as standard man-hours for repair of a single aero engine of Aircraft 'A'.
BRD took 165378 hours for repair of 93 aero engines during the period 2002-06 at the
rate of 1778 hours per engine.

87
BRD informed that extra man hours had become necessary due to ageing of
aircraft and non-availability of skilled manpower. Excess utilization of man-hours,
besides indicating lack of efficiency also added to the cost of overhauls and repairs.
1.6.2.15 Extra expenditure on overhaul of aero engines
A contract for overhaul of 80 aero engines was concluded with a foreign firm in
June 2000. In terms of clause 4.3 of the contract, the firm was required to inform IAF
before replacement of any unserviceable  aggregates with new ones during overhaul.
The firm without adhering to the terms, placed components in 58 engines for which it
claimed payment of US $ 367766 (Rs. 1.70 crores) from IAF in September 2001. The firm
in support of its claim stated that the accessories replaced were found to be irreparable
because previous overhauls of these engines in India had violated technological
norms.
Another 40 aero engines were sent abroad for overhaul through an addendum of
January 2002 to the aforesaid contract. Certain major items in case of four of the
engines though not due for replacement were replaced by the firm during the overhual.
This was on account of the fact that the actual life of these items was not endorsed by
the BRD 'Y' in the respective engine logbooks. The foreign firm claimed an extra amount
of US $ 270795 (Rs. 1.32 crore) on account of these replacements.
The above cases reveal inadequacies in overhauls conducted by BRD 'Y'
deficiencies in enforcing contractual conditions and inadequate record maintenance,
which caused additional expenditure of Rs. 3.02 crore.
1.6.2.16 Loss due to failure to avail of warranty
Hydraulic Pumps are used in aircraft to create pressure for operating various
services that use hydraulic systems such as landing gears, ramps, doors and cabin
pressure. Eighty hydraulic pumps of 435 F make were contracted in April 2004 at a cost
of US$ 432000 (Rs. 1.91 crore) and were delivered by January 2005. Of these, 25 pumps
failed within the warranty period of 12 months. However, claims under warranty were
forwarded in time only in 14 cases. In eight cases, claims were not forwarded at all due
to non-availability of contract and supply details. Three other claims were not made in
time. Thus, warranty claims in respect of eleven defective 435 F pumps were not raised
in time resulting in a financial loss of US$ 59400 due to deficiencies in maintenance of
required purchase records.
1.6.2.17 Technology for extension of TTL of aero engines
The service life of the aero engines was increased to 4000 hours in 1994-95 by
acquiring relevant life extension technology from the OEM. However, the OEM did not
provide technology (2002) for increasing TTL of aero engines from 4000 hours to
6000 hours. Considering that almost all aero engines would have either exceeded a life
of 4000 hours or would be very near doing so, IAF would be completely dependent on
the OEM for overhaul of engines and extension of TTL to 6000 hours. In fact, the
Ministry concluded two contracts with the OEM in September 2003 and March 2005,
for overhaul of a total number of 83 aero engines abroad at a total cost of Rs. 48.67
crore. This was primarily on account of the fact that overhaul by the OEM had become
inevitable, as they also needed life extensions, which only the OEM could provide.

88
Overhaul and TTL extension tasks would henceforth need to be combined and aero
engines will continue to be sent abroad for overhaul as the TBO and the life extension
being given are for the same number of hours i.e. 2000 hours. This would result in
under utilisation of overhaul facilities existing at BRD 'Y'. In 2005-06, the overhaul
tasks allotted to the BRD has already been scaled down to 10.
Audit examination showed that during technical discussions and price
negotiations held in December 2002, the OEM had stated that it would positively
consider the request of Air HQ to provide TTLE technology by the middle of 2003.
However, no evidence was available to show that this was pursued further by IAF.
Almost complete reliance on the OEM for engine overhauls on account of failure to
obtain TTLE technology has encouraged the OEM to adopt rigid stand during price
negotiations and has also increased the demand for changes, favourable to them, in
contract terms and conditions. Very soon several engines would be reaching their
extended life of 6000 hours and further life extensions would have to be considered.
Recommendations
• Bottlenecks on utilizing the capacity of repair and maintenance facilities
arising out of shortage of spares should be addressed through careful and
prompt provisioning and procurement.
• The quality of services and the level of efficiency in repair and maintenance
facilities should be stepped up to eliminate delays, instances of premature
withdrawals and use of man hours beyond norms.
1.6.3 Internal Control Mechanisms
One of the obejectives of audit was to assess the efficacy of the system of
internal control underlying operations and maintenance of Aircraft 'A'. Findings in this
regard are given below.
• Basic record keeping with regard to flights and sorties needed enhancement
as scope for improvement existed in preparing and recording flight manifests.
This has been discussed in para 1.6.1.7 of this report.
• While MIS and other reporting mechanisms were in place, there was no
assurance, however, that these were being used to monitor and control
operations and maintenance activities. On the operations side, it was seen
that flying tasks were not being forecast and allotted in advance at periodic
intervals and recourse to need based flying was being taken, followed by
ex-post facto regularisation. Actual utilisation of aircraft has continued to
deviate from tasks allotted by Air HQ in 1995 without any review or correction.
The deviations have been detailed in para 1.6.1.3 and 1.6.1.5 of this report.
On the maintenance side, failure to meet targets of engine overhaul, delays
in completing overhaul tasks, delays in procuring spares have continued
year after year without adequate remedial action.
• Both BRD 'X' and BRD 'Y' were holding old and non-moving inventory
valued at over Rs. 18 crored since 2001-02 and 2004-05 respectively. This,
besides imposing avoidable inventory costs, reflects weakness in inventory
control and management.

89
• V ariations existed in the costing of overhaul of engines by BRD and Air HQ
thereby indicating that no standard criteria for computing costs were in
existence. This is evidenced by the cost of overhauls conveyed by Air HQ
to MoD in 2004 as Rs. 72.30 lakh while processing of a case of contracting
overhauls abroad, whereas it conveyed to audit that the average cost of
overhaul during the year 2004-05 was Rs. 34.05 lakh.
1.7 Conclusion
The procurement of Aircraft 'A' was primarily for its METAC role which focusses
on troop and cargo movement; para trooping and casualty evacuation. This report
discloses that actual utilisation both in terms of flying hours and payloads carried
were much lower than what was fixed by the Government. Deviations from the basic
METAC role of the aircraft and the predominant use of the aircraft for routine transport
assignments and "other tasks" at the expense of air maintenance role have also been
highlighted. Of specific concern is the fact that training centres have been allocated
substantial flying hours for routine transport role and these centres have logged
considerable hours under this role and under "other tasks" while recording shortfalls
with regard to their primary roles. As regards repair and maintenance, the necessity of
toning up performance by repair and maintenance agencies and by provisioning and
procurement  agencies needs urgent attention. However, what is a matter of overriding
concern is the growing reliance on the OEM for overhauls of aero engines as technology
for extending life beyond 4000 hrs. has not been provided by the OEM. This, combined
with the existing reliance on foreign firms for spares, poses a significant risk that would
need to be addressed so that operational preparedness of Aircraft 'A' is maintained.
The matter was referred to Ministry in November 2006; their reply was awaited
as of January 2007.

ANNEXURE  I
(Refers to paragraph 1.6.1.4)
Details of Paratrooping training courses and conversion courses envisaged and
actually held, actual output and shortfall against envisaged output
FLIGHT 'A'
Sl. Course Output Actual output Shortfall in percentage
No. as per 01- 02- 03- 04- 05- 01- 02- 03- 04- 05-
policy 02 03 04 05 06 02 03 04 05 06
page
1. Basic 1250 1401 1342 1357 1447 1403 —————
2. Refresher 11700 8153 912410067 8275 9572 30 22 14 29 18
3. Basic FF 100 100 77 — 01 13 23 100 100 99 87
4. Refresher FF 800 63 80 48 14 29 92 90 94 98 96
5. Path Finder 12 — 06 — 06 10 100 50 100 50 17
6. Jump Master 72 — 24 — 44 55 100 67 100 39 24
7. PJI Course As 10 09 08 07 07 Shortfall not known as output
required not specified in policy page
8. Medical PCB As 100 per cent shortfall due to non allotment of task by Air HQrs.
required
9. Medical PC As 100 per cent shortfall due to non allotment of task by Air HQrs.
Refresher required
10. Aircrew Para As 100 per cent shortfall due to non allotment of task by Air HQrs.
Ground required
Training
Courses
90
\\SERVER5\F\REPORT 2009\1227LS

91
FLIGHT 'B'
Sl. Course Duration No. of Intake per Output Actual
No. (Days) courses course as per output
to be policy
conducted page
in a year
1. FA Controller  On — On — NIL
Airborne Course required required
basis basis
2. Aircrew paratrooping course
A Basic 28 12 08 96 NIL
B Refresher 07 24 12 288 NIL
C Jump Master 07 — — 72 NIL
3. Aircrew conversion course
A Captain conversion 120 03 10 30 NIL
course
B Second pilots 120 03 08 24 NIL
conversion course
C Navy pilots 120 03 09 27 NIL
conversion course
D Flight Engineer 120 03 09 27 NIL
conversion course

ANNEXURE  II
(Refers to paragraph 1.6.2.4)
Detail of availability of manpower in the production line of aero engine
Y ear Authorised establishment Posted strength Deficiency
Officers Airmen Officers Airmen Officers Airmen
2001-02 03 177 01 95 02 82
2002-03 03 170 01 94 02 76
2003-04 03 170 01 90 02 80
2004-05 03 147 01 81 02 66
2005-06 03 170 01 80 02 90
92

ANNEXURE  III
(Refers to paragraph 1.6.2.7)
Satisfaction level with regard to AOG demands at operating units
Demand satisfaction level
Y ear Total No. Between Between Between More than Demand
of 1-15 days 16-30 days 31-180 180 days pending/
demand days cancelled
raised
2001-02 2476 462(19%) 862(35%) 848(34%) 143(6%) 161(6%)
2002-03 1880 306(16%) 541(29%) 871(46%) 142(8%) 20(1%)
2003-04 4612 996(22%) 1131(25%) 2018(44%) 350(7%) 117(2%)
2004-05 5359 1316(25%) 1387(26%) 2161(40%) 291(5%) 204(4%)
2005-06 6238 1517(24%) 1491(24%) 2326(38%) 272(4%) 632(10%)
93
GMGIPMRND—1227LS—25-04-009.