EIGHTY-SECOND REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
PRADHAN  MANTRI  GRAM  SADAK  YOJANA
(MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
[Action taken on 72nd Report of Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 18.02.2009
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 18.02.2009
LOK  SABHA   SECRETARIAT
NEW   DELHI
January, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka)

PAC No. 1884
Price :  Rs. 51.00
©BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of  Procedure and Conduct of  Business in
Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and printed by the General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110002.

CONTENTS
PAGE NO.
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE (2008-2009) ...........................  (iii)
INTRODUCTION ...................................................................................................... (v)
PART - I
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER  II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by Government ...................................................................... 9
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations  which  the  Committee  do
not  desire  to  pursue  in  view  of  the  replies  received  from
Government........................................................................... 37
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of  Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration ................................................. 41
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies. ........................ 45
PART - II
Minutes  of  the  sittings  of  Public  Accounts  Committee  (2008-09)
held on 19.01.2009.............................................................................. 46
(i)

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2008-2009)
**Shri Santosh Gangwar — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Furkan Ansari
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
***9. V acant
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
*11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Sita Ram Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
15. Shri Arun Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Raashid Alvi
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Prof. P.J. Kurien
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar — Committee Officer
(iii)
* Elected w.e.f.  17th December, 2008 vice Shri Brajesh Pathak ceased to be a Member of
Committee consequent upon his election to Rajya Sabha.
** Elected w.e.f. 17th December, 2008 vice Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh resigned his seat in
Lok Sabha on 11th November, 2008.
*** Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra resigned his seat in Lok Sabha w.e.f. 18th December, 2008.

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Eighty-second Report on action taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their
72nd Report (14th Lok Sabha) on ‘‘Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)’’.
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 19th January, 2009. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations and
Observations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the
Committee.
N
EW DELHI;     SANTOSH GANGWAR,
28 January, 2009 Chairman,
8 Magha, 1930 (Saka)  Public Accounts Committee.

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained in their 72nd  Report (14th Lok Sabha)
on the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended
31 March, 2005 (No. 13 of 2006), Union Government (Civil-Performance Appraisals)
relating to "Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana".
2. In their 72nd Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 29th April, 2008, the
Committee had dealt with the various issues relating to implementation of Pradhan
Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana with a view to assess whether an appropriate mechanism
for identification and prioritisation of eligible habitations had been instituted and
followed in the programme; whether the funds were provided adequately in time and
utilised efficiently. The Committee had also  examined whether the quality control
system was effective to secure construction of good quality roads and that the roads
constructed were being  maintained satisfactorily and monitored effectively.
3. The Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 26 Recommendations/Observations
have been received from the Ministry of Rural Development and these have been
categorized as follows:
( i ) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by
Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, 10, 12, 13, 14, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 23, 24, 25 and 26
Total: 20
Chapter–II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from Government:
Sl. Nos. 4, 15 and 22
Total: 3
Chapter–III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 5, 6, and 11
Total: 3
Chapter–IV

2
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
Sl. No. Nil
Total: Nil
Chapter–V
Gist of Committee's Recommendations/Observations in 72nd Report (14th Lok Sabha)
4. The Committee in their 72nd Report on the subject had made the following
important Recommendations/Observations:
l With a view to curb the corruption in PMGSY , the Committee had asked
the Ministry of Rural Development to replicate the modalities of social
audit incorporated in the Guidelines of National Rural Employment
Guarantee Act (NREGA) Scheme in respect of PMGSY.
l The Ministry had been urged upon to fix a time frame for preparation and
implementation of District/State-wise Plans with a view to avoid duplication
of expenditure on existing roads.
l Need to identify the correct number of habitations that are awaiting rural
connectivity and also proper measurement of the length of road required
for new connectivity as well as upgradation of existing roads, so that
adequate funds are tied up and requisite targets set for completion of the
Scheme are achieved within the stipulated time period.
l The Committee had called for an objective assessment of the contracting
and absorption capacity of States before taking up Schemes like PMGSY
so as to give the Scheme a realistic chance of succeeding and delivering
the expected outcome as well as for full utilization of allocated funds.
l The Ministry had been asked to seek an explanation from the defaulting
States for the unauthorised retention of unutilized fund by their respective
District Rural Development Agencies/District Programme Implementation
Units (DRDAs/DPIUs). They had also desired that all possible measures
should be taken to ensure that the accounts of DPIUs are maintained
properly and reconciled periodically with respective banks and got audited
regularly.
l A comprehensive GIS data base of rural roads Information System should
be created for each State which can be shared at different levels and by
different agencies involved in construction and maintenance of rural roads.
Further, a Road Maintenance Management System may also be developed
using GIS database, which  will enable sustaining the road for a longer
time with minimal efforts.
l Need to evolve a mechanism whereunder the tender documents/process
of the States be examined afresh and monitored periodically so as to ensure
that they broadly conform to the standard bidding document and that the
tendering process of States is fair and uniform across the country.

3
l The Ministry of Rural Development in cooperation with Ministry of
Panchayati Raj should fund capacity building of District and Block level
Panchayats so that they take over the functions like construction
management, maintenance management and road safety.
l The functioning of Online Management and Monitoring System (OMMS)
should be reviewed with a view to remove the deficiencies pointed out by
evolving a practicable Action Plan.
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Rural Development have
been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In the succeeding paragraphs,
the Committee will deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their
Recommendations/Observations made in the Original Report, which need reiteration
or merit comments.
A. Introduction of Social Audit for checking corruption in PMGSY
Recommendation (Sl. No. 3 —Para No. 165)
6. The Committee in their 72nd Report desired that the methodology of social
audit as envisaged in the guidelines of NREGA, if replicated in respect of PMGSY,
would act as an important safeguard against corruption by the implementing agencies
at the village and block levels.
7. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note on the aforementioned recommendation
have inter-alia stated as under:
"The Ministry has taken due  note on the concerns expressed by the Hon'ble
Prime Minister and has recognized the need for further strengthening the
implementation of quality  management mechanism. Consequent to observations
by Audit and concerns expressed by Hon'ble Prime Minister, the lack of quality
bench marks and gaps in quality assurance were recognized as major reasons for
corruption in Rural Roads Construction and it was felt that continuous efforts to
strengthen quality assurance supplemented by transparency and accountability
would greatly help in curbing corruption.  Accordingly, the following steps have
been taken (i) Mandatory quality control tests on material and workmanship
through establishment of field laboratories was already provided, however, now
all the States have been directed to ensure that first running bill of the contractors
is not paid unless the field laboratories are established and mandotary tests are
conducted; (ii) The States have been directed to ensure inspection of all the
works at least at three stages of execution by State Quality Monitors; (iii)  The
implementation of first and second tier of quality mechanism is now being closely
monitored quarterly by the Ministry  and States are being indicated of the lapses
on a regular basis; and (iv) A comprehensive review of implementation of third
tier  of quality mechanism has been carried out and inspection of  National
Quality  Monitors has been made more objective based on testing of material
and  workmanship. Process for continuous and independent review of the
performance of NQM has also been put in place."

4
The Ministry also added:
"Having regard to the recommendations of the Committee, the modalities of
Social Audit in the  context  of implementation of NREGA Scheme have been
examined .......Under PMGSY , all the processes like planning, selection of alignment
of road, topographical and material surveys, geometrical & structural design
and preparation of DPRs, procurement of works, execution and management  of
works, quality control, accounting and monitoring involves specialized technical
knowledge. The works under PMGSY are tendered through transparent bidding
process  generally at State level or at the district level, wherein, the process
requires knowledge of civil works procurement procedures prevalent in State
and Central Governments. Once the work is awarded, at every stage of execution
specialized technical knowledge is required for execution, quality control and
supervision of work. In spite of the above, aspects of transparency and
accountability have been given due attention  and  the programme provides for
the following: (i) Transparency: Before the work is started, full information about
the work, name of executing  agency and name of contractor along with date of
start and stipulated date of completion  is required to be displayed on every
work site. With a view to provide full information about various aspects of
construction and workmanship, Citizen Information Board is also required to be
installed on  every work site giving full information about the type of material
being used in the construction giving details of quantities and requirements of
workmanship in local language and in a manner which can be understood by the
local villagers; (ii) Proactive Role of Public Representatives: In the interest of
total transparency and with a view to ensure pro-active role of public
representatives, the States have been advised to organize time  bound inspection
of road works with local public representatives. The Superintending Engineer,
Executive Engineer and Assistant Engineer are   required to coordinate the joint
inspection/visit of the MP and Zilla Pramukh once in six months, the MLA and
Chairperson of Intermediate panchayat once in three months and the Sarpanch
once in two months duration  respectively to selected road works in respective
areas; and (iii) A three tier quality mechanism is in place to ensure quality of the
work. While the work is in progress, the public is free to indicate issues regarding
quality of works during the inspections by independent quality  monitors, State
Quality Monitors and National Quality Monitors (NQMs).  Apart from these
measures, a pilot project has been taken up in Karnataka  and Orissa with the
involvement of local NGOs for sample audit exercise  and citizens monitoring of
PMGSY projects. Based on the findings of this project, decision would be taken
to formulate appropriate methodology for social audit of PMGSY projects
involving institutions of Panchayati Raj and Civil Society Organisations."
8. The Committee take note of the various steps that have been taken by the
Ministry of Rural Development for incorporating the Social Audit in the
implementation of PMGSY on the lines of NREGA and expect that these  measures
are adequate and effective. They also express the hope that the Ministry would pursue
the matter in the right earnest for strengthening the implementation of quality
management mechanism. They would also like to be apprised about the status of
progress made in respect of the pilot project regarding Social Audit which had been
taken up in the States of Karnataka and Orissa with the involvement of local NGOs
within one month from the date of presentation of their Report. They would also
specifically like the Government to reinforce the monitoring system to ensure

5
transparency  and accountability so as to check corruption in implementation of the
scheme. The Committee also take note of the steps that have been taken by the
Government with regard to prevention of corruption in implementation of PMGSY
and would like to be apprised of the outcome of these measures. The Committee would
also like to be apprised of the outcome of the comprehensive review of the work
carried out by "National Quality Monitors".
B. Non-accomplishment of the set targets
Recommendation (Sl. No. 5—Para No. 167)
9. The Committee's examination of the subject had revealed that the Ministry did
not fix the annual targets for each State for new connectivity and as a result there were
several hindrances in the successful implementation of the Scheme. While concluding
that it was the Ministry rather than the States that lacked the will for implementation,
the Committee, had recommended that the Ministry should gear up its machinery for
granting approval required to the level of the Ministry that are impeding the proper
implementation of the Scheme.
10. Apprising the Committee about the measures taken by them in this regard, the
Ministry in their Action Taken Note have stated as under:
"The Ministry might have erred in its judgment initially, while fixing the time
limits for new connectivity of 1000+ and 500+ habitations. However, it has realized
and based on the implementing capacity of the States, the funding has been
enhanced and systems have been put in place to sanction projects.
Sl. Financial Year Value of proposals Length of proposals
No. cleared cleared
(in Rs. Crore) (Kms.)
1. 2004-05 1830.29 7564.73
2. 2005-06 9108.17 38335.122
3. 2006-07 19426.19 62118.385
4. 2007-08 23020.18 74902.60
5. 2008-09 (August '08) 11256.15 29995.28
The Ministry has taken significant measures for streamlining the process project
clearance, as a result of which the volume of projects cleared has substantially increased.


6
Project Clearance
11. The Committee note that in pursuance of their recommendation, the Ministry
have enhanced the funding based on the implementing capacity of the States and steps
have also been taken to streamline the process of clearing the project. The Committee,
however, find that the reply of the Ministry is silent about the accomplishment of the
targets as per the schedule set under the Scheme. Obviously, in the absence of
information with regard to achievement of the targets, the evaluation of the ongoing
projects is bound to suffer. Therefore, the Committee reiterate their earlier
recommendation that the Ministry should gear up the available machinery to ensure
that targets set under the Scheme are accomplished as per schedule. While fixing
the targets under the Scheme care should be taken to ensure that it is not demand
driven or discretion driven and is based on merit and ground realities. The Committee
expect that the Ministry would look into this vital area with a view to ensure effective
monitoring and evaluation of PMGSY.
C. Appropriate identification of habitations and realistic estimation of the length
and cost of new connectivity
Recommendation (Sl. No. 6—Para No. 168)
12. The Committee in their 72nd Report had noted that appropriate identification
of habitations, realistic estimation of the length and cost of new connectivity as well as
correct estimation of the work load involved for upgradation of the existing roads are
the pre-requisites for success of the Scheme and any flaw in this process will only
defeat the very objective of the Scheme. Therefore, the Committee had emphasised the
need to identify the correct number of habitations that are awaiting rural connectivity
as well as proper measurement of the length of road required for new connectivity and
also upgradation of existing roads, so as to ensure that adequate funds are tied up and
requisite targets set for the Scheme are achieved within the stipulated time period.
13. The Ministry of Rural Development in their Action Taken Note have merely
stated that on the basis of latest data obtained from the States, the Ministry have
firmed up the figures of habitation and connectivity.
14. The Committee are constrained to note that the Ministry have not addressed
the issue regarding appropriate identification of habitation, realistic estimation of
the length and cost of new connectivity as well as correct estimation of the work load
involved for upgradation of the existing roads as recommended by them in their
72nd Report. The Committee have been merely informed by the Ministry that  on the
basis of latest data obtained from the States, they have firmed up the figures of
habitation and connectivity. Obviously, the Ministry have not acted with all the
seriousness that is required. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation and would like to be apprised of the measures/concrete action taken
in this regard within one month's time from the date of presentation of their Report.
The Committee also find that the Action Taken Note is completely silent on the steps
taken by the Ministry regarding correct identification of the number of habitations

7
that are awaiting rural connectivity. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the
Ministry should channelise all their energies to identify the unconnected habitations.
This would enable the Ministry to have reliable detabase and ensure that adequate
funds are made available in time for the implementation of the scheme.
D. Checking of misappropriation/misutilisation of funds by State Governments
Recommendation (Sl. No. 11—Para No. 173)
15. In their 72th Report, the Committee had noted instances of incorrect financial
reporting in respect of the expenditure incurred under the Scheme in some States. The
Committee, therefore, had recommended that in future Ministry should ensure suitable
penal measures are taken to check misappropriation/misutilisation of funds by State
Governments under report to the nodal Ministry. The Committee had also desired that
the Ministry submit a detailed report indicating the precise action taken on each of the
specific cases mentioned by the Audit.
16. The Ministry of Rural Development in their Action Taken Note have stated as
under:
"In Accordance with the recommendation of the Committee, Arunachal Pradesh,
Jammu and Kashmir, Meghalaya and Mizoram have been advised to fix
responsibility in the cases mentioned by Audit in its report (Para 4.3.2.4) on
misreporting by the States."
17. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry as no conclusive
action has been taken on their recommendation. The Ministry were just content with
giving advice to the defaulting State Governments to fix responsibility and no concrete
action on each of the specific cases appears to have been initiated to take the matter to
its logical conclusion, The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation that the Ministry should take suitable deterrent action against the
defaulting State Governments pertaining to irregularities including corruption in
the implementation of the Scheme. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
conclusive action taken by the Ministry in this regard within three months from the
presentation of the Report.
E . Creation of a comprehensive GIS data based on Rural Road Information System
Recommendation (Sl. No. 12—Para No. 174)
18. Expressing their dissatisfaction over the failure of the Ministry to monitor the
delays and deficiencies in preparation of District Rural Road Plan (DRRP) and Core
Network by several States, the Committee had recommended that necessary steps
should be take for cutting delays and reconciling the data prepared at various levels
and also rectify other deficiencies to ensure that appropriate action is taken for arriving
at an accurate and reliable data of unconnected habitations. The Committee had also
recommended that a comprehensive GIS data base of rural roads Information System
should be created for each State which can be shared at different levels and by different
agencies involved in construction and maintenance of rural roads. They had also
desired that a "Road Maintenance Management System" may also be developed
using the GIS data base, which would enable in sustaining the road for a longer time
with minimal efforts.

8
19. The Ministry of Rural Development in their Action Taken Note have inter alia
stated as under:
"Necessary steps have been taken by the Ministry to firm up the data of
unconnected habitations and freeze the same for further use. As regards the
development of GIS database for rural roads, the Ministry has initiated the
development of stand alone and web based GIS database for Rural Roads
Information System and selected Rajasthan and Himachal Pradesh as pilot States.
The system development is entrusted to CDAC and refinement is being done
based on the user feedback. In the meantime, all the States have been advised to
initiate steps to go in for GIS Database Management System, which can be
effectively used for Maintenance Management."
20. The Committee are satisfied to note that in pursuance to their recommendation,
a number of steps have been taken by the Ministry for streamlining and revamping to
check the delays and deficiencies in preparation of District Rural Road Plan and
Core Network by several States. The Committee also note that the Ministry have
taken initiative for development of a GIS data base for "Rural Roads Information
System" in Rajasthan and Himachal Pradesh as pilot States. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the outcome of the implementation of the pilot project and action
taken for extending the project in respect of other States.

SER5\F\REPORT 2009\1229LS\1229LS
9
CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
Rural connectivity assumes critical importance in rural development as it promotes
access to economic and social services and facilitates the growth of rural economy.
Improved connectivity reduces the cost of transportation of farm input and output,
promotes diversification of crops and creation of non-farm employment opportunities
in rural areas. With a view to give much needed fillip to rural development, the
Government of India based on the recommendation of National Rural Roads
Development Committee decided to undertake a massive Scheme for construction of
rural roads known as the "Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)" on
25th December, 2000 under the Ministry of Rural Development. As a departure from the
earlier rural road Schemes, PMGSY is a landmark project as it being implemented as a
100 per cent Centrally Funded Scheme. The primary objective of the Pradhan Mantri
Gram Sadak Yojana is to provide connectivity by way of all weather roads (with necessary
culverts and cross-drainage structures operable throughout the year) to the
unconnected habitations in the rural areas, in such a way that habitations with a
population of 1000 persons and above were initially aimed to be covered in three years
(2000-2003) and all unconnected habitations with a population of 500 persons and
above by the end of the Tenth Five Year Plan Period (2007). For the Hill States (North-
East, Sikkim, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Uttaranchal) and the Desert Areas
(as identified in the Desert Development Programme) as well as the Tribal areas
(Schedule V), the objective was to connect habitations with a population of 250 persons
and above. The Scheme not only focused on constructions of new roads but also on
upgradation of the existing roads to the prescribed standards. Detailed Guidelines
were issued to all the States for the implementation of PMGSY and also for identifying
State Nodal Agencies, Executing Agencies and Programme Implementation Units. Further,
the Guidelines of the Scheme envisaged the setting up of State Level Standing
Committees for monitoring and coordinating programme implementation. It also provides
details for project preparation, scrutiny, tendering, execution, quality management,
monitoring of the project, maintenance as well as procedures for fund flows.
[Sl. No. 1, Part II, Para 163 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
No Comment. Factual statement
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]

10
Recommendation (Serial No. 2)
Examination of the Scheme by the Committee has revealed several deficiencies in
its implementation. It was found that only 33,875 (24 per cent) of the initially targeted
1.41 lakh habitations (revised to 1.73 lakh in March 2005) under the Scheme were
provided connectivity up to March, 2005. The funds mobilized between 2000 and 2005
were Rs. 12,293 crore, which was only around 30 per cent of the estimated requirement
of Rs. 41,571 crore up to March 2005, going by the initial estimate of Rs. 58,200 crore for
seven years. Funds amounting to Rs. 312.34 crore or 19.58 per cent of the test checked
expenditure were diverted or parked in unauthorized deposits or spent on unapproved/
inadmissible items of works. Works were executed by the States without conforming to
the standard design and specifications prescribed in the Rural Roads Manual. The
quality control mechanism was not adequately operationalised which led to the roads
constructed deviating from the prescribed specifications. An Online Management and
Monitoring System (OMMS) introduced in November 2002 was beset with deficiencies
and problems of software, absence of validation checks, defective data entry, etc. The
Committee's findings are dealt with at length in the succeeding paragraphs.
[Sl. No. 2, Part II, Para 164 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Detailed replies given in the subsequent paras.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 3)
The Committee have noted the concern expressed by the Prime  Minister regarding
corruption in Rural Development Programmes and are not convinced by the plea of the
Ministry that Prime Minister's comments did not include the roads constructed under
PMGSY. The Committee are unable to appreciate the sophistry in the interpretation
imputed by the Ministry to the Prime Minister's comments which on a plain reading
clearly indicates that roads constructed under PMGSY was also included in the ambit
of his public statement. The Committee, therefore, urge upon the Ministry to heed to
the concern expressed by the Prime Minister and introduce methods and techniques
to curb corruption in PMGSY . In this context, the Committee would also like to refer to
the modalities of social audit incorporated in the Guidelines issued by the Ministry of
Rural Development in the context of implmentation of NREGA Scheme. The methodology
of social audit envisages in the Guidelines of NREGA, if replicated in respect fo PMGSY ,
the Committee feel, would act as an important safeguard against corruption by the
implementing agencies at the village and block level.
[Sl. No. 3, Part II, Para 165 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry has taken due note on the concerns expressed by the Hon'ble
Prime Minister and has recognized the need for further strengthening the implementation

11
of quality management mechanism. Consequent to observations by audit and concerns
expressed by Hon'ble Prime Minister, the lack of quality bench marks and gaps in
quality assurance were recognized as major reasons for corruption in Rural Roads
Construction and it was felt that continuous efforts to strengthen quality assurance
supplemented by transparency and accountability would greatly help in curbing
corruption. Accordingly, the following steps have been taken:
1. Mandatory quality control tests on material and workmanship through
establishment of field laboratories was already provided, however, now all
the States have been directed to ensure that first running bill of the
contractors is not paid unless the field laboratories are established and
mandatory tests are conducted.
2. The States have been directed to ensure inspection of all the works at
least at three stages of execution by State Quality Monitors.
3. The implementation of first and second tier of quality mechanism is now
being closely monitored quarterly by the Ministry and States are being
indicated of the lapses on a regular basis.
4. A comprehensive review of implementation of third tier of quality
mechanism has been carried out and inspection of National Quality
Monitors has been made more objective based on festing of material and
workmanship. Process for continous and independent review of the
performance of NQM has also been put in place.
Having regard to the recommendations of the Committee, the modalities of Social
Audit in the context of implementation of NREGA Scheme have been examined. NREGA
is a programme aimed at providing employment to the rural poor. Under this programme,
the provisions for public disclosure of wages paid to the beneficiaries have been made
to enable the citizen to know about their entitlements as per  programme guidelines.
With a view to have transparency, the information about the work is required to be
displayed in local languages. With a view to have participation of all affected persons
under process of decision making and validation, the process of consultation with
affected persons has been built in the system. The Social Audit under the programme
includes public vigilance and verification of various stages of implementation, i.e.,
registration of families, distribution of Job Cards, receipt of works application, selection
of public work to be taken up in a particular Gram Panchayat, development and approval
of technical estimates and issuance of work order, allotment of work, implementation
and supervision of work, payment of wages, payment of unemployment allowance,
evaluation of completed work. To ensure accountability, elected representative and
Government functionaries have been made responsible to answer questions concerning
affected persons. Findings of Social Audit are reported back to the people including
action taken with a view to ensure redressal.
Under PMGSY, all the processes like planning, selection of alignment of road,
topographical and material surveys, geometrical & structural design and preparation
of DPRs, procurement of works, execution and management of works, quality control,
accounting and monitoring involves specialized technical knowledge. The works under

12
PMGSY are tendered through transparent bidding process generally at State level or at
the district level, wherein, the process requires knowledge of civil works procurement
procedures prevalent in State and Central Government. Once the work is awarded, at
every stage of execution specialized technical knowledge is required for execution,
quality control and supervision of work. In spite of the aboye, aspects of transparency
and accountability have been given due attention and the programme provides for the
following:
(a) Transparency: Before the work is started, full information about the work,
name of executing agency and name of contractor along with date of start
and stipulated date of completion is required to be displayed on every
work site. With a veiw to provide full information about various aspects of
construction and workmanship, Citizen Information Board is also required
to be installed on every work site giving full information about the type of
material being used in the construction given details of quantities and
requirements of workmanship in local language and in a manner which can
be understood by the local villagers.
(b) Proactive Role of Public Representatives: In the interest of total
transparency and with a view to ensure pro-active role of public
representatives, the States have been advised to organize time bound
inspection of road works with local public representatives. The
Superintending Engineer, Executive Engineer and Assistant Engineer are
required to coordinate the joint inspection/visit of the MP and Zilla
Pramukh once in six months, the MLA and Chairperson of Intermediate
Panchayat  once in three months and the Sarpanch once in two month
duration respectively to selected road works in respective areas.
(c) A three tier quality mechanism is in place to ensure quality of the work.
While the work is in progress, the public is free to indicate issues regarding
quality of works during the inspections by independent quality monitors
State Quality Monitors and National Quality Monitors (NQMs).
Apart from these measures, a pilot project has been taken up in Karnataka and
Orissa  with the involvement of local NGOs for sample audit exercise and citizens
monitoring of PMGSY projects. Based on the findings of this project, decision would
be taken to formulate appropriate methodology for social audit of PMGSY projects
involving institutions of Panchayati Raj and Civil Society Organisations.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 7)
The Committee note that the only source of funding for financing the Scheme
identified was 50 per cent of the Cess collected on High Speed Diesel (HSD) which was
earmarked for the Scheme that was estimated to yield Rs. 2500 crore annually

13
aggregating to Rs. 17,500 crore over the seven year period up to March, 2007. The gap
in funding was proposed to be bridged through borrowing from external lending
agencies like the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank. However, firm proposals
or commitments were available only to the extent of Rs. 4000 crore till March 2005. The
Ministry of Rural Development in co-ordination with the Ministry of Finance signed
agreements for generation of additional resources to the extent of US$ 400 million
(Rs. 2000 crore) each with the World Bank and the Asian Development Bank in October
and November 2004 respectively for funding the projects in six States viz. in
Chhattisgarh, Himachal Pradesh, Jharkhand, Madhya Pradesh, Rajasthan and Uttar
Pradesh. The Committee note that unreliability of data and subsequent reports from
States made the Ministry revise in March 2005 the funding requirement to Rs. 1,32,150
crore (an increase of 127 per cent over December 2000 estimate) to cover the revised
number of 1.73 lakh habitations (22.7 per cent increase). However, the funds mobilized
between 2000 and 2005 were only Rs. 12,293 crore, which was only 30 per cent of the
proportionate estimated requirement of Rs. 41,571 crore up to March 2005, going by
the initial estimate of Rs. 58,200 crore for seven years. The amount actually released
was only Rs. 11,871.32 crore (29 per cent). Thus the resources that could to be generated
were grossly inadequate to meet the estimated funding requirement. The Committee
do not accept the Ministry's explanation that at the time of launching of the Scheme,
dedicated agencies for planning, construction, supervision and quality control, were
not available either at the Central, State or District Levels and there were also serious
constraints on the contracting capacity available in the States. The Committee are of
the considered opinion that before taking up a Scheme like PMGSY , the funding
requirement as well as contracting and absorption capacity of States to implement the
Scheme ought to have assessed realistically in order to give the Scheme a realistic
chance of succeeding and delivering the expected outcome. The Ministry have informed
that the Committee that they have made earnest efforts to evolve appropriate systems,
institutions and procedures, both at the Central and State Level to build up the
institutional capacity as well as the contracting capacity in the States. Up to the end of
the 10th Five Year Plan (March 2007) Rs. 22,786.62 crore has been allocated under the
Scheme, out of which Rs. 19,508.12 crore has been mobilized from Cess and Rs. 2,480.50
crore from external aided projects of the World Bank and Asian Development Bank.
The Ministry of Finance have also accepted in principle for World Bank Loan of $500
million. In addition, mobilization of Rs. 16,500 crore for construction of rural roads
under Bharat Nirman through NABARD has been approved. The Committee while
taking note of the steps taken by the Ministry for the mobilization of resources, desire
that there is no let up in the efforts for mobilization of funds. The funds so mobilized
should be fully utilized for the remaining years under the Scheme so that the targets are
achieved within the stipulated time period.
[Sl. No. 7, Part II, Para 169 of  Seventy-second report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As the Ministry had placed before the Committee earlier, it is continuing in its
efforts for mobilization of funds. As mentioned earlier, while Cess on HSD was the only
source of funding of the programme at the time of its launching, resources were mobilized
from external funding agencies i.e. the World Bank and Asian Development Bank. Two
loan agreements were signed with the Asian Development Bank for US $400 million

14
and US $750 million and with the World Bank for mobilizing SU $400 million for the
scheme. An agreement has been signed with NABARD for Rs. 16,500 crore. Out of this
Rs. 4,500 crore were drawn in 2007-08 and it is proposed to draw Rs. 7,000 crore during
the current year.
There has been a marked increase in the allocation and releases over the last four
years as can be seen from the statement below:—
Y ear Allocation (Rs. in crore) Releases (Rs. in crore)
2004-05 2220.00 2460.71
2005-06 4235.00 4219.99
2006-07 6237.62 6237.61
2007-08 11000.00 11000.02
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC(Vol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 8)
The Committee have noted that as against the total estimated requirement of
Rs. 1.32 lakh crore, Rs. 22,404 crore have been released up to the end of the Tenth Five
Year Plan and they have projected an outlay of Rs. 81,800 crore (including Rs. 20,575
crore from Cess, Rs. 10,000 crore from the externally aided projects, Rs. 16,500 crore
from NABARD and Rs. 34,726 crore as budgetary support) for the Eleventh Five Year
Plan for the Scheme. However, the Planning Commission is yet to finalize the size of the
Eleventh Five Year Plan. The Committee also note that Bharat Nirman is a subset of
PMGSY in which on priority, villages having population of 1,000 or more in plain areas
and habitations having 500 or more of population in hill States, deserts and tribal areas
are targeted to be connected by 2009. Accordingly, 66,802 habitations have been
planned out to be covered with 1.46 lakh kilometres of new link roads under rural road
component. Besides, 1.94 lakh kilometres of existing through routes will be upgraded
and renewed. The total investment under Bharat Nirman has been estimated at
Rs. 48,000 crore. The Committee further note that during the first two years 2005-07 of
Bharat Nirman, Rs. 10,464 crore have been provided, which constitute around 22 percent
of the total investment and 12,841 habitations have been provided new connectivity
with 39,477 kilometres of new link roads and 50,056 kilometres of existing through
routes have been upgraded or renewed during 2005-07. In this regard, the Ministry
have informed the Committee that major States with large connectivity deficits have
demonstrated a substantial increase in absorption capacity during 2006-07. However,
the implementation capacity still needs to be further scaled up in some of the key
States which account for the large portion of the unconnected villages in the country.
The Committee are not satisfied with the progress under the Scheme which requires
corrective measures for its speedy implementation. The Committee strongly feel that
there is an imperative need for full participation by all States in the implementation of

15
the Scheme and also setting of realistic targets in alignment with realistic funding
requirements so that the Scheme is completed within the stipulated time-period,
otherwise PMGSY will remain expenditure oriented rather than result oriented Scheme.
[Sl. No. 8, Part II, Para 170 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As the Ministry placed before the Committee, several measures were taken to
increase the capacity of the States. As a result of the measures, the absorption capacity
has increased in financial and physical terms as can be seen from the table below.
Realistic targets have been set commensurate with the funding. The Ministry will
continue to make further efforts in this direction in consultation with the States.
Y ear Length Completed Expenditure (in Habitation
(in KM) crores of Rupees)
2005-06 22,891 4092 8202
2006-07 30,710 7304 10801
2007-08 41231 10619 11336
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol.III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 9)
The Committee note that out of the total funds of Rs. 11,871.32 crore released upto
2004-05 under the Scheme, the expenditure reported during the said period was
Rs. 9,421.39 crore (79.36 percent). A test check of expenditure of Rs. 1,594.98 crore by
Audit revealed that funds amounting to Rs. 312.34 crore (19.58 percent) were diverted,
parked in unauthorized accounts or not utilized for the intended purpose. The Committee
have noted that in Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala and Nagaland an
amount of Rs. 7.20 crore was spent on the construction/maintenance of buildings,
annual repairs and maintenance work, maintenance of the rural roads, which were
constructed under the State Plan Schemes and water supply lines etc. In Arunachal
Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal an
amount of Rs. 5.85 crore was spent on administrative charges etc. which was not
permitted under the Scheme. The Ministry have informed the Committee that out of
Rs. 19.39 crore that was stated to be diverted, Rs. 8.78 crore which was not permissible
had been recovered. The Committee further note that an amount of Rs. 208.73 crore
was placed in Civil deposits, fixed deposits and term deposits and not kept in single
bank account as required under the Programme Guidelines. In this regard the Ministry
have informed the Committee that during the first two phases of the Scheme, the funds
were released to the State Governments/DRDAs and it was only after January 2003 i.e.
Phase- III onwards that the creation of State Rural Road Development Agency (SRRDA)
was insisted upon and funds were released to its single bank account and that the

16
transfer of funds from the DRDAs/DPIUs to the single bank account took time in some
States. It was also stated that out of the Rs. 21.15 crore pointed out by Audit, Rs. 16.87
crore have been transferred to the SRRDA account and recovery of Rs. 17.86 lakhs is
under progress. From the facts stated above it is evident that there was failure on the
part of Ministry of Rural Development in the initial phases to properly monitor the
utilization of funds under the Scheme. The Committee are distressed to note that even
though the Scheme was introduced way back in 2000, the Ministry have not yet been
able to evolve any mechanism for ensuring proper utilization of the funds. The Ministry
were blissfully unaware of the diversion of funds until they were pointed out by Audit
and the subject was taken up for detailed examination by the Committee. Even now, the
Ministry have not been able to fully recover the diverted amounts as pointed out by
Audit. This indicates a callous and apathetic attitude of the Ministry in exercising
financial accountability in the utilization of funds. The Committee while deprecating
the laxity shown by the Ministry in this regard recommended that all the cases of
financial irregulations should be thoroughly probed into and appropriate action taken
against the persons concerned for their acts of omission and commission.
[Sl. No. 9, Part II, Para 171 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The 19.58% (Rs. 312.34 crores) of the funds as mentioned above as diverted/kept in
unauthorized accounts and not utilized for the intended purpose includes the
following:—
l Diverted—Rs. 19.39 crore.
l Funds lying unutilized—Rs. 21.15 crore.
l Overlapping of works—Rs. 7.84 crore.
l Execution of works not covered under Core network—Rs. 11.90 crore.
l Execution of inadmissible works—Rs. 110.60 crore.
l Irregular charge of tender premium to programme fund—Rs. 44.91 crore.
l In admissible lead charges—Rs. 13.76 crore.
l Execution of unapproved items of works—Rs. 48.80 crore.
l Undue benefit to contractor—Rs. 33.99 crore.
As directed by the Committee, all the above cases were examined by the Ministry
and action as detailed below has been taken:—
1. Diversion of Funds—In case of Andhra Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir,
Kerala and Tamil Nadu, the States have been advised to fix responsibility
for using PMGSY funds for purposes not permitted under the guidelines.
In case of Arunachal Pradesh, Himachal Pradesh and Nagaland, funds are
still lying with the DRDA's. The States have been advised to fix
responsibility and the amounts shall be recovered within a period of two
months.

17
2. Funds lying unutilized—Out of an amount of Rs. 21.15 crores as mentioned
in Audit, only one case, Karbi Anglong (Rs. 2.66 lakhs) in Assam is pending.
The State has been advised to fix responsibility and the amount shall be
recovered within a period of two months.
3. Overlapping/duplication of works—The replies of the States have been
examined and in case of Nagaland, the State has been advised to fix
responsibility.
4. Works not covered under the Core Network—On the basis of the replies
furnished by the States, no action is required/proposed. The cases as
mentioned pertain to the period prior to the finalisation of the Core Network.
5. Execution of inadmissible works—
Inadmissible connectivity —Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Meghalaya,
Madhya Pradesh, Nagaland, Orissa, Punjab and Sikkim have been advised
to fix responsibility for the omission under intimation to the Ministry.
Multiconnectivity— In all the cases pointed out by Audit, except
Tamil Nadu, the works pertain to Phase I and II when the Core Network
was not in place. During these two phases instances of multi-connectivity
have been found. In Tamil Nadu there is a case of multi-connectivity in the
IIIrd phase and the State has been advised to fix responsibility for the
lapse.
Repairs—The cases of 'repairs' pointed out by audit are actually cases of
upgradation of through routes which is eligible for funding under the
guidelines.
6. Irregular charge of tender premium to programme funds—No action is
required in the cases pointed in Audit as they are covered under the
guidelines. In case of Madhya Pradesh and Tripura, tender premium has
been borne by the States.
7. In admissible lead charges—After examination, Punjab and Sikkim have
been advised to fix responsibility for the lapse. In the case of the replies
have been found acceptable.
8. Undue benefit to contractors—All the cases as pointed out in Audit have
been examined and as advised by the Committee, Madhya Pradesh,
Meghalaya and Sikkim have been advised to fix responsibility.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]

18
Recommendation (Serial No. 10)
As per the Programme Guidelines, District Rural Development Agencies (DRDAs)
are required to transfer the unutilized funds to the bank account maintained by the
State Level Agency (SLA). However, the Committee note that in Assam, Rs. 9.99 crore
received against Phase-I works was lying unutilized with the respective DRDAs/DPIUs.
In Goa, Rs. 5 crore released during 2001-02 was lying with DRDA as of March 2005. In
Tamil Nadu, savings of Rs. 3.60 crore from the funds released for Phase-I work remained
with the State Government/DRDA. In Uttaranchal, the Executive Engineer, Temporary
Division, PWD, Sahiya (Kalsi) Dehradun, kept Rs. 4.32 crore received from DRDA
Dehradun in a non-interest bearing account which led to a loss of Rs. 5.33 lakh towards
interest. Similarly, an amount of Rs. 7.94 crore was retained by 3 DPIUs (Saharanpur,
Allahabad and Chandauli) for 30 months, 33 months and 22 months respectively in
Uttar Pradesh. In West Bengal, Rs. 4.08 crore was lying in the State accounts in four
districts (Uttar Dinajpur, Bankura, Bardhaman and Malda) as of March 2005. The
Ministry have admitted that they are aware of funds lying with DRDAs/DPIUs which
have not been transferred to the State Rural Road Development Agencies. The
Committee have also been apprised that out of Rs. 31.5 crore lying with DRDAs/DPIUs
Rs. 26.96 crore had been transferred to the SRRDA account. The Committee are deeply
concerned over the poor utilization of the funds allotted for PMGSY over the years and
unauthorized retention of unutilized funds by DRDAs/DPIUs. The Committee are
unable to understand why DRDAs, which were to be merged with Zilla Parishad as per
orders of the Ministry in 2001, still continue to exist as separate entities. This clearly
indicate the failure of Ministry of Rural Development as the nodal authority in
rationalizing the system for implementation of Rural Development Programmes in
conforming with Constitutional provisions regarding all implementation to be done by
Panchayats. The Committee observe that non-utilization of funds by the DRDA/DPIUs/
States would lead to slippage in the targets fixed and as a consequence PMGSY may
suffer to a great extent in achieving its avowed objectives of increasing rural connectivity.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the specific cases as reported by Audit
should be further enquired into and concrete steps taken to ensure that the amount
sanctioned for PMGSY are disbursed and utilized for the intended purpose. They also
recommend that the Ministry should seek and explanation from the defaulting States
for the unauthorized retention of unutilized fund by their respective DRDAs/DPIUs
and if necessary withhold funds to ensure that action to fix responsibilities on the
concerned authorities responsible for such gross financial mismanagement/irregularities
is taken by defaulting States. The Ministry should take all possible measures to ensure
that the accounts of DPIUs are maintained properly and reconciled periodically with
respective banks and got audited regularly.
[Sl. No. 10, Part II, Para 172 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As already mentioned in the reply in to recommendation 9, the amount outstanding
in case of Assam will be recovered in two months.

19
The accounts of the SRRDA/PIU are audited by Chartered Accountants appointed
for this purpose. Bank reconciliation is an integral part of the accounting system and
is reviewed regularly. The Audited Balance Sheets sent by the States are reviewed and
sample test check of records of the PIU's/SRRDA is also carried by NRRDA/MoRD.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 12)
With a view to achieve the objective of the Scheme, the States were required to
prepare a master plan for the rural roads, first at the block level in accordance with the
Manual for the preparation of DRRP. The plans of all the blocks in a district were to be
integrated into a district level master plan called the District Rural Road Plan (DRRP)
after approval of the intermediate and district panchayats. The plan indicated the
position of connectivity of habitations with the existing roads and the proposed road
network in the district which should, inter-alia, contain a comprehensive inventory of
all rural roads, link route, through route, other district roads, major district roads, state
and national highways. Based on the position of connectivity of habitations in the
DRRP, the core network (CNW) indicating the shortest single connectivity was required
to be prepared. The Committee are constrained to note that there were several instances
where District Rural Road Plans were delayed or prepared without proper survey
which led to incorrect data of the existing road network and unconnected habitations
in the Core Network (CNW). The Committee note that, in Arunachal Pradesh, the CNW
was prepared and sent to National Rural Road Development Agency only in January,
2005 resulting in delay in submission of proposals for Phase III as well as delay in
providing connectivity to 104 villages. In Jammu and Kashmir, the CNW was not
prepared in three districts (Jammu, Kathua and Rajouri) and in Karnataka; the DRRP
was prepared and approved only between January and July 2003. In Kerala, as per the
State level consolidated DRRP prepared between November 2000 and August 2001,
there were 441 identified unconnected habitations, whereas the District Road Plan
prepared by the National Transportation Planning and Research Centre (NTPRC), had
identified 5677 unconnected habitations during 2000-01. In respect of Nagaland, as per
the DRRP prepared in June-August 2001, out of 95 unconnected habitations, only
84 habitations were eligible for coverage under the Scheme. However, the CNW prepared
in December 2002 indicated that there were 215 unconnected habitations, of which 189
fell under the eligibility criteria of the Scheme. In Sikkim, 92 habitations each with
population less that 250 persons were included in the CNW whereas in West Bengal,
the data on the number of habitations in the DRRP and the CNW differed significantly
between the reports submitted to the Ministry in October, 2004 and March 2005. The
Ministry hence admitted that in some cases the inordinate delays in the preparation of
DRRP were mainly due to the institutional arrangement available in the State. However,
separate Guidelines were circulated to all the States for the preparation of District Rural
Roads Plan (DRRP) and identification of Core Network (CNW). It was further stated
the Ministry also apprised the Committee that Detailed Engineering Surveys were not

20
prescribed at the time of preparing the Core Network and States were required to get
them prepared based on  inventorization of existing roads and the roads proposed-
along the existing tracks. Further, the proposals for Phase-III were cleared only after
the submission of provisional Core Network data and this has affected States like
Arunachal Pradesh, Bihar, Manipur etc. who could not get their projects cleared in time
owing to the absence of finalized Core Network. The Committee while expressing their
dissatisfaction over the failure of the Ministry to monitor the delays and deficiencies
in preparation of DRRP and Core Network by several States recommend that necessary
steps should be taken for cutting delays and reconciling the data prepared at various
levels and rectifying other deficiencies so as to ensure that appropriate action is taken
for arriving at an accurate and reliable data of unconnected habitations. The Committee
also recommended that a comprehensive GIS data base of rural roads Information
System should be created for each State which can be shared at different levels and by
different agencies involved in construction and maintenance of rural roads. This will
help in proper planning and allocation of resources and location of various socio-
economic facilities for an integrated rural development. Further, using the information
available at the road network layer, it will be easy to estimate the construction of cost
of selected links and funds required for providing all-weather road access to all villages.
A Road Maintenance Management System may also be developed using the GIS
database, which will enable to sustaining the road for a longer time with minimal
efforts.
[Sl No. 12, Part II, Para 174 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Necessary steps have been taken by the Ministry to firm up the data of unconnected
habitations and freeze the same for further use. As regards the development of GIS
database for rural roads, the Ministry has initiated the development of stand alone and
web based GIS database for Rural Roads Information System and selected Rajasthan
and Himachal Pradesh as pilot States. The system development is entrusted to CDAC
and refinement is being done based on the user feedback. In the meantime, all the State
have been advised to initiate steps to. go in for GIS. Database Management System,
which can be effectively used for Maintenance Management.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No., P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 13)
The Committee regret to find on scrutiny of records that there were several cases
of overlapping or duplication in the construction of rural roads in the States of Arunachal
Pradesh, Chhattisgarh and Nagaland. In this regard, Ministry have informed that the
selection of the roads and its approval by competent authority (State Level Standing
Committee chaired by the Chief Secretary) is the responsibility of State Nodal Ageney,
and the Ministry of Rural Development normally does not check the proposals with a

21
special reference to roads sanctioned by the States under different programmes, since
the proposals have been vetted and approved at the highest level of State Government.
Though the Committee appreciate the fact that the matter pertains to States,
nevertheless, the Ministry cannot absolve itself totally from its responsibility as the
nodal agency for implementation of the Scheme and pass the blame entirely on the
State Governments. The Committee desire that Ministry of Rural Development should
devise ways and means to verify and cross check the works sanctioned under the
Scheme with that of State PWD Departments before embarking on the execution of the
projects, so that there is no duplicity/overlapping.
[Sl. No. 13, Part II, Para 175 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In accordance with the recommendations of the Committee, the Ministry has now
prescribed guidelines vide its letter dated 23rd July 2008 to all the States that while
submitting the project proposals for sanction, a certificate is to be submitted from the
Executive Agency of the State that the proposal submitted for any road under PMGSY
is not funded/implemented under any other scheme. This mechanism is expected to
eliminate duplicity/overlapping of project proposals in the construction of Rural Roads
under PMGSY .
-Sd-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 14)
As per the guidelines of PMGSY each road work taken up under the Scheme
should form part of the Core Net work (CNW). However, scrutiny of records in the
States revealed that several works that were taken up under the Scheme were either not
included in the CNW or the roads constructed covered additional length beyond the
scope of the CNW on which an expenditure of Rs. 11.90 crore was incurred. The
Ministry have informed the Committee that when the project proposals were cleared
by the Ministry in Phase I&II, the Core Network had not been prepared and, therefore,
many cases of sanctioned roads were not a part of the Core Network. From Phase-III
onwards, a specific check whether the proposed road is a part of the Core Network or
not, both for new connectivity as well as upgradation has been imposed with specific
instructions to the Executing Agencies and State Technical Agencies to certify the
authenticity. Keeping in view the crucial importance of Core-Network, the Committee
urge upon the Government to take up the matter with all seriousness and take appropriate
steps to ensure that all the works taken up under the Scheme invariably form part of the
Core Network given the fact that CNW is considered as the cornerstone in planning
and construction of rural road network.
[Sl. No. 14, Part II, Para 176 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]

22
Action Taken
While giving clearance rigorous checks are being exercised by the Ministry/
NRRDA to ensure that all proposals, either for New Connectivity or for upgradation
are to be selected only from the Core Network of the State.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 16)
The Committee note that the data giving the details of the habitations, which were
connected with seasonal roads were to be included under the Scheme for upgradation
to all weather roads were neither available nor considered for detarmining the extent of
upgradation required. The absence of this data led to the inclusion of upgradation
work without providing any weightage for new connectivity in the Scheme Guidelines.
As a result, more upgradation works were taken up by all the States during the first
three years of implementation for which Rs. 365.44 crore were spent in 12 States,
namely; Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Goa, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Manipur, Nagaland, Rajasthan and West Bengal. Examination of the
records of the Ministry revealed that Rs. 1220.13 crore and Rs. 875.77 crores were
spent on upgradation works while Rs. 597.35 crore and Rs. 4151.10 crore wered spent
on new connectivity during the phase I and II (2000-01 and 2001-03) of the Scheme
respectively. The Committee feel that prioritization of new connectivity would have
helped in achieving the envisaged mid-term objective of providing connectivity to all
habitations with population above 1000 by 2003. However, the Committee regret to
note that prioritization of new connectivity and the limit on upgradation works were
specified only in the revised Guidelines issued in January 2003. As a result of this
delay in incorporating the said provision the objective of the Scheme got hampered in
the initial years leading to diversion of financial resources to upgradation thereby
depriving unconnected habitations from being connected to that extent. In this regard,
the Ministry have informed the Committee that a systematic mechanism in the selection
of roads in each phase have now been put into place and detailed Guidelines have
been given to the States for the preparation of Comprehensive New Connectivity
Priority. List (CNCPL) and Comprehensive Upgradation Priority List (CUPL) from which
the roads for new connectivity and upgradation (respectively) are being selected. The
selection criteria have also been detailed out in the Operations Manual circulated to all
the Project Implementation Units of the State Executing Agencies. The Committee are
further concerned to note that in seven States i.e. Bihar, Jharkhand, Maharashtra,
Mizoram, Orissa, Punjab and West Bengal an expenditure of Rs. 51.48 crore had been
incurred on works for providing connectivity to habitations with lower population
inspite of the habitations with higher population were yet to be provided connectivity.
Though these were not altogether precluded from being taken up under the Scheme,
construction of these roads in the initial phase itself had diluted the primary focus of
the scheme in achieving the desired mid-term objective of covering as many habitations
with higher population as possible. The Committee are of the view that these instances

23
of deviations and deficiencies and violation of norms in implementation of the Scheme
are indicative of ineffectiveness or lack of monitoring on the part of the nodal Ministry.
At this stage, the Committee recommend that concreted steps should be taken to give
priority for providing the new connectivity to the unconnecte habitations and limit the
upgadation work so as to achieve the primary and basic objective of providing
connectivity to unconnected habitations.
[Sl. No. 16, Part II, Para 178 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The objective of the PMGSY programme is to provide all weather farm to market
connectivity. In order to fulfil this Comprehansive New Connectivity Priority List and
Comprehensive Upgradation Priority List are prepared taking district as a unit. Because
of this, the habitations selected for New Connectivity in a particular district may have
a lower population, even though habitations with higher population are still not covered
in other districts. This particular dispensation became necessary to provide
geographaical balance in sanctioning the projects. Also the priority is skipped and
lower order habitations are selected in case of the roads proposed to higher order
habitations have problems of land availability or access to the preparation of DPRs.
Only in such cases habitations with lower population are now being considered for
sanction. Further, as per the Guidelines Panchayat headquarters and notified places of
tourist interest are given connectivity not explicitly considering the population.
In all such cases, the State is required to give specific reasons for selecting a
lower order habitation, while habitations with higher population still exist. The procedure
is put in place for this mechanism in the guidelines and is being monitored.
Under Bharat Nirman announced in February, 2005, targets have been fixed for
New Connectivity and Upgradation for all the States and the same were communicated
to the States. The length under New Connectivity is 1,46,185 km and that for
Upgradation is 1,94,131 km. While proposals from States are being considered, the
targets set with respect to both New Connectivity and Upgradation are kept in mind
while sanctioning the proposed roads. This will ensure a balanced development of
rural road network for fulfilling the objective of providing  farm to market connectivity.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 17)
The Committee are disheartened to note that though the Guidelines (December
2000) stipulate thata well established procedure for tendering through competitive
bidding would be followed, no standard procedure was laid down either in the
Guidelines or separately. Under the revised Guidelines of January 2003, it was envisaged
that all the States would follow the standard bidding procedure prescribed/introduced
by the Ministry of Rural Development or NRRDA, but this was done only in 2003-04.
The Committee also note that due to the absence of a uniform procedure, each State
adopted the procedure which was followed in their respective State during the

24
Phase I and II of the Scheme. Further, even after the introduction of the standard
bidding procedure from 2003-04 onwards, the requirements of the procedure were not
compelled while finalizing the tenders in various States. In Arunachal Pradesh, all
works in respect of the packages approved during Phase-II were executed
departmentally without inviting tenders and there was time overrun as the executing
agencies did not maintain the time schedule for completion of work. In Gujarat, two
works were awarded (2003-04) to a single bidder without competition, at 14.4 and 22 per
cent respectively which was above the estimated cost. In 14 districts of Madhya
Pradesh, the lowest offer was rejected in finalizing the tender for award of works during
2003-04 and 2004-05 on which extra expenditrue of Rs. 2.09 crore was incurred. In
Manipur, out of 33 work orders under Phase-II valuing Rs. 80.67 crore issued by the
State Government between January and December 2003, test check of two districts
(Churachandpur and Bishnupur) revealed that work orders valuing Rs. 17.30 crore
were given to contractors who were selected in an irregular manner without competitive
bidding. In Orissa, the works for three packages were awarded in March and April 2002
to a contractor who had defaulted in construction of a high level bridge work which
was abandoned due to execution of substandard work and therefore, the works so
awarded remained incomplete as of March 2005. In Rajasthan, the Chief Engineer,
PWD, Churu, awarded the work without following the process of competitive bidding
and allowed agency charges @ 7.5 per cent amounting to Rs. 56.98 lakh in contravention
of the Guidelines. In Tamil Nadu, wide publicity was not given which resulted in poor
participaton of contractors in the tenders. In Uttar Pradesh 12 DPIUs awarded contracts
worth Rs. 51.44 crore without giving sufficient publicity with the result that only a
single bidder participated. It was also noticed that in West Bengal, competition could
not be ensured as only two contractors participated in the bidding procedure for
seven packages proposed in Bardhaman, Malda and Darjeeling districts in 2003-04.
The Ministry in their reply have stated that the primary responsibility of execution of
work lies with the State Government and as such micro management of the tendering
process is not envisaged at the level of the Ministry. They have also apprised the
Committee that the standard bidding document is a general template document which
provides for inclusion of State specific issues and therefore, States have been requested
to prepare State specific bidding documents after addressing the issues containd in 36
check list points given for the same. Further the suggestions given by the States are
examined and after the response of National Rural Road Development Agency, they
are adopted at different point of time and majority of the States adopted Standard
Bidding Document during first six months of its prescription and not much time was
taken by States for deciding State Specific issues. The Committee regret to point out
this is yet another instance of casual and lackadaisical attitude displayed by the
Ministry with regard to such an important area relating to tendering process under
PMGSY. Though the Committee appreciate the fact that tendering process is not done
at the Ministry level, nevertheless, the Ministry cannot shirk from its responsibility as
to whether the tender bidding documents prepared by respective States broadly conform
and align with the standard bidding documents prepared and circulated by them to
States for compliance. The instances as pointed out by Audit only reinforces the belief
that no such exercise has been done at the Ministry, which is but regretable. In the
light of the foregoing shortcomings/deficiencies in the tendering process as pointed

25
out, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should evolve a mechanism whereunder
the tender documents/process of the States be examined afresh and monitored
periodically so as to ensure that they broadly conform to the standard bidding document
and that the tendering process of States is fair and uniform across the country.
[Sl. No. 17, Part II, Para 179 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As has been noted by the Committee, the standard bidding procedure was
introduced in 2003-04. The Standard Bidding Document is a general template document
which provided for inclusion of the State specific issues and therefore the States
prepared State Specific Bidding Document after addressing the issues contained in 36
Point Checklist. The State Specific Documents and response to the 36 Point Checklist
were examined in NRRDA, consequent to this process the States adopted Standard
Bidding process.
However, having regard to the recommendations of the Committee and incidents
of irregularities observed in various States in spite of standard bidding process, the
concept of independent procurement audit is being introduced. It is proposed to carry
out procurement audit at periodical intervals, for which modalities are being developed.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC(V ol.III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 18)
As per the Programme Guidelines, the stipulated time limit for completion of
formalities such as issue of tender notice, finalization of tender notice, finalization of
tender and award of works was 120 days from the date of clearance of the project
proposals by the Ministry, failing which the works in question were deemed to be
cancelled. However, Audit scrutiny of records in States revealed that 1623 tenders
were finalized with delays extending upto 25 months in respect of works costing
Rs. 1607.08 crore. The reasons attributed by the Ministry for delays were non-response
to tender calls, rejection of tenders due to higher rates, Parliamentary election etc. It
was also stated that inspite of the Standard Bidding Document stipulating that ordinarily,
time beyond 85 days should not be taken for finalization of tenders, there were still time
overruns taking place in respect of finalization of tenders in some of the States. The
Committee, once again regret to point cut that this is yet another case where lack of
ineffective monitoring on the part of the Ministry contributing to poor performance of
PMGSY. The so called reasons attributed for the delays are just routine in nature.
Obviously, concerted and sincere efforts were not made to finalize the tenders
expeditiously. The Committee cannot but deplore the Ministry of Rural Development
and the concerned State Governments for not making serious attempts for timely
completion of the bidding process. At this stage, the Committee can only urge upon
the Ministry to take up the matter with all seriousness it deserves and make concerted
efforts in consultation and co-operation with the concerned State Governments for

26
expeditious completion of the bidding process so that works are awarded and completed
within the stipulated time period. The Ministry of Rural Development should also take
up the matter with concerned States so as to fix responsibility on the concerned
authorities for inordinate delay in finalization of tenders. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the present status of finalization of tenders, within 3 months from the
presentation of the Report.
[Sl. No. 18, Part II, Para 180 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As pointed out by the Audit, in-spite of stipulated time limit for deciding the
tenders under the programme, delays have taken place in finalization of tenders because
of non-response of tender calls, rejection of tenders due to higher rates and other
reasons beyond the control of the executing agency.
Having regard to the recommendations of the Committee, the States have been
advised to fix up the responsibility for inordinate delay in finalization of tenders. The
States have been advised to closely monitor the delays in tendering every month and
in cases of inordinate delays the action for fixing responsibility be taken.
The present status of finalization of tenders is as given below.
As desired by the Committee, the present status of finalization of tenders is as
given below:—
Road works cleared/No Work awarded Balance work
of packages cleared
28195 25537 2658
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol.III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 19)
The rural roads constructed under the Scheme are required to meet the technical
specification and geometric design standards given in the Rural Roads Manual of the
Indian Roads Congress (IRC). However, the Committee are perturbed to note that road
works were executed with higher specifications such as providing higher carriageway
width of 3.75 metres even when the traffic density was less than 100 vehicles per day.
Use of costlier and richer specification and excess use of bitumen in 3941 works in 18
States was also noticed which resulted in an additional expenditure of Rs. 167.66 crore.
While contesting the Audit observation, the Ministry have informed the Committee
that the Guidelines which were in vogue (2004-2005) have been applied by Audit while
examining projects taken up in Phase I & II. They contended that Para 4.3 of the
programme Guidelines issued in December, 2000 provided that the works are to be
executed as per the technical specifications provided by Ministry of Surface Transport
and Indian Roads Congress (IRC) and with this background, at the start of the

27
Phase-I and II, many of the States have followed these specifications which are primarily
applicable for National Highways or the State specifications. The Ministry further
stated that since the State specifications was found to be acceptable by the Central
Road Research Institute who scrutinized the project for Phase-I, the deviations can be
said to be acceptable as they also meet the technical requirements relating to the
durability and serviceability of the roads. The Committee accepts this explanation of
the Ministry, however, the Committee would like a detailed report to be furnished
indicating the precise action taken for fixing responsibility for the use of costlier and
richer specification and excess use of bitumen in 3941 works in 18 States which had
resulted in an additional expenditure of Rs. 167.66 crore.
[Sl.No. 19, Part II, Para 181 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As recommended by the Committee, the Ministry has reviewed the audit
observations and the replies of the States and found that in the case of Chhattisgarh,
Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Maharashtra and Mizoram, the
deviations were acceptable. As pointed out earlier, the specifications used during the
period under audit were primarily those  of NH and the States own specifications. In
case of Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Meghalaya and partly Madhya Pradesh, the States
have been advised to fix responsibility and report to the Ministry as the deviations
were not found acceptable.
Further the Ministry has taken some action to avoid using Richer Specifications/
Geometrics.
1. The base year traffic is checked at the time of sanctioning the proposal to
decide whether the road requires a 3.75 m carriageway or a 3 m carriageway.
In this direction, it is further submitted that the Ministry has appointed an
Expert Committee to review the design standards and specifications for
Rural Roads and the interim recommendations of the Committee on
gemetrics is circulated among the States and are strictly monitored while
the projects are considered for sanction.
2. A separate Book of Specifications brought out by Indian Roads Congress
(IRC) at the request of Ministry of Rural Development is now prescribed
for the construction of Rural Roads under PMGSY. The specifications
adopted by the States and the rate analysis are also vetted at NRRDA for
each phase of work form all the States.
With the steps taken as above, over design/richer specification in the construction
of Rural Roads under PMGSY are avoided.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol.III),
Dated 24.10.2008]

28
Recommendation (Serial No. 20)
As per the programme guidelines, a certificate indicating that land was available
was to accompany the proposal for each road work. However, the Committee are
constrained to note that 68 works were abandoned midway after incurring an expenditure
of Rs. 18.66 crore in Himachal Pradesh, Gujarat, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra, Manipur,
Mizoram, Orissa and Rajasthan. Apart from this 75 works remained incomplete
on which an expenditure of Rs. 25.19 crore had been incurred in the States of
Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu & Kashmir, Orissa, Punjab,
Tamil Nadu and Uttaranchal. The reasons cited for abandonment or the work remaining
incomplete were non-availability of land, pending forest clearance, incomplete major
bridges and so on. Similarly, 42 works costing Rs. 26.18 crore, though sanctioned, were
not taken up in 7 States viz. Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Karnataka, Manipur,
Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu. Further 32 works which were sanctioned at a cost of
Rs. 8.93 crore were not started and were dropped or abandoned in 4 States, namely
Andhra Pradesh, Maharashtra, Punjab and Tripura. The reasons for abandonment of
work were stated to be land dispute or absence of railway permission. In Uttar Pradesh
75 works costing Rs. 19.60 crore were not taken up as the roads were either already
constructed by other agencies or connectivity was already there. In this regard the
Ministry have informed the Committee that the works pointed out by the Audit mainly
pertain to the first two phases, except 7 cases of third phase and 4 cases of the fourth
phase. In the initial phases, the clearances from the respective authorities were not
obtained before the proposals were cleared. The Committee have now been informed
that in those cases where works are not taken up due to valid reasons they are permitted
to be dropped from the approved list and where expenditure has already been incurred,
the State Government is required to bear the cost. The adjustment of the cost is done
by subsequent reduction in the release of funds to the concerned State. In case if there
is a possibility of the work being completed, the Ministry provides all support. In
respect of forest clearances, the issue has now been taken up with the Ministry of
Forest and Environment and some progress have been made in this direction. Out of
the 292 cases mentioned by the Audit, 43 have been completed and in 55 works action
have been initiated for completion of work and another 105 works have already been
completed under some other schemes of the States. The Committee recommend that
the Ministry should take up all the pending cases with the concerned State Governments
so as to ensure that clearance from concerned authorities are obtained expeditiously
and works are taken up and completed. The Committee further recommend that
henceforth the Ministry should ensure that States strictly sponsor only those project
proposals where there is clear availability of land and necessary  clearances from the
forest and other authorities are obtained so that the works are not abandoned or
incompleted mid way.
[Sl. No. 20, Part II, Para 182 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Guidelines (Para 6.12) provide that "it will be the responsibility of the State
Government/District Panchayat to ensure that lands are available for taking up the
proposed road works. A certificate that land is available must accompany the proposal

29
for each road." Keeping in view the recommendations of the Committee, instructions
have been reiterated. Clear availability of land will be kept in view while sanctioning
projects so that in future works are not dropped due to non-availability of land.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 21)
The Committee note that as per the Guidelines of the Scheme, projects sanctioned
had to be executed by District Programme Implementation Units (DPIUs) and completed
within a period of nine months from the date of approval. This was later revised
(January 2003) to nine months from the date of issue of the work order. However, the
Committee are concerned to note that there were delays in completion of projects
ranging between one and 39 months in 1653 works. The reasons attributed by the
Ministry for the same were non-availability of site, material, late commencement of
work, etc. The Ministry have now informed the Committee that they are insisting upon
the States to have a better contract management for timely completion of projects. In
addition, the States have been advised to strengthen their implementing capacity. It
was also stated that delay in some of the States is on account of limited contracting
capacity; however, efforts to overcome the limitation have been made by increasing
the contracting capacity of the States. Besides, a system of performance incentive has
been introduced in the Standard Bidding Document from December 2006 for completion
of works by the contractors within the contracted time period. The Committee hope
that the steps taken by the Ministry though belated would enable completion of the
sanctioned projects within time schedule and to avoid time and cost overruns. They
also expect the Ministry to constantly monitor the works undertaken by States and
also review the contracting capacity of the States and strengthen the same so that
timely corrective steps are taken wherever necessary. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the impact of the steps taken by the Ministry in timely completion of the
projects.
[Sl. No. 21, Part II, Para 183 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As has been noted by the Committee that efforts have been made by the Ministry
to support the States to ensure completion of sanctioned projects within stipulated
time schedule to avoid cost and time overruns. Having regard to the recommendations
of the Committee, the Ministry has further taken following steps to enhance the
contracting capacity:
1. In view of the adverse effects of volatility in the prices of inputs for
construction of rural roads, the States of Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh
and Andhra Pradesh have been allowed to introduce price escalation clause
in their State Specific Documents subject to condition that the price
escalation shall be met from State funds.

30
2. The requirement of upfront submission of 5% Performance Security has
been relaxed with a view to ensure more liquidity of the contractors.
The above revisions are expected to further enhance the pool of eligible
contractors and thereby augment contracting capacity in the States. The statement
showing length of roads completed and expenditure incurred during the last four years
is given below. The impact of the steps taken by the Ministry can be seen from the
increase in the output.
Y ear Length Completed Expenditure (in
(in KM) crores of Rupees)
2004-05 15,464 3077
2005-06 22,891 4092
2006-07 30,710 7304
2007-08 41,231 10619
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 23)
Under the Scheme, a special emphasis was laid on ensuring good quality of roads
for which a detailed procedure was prescribed in the Guidelines. A three tier quality
control monitoring mechanism was established at DPIU, State and National level. As
regards functioning of first tier quality control, the Committee find that Quality Control
Laboratories were not established/set up at District Programme Implementation Unit
(DPIU) level since the launch of the Scheme in Jharkhand, Karnataka, Kerala, Nagaland,
Orissa, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal. The Committee also find that National Rural
Road Development Agency (NRRDA) released Rs. 1.50 crore to Chief Engineer
(Panchayati Raj), Andhra Pradesh in March 2004 for setting up the laboratory and
purchase of survey equipment out of the technical assistance loan received by it from
the World Bank. However, the amount was kept in fixed deposit by the Chief Engineer
(PR) without being utlized as of April, 2005. What is surprising to the Committee is the
fact that NRRDA treated the same as utilized while seeking further funds from the
Ministry of Rural Development. The Committee are not sure as to how the State
Governments as well as the Ministry are ensuring conformity of the material consumed
in road construction, with the specification prescribed, as required in the first tier of
the quality assurance mechanism. The Ministry have admitted that the first tier of
quality mechanism has not been effective as the requirement of mandatory tests in the
specification was too large and impracticable and the senior officers of the executing
machinery in many States were not regularly inspecting the works. However, the
Ministry stated that the Indian Roads Congress (IRC) has been requested to rationalize
the frequency of tests. To ensure more accountability about the field tests and quality
of various components of road, the expert Committee of IRC had been requested to

31
recommend the process and methodology of stage passing. The Committee recommend
that the Ministry should get the deficiencies/lapses as pointed out by Audit examined
with a view to take corrective  measures for ensuring conformity of the  material
consumed in road construction with specification prescribed as per first tier of the
quality assurance mechanism. The Committee would also like to be informed about the
latest status of the setting up of Quality Control Laboratories in the defaulting States
as mentioned in the Audit Report. The Committee also recommend that the Ministry
should explore all possibilities for setting up and maintenance of Quality Control
Laboratories in all States for the periodical test of new materials used at different
stages of road construction by the contractors so as to ensure that quality of the roads
constructed conform to the specified standards.
[Sl. No. 23, Part II, Para 185 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In compliance with the recommendations of the Committee, the NRRDA has
developed a mechanism to monitor operationalization of first tier of quality mechanism.
The States are required to furnish the details about establishment of field laboratories
quarterly. The issue of non-establishment of field laboratories is monitored and taken
up with the States during the discussions in various review meetings. In addition, 495
DPIU level laboratories and 25 Central/Zonal laboratories have been set up for
conducting various tests.
Regarding the setting up of quality control laboratories in the defaulting States,
as mentioned in the Audit report, the status is as follows:—
State No. of DPIU laboratories set up
Andhra Pradesh 40
Karnataka 29
Jammu and Kashmir 14
Nagaland 8
Orissa 23
Tamil Nadu 29
West Bengal 38
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 24)
The National Rural Roads Development Agency (NRRDA) was created to extend
technical support to the Scheme, which, inter alia, involved reinforcement of quality

32
assurance of the works at the Central level. Accordingly, the NRRDA introduced the
system of monitoring the quality of roads through National Quality Monitors (NQMs).
The mechanism involved compliance reporting on the functioning of the first and
second tier of the quality control mechanism apart from reporting on the quality of
roads based on perception through visual inspection and hand feel method. However,
the Committee are disheartened to note that the system lacked accountability for
incorrect reporting as the terms of appointment of NQMs did not prescribe their
accountability where finding were subsequently found incorrect and the certified
work was found not conforming to the specifications. Although the IRC specifications
(February 2002) adopted by the Ministry of Rural Development prescribed that frequent
tests needed to be carried out for seeking additional assurance on the quality of road
material and adequacy of the construction methods and procedures however, the
NRRDA prescribed and followed a system of quality assurance through visual
inspection of roads. The Committee are of the opinion that this methodology followed
by NQM for judging the quality of roads needs to be viewed in the light of the fact that
the roads were designed considering long term traffic growth of 15-20 years and thus
were not susceptible to immediate distress after construction. The Committee are also
surprised that NQMs relied on the quality tests undertaken by the DPIUs, who were
responsible for the supervision of the contractor's work and payment to the contractors
and could not therefore provide an independent and rigorous quality assurance. The
Ministry have informed the Committee that the process of selection and performance
review has been made independent and for this purpose, and independent Committee
headed by Secretary General, IRC has been constituted and the Committee is entrusted
with the work for selection of new NQMs and performance review of existing NQMs.
The Committee while welcoming the steps taken by the Ministry for streamlining
selection of NQMs, however recommend that the Ministry should ensure that Quality
Control is exercised more vigorously so as to adhere to all technical specifications
relating to construction of rural roads as given in the Guidelines. The Committee desire
that the Ministry should plan for quality control right from the stage of surveys,
investigations, design and preparation of Detailed Project Report. Further, some
percentage of the cost of the project should be set apart for implementation of quality
measures system. The Committee further desire that the tender documents must be
revised clearly specifying that contractor should establish field laboratories with the
specific minimum testing equipments and facilities.
[Sl. No. 24, Part II, Para 186 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Based on the observations of the Audit a thorough review of third tier of quality
mechanism has been carried out and following steps have been taken:
1. National Quality Monitors are generally retired State/Central Government
officials of the level of Superintending Engineer and above. Periodical
review of performance of NQMs is being carried out for appropriate
monitoring of quality of PMGSY works. Accordingly, mechanism for
independent performance evaluation of NQMs has been put in place.

33
2. Guidelines and reporting format for inspection of NQMs has been
thoroughly revised and following features have been introduced:
a. Objective methods of observations for assessment of quality of material
and workmanship based on actual measurements, field tests and hand-
feel tests have been prescribed.
b. The NQMs are required to conduct tests by themselves and compare
the results with test reports available in PIU with a view to see, as to
whether the test under first tier of quality mechanism have been properly
carried out by PIUs.
c. The NQMs are required to grade the quality of material as well as
workmanship of each item of work and on the basis of grading of
individual items and sub-items, overall grading of work is awarded.
d. In case of rectifiable defects in quality of material and workmanship, if
appropriate action for rectification has been taken by PIU and verified
by another independent monitor, improvement in quality grading of
work is done by NRRDA.
As observed by the Committee, the Standard Bidding Document has clear
provision for establishment of field laboratory with appropriate equipments and facilities.
Non-establishment of field laboratory and non-compliance of rectification of defects
of works by the contractor forms fundamental breach of contract as per provisions in
the Standard Bidding Document.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 25)
The rural roads constructed or upgraded under the Scheme were to be maintained
by the concerned Panchayati Raj Institutions (PRIs). The Guidelines provided that
each State Government, while submitting the project proposal for approval, should
identify a suitable PRI (District Panchayat/Intermediate Panchayat) for undertaking
the maintenance of the entire Core Network and particularly the roads constructed/
upgraded under the Scheme, besides furnishing an undertaking for necessary budget
provision and the release of maintenance costs. The road constructed under the Scheme
are not required to undergo major repairs for at least five years after their completion.
For this purpose, the State Governments are required to obtain a bank guarantee for 10
per cent of the value of the work from the contractor which was to be valid for 5 years.
The rural roads are required to be handed over by the PIUs on completion of the
guarantee period of 5 years to the designated PRIs for regular maintenance. However,
budget allocation was not made for maintenance works in Arunachal Pradesh and
Jharkhand. The Committee are however, concerned to note that PRIs were not identified
for undertaking the maintenance work in the States of Assam, Jharkhand, Karnataka

34
and Kerala. Funds were not released or deposited into the maintenance accounts by
the Governments of Chhattisgarh and West Bengal. It was found that the Government
of West Bengal neither had the fund requirement assessed for maintenance nor
provision of funds made in the budget. The Committee regret to observe that the role
and importance of PRIs in the maintenance of rural roads has not been adequately
recognized by the States. A responsive grass-root level organization with a high degree
of commitment, motivation, professional competence and above all integrity is the sine
qua non for the success of achieving the avowed objectives of rural connectivity as
well as maintenance of the roads constructed. The Committee therefore, recommend
that Ministry of Rural Development in cooperation with Ministry of Panchayati Raj
should fund capacity building of District and Block level Panchayats so that they take
over the functions like construction management, maintenance management and road
safety. They therefore, recommend that State Government should identify the PRIs
withour any loss of time.
The Committee understand that sometimes road works are held up at the time of
preparation of District Road Proposal, either due to actual availability of land not being
investigated properly or the local panchayat is not taken into confidence about the
proposed alignment, which result in dispute subsequently. There, the Committee
recommend that all States should held informal consultation with Panchayati Raj
Institutions along the proposed alignment to sort out issues of land availability  and
environmental impact well in advance.
[Sl. No. 25, Part II, Para 187 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
District Rural Road Plan (DRRP) and Core Network (CN) are being approved by
the district panchayat. Annual project proposals are also approved by the district
panchayats before they are placed before the State level Standing Committee (SLSC).
Further, at the time of preparation of the Detailed Project Report (DPR) a 'transect
walk' is organized by the Assistant Engieers in which representatives of local panchayat,
patwari, engineers of Project Implementation Units, and concerned villagers participate.
Issues related to availability of land are sorted out and documentation for land donation
is obtained. A copy of the same is forwarded to revenue officials for making necessary
changes in the ownership/possession record of land. Forest department officials are
included where ever forest land is likely to be involved.
A certificate that the land is available for the project work is essential part of the
proposal sent for approval to the Ministry of Rural development.
Thus Panchayati Raj Institutions are being involved and consulted with the
finalization of road alignment and to sort out issues related to land. Forest officials are
involved to ensure that there are speedy settlements of issues related to forest and
environment impact.
Recommendations of the Committee regarding capacity building of the District
and Block level Panchayats so that they take over the functions like construction

35
management, maintenance management and road safety in cooperation with Ministry
of Panchayati Raj has been noted for guidance.
As such, consultations with the Panchayati Raj Institutions are already built in
the Programme Guidelines of PMGSY .
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 26)
The Committee note that while according approval to the PMGSY and the
Guidelines framed thereunder, the Government envisaged that Online Management
and Monitoring System (OMMS) should be the core component for monitoring the
progress of the Scheme. The Committee have noted that the main objectives of OMMS
are to create a database of rural roads; to track annual proposals from preparation of
projects to completion of works; to make available a simple and transparent accounting
system and to assist in ensuring maintenance management. The software is designed
to generate outputs useful for monitoring and management at the District Programme
Implementation Unit (DPIU), the State Rural Roads Development Agency (SRRDA),
the National Rural Roads Development Agency (NRRDA) and the Ministry of Rural
Development. However, the Committee are surprised to find that although the PMGSY
was started in December 2000, the OMMS was formally launched only in November
2002 and the accounting module of OMMS was developed as late as in 2004. What is
more disturbing to the Committee was the fact that till 2004, the System was implemented
in only two States.
The Committee further note that there was weaknesses in the design and internal
control mechanism of the OMMS and the database generated was incomplete and
unreliable. thus even after five years of launching of PMGSY and incurring an
expenditure of Rs. 20.67 crore, the OMMS was not found to be fit for decision making
and monitoring. The Ministry admitted that they did not have a formal IT strategy and
IT group and they depended on NIC and C-DAC for co-coordinating the functioning
of the Application. The Committee find that the software was tested by C-DAC before
hosting the website as C-DAC was the developer of the software and the main
responsibility of ensuring that the Application was developed as per the requirements
was the responsibility of the Ministry. While accepting the fact that the States had not
yet filled the data in important fields even after using the software for more than 3 years
since its launch in 2002, the Ministry stated that the database was designed with
proper indices and keys but the States were not prepared to make data entry and
therefore nulls were allowed in many fields. it was further stated that they have taken
steps to improve the implementation of the package and all States have been advised
to identify IT nodal officers in each Programme Implementation Unit who are responsible
to ensure that the data are correct and up-to-date. Further, the State Technical Agencies
have also been asked to scrutinize the proposals whether all the data regarding the
proposals have been entered in the system. Gaps in the data are also been reviewed

36
and the performance of each State have been reviewed at the time of review meetings
and empowered Committee meetings. The Committee, however, feel that a lot needs to
be done for the removal of deficiencies pointed out in the functioning of Online
Monitoring and Management System. They therefore, recommend that Ministry should
review the functioning of OMMS with a view to remove the deficiencies pointed out
by evolving a practicable action plan. The Committee are of the opinion that adequate
training should be imparted to the personnel handling the OMMS in the States. Further,
the accounting module of OMMS should be urgently implemented so that it would be
an additional tool for the Ministry and the States to strengthen the financial management
of the Scheme. The Committee also recommend that the States should take necessary
steps to update the online information and wherever OMMS have not been installed,
the Ministry should take necessary steps to install the System immediately.
[Sl. No. 26, Part II, Para 188 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As directed by the Committee, an overall review of the functioning of the OMMAS
was carried out in consultation with the States and also at the level of Secretary (RD)
and DG , CDAC. The deficiencies in the system were assessed and an action plan has
been prepared after a comprehensive review and discussion with the States. The
software issues have been addressed by CDAC. A dedicated team from CDAC has
been stationed at NRRDA and it assists MoRD/NRRDA in the implementation and
trouble shooting. Training needs/requirements of States have been assessed and is
being provided regularly. The performance of the States in updating data in OMMAS
is being reviewed regularly and States advised accordingly.
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED
FROM GOVERNMENT
The Committee note with concern that as of May 2001 the number of unconnected
habitations eligible for assistance under the Scheme was 1.41 lakh. However, the data
kept changing frequently after the launching of the Scheme. In December 2003, the
number of eligible unconnected habitations was projected as 1.60 lakh and in the
following year i.e. during December 2004, it was estimated at 1.71 lakh. Later the figure
went up to around 1.73 lakh in March 2005. According to Audit, the figure of May 2001
was adopted by the Ministry as a measure of the magnitude of the problem to be
addressed and the source or the basis of this data was not on the records of the
Ministry. A State-wise analysis indicates that in Tamil Nadu, the data adopted by
District Programme Implementation Units (DPIUs) against the roads proposed under
the Scheme was neither supported by any documents nor they were verifiable. In
West Bengal, no survey was conducted for assessing the number of unconnected
habitations as well as the road length to be constructed under the Scheme. In
Chhattisgarh initially, 12,561 eligible unconnected habitations were reported to the
Ministry; however, the figure was again revised to 13,761 habitations in the tribal and
hilly areas without survey or any other evidence in support of the revised estimation.
The Committee further note that the exact quantum of work involved in terms of the
number and length of the roads and approximate cost were not available when the
Ministry fixed the targets for connectivity. The Ministry were candid in their admission
before the Committee that they had launched the Scheme without reliable data so as to
avoid delay in its implementation. They stated that the initial estimate was on some
parametric basis and it was not really based on Detailed Project Report (DPR) or on the
basis of actual Bill of Quantity. The Committee are appalled that such a massive and
well conceived Scheme involving huge financial outlays was launched without reliable
data. The Committee are unable to accept the plea of the Ministry that this happened
in order to avoid delay in implementation. In fact, there were inordinate delays in the
initial phase of implementation. The Committee regret to find that fixing of targets,
allocation of funds as well as proper monitoring of the Scheme was sluggish. What
perturb the Committee more is the fact that the Ministry have conveniently ignored the
recommendation made by the Standing Committee of Urban and Rural Development in
their Report presented to the Parliament in February, 2001 that a District Rural Road
Plan should be prepared before launching the Scheme so as to ensure proper utilization
of resources. The Committee expect that by now Government has diligently identified
the roads laid under other Schemes and number of unconnected habitations eligible
for assistance before taking up the Scheme and that there will be no subsequent
revision in the database so as to enable fixation of realistic targets for connectivity to
unconnected habitations. The Committee recommend that responsibility be fixed for
37

38
past negligence and a timeframe be fixed for preparation and implementation of District/
State-wise Plans with a view to avoid duplication of expenditure on existing roads and
enable proper utilization of the scarce resources to achieve the objectives of the
Scheme.
[Sl. No. 4, Part II, Para 166 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In their submission before the Committee, the Ministry had clarified that, based
on the recommendations of the Standing Committee on Urban and Rural Development
in their report presented to Parliament in February, 2001, detailed guidelines and
instructions were given to all the States for the preparation of District Rural Road Plan
(DRRP) It had also been clarified that the scheme was launched prior to this on
parametric data borrowed from NRRDC report and subsequently based on the actual
DRRP & Core Network, figures were revised in respect of both the number of
unconnected habitations and the length required. All the States have prepared DRRP
and Core Network. However, after realizing that certain shortcomings have crept in
while preparing the DRRP and identification of Core Network, States were asked to
have a re-look and revise the data with ground verification, before finalizing and
freezing the data. All the States have submitted the revised data and accordingly the
core network of the States was finalized and frozen.
Subsequently, however, Andhra Pradesh, Bihar, Kerala and West Bengal requested
for further revision of Core Network with respect to marginal changes.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 15)
As per the Guidelines of the Scheme an unconnected habitation is defined as one
which was located at a distance of at least 500 metres or more in the plains (1.5 km of
path distance in the case of hills) from an all weather road or a connected habitation
with population size of 500 persons and above (250 and above in case of hills).
However, the Committee are surprised to note that in 17 States i.e. Andhra Pradesh,
Arunachal Pradesh, Assam, Bihar, Gujarat, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Madhya Pradesh,
Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu & Tripura Rs. 47.36 crore were spent on
providing connectivity to ineligible habitations. Further, the Guidelines provide for a
single road connectivity and in case the habitation was already connected to another
connected habitation by way of an all weather road, no further work was to be taken up
under the Scheme. However, to the surprise of the Committee it was found that in 6
States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Kerala, Punjab and Tamil Nadu, Rs. 28.92 crore
were spent for providing multi-connectivity. The Guidelines also state that repairs to
black topped or cement roads and construction of district roads were not permitted
under the Scheme, however, in 9 States i.e. Andhra Pradesh, Chhattisgarh, Haryana,
Karnataka, Kerala, Maharashtra, Orissa, Uttaranchal and West Bengal an expenditure

39
of Rs. 34.32 crore were incurred on repair works and construction of district roads. The
Committee do not accept the Ministry's contention that the issue mainly pertained to
the period upto 2003 when the Core Network had not been prepared and detailed
Guidelines had not been issued leading to some deviations. Instead of accepting their
abject failure in matching the progress of work for giving connectivity to the potential
habitations, the Ministry have chosen to pass the buck on the non-existence of Core
Network during the period proceeding 2003 which is anything but regrettable. The
Committee find that even after CNW is put in place, there have been instances of
inadmissible works undertaken by States. The Committee recommend that the Ministry
should probe into all the cases, where inadmissible works have been undertaken by
States so as to fix responsibility on the concerned authorities for omissions and
commissions. The committee expect the Ministry to take suitable steps to ensure that
works undertaken in the Phase-III strictly conform with the guidelines and no
inadmissible work is undertaken.
[Sl. No. 15, Part II, Para 177 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As advised by the Committee, the cases pointed out by Audit have been examined
and the following action has been taken:—
Inadmissible connectivity— Andhra  Pradesh, Bihar, Meghalaya, Madhya Pradesh,
Nagaland, Orissa Punjab and Sikkim have been asked to fix responsibility for the
omission under intimation to the Ministry.
Multi-connectivity— In all the cases pointed out by Audit, except Tamil Nadu, the
works pertain to Phases I and II when the Core Network was not in place. During these
two phases instances of multi-connectivity have been found. In Tamil Nadu there is a
case of multi-connectivity in the IIIrd phase and the State has been asked to fix
responsibility for the lapse.
Repairs—As intimated by the States, the cases of 'repairs' pointed out by audit
are actually cases of upgradation of through routes which is eligible for funding under
the guidelines.
However, as pointed out in the reply to recommendation 14, Ministry is taking
steps to ensure that the works undertaken conform to the guidelines.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 22)
The Guidelines under the Scheme also envisage that suitable penalty clause be
incorporated in the Agreement and the same is invoked and penalty imposed on the
contractor for the time over-run in completion of project. However, the Committee find
that the recovery of liquidated damages aggregating to Rs. 35.28 crore was not effected

40
in Bihar (Rs. 4.77 crore), Gujarat (Rs. 1.56 crore), Himachal Pradesh (Rs. 1.23 crore),
Madhya Pradesh (Rs. 2.58 crore), Maharashtra (Rs. 524 crore), Orissa (Rs. 19.42 crore)
and Rajasthan (Rs. 0.48 crore). In this regard, the Ministry have informed the Committee
that they have taken up the matter with the concerned agencies for recovery of the
same and now the contractor is laible to pay liquidated damages in case where extension
of time without levy of compensation has been granted by the competent authority in
the State. However, the extension of time without levy of compensation could be
granted for a case where delay is not attributable to the contractor including Force
Majure conditions. It was also stated that the non-recovery of the liquidated demage
could also be watched through a third party Audit and all the State Governments have
been advised to take appropriate action against the officers who have failed to recover
the liquidated damages. The Ministry have also informed the Committee that out of the
Rs. 35.28 crore liquidated damages mentioned in the Audit Report, Rs. 5.24 crore has
been recovered and in works valuing Rs. 25.25 crores, time extension have been given
by the States as the delays were not attributable to the contractors and the other cases
are being pursued with the States. While expressing their dissatisfaction over the poor
rate of recovery of damage from the contractors, the Committee urge upon the Ministry
to closely monitor all the cases in coordination with States so that damages are fully
recovered with in a definite time period. They also recommend that in future Ministry
should impose penalties on the States concerned who fail to take prompt action against
the contractors' where the work was behind schedule. The Committee would like to be
apprised about the progress made in this regard and also the impact of setting up a
third party Audit on recovery of damages from the contractors.
[Sl. No. 22, Part II, Para 184 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As advised by the Committee, the States have been asked to give more stress on
contract management, monitor all works which are behind schedule and take action
against the defaulting contractors as per the contract documents. The States have
been advised to fix responsibility in case liquidated damages are not levied or recovered.
The States have also been asked to submit half yearly returns to NRRDA so that the
same can be monitored more closely.
The Ministry in its submission to the PAC had stated that non-levy of liquidated
damages could come the notice when a third part audit like that of the CAG's takes
place. It is therefore hoped that such cases would come to light when the Accountants
General carry out their annual audits in the States. The case pointed out in such audit
will be pursued and action taken.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No., P-17017/5/2007-RC(V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]

CHAPTER  IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
The Committee are of the considered view that for the completion of the Scheme
within time bound period, the annul target of coverage of eligible habitations under
each State needed to be fixed while planning the Scheme. However, the Committee find
that procedures and systems were revised repeatedly. Though the Ministry gradually
refined and standardized the procedures after the first three years, implementation and
planning went on simultaneously leading to lack of clarity and inadequate controls.
The Committee regret to note that the Ministry did not fix the annual targets for each
State for new Connectivity. As a result there were several hindrances in the successful
implementation of the Scheme. While it is true that in Andhra Pradesh, neither the State
Government had adequate staff to cope with the increased work load nor there were
separate staff provided exclusively to handle the work and similarly, in Chhattisgarh
and West Bengal, there was large scale shortage of Technical staff at the District
Level/Programme Implementation Unit resulting in non-ensuring of quality and delay
in completion of the roads, the fact remains that no appreciable efforts were made by
the Ministry till 2003-04 for training the staff in the the District Programme
Implementation Units. The Committee are unable to understand the Ministry's
explanation that constraints such as absorption capacity of the States at the initial
stage might have delayed the launch of the Scheme by three to four years which
smacks of casualness and lackadaisical approach of the Ministry to such an important
Scheme. Obviously, the Ministry was slack in making efforts to help the States to
benefit from a fully Centrally Funded Scheme. This resulted in revision of completion
of target from 2003 to 2009, besides leading to unplanned and ineffective execution of
the Scheme. The Ministry have now stated that the main reasons for such highly
discouraging performance, was inadequate funding and steps are now being taken to
mobilize additional resources and augment funding for the Scheme. This clearly indicates
that it was the Ministry rather than the States that lacked the will for implementation.
Besides, assessiment of the capacity of the States have been done and funds to the
States are now being provided depending on the progress of works already sanctioned
while considering fresh proposals. Though the Ministry have claimed to have enhanced
funding for the Scheme, nevertheless the targets set under the Scheme have not been
accomplished as per the schedule. The Committee recommend that Ministry should
gear up its machinery for granting approval required to the level of the Ministry that
are impeding the proper implementation of Scheme.
[Sl. No. 5, Part II, Para 167 for Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
41

42
Action Taken
The Ministry might have ened in its judgement initially, while fixing the time limits
for New Connectivity  of 1000+and 500+habitations. However, it has realized and
based on the implementing capacity of the States, the funding has been enhanced and
systems have been put in place to sanction projects.
Sl. Financial Year Value of Proposals Length of proposals
No. Cleared Cleared
(In Rs. Crores) (Kms.)
1 2004-05 1330.29 7684.73
2 2005-06 9108.17 38335.12
3 2006-07 19426.19 62118.385
4 2007-08 23020.18 74902.60
5 2008-09 (August' 08) 11256.15 29995.28
The Ministry has taken significant measures for streamlining the process project
clearance, as a result of which the volume of projects cleared has substantially increased.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]
Recommendation (Serial No. 6)
At the time of launching of PMGSY , the Ministry of Rural Development had
estimated that Rs. 58,200 crore would be required for providing new connectivity to
1.41 lakh habitation and also for the upgradation of the existing rural roads. The
funding requirements of Rs. 34,200 crore for new connectivity were worked out based


43
on the average lead distance per habitation of 1.5 km and the average cost of construction
as Rs. 14.25 lakh per km. However, the Committee note that the Audit did not come
across any basis for estimating the cost for upgradation of the existing roads at
Rs. 24,000 crore. In this regard, the Ministry have informed the Committee that the cost
of estimates of the Scheme at the time of launching was based on the estimates provided
by National Rural Road Development Committee (NRRDC) which estimated the average
length required for connecting a new habitation as 1.26 km, whereas on the basis of the
data provided by the States, after preparing the District Rural Road Plan (DRRP) and
Core Network (CNW) the average length was found to be 2.1 km per habitation. In
addition to it the DRRP and the Core Network showed that 1.73 lakh habitations are
eligible under the Scheme as against 1.41 lakh habitations assessed by the NRRDC.
Hence, there was a difference not only in the number of habitations to be connected,
but also in the total length for new connectivity. As regards cost estimates, NRRDC
had assumed Rs. 8 lakh per km including Cross Drainage Works, however, the average
cost for new connectivity at National level during Phase-III, based on District Project
Reports (DPRs) was around Rs. 21 lakh per km. For upgradation of roads the revised
estimation was Rs. 15 lakh per km as against NRRDC assumption of Rs. 5 lakh per km.
The Ministry have informed the Committee that the changes in the number of habitations,
length required for new connectivity and the realistic estimation of cost with necessary
provisions for sustainable rural roads, are the causes for large scale deviations in the
revised cost of the Scheme. It was also stated that it is not possible to prescribe a
uniform unit cost norm across the country, since the rural roads constructed are expected
to cater to varying conditions with respect to terrain, soil type, expected trffic and
drainage view that these facts about variability of parameters of roads is a well known
fact and norms for estimates are always arrived at after taking these into consideration.
The Committee would like to emphasis that appropriate identification of habitations,
realistic estimation of the length and cost of new connectivity as well as correct
estimation of the work load involved for up gradation of the existing roads are the pre-
requisites for success of the Scheme and any flaw in this process will only defeat the
very objective of the Scheme. This requires energetic supervision of work done by
engineer along a hierarchical chain of command. At this stage the Committee cannot
but emphasise the need to identify the correct number of habitations that are awaiting
rural connectivity and also proper measurement of the length of road required for new
connectivity as well as upgradation of existing roads, so that adequate funds are tied
up and requisite targets set for completion of the Scheme within the stipulated time
period.
[Sl. No. 6, Part II, Para 168 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
On the basis of the latest data obtained from the State, the Ministry has firmed up
the figures of habitation and connectivity.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P-17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]

44
Recommendation (Serial No. 11)
The Committee are perturbed to note the instances of incorrect financial reporting
in respect of the expenditure incurred under the Scheme in some States. For instance in
Meghalaya, Rs. 34.95 crore released in 2000-01 for 208 works under Basic Minimum
Services (BMS) was shown as utilized in the utilization certificate submitted to the
Ministry. However, the works were yet to be completed as of March 2005. The Ministry
have informed the Committee that as per the available records, 136 complaints pertaining
to irregularities including corruption in programme implementation have been received
and 80 cases were referred to the State Governments for action at their end and in
45 cases, independent monitors were deputed to investigate, out of which irregularities
were found in 14 cases. These cases have been taken up with the States for rectification
and the States have been asked to initiate action against the concerned persons.
Another 14 cases are either under enquiry or initiated for enquiry. The Committee while
taking note of these steps desire that in future Ministry should ensure suitable penal
measures are taken to check misappropriation/misutilisation of funds by
State Governments under report to the nodal Ministry. The Committee would await a
detailed report indicating the precise action taken on each of specific cases mentioned
by the Audit.
[Sl. No. 11, Part II, Para 173 of Seventy-Second Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In accordance with the recommendations of the Committee, Arunachal Pradesh,
Jammu and Kashmir, Meghalaya and Mizoram have been advised to fix responsibility
in the cases mentioned by Audit in its report (Para 4.3.2.4) on misreporting by the
States.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Rural Development, OM No. P . 17017/5/2007-RC (V ol. III),
Dated 24.10.2008]

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
---NIL---
NEW DELHI; SANTOSH GANGWAR,
28 January, 2009 Chairman,
8 Magha, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
45

PART  II
MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2008-2009) HELD ON 19TH JANUARY , 2009
The Committee sat from 1500 hrs. to 1545 hrs. on 19th January, 2009 in Committee
Room "D" Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Santosh Gangwar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Furkan Ansari
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri K.S. Rao
6. Shri Sita Ram Singh
7. Shri Kharabela Swain
8. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Raashid Alvi
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
12. Shri Shanta Kumar
13. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary-II
46

47
Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.N. Chatterji — ADAI
2. Shri A.K. Awasthi — ADAI
3. Shri A.K. Thakur — DGACR
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members of the Committee to the
sitting. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption the draft Report
on Action Taken on 72nd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to "Pradhan Mantri
Gram Sadak Yojana (PMGSY)". After some deliberation, the Committee adopted the
draft Report with some minor changes and authorized the Chairman to finalise and
present the same to the Parliament in the light of factual verification done by Audit.
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the Memorandum No. 2
regarding the status of submission of the pending Remedial Action Taken Notes by
various Ministries/Departments of Government of India to the Public Accounts
Committee. The Members expressed their concern over inordinate delay in furnishing
the Remedial Action Taken Notes by various Ministries/Departments. The Chairman,
PAC apprised the Members about a letter addressed to the PAC Secretariat by the
Joint Comptroller General of Accounts, Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
in which he has explained about the steps taken by the Ministry in the matter and
sought for extension of time for furnishing the status of pending Remedial Action
Taken Notes by 2nd February, 2009.
4. The Audit Officers explained to the Committee their views on the subject and
made certain suggestions for improvement/streamlining of Audit oversight with a
veiw to ensure that the Ministries/Departments take necessary action for furnishing of
Remedial Action Taken Notes expeditiously. The Committee desired that the Audit
may furnish a Statement of Remedial Action Taken Notes which are pending for five
years for their consideration. The Committee decided to have a further briefing by the
Secretary (Expenditure) after receipt of the status of Remedial Action Taken Notes
from the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).
5. The Committee also decided that since the Session of Lok Sabha is likely to
commence from 12th February, 2009, duration of the proposed Study Tour of the
Committee to Kolkata and Chennai may remain three days instead of four days and it
may be conducted from 9th to 11th February, 2009.
The Committee then adjourned.
GMGIPMRND—1229LS—24-4-2009.