7
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL
SCIENCES (AIIMS)
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2004-05
SEVENTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
Server-1\Report LS\4089LS\4089LS

SEVENTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL
SCIENCES (AIIMS)
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE
Presented to Lok Sabha on ___________
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ___________
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
January 2005/Pausa 1926 (Saka)

PAC No. 1758
Price: Rs. 43.00
©2005 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2004-2005) .......................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................... (v)
PART—I
REPORT................................................................................................................ 1
APPENDIX-I Audit Paragraph 1 of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India for the year ended March 2000 (No. 4 of
2001), Union Government (Autonomous Bodies) .................... 57
A
PPENDIX-II Conclusions and Recommendations ........................................ 83
PART—II
Minutes of the sittings of the Committee held on 03.10.2002,
28.9.2004, 29.9.2004 and 03.01.2005........................................... 101

COMPOSITION  OF  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
*6. Shri Naveen Jindal
7. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Dr. R. Senthil
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
13. Kunwar Revati Raman Singh
14. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Dr. K. Malaisamy
19. Shri V . Narayanasamy
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
21. Shri Jairam Ramesh
22. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
5. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Committee Officer
* Shri Naveen Jindal, MP has been elected a Member to the Committee on 16th December, 2004
vice  Shri A.R. Antulay, MP who resigned from the membership of the Committee w.e.f.
27th August, 2004.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee having been authorised by the
Committee, do present on their behalf, this Seventh Report (14th Lok Sabha) on "All
India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)" based on Paragraph No. 1 of the
Comptroller and Auditor General Report No. 4 of 2001.
2. The C&AG Report No. 4 of 2001 for the year ended March, 2000 Union
Government (Civil—Autonomous Bodies) was laid on the Table of the House on
14th August, 2001.
3. The Committee (2002-2003) took oral evidence of the representatives of the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and AIIMS at their sitting held on 3rd October,
2002. The Committee (2004-2004) took oral evidence of the representatives at their
sittings held on 28th and 29th September, 2004. The Committee (2004-2005) considered
and finalised this report at their sitting held on 3rd January, 2005. Minutes of the
sittings form Part-II of the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in the Annexures to the
Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare and AIIMS for the cooperation extended by them in
furnishing information and tendering evidence before the Committee.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
13th January, 2005 Chairman,
23 Pausa, 1926 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

REPORT
Introductory
The Health Survey and Development Committee, chaired by Sir Joseph Bhore,
an Indian Civil Servant, had in 1946 recommended the establishment of a national
medical centre which would concentrate on meeting the need for highly qualified
manpower to look after the nation's expanding health care activities. The
recommendations of the Bhore Committee converged to create a proposal which found
favour with the Government of New Zealand. A generous grant from New Zealand
under the Colombo Plan made it possible to lay the foundation stone of All India
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in 1952. The AIIMS was finally created in 1956,
as an autonomous institution through an Act of Parliament, to serve as a nucelus for
nurturing excellence in all aspects of health care with the following objectives:—
(i) To develop patterns of teaching in Undergraduate & Post-graduate Medical
Education in all its branches so as to demonstrate a high standard of
Medical Education in India;
(ii) To bring together in one place educational facilities of the highest order
for the training of personnel in all important branches of health activity;
and
(iii) To attain self-sufficiency in Post-graduate Medical Education.
2. The All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) Act of 1956 specifies
certain functions of the Institute in order to achieve these objectives. According to the
Act, the Institute may:
(i) Provide for Undergraduate and Post-graduate teaching in the science of
modern medicine and other allied sciences, including physical and
biological science.
(ii) Provide facilities for Research in the various branches of such sciences.
(iii) Provide for the teaching of Humanities in the Undergraduate courses.
(iv) Conduct experiments in new methods and Medical Education, both
Undergraduate & Post-graduate, in order to arrive at satisfactory standards
of such education.
(v) Train teachers for different medical colleges in India.
Organisational set up
3. AIIMS is under the administrative control of Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare. The Executive authority of the Institute is vested in a Governing Body.

2
According to Clause 7(1) of the Act, the Central Government nominates from amongst
the members of the Institute, the President of the Institute who is also the ex-officio
chairman of the Governing Body. The Minister of Health and Family Welfare is, at
present, nominated by name as a member of the Institute and also the President of the
Institute. The Director is the Chief Executive Officer.
4. The Institute is recognized as a foremost centre for learning by undergraduate
students as well as post-doctoral residents. It conducts teaching programms in medical
and para-medical courses both at Undergraduate and Postgraduate levels and awards
its own degrees. It also runs a College of Nursing and trains students for B.Sc. (Hons.).
Teaching & Research are conducted in 42 disciplines. In the field of Medical Research,
AIIMS has to its credit, more than 600 research publications by its faculty and
researchers in a year.
5. According to the information provided by the Ministry to the Committee in
September, 2004, AIIMS consists of 50 Departments and Centres, 142 Speciality Clinics
and 13 General Out-Patient Departments (OPDs) providing services to the patients on
different allotted days as well as five Specialised Centres, namely, the Centre for
Community Medicine, the Centre for Cardiothoracic Sciences, the Institute Rotary
Cancer Hospital (IRCH), the Centre for Neurosciences and Dr. R.P. Centre for Ophthalmic
Sciences.
These clinical departments alongwith Super Speciality Centres manage all types
of disease conditions except burn cases, dog-bite cases and patients suffering from
infectious diseases. A comprehensive Rural Health Centre at Ballabhgarh in Haryana,
managed by AIIMS, provides health cover to about 2.5 lakh population through the
Centre for Community Medicine.
6. This Report is based on the Audit Review contained in Paragraph 1 of the
Report of the C&AG of India for the year ended March 2000—Union Government
(Autonomous Bodies) No. 4 of 2001 relating to "All India Institute of Medical Sciences
(AIIMS)"*. The review of the Institute was conducted in Audit for the period 1995-96
to 1999-2000 with the objective of evaluating the performance of the Institute as a
center of excellence in Medical Research, Teaching and Patient care. Audit scrutiny
had revealed that the All India Institute of Medical Sciences, which was established as
a Teaching Hospital for developing excellence in Medical Education and Research in
1956, had over the years developed into a large hospital without adequate emphasis
on Teaching or Research. While Teaching had suffered due to shortage of teaching
staff, very little resources had been allocated for Research. A large complement of
teaching staff were employed on ad-hoc basis. There was no evidence of utilization of
Research findings.
7. Further, the Audit Review indicated that the hospital infrastructure was deficient
and the Specialised Centres for treatment of cancer and trauma had not developed.
The Drug De-addiction Centre was also found to be not fully functional. Substantial
part of resources received from the National Illness Assistance Fund for providing
*For details please refer to the Audit Paragraph.

3
treatment to the poor had remained unutilized. With regard to the cadre of doctors and
nurses, the Audit stated that large shortages had resulted in depriving the patients of
diagnosis, treatment and medical care. The doctor patient ratio was very high and the
waiting time for surgery was very long. The Audit further noticed various instances of
losses and mismanagement in the administration of the Institute. Large investments in
providing subsidized Medical Education for providing excellence and sufficiency had
gone substantially unreturned. On the basis of the Audit Review, the Committee called
for written information from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and the AIIMS
or certain aforesaid issues. Thereafter, the Committee, took Oral Evidences of the
representatives of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and the All India Institute
of Medical Sciences. During the course of examination of the functioning of AIIMS,
the Public Accounts Committee noted various shortcomings in the working of Institute/
Ministry which have been dealt in detail with in the succeeding chapters.
Objectives of the Institute
8. The All-India Institute of Medical Sciences was established as an institution
of national importance by an Act of Parliament to develop patterns of teaching in
Undergraduate and Post-graduate Medical Education in all its branches so as to
demonstrate a high standard of Medical Education in India; to bring together in one
place educational facilities of the highest order for the training of personnel in all
important branches of health activity; and to attain self-sufficiency in Post-graduate
Medical Education.
9. The objectives behind setting up AIIMS was to have comprehensive facilities
for Medical Research, Teaching and Patient-care. It was conceived as a Centre of
excellence in the areas of Medical Research and Education while serving as a hospital
for specialized Medical Services. However, the audit review has revealed that over the
years, the Institute has grown only in terms of general medical services at the expense
of Research, Education and Specialisation.
Research Activities
10. The Committee have been given to understand that research schemes relating
to health and medical subjects are undertaken by faculty members of AIIMS on behalf
of national and international agencies. According to Audit paragraph, all members of
the faculty are entitled to the grant of research funds for inter-departmental Research
Projects, Projects connected with national health priorities and Projects involving
development/acquisition of new techniques or skills which have not been undertaken
by the Institute. The audit scrutiny has revealed that during the period 1995-96 to
1999-2000, out of 185 Research Projects/schemes completed in the Institute, final reports
were not submitted by the Principal investigators in 99 projects/schemes. It has been
further pointed out by Audit that none of the research findings were got patented/
commercialised. Final reports from the principal Investigators in respect of 54 of the
154 completed Projects/schemes undertaken during 1991—95 were outstanding till
March 2001.

4
11. As regard to the total Research Projects undertaken in the lnstitute during
the last decade, the Ministry, in a written note, have submitted as under:—
Y ear Opening New projects Projects Projects
Balance sanctioned closed during remaining at the
during the year the year end of the year
1994-1995 125 78 53 150
1995-1996 150 66 36 180
1996-1997 180 44 17 207
1997-1998 207 79 44 242
1998-1999 242 72 86 228
1999-2000 228 63 64 227
2000-2001 227 107 74 260
2001-2002 260 125 100 285
2002-2003 285 86 93 278
2003-2004 278 105 79 304
According to the Ministry, the Final reports were submitted to the Funding
agency by the Project lnvestigators themselves. However, the average time taken to
complete the final report in each of the projects was 3-6 months after completion of the
project.
12. Regarding the monitoring of the Research Projects that was followed at the
Institute, the Financial Advisor of the lnstitute, while deposing before the Committee,
inter-alia stated:
"Till such time, as the CAG took it up in their Report, the onus of the final report
submitted was more or less with the funding agency in question, and they were
actually monitoring the budget allocated for a certain project, and whether the
project was being used for certain purpose. A similar concurrent monitoring
proceudre was not in place in the institute, which has now been brought into
place after this whole issue was raised by CAG."
He further added:
"Then, there is a small amount that the lnstitute gives for actually promoting
research for the younger generation of the faculties to enable them to build
research projects. That could be then sent for funding to the major donor agencies.
There were 42 such projects where certain advances have been given which
remained, for some reason or the other, outstanding. Actually they were not
outstanding if I may be permitted to say so. But there were some adjustment
problems. They just had not bothered to send in the report. And, our regulatory
mechanism in the research section was very weak. In compliance to the CAG
observations, a stringent mechanism has been put in place to ensure that does
not happen".
13. Audit has pointed out that the Estimate Committee had recommended that
the research projects conducted at the Institute should be reviewed by the Director
and Dean half yearly with reference to the progress made, expenditure incurred and
time spent and likely time and expenditure required to achieve the desired results. It

5
was seen by audit that review of research projects was conducted for one year
(1997-98) only. The review for the years 1995-96, 1996-97 1998-99 and 1999-2000 was
not conducted.
14. The Committee desired to know the reasons for non-compliance of the
recommendation of Estimates Committee by AIIMS. The Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, in a note, replied as under:
"It is regretted that the review of research projects at AIIMS was not conducted
on a regular basis. The observation of Audit has been noted for compliance and
the work of Research Projects not taken up for review earlier has been undertaken
by the Reserach Cell at AIIMS and is likely to be completed by October/
November 2002."
15. In reply to a question, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have stated
that an allocation of Rs. 12.00 lakhs is being made each year as Institute Research
Grant (I.R.G.) from the Budget allocated to the Institute during the year 1994-95 to
2003-2004. The details regarding funds allotment and expenditure in respect of Research
Projects in AIIMS during the last ten years alongwith the percentage of expenditure
incurred on research work out of total budgets allotments is as under :
(Rs. in lakhs)
Y ear Total Budget allocated under Non-Plan
1994-1995 5300
1995-1996 6629
1996-1997 7353
1997-1998 8921
1998-1999 14950
1999-2000 16000
2000-2001 16112
2001-2002 15500
2002-2003 12350
2003-2004 21818
16. In the Institute, the Patient care services and research activities are inter-
related. The normal grant to the Institute caters to the reserach activities and patient
care activities simultaneouly. However, the Institute receives research grants from
other Govt. funding organizations and Non-Govt. agencies also. Details of the extra
annual grant and expenditure on research projects for the last ten years from 1994-95 to
2003-04 are as follows:—
(Rs. in Lakhs)
Y ear Extra Mural funds received Expenditure
12 3
1994-1995 986.40 850.08
1995-1996 747.96 730.03
1996-1997 754.58 820.67

6
12 3
1997-1998 1022.36 916.72
1998-1999 1133.82 1090.83
1999-2000 1253.68 1210.62
2000-2001 1670.78 1465.79
2001-2002 2083.54 1893.74
2002-2003 2351.04 2243.42
2003-2004 2038.19 2226.93
17. It is evident from the above table that funds for Research projects was either
external agencies (extra-mural grants) or the intra-mural grants of the Institute. In this
connection, the Committee noted during evidence that Project Reports in both the
cases were submitted differently. In case of intra-mural grants, Reports were given to
the Institute and in the case of extra-mural grants, the Director, AIIMS had deposed as
follows:
"All the research projects and all the research workers are answerable to those
organizations for giving their reports."
He, however, added that the system was changed after the C&AG Report and
now the Reports for the extra-mural as well as intra-mural grants are required to be sent
to the institution.
18. The Committee desired to know as to why final reports in respect of 99
Projects/Schemes out of 185 research Projects/Schemes during 1995-96 to 1999-2000
were not submitted. In reply, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have stated in
a note, as under:
"The final reports of most of the projects were being submitted by the Principal
Investigators directly to the funding agencies. In compliance to the objection
raised by audit, effort is being made to obtain copies of the final reports and the
submission of a copy of the final report has also been made mandatory in the
case of allongoing projects at AIIMS....... Research activity did not suffer in any
way. Reporting is an ongoing process that cannot be always quantified. The
final research outcome in many cases take years to materialize."
19. A test check of records of research section by Audit has revealed that
investigators of projects were given advances to undertake the projects and amounts
were posted in the ledgers. In certain cases, the investigators did not render the
accounts even after completion of projects resulting in accumulation of money in the
hands of investigators. There were cases where the investigators had either retired or
had left the Institute without clearing the advances. While Rs 41.86 lakh were
outstanding with Investigators in respect of 110 projects. Rs 5.42 lakh was outstanding
in respect of 42 projects which were closed four to ten years ago.

7
20. As regards the issue of the investigators not rendering the accounts of the
advances given to undertake Research Projects, the Institute, in a written note have
stated as follows:
"The advances are sanctioned to project investigators on their request and the
same are noted in advance payment register. The register is reviewed quarterly
to know the position of total number of outstanding advances..... In case of
retiring project investigators, they are advised to settle their advances before
superannuation, otherwise outstanding advances are shown in their no demand
certificate for recovery actionout of their terminal benefits."
21. In reply to a query about the status of the outstanding advances, the
Committee were informed that:
"Of the Rs. 5.42 lakh outstanding in respect of 42 cases, 9 cases amounting to
Rs. 174230/- have already been sorted out and the reconciliation of the rest is in
the pipeline. Only 5-6 faculty members/researchers have retired and the rest are
still working at the Institue. The reason for the non-clearance is that the residual
work in a project sometimes continues well beyond the time a project is supposed
to have technically ended."
22. In response to a subsequent query on the extent of money recovered in
cases of investigators who had since retired, it was informed that a sum of Rs. 17,68,800
had since been recovered from them.
Achievements of the Research Projects
23. The Audit Review had revealed that the results of Research in AIIMS did not
bring in the intended benefits in terms of improved methodology, patenting or
commercialization. However, the Ministry, while taking a different view on the matter in
their written note, submitted as follows:
"AIIMS has been rated as the top Institution in Clinical Medical Research in the
country. It has also been rated as the top health institution in Biomedical Reserach.
According to an assessment done by NISSAT, Department of Scientific and
Industrial Research, 1999—it is the only health institution amongst 8 high output-
high impact research institutions representing all science disciplines."
24. Explaining the position in this regard the Director, AIIMS, stated as under:
"AIIMS has been in the fore-front of biomedical research. The nature of research
at AIIMS is largely clinical research and basic research as applied to patient
needs. Research at AIIMS contributes not only in terms of the large publication
output—more than 1300 publications in the last academic year, to be exact 1393,
but also in terms of the receiving, a large corpus of extramural grants, by a
process of competitive adjudication. The last financial year saw AIIMS receive
Rs. 23 crore as extramural grants. From the view point of funding agencies,
AIIMS, in recent years, has received the largest contribution to any biomedical
institution from the Indian Council of Medical Research, Department of Science
and Technology and Department of Biotechnology. The recognition of AIIMS

8
faculty as research workers of the highest quality is also obvious from their
selection as Fellows of the three main science Academies of the country.
22 faculty members from AIIMS are fellows of the Indian Academy of Science,
28 are Fellows of the National Academy of Science and 15 are Fellows of the
Indian National Science Academy. No other medical institution in the country
has as many Fellows. Moreover, six Faculty members (current and retired) are
Fellows of all three Science Academies—again an unmatched achievement. The
research prowess has also been acknowledged by Science Academies in the US
and Europe. Two of three Indian Fellows of the Royal Society, UK belong to the
AIIMS. Four AIIMS faculty members are Fellows of the Third World Academy
of Sciences, and one each of the USS, USSR and Norwegian Academy of Sciences.
The quantum of research, which the AIIMS performs has also to be viewed in
the context of the proportion of time the Faculty can apportion for research
activities. The large patient care load and the equally important training
programmes for undergraduates, postgraduates, doctoral and post-doctoral
students also require a significant proportion of their time. This is unlike any
other research institution in which there is some teaching, there is no service
element at all. Despite this, the AIIMS is the only health institution among eight
high output/high impact institutions in all scientific disciplines. This is indeed a
major achievement for an institution which is not a full time research institution,
since the faculty has to equitably distribute its time between patient care, teaching
and research. the AIIMS has been identified as the top institution in clinical
medical research and the top health institution in biomedical research by
independent assessment.
Research at AIIMS can also be gauged by the impact it has made on the National
Health Programmes and Policies. The National Goitre Control Programme and its
resultant Iodine Deficiency Disorders Programme stem entirely from the seminal
work conducted by several generations of research workers at AIIMS."
25. Elaborating further in this connection, the Director added:
"One is the stem cell research.This is the foremost in the world now. In this
research, the stem cells are taken out and introduced into the patient by way of
transplantation. We are injecting the autologus stem cells into the myocardium
or heart muscle to regenerate the heart muscle. Clinical studies, which are the
largest in the world, have been completed in the institute. We have done it in 35
cases where we have been able to show that the myocardium or the heart muscle,
which is damaged, can be repaired and regenerated as a working heart muscle.
Similarly we try to do this in pancreas. We are injecting the stem cells into
pancreas. We are trying to develop a methodology whereby we can control the
diabetes or we can eliminate the diabetes. The third and the foremost is the
neurological area. If we inject the stem cells into a person after the stroke, the
area of damaged brain can be reduced and recovery and rehabilitation will be
faster.
The other area of research, which is being done, is the Parkinson's disease. This
is the basic, significant and important stem cell research which has been done.

9
We have established a national facility called Organ Retrieval Banking
Organisation (ORBO) which is a nodal agency for the heart transplantation.
Also, for the first time we are able to do combined liver pancreatic and kidney
transplantation in the patients suffering from youngs onset pancreatic disease.
We have carried out the first heart transplantation in 1994. Since then we have
been doing heart transplantation regularly. Third August has been declared as
the national heart transplantation day".
26. Furthermore, in a written note, the Ministry provided a brief account of the
progress of research in AIIMS as follows:
"In the field of medical research, both basic and applied, AIIMS is the
acknowledged leader. The institute faculty has published 1108 papers in reputed
indexed journals while more than 300 research projects were completed during
the year 1999-2000 alone. Our milestones in research include important research
outcomes used to control Diarrheal diseases, Leprosy, Malaria, Cancer,
Tuberculosis, AIDS, Genetic Disorders, Iodine Deficiency Disorders and Hepatitis
and Liver Diseases. Our new initiatives in Research include progress in areas
such as Molecular Diagnostics and Therapeutics especially in Malaria, hepatitis,
leprosy, tuberculosis, diarrheal diseases, sexually transmitted diseases,
respiratory infections, Proteomics and Genomics for diagnosis and
prognostification of diseases and drug development, Structure based drug design
for rapid drug development and use of Molecular Epidemiology for identification
of viruses and bacteria".
27. During Oral Evidence, the Secretary, Ministry of Health further made the
following submission:
"As many as 8 patents have been filled by AIIMS in the last few years. As far as
diagnostic products are concerned, 12 new diagnostic products have been
brought out by AIIMS. All these have been the fruits of the research conducted
by this institute. So, it will be incorrect to say that this institute has not been
doing any research and adequate funds are not being provided. As far as research
is concerned, definitely, there is no limit to it. It can be done provided funds are
available. Like any other institute, this institute is also handicapped for want of
adequate funds because the entire health budget is limited......."
28. When asked to explain the level of interaction in AIIMS with the best available
Medical Research-Oriented Institutes, it was stated:
"A large number of researchers from abroad and India visit AIIMS & deliver
lectures and debate on collaborative research projects. This has led to the
development of many task forces, collaborative national research projects and
collaborative international research projects outlined under research activities.
The Institute has benefited from this interaction in the areas of Breast Cancer,
Lung Cancer, Radiological Procedures and Does Reaction in Chemo-Therapy,
Orthopaedics and Epidemiological studies etc."
Research in dental sciences
29. According to Audit para the Estimate Committee of the Fifth Lok Sabha had
recommended for establishment of a Centre for Post-graduate Education and Research

10
in Dental Sciences in the Institute during Sixth Five-year plan (1980—85). However, it
had not been set up so far, The Institute had stated in a written note submitted in
August 2000 that the Academic Committee had approved the proposal in July 1998 for
establishment of a Centre for Dental Education and Research. They had further stated
that the EFC memo had been prepared and approved by the Project Committee
constituted by the Institute and that the proposal was ready for placing before the
Finance Committee/Governing Body for its approval.
30. When enquired by the Committee regarding the reasons due to which the
Centre for Dental Education and Research could not be approved by Academic
Committee before July, 1998, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare responded as
follows:
"Initially the Academic Committee approved the setting up of the Centre for
Dental Education and Research in 1979. It was resubmitted in January 1998 for
the re-consideration by the Academic Committee of the Institute. The Academic
Committee in its meeting held on 25th July 1998 approved the proposal for the
Establishment of Centre for Dental Education and Research."
31. In response to the query with regard to the setting up of the Centre for Dental
Education not materialising, the Ministry inter-alia stated:
"It is true that the proposal for Establishment of Centre for Dental Sciences was
first approved by the Academic Committee in 1979. It could not materialize because
of financial constraints and the proposal was resubmitted to the same Committee
in 1998."
32. Responding to the query of the Committee pertaining to the status of the
proposal placed before the Financial Committee/Governing Body and the expected
date by which Centre would be in service of public, the Ministry in their written note,
inter-alia, stated:
"The site for the Centre has been identified and the architectural plan for the
Centre is now under consideration and will soon be submitted to the Delhi
Urban Arts Commission. However, because of insufficient funds projected in
the said EFC Memo, a revised EFC Memo for Rs. 42.14 crores has been resubmitted
to the Ministry for its reconsideration. Once approved, the Centre would be
ready for public service within two years of the time of initiation of the project."
33. In his submission before the Committee, the Director, All India Institute of
Medical Sciences assured the Committee as follows:
"We are going to have a dental college. I think the programme is on. The EFC has
been cleared. We will start a dental college. I think this was in the initial part of
the Parliament's report or when the Act was framed that there will be a dental
college. But for many reasons, I think the dental college was not taken up. But
we have taken it up now and a dental college will start. There is a need for post
graduation in dental services. We have lots of colleges where they are providing
under graduates in dental sciences. But there are very few post graduate colleges.
In fact the country is facing a shortage of post-graduate teachers for these
under graduate dental colleges."

11
34. In a written note submitted to the Committee, it was stated that the Centre
was expected to be completed within the stipulated period i.e. by September, 2005.
In another written submission to the Committee, the Ministry informed:
"Degree courses (MDS) in all branches of Dentistry will be started once the
centre is functional in 2005."
Academic Infrastructure
35. One of objectives of the Institute was to develop patterns of teaching in
undergraduate and post-graduate medical education in all its branches so as to
demonstrate a high standard of medical education to all medical colleges and other
allied institutions in India.
It is pertinent to note in this connection that, as per Audit, against the sanctioned
strength of 475 faculty members as on 31st March 2000, only 324 members were in
position resulting in a shortage of 151 (32 per cent). It may be seen that the largest
shortages are in the cadre of Assistant Professors. These posts were not filled up on
regular basis after September 1993 due to orders passed by the Hon'ble High Court of
Delhi in November 1994. However, 115 ad-hoc Assistant Professors were appointed
between 1993-94 to 2000-01, out of which 52 were appointed on ad-hoc basis three to
seven years back. The ad-hoc arrangement diluted the staffing norms while not
contributing effectively to excellence in education.
36. The Committee desired to know the system followed at the Institute to estimate
their requirement of Faculty Members. In reply the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare inter-alia submitted vide their written note:—
"..... the proposals for creation of faculty posts are submitted by the Heads of
the Department with detailed justification based on the requirements of their
respective Departments viz. increase in the number of patients, man-power to
handle new techniques, introduction of new facilities etc. The proposals so
received are placed before the Academic Committee for its approval. Once the
approval is sought, the same is placed before the Standing Finance Committee
for its approval from the purview of financial implications. On the ratification of
the minutes of the Standing Finance Committee by the Governing Body, the
proposal for creation of posts at the Professor level is sent to the Ministry of
Health and Family Welfare for its approval. After creation of the posts, the same
are advertised as temporary faculty posts."
37. When asked to explain the reasons for a large number of vacancies in the
cadre of Assistant Professors, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare stated in a
note as under:
".......about 135 ad-hoc appointments at the level of Assistant Professor have
been made during the last 8 years against leave vacancies on the request of
concerned Head of the Department of the Institute. These ad-hoc appointments
have been resorted to, as no regular appointments could be made in the entry-
level faculty posts of Assistant Professor at this Institute since September, 1993
due to an interim order passed by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi on 15.11.1994,

12
i.e. "till next date, reservation be not given effect to" in a Civil Writ Petition filed
by the Faculty Association of AIIMS on the issue of the reservations in Faculty
posts. Finally, the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi dismissed the aforesaid Writ
Petition on 26.11.2001 and accordingly, 164 vacant posts of Assistant Professors
in various disciplines were advertised with reservation as per the Government
Rules, for making regular appointment. The last date for receipt of applications
was 10.5.2002. The process of selection to these post has already been started
and it is expected to be completed within the next 2-3 months."
38. On the issue of ad-hoc appointments of Doctors and vacancies in faculty, the
Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare stated:
"....because of the court case and other such things, we were not able to take
Assistant Professors, which is the entry point of the faculty members. So we
took them on ad hoc basis. This type of ad hoc business was done because
there was a court binding on us. Faculty of AIIMS went to the court against the
reservation policy that there should be no reservation of vacancies for SC/ST
and OBC categories. The courts sat over it for 7 years. In these 7 years work had
to be performed. We have to look after the patient-care services. That is how the
ad hoc appointments have come. Otherwise, the ad hoc appointments were not
the pattern earlier.
As regards regularization of the ad hoc doctors, already 164 doctors have been
regularized. So the problem of ad hoc doctors that we were carrying, today we
have come out of it. Now there is no further ad hoc appointment. We have
something like 70 vacancies in faculty. All these posts have been advertised.
The process of recruitment is going on. Within next two-three months, all these
vacancies will be filled up."
39. In a subsequent note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry have furnished
the following position in respect of sanctioned and in-position strength in respect of
teaching staff.
Year 2004
Sl. No. Name of the Post Sanctioned strength In position strength
1. Professor 115 139
2. Additional Professor 44 103
3. Associate Professor 115 83
4. Assistant Professor 226 112
5. Principal/Lecturer, 08 06
College of Nursing
It is evident, from the table that there was still shortage of teaching staff,
particularly Associate Professors and Assistant Professors in AIIMS.
40. Audit review has also revealed that the Institute neither proceeded on a
definite organised basis to create the requisite impact on the functioning of medical
institutions elsewhere in the country nor formed any committee to achieve the above
objectives. No exercise had been done to correlate the production of any category of
professional, para medical or non-medical staff to meet specific identified needs.

13
41. However, in a note, the Ministry have contended that the cherished objective
of the Institute to develop patterns of teaching in all branches of undergraduate and
postgraduate medical education to demonstrate high standard of Medical Education
is being fully accomplished. Based on a nation-wide survey, the AIIMS medical college
has been voted to be the best in the country.
42. Further, according to the Ministry, a Centre for Medical Education and
Technology (CMET) was established at AIIMS in 1989 in keeping with the leadership
role in education, with the following broad objectives:
— To promote Faculty development and develop skills in curricular planning.
— To rationalize the use of educational technology for designing effective
teaching.
— To influence institutional policies for improved educational planning.
— To undertake research in medical education.
— To act as an advanced centre for designing formal instructional courses
for certification.
— To develop database and information retrieval services on various aspects
of medical education.
— To undertake production of learning resource materials for the training of
medical and other health care personnel.
43. Further according to the Ministry, CMET was designed by WHO-SEARO as
a regional centre for organizing training programs for the health professionals in the
South East Asian region. The Faculty members of CMET were also being invited as
Resource persons for various national training workshops organized by the State
Governments and other organizations.
44. Explaining the position further in this regard, the Ministry have stated:
"The AIIMS has also been actively involved in disseminating information and
training medical professionals through the process of short and long term training
programmes, which are not linked to degrees. Short-term training attachments
last for a maximum of 6 months and provide necessary skills enhancement for
postgraduates and even senior medical professionals from different parts of the
country. From 1996-2003, AIIMS has imparted short-term training in several
clinical and basic disciplines to 1678 doctors and scientists from different parts
of the country, mainly from various governmental institutions and medical
colleges. This has helped in resource enhancement in these institutions and
transfer of the necessary expertise to different parts of the country. Long-term
training has also been imparted for periods upto 2 years, mainly to medical
professionals sponsored through the WHO fellowship scheme and also for
defence medical personnel. From 1996-2003, 303 candidates have utilized the
WHO fellowlship scheme to receive long-term training at AIIMS. In addition, 62
other medical professionals (mainly from the Armed Forces) received long-term
training at AIIMS."

14
Brain Drain
45. It has been pointed out in the Audit para that the Estimate Committee in their
102nd report (Fifth Lok Sabha) had recommended that steps should be taken to complete
studies for ascertaining the cost of education and training in the Institute and to bring
home to students the cost incurred by Government on their training so as to instil in
them a sense of obligation to the country. The Institute had not conducted studies to
ascertain the cost of training graduate and post-graduate doctor since 1987. The
academic section of the Institute never conducted any survey of graduates/post-
graduates who qualified from the Institute and the Institute was not able to provide
any detail of that. However, on going through report on review of extra-mural funded
projects from different funding agencies which were closed as on 31.3.1992 in a pilot
study based on 390 respondents, 49 per cent were practising/employed abroad. To
that extent specialised medical attention has been denied to the beneficiaries.
46. The Committee expressed concern that substantial number of students were
practising/employed abroad. Responding to it the Institute inter-alia submitted as
follows:
"It will perhaps be not possible to put a pre-condition on such bright students
on not going abroad after obtaining training at the Institute as this will amount
to denying the right of self progression and advancement. If the country can
create appropriate opportunities of training, jobs and environment, remuneration
etc., such an outflow will automatically be reduced."
However, in a written submission made to the Committee it was added:
"As of now the system has been completely streamlined & the guidelines for
going abroad are strictly enforced. This has ensured that there is no exodus of
doctors on foreign assignment. However, still if someone resigns the job,
vacancies are filled up through the due recruitment process."
47. Replying to another question as to whether the Ministry had assessed the
cost of medical education provided to such Doctors who had found their vocations
abroad, it was replied:
"No such assessment of the cost of medical education provided to the  doctors
has been conducted so far."
48. The Committee desired to know as to what action was taken against those
members of teaching staff who had gone abroad on study leave but failed to return. In
reply, the Ministry submitted as follows:
"During the last five years, 08 faculty members did not return after completion of
the approved period of leave. The penalty of removal from service has been
imposed on 05 faculty members and with-holding of two increments was imposed
on another such faculty member. Rest of the 2 were exonerated by the Inquiry
Committee."

15
49. When the Committee sought to know the criteria for grant of study leave, the
Secretary informed the Committee viz.:
"The guidelines are to entitle one year's assignment abroad for every five years
of service in the Institute. Once he comes back, he has to serve for a minimum
period of three years... At a given time, one Faculty Member from a particular
department may be permitted for a long term assignment/fellowships etc. and
one faculty member for a short term assignment/fellowship upto 3 months keeping
in view the strength of the concerned department, so that the work of the
department may not suffer."
50. Enumerating the guidelines framed by the Governing Body of the Institute, it
was inter-alia stated that:
"Any request for extention after completion of maximum permitted duration i.e.
two years will be considered as resignation letter, which will be processed by the
competent authority immediately."
51. Responding to a question whether the Departments of the Institute faced
any problems due to absence of such Faculty Members who proceeded on long study
leave, the Secretary stated:
".....the Head of the Department before sending anybody is asked to give an
undertaking in writing that he will manage the work with the help of existing
staff."
52. Clarifying the situation further, the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare stated during the Oral Evidence:
"As far as the people leaving the organization is concerned, the position is as
follows. Of course, it is said that a number of people are leaving AIIMS, etc.
Here, I would like to place one issue before you. Till recently a large number of
faculty members of AIIMS were on ad hoc appointments. They did not have a
regular position in AIIMS. So, they were not very sure as to what was going to
be their future in AIIMS. So they started leaving. When they got a better
opportunity in Escorts or some other Institute here or abroad, they left AIIMS in
large numbers. But, in the last one year, most of those ad hoc appointees have
now been regularized. Today, except a few, I think, most of the people, who were
on ad hoc appointments, have been regularized. This has been a great
achievement  in AIIMS in the last couple of years. So, now the Director is very
confident that this brain drain will not take place. From the regular faculty of
AIIMS, not many people have left. In the last three or four years, only eight
people have left the Institute out of the regular faculty. Earlier, many of those
who were on ad hoc  appointments used to leave. Now that they have been
regularized, we expect that there will not be much of brain drain from AIIMS."
53. While elaborating on the preventive action taken to stop brain drain, he
further stated as follows:
"Today we have evolved a pattern by which people cannot just leave the
institution on their will. Even those who want to go abroad on foreign training or
other such assignment, there is a stipulation that any member of the faculty can

16
have certain limited number of years. After putting in five years of service a
member can have one year's assignment abroad. After one year he will have to
come back. There are nine such cases where members after completing one year
have overstayed the period of deputation. Disciplinary action has been taken
against all of them. In fact some of them have been removed from service also."
He also assured the Committee as follows:
"As of today, there is not even a single member of faculty who is overstaying.
That discipline has been brought back now because now the faculty understands
very clearly that if anybody overstays he will be checked out."
Autonomy of AIIMS
54. During the course of examination of the Audit findings, the Committee had
expressed grave concern over the fact that this Premier Institute had strayed away
from its intended objectives. While analysing the causes for the same, the Committee
were of the view that the foremost reason for the same was erosion in the level of
autonomy enjoyed by this Institute.
On being asked, the Ministry in its written submission inter-alia stated:
".......the functioning of the Institute is affected due to the limited nature of
autonomy. This pertains mainly to creation of posts at the Institute."
55. When the Committee sought suggestions from the Institute to restore their
autonomy and bring them on par with the other Premier autonomous institutions like
IITs and IIMs, it was candidly stated:
"AIIMS should be given complete financial and functional autonomy. Besides
complete financial & functional autonomy on the pattern of IIMs & IITs is
desired without any political interference in management and decision making
process of the AIIMS."
56. The following suggestions were submitted by AIIMS for grant of fair measure
of autonomy:—
"As per para (7) of the AIIMS Act—(i) There shall be a President of the Institute
who shall be nominated by the Central Government from among the members
other than the Director of the Institute. (ii) The President shall exercise such
powers and discharge such functions as are laid down in this Act or as may be
prescribed by rules or regulations. Generally the Union Minister of Health and
Family Welfare is nominated as President of the Institute. However, system for
appointment of President as prevalent in the Central Universities, IIMS & IITs
may be followed.
Despite being an autonomous Institute, the AIIMS depends upon the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare for financial grants under the plan and non-plan
heads. This causes problems as funds are never sufficient to meet the
requirements of AIIMS and are subject to multiple level scrutiny. It is proposed
that the plan budget may be allocated to the AIIMS directly by the Planning

17
Commission and the non-plan budget may be provided in sufficient quantity to
meet the minimum patient care obligations of AIIMS as per the actual requirement.
Many of the proposals, particularly, those relating to revision of pay scales or
upgradation of pay scales at AIIMS are subject to the approval of the Ministry
of Finance. This causes lots of delay and many times rejection of the proposals
from the Ministry of Finance. Within the delegated financial powers of the AIIMS
these matters may also be decided at the level of the Institute only with the
approval of appropriate bodies like SFC and GB."
57. When asked to comment on the above suggestions, the Ministry inter-alia
stated as follows:
".......except for the appointment of Director, the institute has been given full
powers for creation of posts upto the level of Associate Professor and also in
regard to filling up of the same. The All India Institute of Medical Sciences is a
super-speciality institution and enjoys autonomy in providing in-patient and
out-patient services, teaching, training of undergraduate/postgraduate students,
research, etc. and provides tertiary care to patients. The institute enjoys full
autonomy in the above matter. Sufficient funds are provided to the institute both
under Plan and Non-Plan within the limited resources available. However, while
utilizing the plan funds, the institute has to keep in mind the general economy
instructions and guidelines issued by the Ministry of Finance and other
departments from time to time. Plan funds are utilized in respect of only approved
plan schemes for which they are to follow rules and regulations and guidelines
issued by the Planning Commission from time to time."
It was further added:
"It is absolutely essential that the staff selection function be taken away from
the Staff Selection Committee of the institute and function needs to be entrusted
to outside agency like UPSC or such independent and creditable agency. The
Act of 1956 needs to be relocated as it has become outdated. The command and
control system needs to be re-oriented encouraging functional autonomy but
administrative needs to be made hierarchical."
58. The Ministry expressed agreement over the suggestion that the status of the
Institute be made similar to that of IITs & IIMs. On the appointment of President,
Ministry stated that the suggestion of the Institute to make it as the one prevalent in
Central Universities, IIMs & IITs, was under process.
Patient Care Services
59. According to the Ministry, AIIMS is rated as a leading Hospital-cum-Research
Institute in India providing specialist and super specialist treatment to general as well
as referred cases from all over the country. However, Audit in their scrutiny had
concluded that this Institute as a teaching hospital had failed on one hand in developing
academic excellence and innovation in technology, and, on the other, in providing
quality treatment as a specialist referral hospital of national importance. The basic
reason cited by Audit for the same were large shortages in the cadre of doctors and

18
nurses that had resulted in depriving the patients timely diagnosis, treatment and
medical care. As per the Audit review, the doctor-patient ratio was very high in the
Institute and the waiting time for surgery ranged from two and a half months to 34
months.
60. The Audit further reported that a large number of equipments, procured for
use in specialized diagnosis and treatment, were either installed late or not installed at
all or were lying damaged. Since most of the resources of the Institute had gone
towards the upkeep of the hospital, the infrastructure continued to be deficient. Audit
had also noticed that the Institute could not use a substantial part of resources that it
received from the National Illness Assistance Fund for providing treatment to the
poorest of the poor. Further, patient care a crucial element in drug de-addiction treatment,
had suffered as the total number of nurses deployed on duty was half of the requisite
strength and casualty, emergency & intensive care facilities were not available. The
Audit also pointed out that the Cancer Hospital was not fully functional and Specialized
Centre for treatment of Trauma had not materialized though the plan was approved in
1995.
61. The succeeding paragraphs deal with the various shortcomings/irregularities
in the patient care services provided by the Institute, as noted by the Public Accounts
Committee during their course of further examination of the subject.
Hospital services—Wards and OPDs
62. The Institute provides medical care to patients either by admitting them to
Private and various General wards or through the OPD. The Institute has 50 clinical
departments including superspeciality centres to manage practically, all types of
diseases except burn cases, dog-bite cases and cases of infectious diseases.
Accordidng to the Institute, on an average about 7,000 patients attend the OPD per
day. About 75,000 patients are admitted per year. In AIIMS evening OPDs were started
in the discipline of Medicine, Surgery, Paediatrics and Obst. & Gynaecology in January,
2003 with the existing manpower and Infrastructure on the second floor of Rajkumari
Amrit Kaur OPD Block. However, the same was discontinued in July, 2003 as it was
seen that the number of patients attending in the evening OPD was abysmally low.
63. Though the Public Accounts Committee (Sixth Lok Sabha) in their 49th Report
had recommended that the strength of doctors be suitably fixed to bring down the
waiting time of out patients to half an hour at the most, the Institute had not fixed so far
any norms for deployment of doctors in OPD on the basis of workload to ensure
satisfactory patient care. On being inquired of the action taken by the Institute on the
said recommendation of PAC, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, vide the
information submitted to the Committee inter-alia responded as follows:
"The Committee has recommended increase in the number of doctors without
taking into consideration the constraint of space in the existing buildings. Further
uncontrolled and excessive increase in the population of Delhi without
commensurating increase of hospitals and lack of referral character of the AIIMS,
resulting in large number of patients with trivial ailments coming to the AIIMS
OPD besides the serious patients, contributed to the excessive workload for the

19
doctors in the OPD's and long waiting time for the patients. However, appropriate
action has been initiated to meet the requirements of better patient care and
lesser waiting time for more number of patients availing services of various
specialities and super-specialities. An ambitious master plan has also been made
to almost quadruple its patient care facilities including the services, doctors,
nurses and other staff. The mega project has been approved by the Governing
Body and is awaiting approval from statutory Government authorities."
It was further added:
"A committee under the chairmanship of the Dean periodically reviews the clinical
workload of the departments concerned and decides on development and/or
introduction of newer speciality and super speciality clinics and also analyzes
the requirement of doctors at a given point of time. It is the job of the Standing
Committees like Academic Committee, Finance Committee, and the Governing
Body of the Institute to review the recommendations and sanction additions/
upgradations whenever needed".
64. The Committee desired to know the Doctor-Patient ratio in AIIMS in each
discipline and whether there has been any increase noticed on the same, particularly in
view of the fact that patients from all over the country avail of specialist treatment
facilities in the Institute. In reply the Ministry have stated as under:
"As far as the General OPD in the AIIMS Main Hospital is concerned, there are
about 130 doctors available daily for providing consultation and treatment to
the patients. The average doctor-patient ratio is 1:32 as far as General OPDs are
concerned. As regards super speciality OPDs/clinics, the number of doctors
available is variable and depends on other responsibilities pertaining to O.T.,
emergency, teaching, training and research. In the last 5 years the increase
noticed on the same is as under:
Y ear Ratio
1999-2000 1:21
2000-2001 1:24
2001-2002 1:26
2002-2003 1:30
2003-2004 1:32
AIIMS follows the norms of having a fixed "core" strength of six faculty members
and six residents (Senior and Junior) for unit/ward comprising of 40 general beds
and 2-3 isolation rooms. Thus the doctor patient ratio as far as indoor services is
concerned comes to 1:35. However, it may be noted that other categories of
doctors like Pool Officers, Research Associates, S.R.Os. and J.R.Os. also involved
in patient care activities along with research, have not been taken into
consideration for calculating this doctor patient ratio."

20
65. To a specific query of the Committee regarding adequacy of the existing set
up in terms of space, teaching and non-teaching staff and facilities/services, the Ministry
stated as follows:
"As far as AIIMS is concerned, with regard to the requirement of space, steps
were undertaken for optimum utilization of existing facilities. This inter-alia
included (a) Decongestion of RAK OPD Block, (b) Streamlining of Emergency
Services in addition to construction of emergency ward with 60 beds includng
two High Dependency Units, (c) Augmentation of new Pvt. Ward facilities. In
spite of shortage of manpower in AIIMS, the existing manpower was re-deployed
in a judicious and rational manner to provide patient-care services in the areas
mentioned above. Trauma Centre with a capacity of 186 beds was nearing
completion. Centre of Dental Education and Research with 20 beds was likely to
be completed by June, 2005. Position Emission Tomography which would provide
diagnostic facilities in the field of Cardiology, Oncology and Neurology was
likely to be commissioned by September-October, 2004. CN Tower with 7 floors
was proposed to be constructed. IRCH with 7 floors increasing the bed strength
from 96-200 had been commissioned."
Indoor Patients
66. As regards the procedures of admission of patients to the Institute, the
Committee have been informed that:
"The patients are admitted for in-patient treatment in various departments
depending upon the nature and severity of the ailment and as such specific
number of patients in the wait list for various ailments in each department is not
maintained. However, presently there is no waiting time for private ward admission.
For general ward patients, the waiting time depends upon number of factors i.e.
disease being treated, stage of disease, other system involvement, critically of
condition, operability etc.
As far as AIIMS Hospital is concerned, there is a provision of accommodation/
shelter to the patients/attendants by way of two Dharmshalas namely Rajgarhia
Vishram Sadan & Surekha Vishram Sadan. One more Dharmshala (Sai Bhakti
Samaj) is also likely to be operational shortly. The total bed capacity of all the
three Dharmshalas providing shelter to the relatives of the patients is 402 beds."
67. According to the Institute, the number of beds available in various wards/
units of the hospital and the centres for indoor patients as on 1.7.2004 is as under:
A.I.I.M.S. Hospital (Main)  986 (including casualty)
C.N. Centre   360
RP Centre    301
Dr. BRA  IRCH     96
Drug De-addiction Centre     50
CRHS Ballabhgarh     60
Total 1853

21
68. The Ministry further informed the Committee that in the next one year AIIMS
would add another 465 beds to its existing strength of 1853. When asked to explain
whether the Institute was capable of handling the ever-increasing rush of patients, as
it was expected to be well equipped for treating mostly critical cases, the Ministry
submitted as follows:
"AIIMS is facing a huge attendance in the OPD with about 15,00,000 patients
per year attending it. Many speciality/super speciality departments have already
augmented their indoor facilities by developing High Dependency Units (HDUs)
for the respective wards and designated ICUs for admitting critical patients in
the Main Hospital. Several new speciality Centres are being planned. The Trauma
Centre, Dental Centre, Dr. BRA  IRCH, additional Cardio-Thoracic & Neuro
Sciences Tower will be commissioned in the coming year itself."
Strength of Doctors and Nurses
69. According to the Audit, the number of patients, number of specialists available
and time taken per patient during March 2000 in six main OPDs (Dental, Paediatric
surgery, Neurology, Cardiology, IRCH & ENT) was as follows:—
Sl. Speciality T otal Total Duration No. of No. of Time
No. (OPD) No. of No. of of OPD Specialists Patients taken
Patients days on who seen per per
seen in in working attended hour per patient
March March day in OPD in specialist/ in
2000 2000 M arch March 2000 doctor Minutes
2000 (in
hours)
1. Dental 5862 25 6 6 7 9
2. Paediatric 1702 25 5 1 13 4
Surgery
3. Neurology 2842 14 4 7 7 9
4. Cardiology 9443 25 4 14 7 9
+ CTVs
5. IRCH 4133 20 7 4 7 9
6. ENT 9635 25 4 6 16 4
70. The Committee desired to know whether the present strength of doctors and
nurses is sufficient to provide medical care to the patients. In reply, the Ministry have
stated:—
"So far as break-up of Nurses is concerned, the nurses are posted in the
Department/wards on rotational basis keeping in view the requirement in each
department/wards. At present total bed strength is 1853 while the sanctioned
strength of nurses is 1866. The sanctioned strength of nurses is in accordance
with the norms and enough to meet the existing load of patient care services.
More nurses posts are going to be sanctioned shortly in the revised EFC proposal
for Trauma Centre & Dr. BRA  IRCH. Whenever, bed strength and support
services are increased the strength of the Nurses and doctors will also require to
be increased as per norms.With the completion of various projects in the pipeline
not only will additional patient care facilities be created but also additional
manpower will be employed.

22
At present 65 faculty posts are lying vacant at this Institute. Most of these
vacancies have fallen vacant during the 2003 and 2004 due to promotion,
retirement and all the vacancies are being published in the national dailies soon
for making regular appointments and will be filled within 5-6 months."
71. When the Committee enquired about the steps taken to enhance the strength
of Doctors and nurses so as to provide proper medical care to the patients, the Ministry
assured the Committee viz.:
"The sanctioned strength of nurses is in accordance with the norms and enough
to meet the existing load of patient care services. Whenever, bed strength and
support services are included, the strength of Nurses & Doctors will also require
to be included as per norms. With the completion of various projects in the
pipeline, not only will additional patient care facilities be created but also
additional manpower will be employed."
72. The Committee further sought to know if the Institute proposed to give any
financial incentives/more and better accommodation and other relevant facilities etc.
to Doctors as well as Nursing Staff for handling increased workload due to heavy
patient traffic, and long and odd hours of duty. To this, the Ministry inter alia stated:
"Nursing staff and Resident doctors have shift duties. Most of them are being
provided residential accommodation in the Institute Campuses/Hostels. However,
in the future expansion programme for AIIMS more residential units will be
constructed. Regarding financial incentives the pay scales of faculty at AIIMS
are higher as compared to other hospitals. They are given financial grants for
foreign visits."
73. Regarding the steps taken by the Ministry/AIIMS to increase the manpower
in technical/non-technical category in the Institute, the following was submitted:
"The activities of the Institute have increased manifold and many new areas
have been developed/established, but the strength of the manpower has not
been increased proportionately. To ensure that patient care services are not
hampered, 811 persons in Group 'C' and 1061 persons in Groups D, are working
on temporary/adhoc basis. In addition to this, Institute has also given some
services on contract.
The requirement of the posts and departments have been worked out and action
has already been initiated to create posts.But the same has not fully materialised
due to financial constraints of the Institute."
Deployment of Nurses
74. According to Audit, 319 new posts were created in the cadre of nurses during
1994—99, however, it did not serve the purpose as the sanctioned strength of 1994-95
was not fully utilized. It was observed in Audit scrutiny that there was a shortage in
cadre of nurses ranging between 27 to 38 percent during the review period.
75. The Committee asked the Ministry to explain reasons for shortage in the
cadre of nurses as well as present position of deployment of nurses. The Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare, in their advance information, replied as follows:
"the shortage in the cadre of nurses was because of the reservation policy of the
Government. Since qualified nurses from the reserved categories were not

23
available, the posts were lying vacant. By special recruitment drives, most of
these posts have been filled up and now more than 95% of the sanctioned posts
of the nursing staff are filled up."
76. On being inquired about the assessment of the impact of shortage of
nurses on patient care and action thereon, the Ministry, in their advance information,
stated:
"the shortage is being constantly monitored. Even the earlier shortage of nurses
was not allowed to affext the patient care in the Institute by employing ad-hoc/
temporary nursing staff against the vacant posts."
77. The Audit also observed that nurses were being trained in two courses only
i.e. B.Sc. Nursing (Post Certificate) and B.Sc. (Hons.) Nursing which provided general
training and no specialized training in critical areas was provided.
78. Replying to the query of the Committee in this regard, the Ministry informed
as follows:
"the nurses are being deputed to participate in various specialized training
programmes, conferences, workshops synopsis etc. to enhance their knowledge
and skills. In the last financial year (2001-2002) 56 nurses participated in various
training programmes, conferences etc.
..........Besides that, the AIIMS runs it own regular in-service training/programme
for the nurses in various specialized areas, in collaboration with respective clinical
departments and hospital administration like intensive care, accident and
emergency care, nursing care of the AIDS affected patients and hospital waste
management."
Waiting time for surgery and availing diagnostic facilities
79. It is pertinent to note that the waiting time for patients awaiting surgery in
AIIMS ranged between 2 months to 34 months. However, the audit noted that actual
waiting time may be much higher if the waiting time for Ultra Sound, C.T. Scan, M.R.I.
Scan are added.
When required, the Institute in a written note, stated as under:-
"all patients undergoing surgery are normally admitted at least one or two days
prior to the operation and remain in the hospital for 4 days to even more than a
month after operation depending upon the procedure carried out and the level of
sickness involved. As the beds belonging to different surgical discipline are
different, the availability and allocation of beds according to the need  of the
patients leads to different waiting time for patient of different categories and
disciplines. Diagnostic investigations like MRI, CT Scan, Ultrasound are also
made available to patients according to their degree of disability and urgency.
Efforts are being made to increase the hours of running of these services in order
to ensure that the waiting period is substantially reduced."

24
80. When enquired by the Committee whether patients visitings AIIMS for
treatment were made to wait for a painfully long time to undergo diagnostic procedure
e.g. Ultrasonography, CT Scan, X-ray, MRI Scan, Mammography etc., the Ministry in
a written note stated as under:
Sl. Name of the diagnostic W aiting time
No. Investigation General OPD Private OPD Indoor patients
1. CT Scan 0-6 weeks 0-6 weeks 2-3 days
2. Ultrasound -do- -do- -do-
3. Conventional X-ray No waiting time except when bowel preparation required
4. Mammography 0-6 weeks 0-6 weeks 2-3 days
5. MRI 2-3 months 2-3 months 2-4 days
81. On being asked if the patients were  made to wait for months together to avail
facilities available for various diagnostic procedures, it was stated:
"It is not a fact that the patients are compelled to wait for months together for
various tests/diagnostic procedures. Since priority is given to Emergency/indoor
patients, in whose case  all efforts are made to carry out the investigations on the
same day, the OPD patients may have to wait."
It was furhter submitted:
"........we are moving forward to open a new diagnostic facility centre whereby
the existing facilities are totally used for the general ward patients. The number
of private wards is going to be 170 in the near future. These new diagnostic
facilities will be separated so that the time taken by the private ward patients and
the general patients will be considerably reduced thereby avoiding the waiting
period. As of now, in certain Department, there is no waiting list for any of the
procedures."
82. The Committee desired to know whether any study has been conducted to
work out of the total number of machines required in AIIMS to cater to the heavy
patient load and reduce waiting time, the Ministry informed that necessary machines
and equipment are being provided to meet the ever increasing demands based on the
patients load, availability of new technology and its direct impact on patients care &
research.
Supply of Surgical consumables and Medicines to patients
83. According to Audit, the Institute purchased surgical consumables to be
supplied to the patients undergoing surgery free of cost. A few patients were also
asked to purchase certain items which were not available with the hospital. On test
check, the Audit found that a patient was asked to purchase certain items including
21 surgical ones from the market in the months of March 2000 despite those being
available with the main store of the Institute, out of which 15 items were issued by the
main store on indents of the concerned department.
84. On the policy of the Institute regarding the supply of surgical items to
patients, the Ministry of Health & Family W elfare inter-alia submitted the following:
"All commonly used surgical items (like bandages, gauze, gloves, syringes, I.V.
sets, B.T. set etc.) and life saving/emergency items (like endotracheal tube, foley's

25
catheter, gastric tube etc.) are procured and supplied for all the patients in the
AIIMS hospital. However, the costly items like hip/knee replacement prosthesis,
shunts etc. are usually bought by the patients. However, in case of very poor/
indigent patients, the hospital procures and supplies all the items required on
the commendation of the treating consultant/medical social services officer."
It was further added by the Ministry, in a written note as under:
"As far as AIIMS main hospital is concerned, all medicines and surgical items
are provided to patients attending emergency services (Casualty). For admitted
general ward patients, essential drugs and surgical items numbering 130
approximately are issued from the hospital. However, due to constraints of budget,
main hospital cannot afford to provide higher antibiotics, anticancer drugs,
specialized suture and other surgical consumables from hospital stores. However,
some financial assistance programme for poor and indigent patients are in
existence."
Further, it was submitted that:
"Poor patients who cannot affort to buy medicines etc. are issued the same from
the hospital on the recommendations of the treating consultant to the effect that
the patient is poor and cannot afford to buy the medicines etc."
85. The Committee sought to know the Ministry's position on the objections
raised in Audit review about non-supply of surgical consumables to a patient. The
Ministry, in their written note, inter-alia stated as follows:
"It is possible that in the instant case, the item available was not a commonly
used life saving item and therefore the patient could have been asked to purchase
the surgical items.
The remedial measure to stop repetition of such an event is that all the medical
and surgical items required for all the patients in the hospital are procured and
issued by the hospital for which the non-plan budget of the Institute would
need to be increased drastically. The Institute is also in the process of levying
package charges for the entire spectrum of therapeutic, diagnostic and surgical
services being offered by it on the prevailing pattern of the Cardio thoracic and
Neurosciences Center. This step would obviate the scope of any adhocism in
the procurement and use of surgical or other items."
86. When asked to elaborate the existing procedure for procurement, storage
and supply of medicines/drugs to patients, the Ministry informed:
"A full-fledged store section in the main hospital headed by the Store Officer
and other staff working under him are responsible for the procurement and issue
of medicines and other surgical/general/linen etc. items to the various patient
care areas in the hospital. The drugs and surgical items are selected by respective
selection Committees comprising of senior faculty members from major disciplines
who are responsible for selection of items based on their experience, following
the laid down store purchase rules/procedures.

26
All life saving and basic drugs and surgical items are provided free of cost to the
indoor patients, in General wards & Emergency/Casualty. However, patients are
requested to procure expensive antibiotics and surgical items used in patients
care."
87. To a question whether any discrepancies were noticed in the supply of
medicines to patients, the Ministry replied:
"No case has come to notice where discrepancies were noticed in the supply of
medicine to the patients in last three years."
Treatment for poor patients
88. Audit scrutiny had revealed that the Institute had been receiving grants/
financial assistance from the Ministry and the Prime Minister's Relief Fund, besides
other outside agencies, by cheques drawn in favour of the Director of the Institute for
treatment of individual poor patients. Money so received was kept in patient treatment
account. Apart from this, money was also received in the form of cash donations from
individuals, religious trusts & donations boxes in various wards and OPDs of the
hospital for which the Institute maintained poor patient accounts.
89. While furnishing details regarding the facilities available to poor-patients,
the Ministry, in their written note, submitted that:
"Patients belonging to the lowest strata of Society are provided financial
assistance from various Govt. and other voluntary agencies like P.M. Relief
Fund, National Arogya Nidhi, Delhi C.M. Relief Fund, NIAF, Sai Baba Trust,
Cancer Sahyog, Rotarians etc."
90. The Committee learnt that National Illness Assistance Fund (NIAF) was
established by the Government in January 1997 in order to provide financial assistance
to poor patients living below the poverty line for treatment of life threatening diseases.
Under this scheme, the Government of India provided an advance payment of Rs. 10
lakh to the Medical superintendent of the Institute to enable him to sanction an amount
upto Rs. 25,000 immediately to reach deserving case for treatment in the Institute.
Cases requiring more than Rs. 25,000 were sent to the Managing Committee of  NIAF
for approval/sanction.
91. Audit noticed that an amount of Rs. 10 lakh received in December 1997
remained deposited in the bank account till October 1999. It was further noticed that an
amount of Rs. 4.85 lakh was utilized between November 1999 and March 2000 leaving
credit balance of  Rs. 5.15 lakh.
92. When asked to respond to the Audit observation during the course of
examination by the Committee, the Ministry in a written note inter-alia stated:
"There was certain teething operational problems related to the effective
operation of the National illness Assistance fund which were surmounted after
the first few months of the starting of the fund. The fund is being very effectively
utilized at this juncture to redress the constraints faced by the poor patients."

27
93. On being further queried as to why the NIAF was not optimally utilized, the
Ministry inter-alia stated:
"The NIAF during the time of its inception could not be utilized to its optimum
due to various technical difficulties and bottlenecks which were likely in the way
of implementation. The Central Committee of  NIAF was apprised of the difficulties
being faced by the hospital. These difficulties have been sorted and now a large
number of poor and indigent patients are getting regular financial assistance
under this scheme."
94. Elborating futher on the utilization of the fund by AIIMS, it was stated:
"Due to awareness regarding thise scheme, the number of applicants has increased
manifold. As a result, funds get exhausted soon and there is timelag in
replenishment of funds from central agency. Patients who have been
recommended assistance under this scheme have to wait for disbursement during
this timelag."
95. On the steps that could be taken so that deserving patients get relief from
this fund well in time, the Institute has suggested that:
"Allocation of a higher quantum of funds and well in advance before last allocated
funds exhaust, can avoid this delay. As a beginning a sum of Rs. 10.00 crores
may be given to the AIIMS for treatment of only poor patients needing immediate
medical assistance. This will take care of all serious diseases like Kidney, Heart
Liver, Cancer, Brain etc."
Machinery and Equipments
96. As regard to the purchase and disposal of machinery and equipment in the
Institute, various irregularities were noted by Audit. The Institute had purchased one
'Counter chamber' to be used as sample analyser for Department of Pharmacoloy in the
year 1994-95 for Rs. 46.55 lakh out of a grant from Germany. The machine was stated to
be non-functioning. However, the machine was neither taken in the stock register of
the department nor anyone know about its working and whereabouts of the local
agent. In another case cited by Audit, a repeat order for 'Non-Invasive continuous
hemodynamic monitoring system' costing Rs. 13.86 lakh was placed by the Institute in
August 1997 on the basis of purchase made in May 1996 without calling for tenders for
the Department of  Anesthesiology when the earlier equipment purchased in 1996 was
not being used by the department. Audit also noted that the four vital equipments
costing Rs. 2.30 crore purchased/imported during 1993 to March 2000 were not installed
as the essential parts required to run the system were not supplied and the equipments
supplied were different from those ordered. Four equipments costing Rs. 34.70 lakh
and one costing 42650 Swiss Frances installed during September 1989 to March 1998
remained out of order for most of the time upto June 2000.
97. During their examination, the Committee sought to know about the system in
place for the procurement of equipments in the Institute. The Ministry, in their written
note, explained the same as follows:
"In the matter of procurement of stores/equipments, the Institute follows the
procedure prescribed under various Government regulations like GFR./DGS&D
manual etc. The specifications for the store/equipments to be purchased are

28
drawn by the Technical Committee constituted under the Competent Authority
and the rates are obtained through the limited tender for stores (upto the value
of Rs. 2 lakhs) and open/global tender for stores (costing more than Rs. 2 lakhs).
Such tenders are evaluated by the Technical Committee and based on their
recommendations purchases are made from the lowest quotee."
98. The Committee enquired about the case cited in the Audit Review where a
counter chamber costing Rs. 46.55 lakh was not taken in the stock register of the
Department of Pharmacology. The Institute, in their written information, inter-alia
submitted:
"The stock entries are made by the user departments only when the equipment/
machinery is installed and commissioned satisfactorily. The counter chamber in
question was not taken into stock since this equipment was not installed by the
user department from the very beginning. In compliance to the observation
raised by Audit, a system is being devised whereby the stock entry shall be
made upon the receipt/inspection of stores."
99. With regard to the non-functioning of the said ‘Counter Chamber’, the
Committee were informed as follows:
"The case is presently with the Vigilance Department on receipt of information
of non-installation from the present enquiry. A Committee comprising of senior
Faculty Members and Store Officer was constituted in December 1999 and the
enquiry report was submitted by the Committee. Action is being initiated by the
Vigilance Cell, AIIMS, to fix responsibility for the same."
100. On being inquired about the repeat order for purchase of Non Invasive
continuous hemodynamic monitoring system for the Department of Anesthesiology
without calling tender, the Director, AIIMS, while deposing during the course of Oral
Evidence, stated viz.:
"This is actually for patients who are very sick and being anesthesiated. Because
the tender process would have taken a long time, the department certified that
there was no upgradation of the equipment till date. So, it was a repeat order
only."
101. The Committee enquired about the reasons due to which equipments
purchased/imported by the Institute could not be installed or installation was delayed.
The Ministry of Health & Family Welfare vide their written information inter-alia
submitted:
"in some unforeseen circumstances, like the non availability of site or some part
of the equipment not received from the consignee, unavoidable delay beyond
the control of the department takes places. Steps have been taken to obviate
such delays in the future."
102. In reply to the Committee's query on the action taken on the supplier, who
did not supply the parts required to run the system, the Ministry stated that when the
equipment was supplied in 1993, part of the equipment, including a software for

29
integration of data with the Force Plates and Kinematics systems and one Camera was
not supplied with the equipment. Since the supply was done through WHO, the fund
position of WHO reportedly did not allow for purchase of the remaining software and
hardware for the equipment, though the request were sent to WHO for the same.
Despite several correspondence made with the Principal suppliers in U.K. and the local
agents in India, the matter remained pending. However, it was intimated that a move
was on to contact another agent who was proficient in the installation of the equipment.
According to the Ministry, the reasons for the equipments remaining out of order were
mainly attributable to non-supply of essential parts of equipments by the suppliers in
time. The Committee were informed that necessary corrective measures to enforce
warranty, Performance Guarantee and Down Time Clauses effectively had been taken.
103. On being enquired of the current status of 28 equipments costing Rs. 23.11
crores plus US$ 1,31,400, the Ministry, in their written note, stated:
"All the equipments have since been installed and as of now all the equipments
are fully operational except the Counter Chamber from the Department of
Pharmacology. This case is under investigation by the Central Vigilance
Commission."
104. While apprising the Committee of another significant proposal to purchase
sophisticated equipment by the Institute, the Secretary or Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare stated:
"There is a proposal for a Positron Emission Tomography (PET) facility, which
is, again an ultra-modern, state-of-art diagnostic facility. This is going to cost
about Rs. 18 crore. This has been sanctioned and the equipment is about to
arrive, and AIIMS is going to commission it in December, 2004. This will be a new
facility, in the entire North India, where we do not have any PET scan facility. I
think, this is the first one which is going to be added in the field of cardiology,
oncology and neurology. It will predict a disease before its onset. This is the
most important facility that we have here."
105. Elaborating on the steps taken to augment the number of machines required
for various investigations, the Ministry inter alia stated:—
"In the AIIMS a two pronged approach has been adopted to provide necessary
machines & equipment to meet the ever increasing demands. Firstly based on
the patient load availability of new technology and its direct impact on patient
care & research all the Departments project their requirements every year. This is
discussed with the Departments and necessary funds are provided to procure
them depending upon their priority and availability of finances. Secondly,
additional facilities and centres are further strengthened and established to
provide more physical space and patient care facilities. Without additional space
machines cannot be installed."

30
ESTABLISHMENT OF V ARIOUS CENTRES
Institute Rotary Cancer Hospital (IRCH)
106. According to audit, the Institute with the collaboration of Cancer Foundation
Society of India established a Rotary Cancer Hospital. The construction work upto
first floor of proposed eight storeyed building was completed (Civil work only) in May
1981. In 1992, the Institute found the need to develop a comprehensive cancer centre
in North India at IRCH. Since the patients attending IRCH came from different parts of
the country and the waiting period for admission and treatment of cancer patients was
inordinately long, it was decided to construct six additional storeys above the existing
block and one additional block. When the Institute had submitted memorandum for
EFC approval in 1992, it had projected the completion of construction of building in
three years and functioning of the hospital to start by the end of the Eighth Five Year
Plan. Audit also observed that though the building plans were approved by New Delhi
Municipal Council (NDMC) in December, 1995, the construction work was taken up
only in January, 1999. Reasons for delay were not made available to audit. The safeguard
of liquidated damages were not provided in the contract.
In their written note, Ministry replied:
"M/s. Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation (HSCC) was entrusted the
project management for the work on 21.2.1997 and agreement was signed between
H.S.C.C. and AIIMS on 2.3.1998. The process of shortlisting of contractors and
tender process was started and the work was awarded on 18.12.1998. Work was
started by the firm in January, 1999 and is likely to be completed by December,
2002."
107. While explaining the expansion of IRCH project, the Ministry, vide their
written information, had inter alia stated:—
"At present the second, third, fourth & fifth floors have been handed over to
AIIMS. Patient care activities are being carried out on the second & third floors
only. The fourth & fifth floors cannot be utilized in the absence of electricity. The
sixth & seventh floors have been substantially completed and are expected to be
handed over within a few weeks.
As far as the construction of the building is concerned it can be completed
within two-three months (i.e. by December, 2002) subject to the availability of
funds."
108. In a written note regarding the current status of IRCH, the Committee were
informed as follows:—
"A new building with 7 floors increasing the bed strength from 96 to 200 has
been commissioned. It will be fully functional after the deployment of additional
staff and machinery and equipment, after approval of revised EFC."
109. The Secretary, Ministry of Health, while deposing before the Committee on
the Rotary Cancer Hospital inter alia stated:—
"It has been made operational with 96 beds which are fully functional. Another
104 beds will be made functional. There is some shortage of staff. We have not

31
been able to create new posts because of the economy Circular of the Government.
It cannot be managed with the existing number of people, so we need new posts.
So, we are approaching the Ministry of Finance for creation of posts, and with
that all the 200 beds will be fully commissioned. Today, about four floors are
functioning, another four floors are vacant and they are waiting for the posts.
So, with all these additional facilities, which have come, we have been able to
add 118 beds in the last one year to the existing 1853 beds. By next year, 465 beds
will be added to the existing capacity."
Trauma Centre
110. AIIMS had prepared a scheme for the establishment of CATS (Centralized
Accident and Trauma Service) for the city of Delhi which would include the
establishment of an Apex Centre and Peripheral Hospitals with the following
objectives:
(i) to provide trauma services to the injured; preferably the treatment to be
started at the site of the accident;
(ii) to train personnel to deal with such emergencies;
(iii) to establish a Research Centre in collaboration with transport,
communication, law and police authorities to prevent accidents by constant
data evaluation and public education; and
(iv) to use rehabilitation techniques for effective treatment in the shortest
possible time and also to make invalid victims useful citizens.
111. According to audit, the Government had approved the setting up of a
Centralised Accident and Trauma Service (CATS) under the aegis of AIIMS at a cost of
Rs. 16.65 crores and it was conveyed in May 1984. This was subject to condition that
the construction work of the Centralised Accident Hospital (Apex Centre) would be
taken up immediately and the Centre would be made functional within five years. In
1989 it was decided that the scheme would be transferred from the  Central sector to the
Delhi Administration and be implemented by a society registered for the purpose and
supported by Delhi Administration. Taking into consideration the aspects of cost and
utility, in 1991 it was felt that it would not be feasible to set up CA TS by Delhi
Administration. The Centre envisaged under CATS was necessarily to be a part of a
multi-disciplinary hospital like AIIMS of Safdarjung Hospital. New Delhi Municipal
Council and Delhi Urban Art Commission had in 1995, approved the drawings of
Trauma Centre. However, till November, 2000 the construction had not commenced
though an expenditure of Rs. 13.56 crore had already been incurred towards payment
of land charges, consultancy fee etc.
112. The Ministry, in their written Note submitted:—
"The Cabinet Committee on Economics Affairs has approved the proposal for
setting up of an Apex Centre for Trauma Care at the cost of Rs. 54.14 crore. The
construction of the 140 bedded centre began in December, 2001. The building is
expected to be completed/commissioned in 12-15 months after the start of
construction i.e. by March, 2003."

32
113. On being asked to state reasons leading to delay in commencement of
construction work of Trauma Relief Centre by November 2000, the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare inter-alia submitted before the Committee as follows:
"The Trauma Centre was originally conceived to be taken up by the AIIMS and
land was handed over in January 1986. On the recommendation of Lt. Governor
of Delhi, the Project was handed over to the Delhi Administration. A meeting was
taken by the then Union Health Minister in 1991 with Lt. Governor of Delhi in
which it emerged that it would not be feasible for the Delhi Government to set up
the proposed apex centre not only in view of the financial constraints but also
from the view-point of its utility and cost effectiveness. It was felt necessary
that the centre be part and parcel of multi-disciplinary hospital like AIIMS or
Safdarjung Hospital. It was decided that the land measuring about 14.5 acres
near the Raj Nagar Crossing, Ring Road should be returned by the Delhi
Administration to Central Government for utilization as site for Trauma Centre.
The land was handed over the AIIMS in December 1992. In January, 1993
M/s. Hospital Services Consultancy Corporation (A Govt. of India Undertaking)
was engaged for architectural and structural designs. Site plans were prepared
for the Trauma Centre and the same were approved by the Delhi Urban Arts
Commission, the Delhi Fire Services and the New Delhi Municipal Council. In
view of the tremendous paucity of funds a revised EFC Memo for the first phase
of construction could only be seen through in March 2001.''
114. On being asked about the current status as well as the likely date for
completion of construction work, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare informed
the Committee viz.:
"The work was started for a tendered amount of Rs. 34.72 crore (building and
services) in January 2002 with a contract period of 12 months. Structure work of
the Trauma Centre building is almost complete and the finishing work is
underway. The value of work done till date under the present contract inclding
consultancy fee and other incidental expenses is Rs. 21 crore (approximately).
The targeted date of completion of the construction is January 2003. Further it
may take three months for commissioning of the Centre. However, this is subject
to the availability of funds from the Ministry commensurate with the project
requirements."
115. The Committee during the course of evidence observed that the Director of
the Institute had initially assured the Committee that the Centre would be in operation
two years after the sanction was received from the Government thereby creating a
vacuum of  two years between the promise and the actual implementation. The Secretary,
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare clarified thereon as follows:
"For the Trauma Centre sanction has already been accorded. The work is at a
very advanced stage. In fact the building is about to be completed. Thereafter it
is a question of procurement of the necessary equipment. May be the functioning
will start with the available staff. If additional staff is required, the necessary
procedure will be undergone."

33
116. In September, 2004, the Ministry intimated the Committee that the Trauma
Centre, having a capacity of 186 beds was nearing completion.
117. The Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, while deposing before
the Committee during evidence on the latest position of Trauma Centre inter alia
stated:—
"......it went through several ups and downs. Even though there was an EFC
approval for Rs. 54 crore, two more floors were also added to the building. Now,
the civil construction is complete. Unfortunately, at the time of earlier EFC
approval, adequate provision was not made for the equipment that is needed for
a large Trauma Centre like this. So, we again had to go back to the Finance
Ministry with a new EFC which was approved just about two days back with an
outlay of about Rs. 162 crore. This is clear now. Now, we are able to order
whatever equipment is required for the Trauma Centre, and the Director has
promised that by April, 2005 this Trauma Centre will be fully functional and
operational."
118. On the issue of manpower deployment at the Trauma Centre, the Director,
AIIMS had inter alia submitted:
"In our institution, we have an in-charge of the casualty and we are carrying out
routine training programmes for the residents and for the senior residents in
trauma care as well as first-aid and resuscitation. This is a programme which
goes on. When we have the Trauma Centre facility, we will rotate the doctors in
that Trauma Centre from the main institution so that we can provide a continuity
of care in those areas.''
Drug De-Addiction Centre
119. The Drug De-addiction Centre was established at Deen Dayal Upadhayaya
Hospital under the aegis of the Institute. Necessary funds, as required, were provided
to the Institute during Seventh Plan with the following objectives:
"to establish system from continuous monitoring which could evaluate changing
trends in substance abuse over a period of time, specially in vulnerable section;
to develop rational strategies for reducing and preventing drugs alcohol related
disabilities so that the centre would become a centre of excellence and resource
for SAARC and South-East countries for training, research and other related
aspects."
120. According to Audit, the Centre did not have its own casualty/emergency
and ICU facilities. Patients of casualty/emergency were being sent to the casualty
department of Deen Dayal Upadhayaya Hospital for treatment. The shortfall noticed in
the deployment of the nurses for the treatment of in-patients against the sanctioned
strength was more than 50 per cent during the years 1993-94 to 1998-99, which adversely
affected the patient care. Audit had also observed, that though there was a considerable
increase in the number of new and old patients since 1995-96, the in-patient admissions
remained almost stagnant.

34
121. The Committee enquired as to whether the required facilities such as casualty/
emergency and ICU for running the Drug-De-addiction Centre were set up, the Ministry/
AIIMS inter alia stated:
"It was never planned to start a separate casualty/emergency/ICU facility
separately for the De-addiction Centre. As this centre was located within the
premises of a general hospital namely Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Hospital (DDUH),
it was not necessary to establish its separate emergency/casualty services.
Patients requiring such care were managed within the overall emergency/ICU
service of Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Hospital."
122. When the Committee enquired about the reasons for the shortfall of more
than 50%, in the deployment of nurses during 1993-94 to 1998-99 for treatment of in-
patients, the Ministry stated:
"The sanctioned position of the nurses was not filled up, as the bed strength of
the Centre had reduced to 16 by then. The M.S., DDUH had taken over 50% of
the sanctioned beds for other facilites of the DDUH. The available strength of
nurses in the centre was adequate to run effectively all the activities of the
Centre, which included OPD, ward and Community Clinic."
123. The Committee enquired about the in-patient admission capacity at the
Centre as well as any subsequent arrangement made to cater to the enhanced
requirement. The Ministry vide their written note, inter-alia stated:
"The Centre functions with 16 beds only and conscious attempts have been
made to shorten the hospital stay and practice energetic OPD treatment which is
more cost effective. The Centre has been allotted 10 acres of land at Ghaziabad
for a 50-bedded hospital, which would be equipped with the entire spectrum of
services essential to a hospital. The construction work is on at full swing and the
hospital is expected to be fully functional by May, 2003."
124. Subsequently, the Committee were informed that the Drug De-Addiction
Centre had already been established on 10 acres of land allotted at Ghaziabad for a 50
bedded hospital and was functioning since April, 2003 though the target date set for
the same was May, 2003. The Centre was well equipped with modern equipments.
Clinical care was also provided to the patients at this hospital. The Centre had a total
of 9 faculty members out of which two were pre-clinical scientists and remaining 7 were
psychiatrists. In addition, the Centre had non-faculty permanent staff from various
disciplines viz., Biochemistry, Clinical Psychology and Social work.
Department of Physical Medicine & Rehabilitation
125. As per Audit, the Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation
attended to the requirement of handicapped patients and helped them to return to their
normal lives by providing physiotherapy, occupational therapy services as well as
artificial limbs. The Prosthetic and Orthotic workshop attached to the Department
produced/modified/repaired and distributed limbs, calipers, shoes, etc. Audit observed
that the number of patients, especially the number of old patients were increasing
since 1995-96 but the production of appliances remained stagnant except during

35
1998-99 and 1999-2000 which showed downward trend. During their test check of the
records, the audit noticed that no norms had been fixed for deployment of doctors,
paramedical and workshop staff and no targets were fixed for evaluating the performance
of the Department. The waiting period of patients ranged between 12 to 15 months.
126. The Institute, with regard to the production of appliances by a Prosthetic
and Orthotic workshop of the Department of Physical Medicine and Rehabilitation, in
their written Note inter-alia stated:
"The number of appliances produced in the Departments' workshop reduced
from the previous level because out of the 13 technical workers engaged in the
manufacture of the appliances, 4 workers retired. The production scaled down
from the previous level corresponding with the number of technical hands
available in the workshop."
127. As regard to the waiting period of patients in prosthetic workshop and the
non-installation of equipment, the Institute inter-alia informed as follows:
"It is true that the waiting period of the patients for prosthetics is 12—15 months.
The waiting list is dependent on the number of patients requiring appliances and
the waiting list varies with the number of patients requiring appliances."
128. On the query of the Committee on the remedial measures to minimize waiting
period for patients, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare and the All India Institute
of Medical Sciences vide their written information replied as under:
"The evaluation of performance of the department is based mainly on the number
of patients treated, teaching and other activities. Vacant positions in Prosthetic
and Orthotic Workshop are in the process of being filled. The waiting period for
prosthetic appliances has been reduced to about six months whereas there is no
waiting period for Orthotic appliances."
Organ Retrieval Banking Organisation
129. During the course of examination of the audit paragraph, the Director, AIIMS
informed the Committee about ORBO as follows:—
"We have established a national facility called Organ Retrieval Banking
Organisation (ORBO) which is a nodal agency for the heart transplantation.
Also, for the first time we are able to do combined liver pancreatic and kidney
transplantation in the patients suffering from youngs onset pancreatic disease."
Finances of the Institute
130. The Institute is largely fed by grants from the Government. According to
Audit, receipts at the Institute grew during 1995-96 to 1999-2000 from Rs. 243.8 crore to
Rs. 625 crore. This growth was mainly due to substantial increase in non-plan grants
from the Central Government i.e. Rs 66 crore in 1995-96 to 160 crore in 1999-2000. Plan
grants grew at a moderate pace rising from Rs. 53 crore in 1995-96 to Rs. 80 crore in
1999-2000. As per the Audit, evidently large resources are being made available to the
Institute for its functioning without specifying the objectives. In 1995-96 the ratio of

36
non-plan to plan resources was close to 1:1, while in 1999-2000 it is 2:1. The Audit
concluded that increasing the non-plan grant allocation while allowing the plan grant
allocation to grow at a slow pace has resulted in defocusing the emphasis.
131. Audit noted that for the functioning of the Institute, large resources were
made available without specifying the objectives and moderate increase on the specific
purpose grants was there only to the tune of Rs. 5 crore during the period. The hospital
receipts during the last five years were almost static (Rs. five-six crore) and donations
were insubstantial.
132. The total Budget allocated under Non-Plan during each of the last 10 years
is as under:
Y ear Total Budget allocated
under Non-Plan (Rs. in lakhs)
1994-95 5300
1995-96 6629
1996-97 7353
1997-98 8921
1998-99 14950
1999-2000 16000
2000-2001 16112
2001-2002 15500
2002-2003 12350
2003-2004 21818
133. Regarding the substantial growth in non-plan grants as compared to moderate
growth in plan grants during the period of review, the Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare vide their written information stated:
"Substantial increase in Non-Plan grants is mainly the result of heavy expenditure
on salaries/pensionery benefits due to revision of pay scale w.e.f. 1.1.96 on the
recommendation of Vth pay Commission and with the increasing load of patients
at the institute, a substantial increase in the running costs of the hospital. There
was no such impact on expenditure on 'Plan' side, where the grants/expenditure
grew at a moderate pace."
134. In reply to a query on the utilization/sufficiency of non-plan funds, AIIMS
in a written note submitted:
"In respect of the Non-Plan funds, sufficient funds are provided based on the
requirement of the institute and within the overall allocation of the Ministry. The
institute also utilizes the funds generated by the institute to meet the day-to-day
activities. The problem regarding shortage of Non-Plan funds is mainly because
the All India Institute of Medical Sciences has made recruitment of Group C & D
posts over and above sanctioned strength for which the institute is taking
action for regularization of the same as and when the vacancy arises and other
economic instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance from time to time.
AIIMS is provided funds within the limited resources available with the Ministry."

37
135. According to Audit specific purpose grants to the institute have increased
by a moderate Rs 5 crore in five years. In this regard, AIIMS in a written note submitted
as follows:
"Though there was not much increase on account of hospital receipts, the
overall revenue generation of the institute by way of user charges, licence fee,
etc. has gone up from Rs. 8.91 crores in 1995-96 to Rs. 15.88 crores in 1999-2000.
The hospital charges are in the process of being further rationalized."
136. Audit has further pointed out that unspent balances at the end of the year
grew from Rs. 3.82 crore at the beginning of 1995-96 to Rs. 95.94 crore at the beginning
of 1999-2000. Similarly investment of surplus funds went up from Rs. 31.6 crore in
1995-96 to Rs. 96 crore in 1999-2000. This must be seen in the background of the fact
that a large number of projects remain incomplete."
137. Explaining the position in this regard, the representative of the Institute
stated as follows:
"This (surplus) money was not part of the plan or non-plan allocation, the
regular allocation given to the institute. But basically a large amount of it is the
money generated by the institute. Prior to 1990-95, the instiute was not raising
any charges against the treatment given to patients. We are still treating a majority
of the patients, specially the poor patients, free of cost. But for the paying
category now, in certain centres, specially cardiothoracic and Neuro-sciences
centers, there is a system of package charges. That was introduced in 1994-95.
Consequently, on the revenue side till 1994-95, we had a small amount of money
which was basically on innocuous things like security deposit, earnest deposit,
caution money, employees insurance money etc. But this suddenly grew. Part of
the reason of its growth was also that it was not liquidated on plan or non-plan
scheme. A large part of this money belongs to the Cardio-thoracic and Neuro-
Sciences centres alone where a system of package charges was levied in 1995.
This is an internal revenue generation mechanism of the institute which has
actually helped to evolve a system where we are generating a certain amount of
revenue which, at some stage, has to be dovetailed back into the projects."
138. In this connection, the Secretary, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
added as follows:
"It did not have the approval either of the institute body or the Governing body
but perhaps a particular department in their anxiety to create some resources for
improving that department, they started charging it. And, now, it has been
stopped.
Now that it has come to the notice, we will certainly take this into account. As the
institute has been raising the question of constraint of resources, this will be
brought into the fold of budgetary resources. We will try to take this amount into
the budgetary process and see to it that certain activities for which they have
been clamouring for resources are met out of this and we will be able to liquidate
this very soon."

38
Accounting Mechanism
139. As regards the steps being taken to enforce proper accounting mechanism,
the Secretary, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare stated during evidence as under:
"They are trying to put in place a very stringent accounting mechanism. I agree
that whether the money came from any source, it is public money, and it should
have been accounted for thoroughly and properly. If somebody has given the
advances for a particular purpose, it ought to have been taken into account that
whether it has been properly utilized and accounted for. I think, most of them
have already been settled. But whatever has not been settled will be taken care
of. But for future, certainly we will lay down the system so that they are properly
maintained."
140. While expressing the need to have a Chartered Accountant for auditing the
accounts of the institute, the submission of AIIMS was as follows:
"There is also a need for development of a system so as to examine the requirement
of the institute in respect of machine and equipment and upkeep of the same and
also to utilize the funds on priority basis."
141. On the need to have an internal audit in respect of the accounts of the
institute, AIIMS submitted that:
"There is an urgent need to have an internal audit in respect of the accounts of
the institute so as to develop a system of proper utilization of the resources
available and utilization of public money to the maximum possible extent."
142. Responding to a query from the Committee on the overall adequacy of fund
for AIIMS to undertake various activities, the institute has submitted:
"AIIMS suffers from inadequacy of funds to undertake various activities of
Patient care services and Research work and the same has been intimated to
Ministry from time to time. During the Xth plan as against the projected
requirement of Rs. 1059.15 crores, only Rs. 675.00 crores have been allocated. In
fact AIIMS has projected an additional requirement of Rs. 600 crores to start new
super-speciality Centres. All these requirements have been projected to the
Ministry from time to time."
AIIMS—Like institutes
143. The Ministry in a written note has informed the Committee that under the
Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana, formulated by the Government of India in
2003 the opening of six more hospitals has been announced in the country with the
same standard as that of AIIMS. These proposed AIIMS-like institutions are to be set
up in Bhopal (Madhya Pradesh), Jodhpur (Rajasthan), Raipur (Chhattisgarh), Rishikesh
(Uttranchal), Patna (Bihar) and Bhubaneshwar (Orissa). These particular States were
identified on the basis of various Socio-Economic indicators like human development
index, literacy rate, population below poverty line and per capita income. The Ministry
further informed that these factors were compared with the availability of the number
of Medical Colleges which provided speciality/super speciality treatment in those
States which had led to overflow of referral cases requiring tertiary super speciality
care in AIIMS, New Delhi leading to inconvenience, high expenditure to the patients
and high fatality rates due to loss of time in providing critical care to the patients.

39
144. When enquired about the objectives of the six AIIMS-Like institutes, the
Ministry, in their written submission to the Committee, has stated:
(i) The institutes would  provide state-of-art medical care in 39 specialities
and super-specialities.
(ii) The project will provide a fillip for raising the prevailing standards of
medical education and  provide a capable medical workforce of not only
medical graduates but also well-trained specialist and super-specialists
comparable to the level of AIIMS.
(iii) The Institutes will function as apex medical institute in the State. The State
can develop and streamline a referral system that will ensure that all health
institutions  are optimally utilized. The guidance and feedback from the
institute can strengthen  the units at the other levels  of the referral chain.
(iv) There are sizeable social benefits for the families in the States with   the
added prospect of bringing super-speciality services  practically to their
doorsteps. Improvement  of health will stimulate all round socio-economic
development in these  States and particularly  in the backward areas.
(v) Adjoining  State patients  can have access to these Super-Speciality care."
145. In reply  to a question about the status of work in respect of setting up of
these AIIMS like Institutions, the Ministry, in a written note have submitted as follows:
"Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission have  already given in-principle
approval for the Project.
A Project Management Committee (PMC) has been formed under Chairmanship
of Secretary (Health) with Director General of Health Services, Additional
Secretary (Health), Joint Secretary concerned and representatives from Finance,
Planning Commission, Airports Authority of India and Director (AIIMS) to
oversee the  implementation of the Project. The Committee is meeting regularly
to decide/monitor the various  related issues.
Foundation Stones at the sites of proposed AIIMS have already been laid  and
construction of boundary walls around the land earmarked for the purpose is
being taken up.
HSCC(I) Ltd. a PSU under the Ministry has been appointed as the In-house
Consultant to assist the Ministry in selection of a Project Consultant and selection
of architectural firms/architects for finalisation of the architectural concept/design
and also in assisting  the construction of boundary  wall at the sites of proposed
AIIMS.
Draft rules and regulation have already been framed for formation of a Society
under the Societies Registration Act for managing the affiars of the six proposed
AIIMS. Draft EFC proposal has been prepared and comments from the appraising
agencies are being obtained. Comments from Plan Finance and Establishment
division of Deptt. of Expenditure  have been received. Comments from Planning
Commission, Medical Council of India and HRD are awaited.

40
The process for Selecting Project Consultant for providing  Comprehensive
Consultancy services for setting up six AIIMS have already been started
Advertisement for the  selection of project Consultant    was released and EOI
received in response to the advertisement are being short-listed for issuing of
Request for Proposal document. Advertisment  for seeking EOI from architectural
firms/architects for participating in global competition for providing  prototype
Architectural concept/design for six AIIMS is being finalized and likely  to be
advertised shortly."
146. As regards the progress of construction work of AIIMS-like Institutes, the
Secretary inter-alia stated during evidence as under:
"Project preparation has been started. We have to go to the Expenditure Finance
Committee. This memorandum is ready. It is now with the hon. Minister for
Health and Family Welfare. Once he approves it, this will be placed before    the
EFC. The  Planning Commission has already given an in-principle approval to
this. The  Finance Ministry also has given an in-principle approval to the setting
up of these six institutes. These approvals  are on the file and the moment the
hon. Minister approves it, we would be taking it to the EFC.
On the other side, we have a Project Management Committee headed  by me
with some other members and the Director (AIIMS) is also a member of that
Committee. We have  already short-listed six Project Consultants of international
repute. We have asked them to prepare proposals. Based on that we will be
appointing  a project  consultant who will give us the project design  and the
estimated expenditure.  We also are putting advertisements in international
journals and magazines asking for a good architect who can give us a  good
architectural design for these institutes  that will be  used as a base. Based on
that,  the Project  Consultant will  make the detailed  estimates. This exercise is
on. The moment the EFC approves it, the proposal would be taken to the Cabinet
Committee on Economic  Affairs."
Explaining further in this regard,  the Secretary stated:
"........In reply to a Starred Question, the hon. Minister said, the scheme is
currently in the process of being placed before  the EFC. Therefore, there is
definitely a commitment on the part of the Ministry to take this issue forward and
to get the necessary  approval before the actual work starts. This year there is a
provision of Rs. 60 crore in the Budget. Last year we had 6 crore Rupees for
putting up the compound  wall and around the land we got. That is already  on
and in some places it has been completed as well.
This Rs. 60 crore is mainly for the appointment of project consultant and to
pay him for the initial work so that he can start the project design. We have
already asked the Planning Commission to keep a provision of  at least Rs. 1000
crore next year, that is, 2005-06 so that once  the project design is available the
actual work can start. So far as the Ministry is concerned, we are moving forward.
The question is, how long will it take. This is something which can be decided
once we have got the project design from the consultant."

41
147. In reply to a query, the Ministry have informed that the total project duration
from zero date to completion is estimated at 36 months.
148. In a subsequent  clarification, the Ministry have stated that  there is no
proposal to enhance such number of Institutes in the remaining part of the country.
149. When asked to explain the role of State Governments  in the  establishment
of these AIIMS like Institutes, the Secretary, while  deposing  before the Committee,
stated that:
"The support that has to be given by the State Governments is that for the new
ones they have to give about 100 acres of land free of cost and also provide
services  like road connectivity, electricity and water supply. This was the
stipulation that the State Governments have to contribute. The capital cost  of
each of these institutes has been  worked out to roughly about Rs. 280 crore
non-recurring  and  about Rs. 60 crore for each of these institutes  as recurring
expenditure by the Government  of India."
150. When the Committee expressed concern about other States, the Secretary
submitted as  follows:
"Six other States are chosen where one medical college would be  upgraded to
the level of AIIMS. These are Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Jammu & Kashmir,
Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. The institutes that have been
selected for upgradation are as follows: Government  Medical College, Jammu;
Nizam  Institute of Medical Sciences, Hyderabad in Andhra Pradesh; K.P.
Viswanathan Government Medical College, Trichy in Tamil Nadu; Government
Medical College, Kolkata  in West Bengal, Rajendra Prasad Institute  of Medical
Sciences, Ranchi, and Sanjay Gandhi Post-Graduate Institute  of Medical
Sciences, Lucknow in Uttar Pradesh. These six centres have been selected for
upgradation."
151. While furnishing the details regarding the infrastructure about these
upgraded hospitals, the Ministry stated:
"This would entail infrastructure development  of facilities, provision of Super-
specialities based on the specific needs of that facilty. Running and staff costs
for these would be borne by the respective States themselves."
152. Replying to a query on whether there would be co-ordination among these
upgraded hospitals for sharing of information  as well as for reference  of cases, the
Ministry submitted:
"Co-ordination and sharing of information among the six medical institutes
proposed to be upgraded would be worked out by the governing bodies of
respective  institutes, if such need is felt by them."
153. The Committee desired to know if the original character of the Institute was
being revived in the light of setting up of the six AIIMS-like Institutes. The Ministry
inter-alia stated as follows:
"At present, there is no proposal under consideration in the Ministry to declare
AIIMS as a referral hospital. AIIMS is a super-speciality institution and enjoys
autonomy in providing in-patient & out-patient services, teaching/training of

42
Under Graduate/Post-Graduate students, research, etc. and provides tertiary
care to patients. A large number of patients including serious patients with
multifarious ailments come directly to AIIMS OPD/Emergency for treatment.
The AIIMS is involved in research activities and the faculty of AIIMS on their
own are able to attract research funds from various funding agencies, like
Department of Biotechnology, Department of Sciences & Technology, Indian
Council of Medical Research, etc. The Institute was able to attract Rs. 20.3
crores of research grant in the year 2003-04 from outside agencies. In order to
reduce patient care load on AIIMS, there was a proposal to set up six AIIMS like
institutions in the States of Bihar, Chhattisgarh, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa,
Rajasthan and Uttaranchal."
MISCELLANEOUS
A. Unauthorised occupation of land
154. Audit in its review has brought out that the unauthorized occupation of
land allotted to the Institute at Masjid Moth had not only resulted in blockage of funds
of Rs. 9.97 crore but had also affected the construction of quarters, thereby defeating
the purpose which was sought to be achieved.
155. According to audit the Institute was allotted 32.09 acres land at Masjid
Moth during 1966-69, out of which about 22 acres was under encroachment by the
Jhuggi Jhompadi (JJ) dwellers as the land remained vacant due to paucity of funds for
construction of the projects. A joint survey of this cluster was carried out in 1992-93 by
the officers of the Slum Department of Delhi Development Authority (now MCD) as
well as the Institute, which revealed that the number of JJ dwellers, who were eligible
for alternate site, were 2456. Resettlement charges were to be paid by the land owning
agencies (Institute) which were revised by the MCD from Rs. 10000 per Jhuggi to
Rs. 29000 per Jhuggi from April 1993. The Institute deposited first instalment of  Rs. 2.97
crore with Slum Department of MCD as their share of relocation cost (upto September
1993). A cursory survey conducted by the Slum Wing Department revealed that in
addition to 2456 eligible JJ dwellers, there existed 4500 ineligible JJ dwellers in the
cluster. After detailed deliberations in the meeting held in December 1996 under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (Urban Development), Ministry of Urban Affairs and
Employment, it was decided that 2456 eligible JJ families and about 4500 ineligible
JJ families (as on March 1996) needed to be shifted from the site belonging to the
Institute. The institute would pay Rs. 4.28 crore (Rs. 7.25 crore - Rs. 2.97 crore already
paid) for relocation of eligible JJ families and Rs. 9.90 crore for ineligible JJ families.
Thus the Institute would pay a total sum of Rs. 17.15 crore to the MCD as relocation
cost. The additional amount could be paid in two instalments. Accordingly the Institute
paid Rs. 7 crore to MCD in August 1997. The time schedule for shifting the JJ cluster
was fixed as March 1998 or 12 Months from the date of depositing the amount of Rs. 7
crore to the Slum Department of the MCD. The Institute would then protect the land
and start development. As such the Institute, paid Rs. 9.97 crore to MCD for giving
possession of land. However neither the vacation nor the possession of land was
attained (July 2000).

43
156. In this connection, the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare have furnished
the following information:
"The land measuring 32.09 acres at Masjid Moth was allotted in phases from
1966 to 1969. The land remained vacant for sometime on account of dispute
centering around a proposal for the construction of a 60  feet wide zonal road
connecting Gautam Nagar to Ring Road. AIIMS utilized the land partially to
construct Type II quarters in the year 1973. After active follow-up and persuasions,
the MCD took up the work of relocation of the jhuggies cluster and the same was
completed in April 2001".
157. While furnishing a reply to the query of the Committee as to how the
vacated land would be utilized, It was inter-alia submitted:
"It is planned to utilize the said land for construction of super speciality centers
and hostels. For the same the land use of the said campus is to be got changed
as "Institutional" and Ministry of Urban Development has to grant the said land
use change permission. The matter has already been taken up with the Ministry
of  Health and Family Welfare and Urban Development for relaxation/permission
required for construction of additional super specialty centers in the said campus.
Once the same are obtained, the re-development plan of Masjid Moth Campus
and Ansari Nagar Campus shall be finalized and submitted to the NDMC for
approval. This land is a part of development in the Master Plan for AIIMS."
B. Computerization
158. According to Audit, the Institute acquired a computer system at a cost of
Rs. 2.03 crore in April 1989. The software of patient care system (one of the modules of
the computerisation programme) was developed by Tata Consultancy Services at a
cost of Rs. 25 lakh in May, 1990. Audit has observed that the Institute realised in
August 1996 that the patient care system had not been used successfully due to
bottlenecks, lack of direction and coordinated efforts and it was decided that there
should be no extension of the annual maintenance contract. Audit has found that there
was no record to exhibit how far the requirements, which were shown at the time of
initiation of computerization, were achieved.
159. According to Audit, the institute was unable to keep up its decision regarding
replacement of the computerized system timely due to which even the data stored
during its functioning could not be further utilised. As a result, despite incurring an
expenditure of Rs. 3.99 crore, the Institute got no benefit from computerization.
160. On being asked about the accomplishment of the objectives of setting up of
Computerization system at the Institute, when the system was not running successfully,
the Institute/Ministry in their written information stated:
"The computerization system was set up at the institute with the prime objective
of introduction of computerization at AIIMS and it was to be implemented for
Patient Care System, Administration, Library, Academics and Research &
Teaching. The Institute has established a very large network on the basis of
which the above programmes have been implemented. It is only the Patient Care

44
System Computerization that has been terminated on various other accounts
than the overall computerization programme itself, such as,
(i) Whereas on one side, for the computerization of Patient Care System
recommended by the DG(NIC) and supplied by the ECIL, the main-frame
computer system as was of a very old technology, on the other hand the
faculty, student, staff of the institute started using the personal computer
which were much faster than the terminals of the main-frame system.
(ii) The system was not capable of handling more than 24 online users,
whereas, the number of users on the network had increased beyond 100. It
required immediate replacement/upgradation.
(iii) The expenditure for the replacement of the system on its upgradation was
manifold as compared to the latest technologies that were available in the
market."
161. On the query of the Computer regarding the bottlenecks in the implementation
of computerization programme and the efforts to plug these bottlenecks, the Ministry/
AIIMS in their written information inter-alia stated:
"The bottleneck was the mainframe hardware which had limited functions and
was unable to meet the complete requirements of the faculty and the management.
The Institute has taken the services of a consultant firm that has prepared
reports and submitted the documents related to the procurement of the hardware,
software and implementation plan which shall take care of the bottlenecks through
a well defined Information Strategy Document also prepared by the same
consultant firm. These documents have since been approved by the Steering
Committee of the Institute, consisting of Heads of various departments, senior
functionaries, Chiefs of Centres and the Director, AIIMS in chair."
162. The Committee desired to know whether any inquiry has been set up to
review the whole episode of setting up of computerized system with a view to fix the
responsibility. In their reply, the Ministry inter-alia stated that the review has been
made by the Technical Sub-Committee of the Institute alongwith the consultant
appointed by the Institute. All the facts that related to the functioning of the mainframe
system were considered by the Committee, and it was of the view that the availability
of state of the art technology on one side and the obsoleted mainframe technology of
the computerized Patient Care System created an imbalance that caused the closure of
the mainframe system. Cost benefit analysis favoured implementation of the state-of-
art technology that must be reviewed every time after a period of 18-22 months for
upgradation. This could not be possible due to high costs involved at that point of
time for the upgradation of the mainframe system. No single individual could be held
responsible for the closure of the erstwhile unsuccessful programme.
C. Misleading advertisement by quacks
163. During evidence the Committee pointed out that various advertisements
appeared regularly in print media/visual media which claimed to give immediate
remedies/relief for incurable/dreaded diseases such as epilepsy, cancer etc., which

45
was a very serious matter. The Committee observed that such unauthorized/illegal
medical practices by quacks and healers were banned under the Law. When asked on
the steps taken to prevent such practices, the Ministry inter alia submitted:
"It is proposed that a statutory regulatory frame work should be provided,
specifying the procedure as to how any new medical system will be examined by
an Expert Committee for recognition or rejection of claim of any new system of
medicine/pathy, after, making an objective analysis. It is also proposed that
while giving details of the procedure to be followed for recognition, it will be
provided that practice in unrecognized system of medicine/pathy is prohibited.
A penalty clause will have to be added to specify that practicing in any medical
system which has not been recognized under the procedures of the said statutory
framework, and which does not have a Regulatory Act of its own, will be an
offence for which penalty can be specified. Under the proposed framwork, the
responsibility of enforcing the prohibition and penal provisions to be included
in the Act, would be given to the State Govts./UT administrations."
Observations and Recommendations
164. The Committee note that the All India Institute of Medical Sciences was set
up in 1956 by an Act of Parliament as an autonomous institution of national importance
with the objectives of developing patterns of teaching in under-graduate and post-
graduate medical education in all its branches so as to demonstrate a high standard
of medical education to all medical colleges and other allied institutions in India; to
bring together at one place educational facilities of the highest order for the training
of personnel in all important branches of health activity; and to attain self-sufficiency
in post-graduate medical education.
165. The Committee note that the foremost objective behind setting up of the All
India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in the year 1956 was to establish a
Centre of excellence in Medical Research while serving as a hospital for specialised
Medical Services. The Committee are constrained to point out that All India Institute
of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) established as a teaching hospital for developing
excellence in medical education and research has grown into a large hospital without
adequate emphasis on teaching or research. The  Institute has failed to emphasize
medical research though this was one of its major objectives. The results of research
have not brought in the benefits in terms of improved methodology, patenting or
commercialisation. The Committee further note that a very small amount has been
earmarked every year as Institute Research Grant from the budget allocated to the
Institute during the period 1994-95 to 2003-2004. Though there has been increase
in the annual extra mural funds from the Non-Government/International Agencies
for Research from Rs. 9.86 crores in 1994-95 to Rs. 20.38 crores in 2003-2004,
there has been hardly any increase in the allocation from the budget allocation of the
Institute of Rs. 12 lakh being made every year for the purpose. Thus, barely one to two
percent of allocation of funds to Institute is being allotted for research. Though the
total budget allocated under Non-Plan has increased from Rs. 53 crores in 1994-95
to Rs. 218.18 crores in 2003-2004, the inability of the Institute to allocate appropriate
commensurate increase of the budget for research purposes indicate that the Institute
has failed to put adequate emphasis on medical research.

46
166. Various Research projects related to health care are undertaken by the
members of AIIMS Faculty on behalf of national and international agencies. All
Members are entitled to grant of funds for (a) inter-departmental research projects
(b) projects connected with national health priorities and (c) projects involving
development/acquisition of new techniques or skills not undertaken by the Institute.
The Committee regret to observe that research in AIIMS has been adversely affected
not only for want of funds but also due to certain laxity shown by the Institute authorities
to review/monitor the projects. In purely quantitative terms, 339 research projects
commissioned during the decade 1991 to 2000 have been completed, but no final
reports was received in respect of 153 projects. At least 54 out of these 153 projects
were completed on paper during the period 1991-95.
167. The Committee are surprised that most of the Research Projects undertaken
in AIIMS are not reviewed despite a recommendation from the Estimates Committee
made in their 102nd Report of Fifth Lok Sabha. The Committee note the Estimates
Committee had recommended that the research projects conducted at the Institute
should be reviewed by the Director and Dean half-yearly with reference to the progres
made, expenditure incurred and time spent and likely time and expenditure required
to achieve the desired results. However, the Audit Review has revealed that review of
research projects was conducted for one year (1997-98) only. The review for the
years 1995-96, 1996-97, 1998-99 and 1999-2000 was not conducted.
168. Further as there is no evidence of the utilisation or dissemination of research
findings, the Committee are inclined to conclude that even the small efforts at
promoting innovation have gone waste due to lack of will and application. Higher
allocation would also not improve matters until the institutional arrangements improve
and the projects are monitored for desired results. The Committee regert to point out
that the Institute has failed to carry out the reviews as recommended by the Estimates
Committee of Parliament. The Committee have now been informed that Director,
AIIMS has constituted a Research Review Presentation Committee, which would
review the Research Projects.
The Committee hope that the monitoring and review of all Research Projects
would be undertaken by the Review Committee with a regular periodicity so as to
assess the progress and viability of Research Projects. Although the Committee have
been apprised of an impressive list of various research activities undertaken in
AIIMS in the last few years, it is felt that there is need for timely submission of
investigation reports. The Committee recommend that it is essential to ensure that
all Reports of research work funded by Government/Non-Government/International
Agencies are invariably submitted to the Institute. The Institute shold ensure that the
research findings are patented/commercialized timely so as to use them to the best
advantage of the nation and humanity. A national research agenda may be formulated
to meet the emerging and resurgent medical needs of the country and also to strengthen
the capacity to investigate and successfully handle outbreaks of hitherto unknown
diseases for instance, AIDS, SARS etc. In order to meet this objective, the Committee
desire that the Institute should develop necessary infrastructure for surveillance,
rapid laboratory diagnosis and timely interventions, which, in turn, would enable the

47
country to effectively handle any health catastrophe. In this connection, the Committee
strongly feel that grants for Research in AIIMS need to be augmented suitably.
169. The Committee would like to point out that the purpose of medical research
is to apply the results thereof for practical use in the fight against diseases with
exemplary promptitude so that benefits of research reach the ailing humanity. The
Committee, therefore, desire that time-bound programme for completion of ongoing
research projects should be formulated and the pace of research and their practical
application in the medical field should be intensified. A mechanism needs to be evolved
expeditiously so that research efforts of AIIMS and other Central Medical Research
Institutes in the country and newer models of medical education developed by AIIMS
are available to the Medical Council of India (MCI) to be adopted nationwide. It is
imperative that there should be a system to ensure that AIIMS and the other advanced
Central Institutes in the field transfer all their experiences to the MCI from time to
time to enable the Council to incorporate some of those, as are approved by the
Council in its recommendations, on under-graduate and post-graduate medical
education.
170. As per the latest information furnished by the Ministry, there are 444
faculty members in position as against the sanctioned strength of 509. The Committee
note that All India Institute of Medical Sciences was to function as a Teaching Hospital
to develop excellence in Medical Education and Research. However, teaching has
suffered on account of shortage of teaching staff and the employment of teaching staff
on ad-hoc basis due to the matter remaining subjudice for seven years. For instance,
the Committee note that against the sanctioned strength of 475 faculty members as
on 31st March 2000, only 324 members were in position resulting in a shortage of
151 (32 per cent). Considerable shortage of faculty members existed in the cadre of
Assistant Professors. These posts were not filed up on regular basis after September
1993 due to orders passed by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in November 1994.
However, 115 ad hoc Assistant Professors were appointed between 1993-94 to
2000-01, out of which 52 were appointed on ad-hoc basis three to seven years back. It
may not be out of place to mention that an ad-hoc arrangement dilutes the staffing
norms while contributing adversely to attaining excellence in education. The
Committee feel that such a situation, if left unattended, would gradually degenerate
thereby seriously hampering the Institute's reputation as a Premier Teaching
Institution. The Committee, however, have been given to understand that of  late all ad-
hoc appointments have been stopped and would not be made in future also. The
Committee feel that not only the sanctioned strength of the faculty members should
be filled up with suitable persons at the earliest but it is necessary to review the
sanctioned strength periodically to meet the growing demand resulting from increase
in number of students from time to time.
171. The Committee find it very disappointing that Doctors employed in the
Institute invariably go on study leave abroad but seldom return on time for a substantial
period in order to earn money. The Audit review of the extramural funded projects
from different funding agencies, which were closed as on 31.3.1992 in a pilot study
based on 390 respondents, showed that 49 per cent were practicing/employed abroad.
The Committee regert to observe that large investments in providing subsidised

48
medical education for developing excellence and sufficiency have gone substantially
unreturned. Though the Committee agree that the opportunities for self-progression
through exposures to advancements in the bio-medical field should not be denied yet
they feet that it is unethical to use the country's meagre resources for training just
to enable the trained personnel leave the country later in search of greener pastures
abroad. The Committee are further surprised to find that the Institute did not undertake
any study to ascertain the costs incurred by the Government on providing world-class
education to Medical professionals, despite the recommendations of the Estimates
Committee in 1987. The Estimates Committee had expected that medical professionals,
trained at the Institute would develop a sense of obligation when they know that the
country invests its scare resources for their training. The Committee are of the
opinion that such a study is imperative. This, the Committee further feel, could
prevent the exodus of the skilled personnel to a certain extent. They, therefore, desire
that the Government must make a study to assess the cost of subsidized medical
education to doctors. The Committee have been informed that AIIMS has now started
formulating necessary guidelines for doctors going abroad on study leave or
assignments and would enforce its strict compliance. The Committee feel that the
Ministry may also explore the possibility of stipulating a provision in the existing
procedures that the doctors trained and absorbed in AIIMS will have to serve the
Institute for a minimum number of years before they are considered eligible to apply
for study leave to go abroad. The Committee further desire that appropriate action,
penal or otherwise, should be taken against the doctors who overstay while on study
leave abroad. In this connection, it is pertinent to note the statement of the Director,
AIIMS that any person over staying/extending his stay of a maximum period of two
years in one go will be treated as having resigned from the AIIMS. The Committee
view this as a welcome step which needs to be sustained with same vigour. The
Committee also hope that the Institute will take specific steps in regard to certain
particular super-speciality disciplines for example Neurology, Cardiology, Nephrology,
Oncology etc. to ensure that services in their Departments do not suffer due to
absence of doctors who proceed on study leave. The Committee are apprehensive that
if the brain-drain is not checked well in time then the Institute would drift away from
the avowed objective of being a Centre of Excellence to train highly qualified manpower
to look after the nation's expanding health care scenario.
172. One of the objectives of the Institute is to demonstrate a high standard of
medical education to all medical colleges and allied institutions in the country. The
Committee note that the methods adopted for dissemination of information regarding
high standards of medical education evolved by AIIMS include publication of such
information in the Annual Reports of the Institute, organization of workshops and
symposia on different aspects of medical education, offering short-term courses to
teachers, publication of Mamoranda and Text books on medical education, etc. The
above methods are, in the opinion of the Committee, not adequate by themselves. Mere
supply of information to all medical colleges and allied institutions can not be
considered sufficient unless the high standard of medical education perported to be
achieved through models evolved by AIIMS is actually attained. This will need a
systematic evaluation of the standards achieved by these colleges vis-a-vis those in

49
existence in AIIMS so that deficiencies noticed, if any, are rectified with  promptitude.
It will be desirable to have a periodic test-check of the standards of few medical
colleges to undertake the necessary evaluation. The Committee desire that AIIMS
should endeavour to keep itself apprised of medical advancements in the International
field also so as to play a dominating role in bringing about a qualitative improvement
in under-graduate and post-graduate medical education in the country.
173. An instance of casual attitude of the Ministry as well as Institute in the
field of Medical Education is evident from the fact that the Centre for Post Graduate
Education and Research in Dental Services, which was proposed to be established
during Sixth Five Year Plan (1980—1985) is yet to be set up. The proposal for this
Centre, approved as early as in 1979, was again considered and approved by the
Academic Committee in July, 1988. The Centre is now  planned to be completed by
September, 2005. The inordinate delay in completion of this Centre is nothing, but
inexplicable.  At this stage, the Committee cannot but strongly emphasise the need
for taking suitable steps to ensure that this Centre is completed and made functional
by the target date.
174. The Committee are aware  of the serious  debate currently doing the
rounds over the level of autonomy enjoyed by the Institute. They note that AIIMS was
established as an autonomous institution to serve as a Centre of Excellence in the
areas of medical service and education while serving a super-speciality hospital.
However, the Committee are concerned to note that by and large various activities
undertake in AIIMS are dependent on the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for
grants and thus, autonomy, which was meant to spell out 'freedom of action', as
envisaged during the setting up of AIIMS, has been somewhat hampered. During
evidence, the Institute expressed reservations over the limited autonomy available to
them and informed the Committee that their functioning has been adversely affected
for want of complete 'functional' and 'financial' autonomy. The Committee are in
agreement with the apprehensions expressed that excessive Government control as
well as political influence erodes the efficiency and growth capacity of an Institute.
They, therefore, are of the view that complete autonomy in conducting bio-medical
research is an essential pre-requisite for the growth of AIIMS so as to reach the
standards of excellence envisaged in the Act of 1956. The Committee desire that the
question of autonomy of AIIMS may be carefully examined by appointing an external
agency immediately which ought to ensure, in the process, the outstanding character
of the Institute. Further the Committee stress that, if need be, the Act of 1956 may be
suitably amended in the light of ground realities particularly for constitution of the
Governing Body of AIIMS, and immediate reforms be implemented in the light of
study conducted by the aforesaid expert Body. The Committee feel that these measures
would go a long way in reviving the glory of this Premier Institute and would help it in
the achievement of its avowed objectives.
175. The Committee note that the Institute was conceived as a centre of
excellence in the areas of medical research and medical education while serving as
a hospital for specialised medical services. The Audit review has revealed that over  the
years the Institute has grown in terms of delivery of general medical services at the

50
expense of research, education and specialisation. As a result, the objectives remain
largely unfulfilled while additional resources continue to be deployed  with the
expectation that the Institute is growing in the direction visualised. The Institute, as
a teaching hospital, failed, on the one hand in developing academic excellence and
innovation in technology, and on the other, in providing quality treatment as a
specialised referral hospital of national importance. Large shortages in the cadre  of
doctors and nurses have resulted in depriving the patients of the quality time in
diagnosis, treatment and medical care. The doctor-patient ratio  is very high in as
much as a patient gets barely four to nine minutes of attention from the doctor at the
OPD. Waiting time for surgery ranges from two and a half months to 34 months. If
the waiting time for diagnosis tests are added, the waiting time would be even longer.
The Committee are of the view that various factors responsible for this state of
affairs are resource constraints, adhocism and shortfalls in adequate strength of
doctors, nurses and skilled personnel, overcrowding of outdoor and indoor  patients,
inadequacy  of beds and inappropriate diagnostic  facilities, poor quality patient-care-
facilities etc. available in the Institute. The Committee feel that concerted action
needs to be taken to overcome infrastructural problems, including  those of staffing
and providing better  facilities for patients thronging the Hospital. The Institute
needs to develop a modern patient administration system, appoint patient co-ordinators
and increase co-operation between its various departments.
176. The Committee feel that  the Out Patient Department (OPD) of a hospital is
the most important unit where almost all patients suffering from mild to severe
conditions reports first. It is here that a patient forms his first impression of the type
of service that he should expect to get from  the hospital. On an average about 7,000
patients attend the OPD  of the Institute per day. Though the Public Accounts Committee
(Sixth Lok Sabha) in their 49th Report had recommended that the strength of doctors
be suitably  fixed to bring down the waiting time of  out patient to half an hour at the
most, the Institute had not fixed so far any norms for deployment of doctors in OPD on
the basis of work load to ensure satisfactory patient care. The Committee are
concerned to point out the average Doctor-Patient ratio in the OPD in the AIIMS has
increased gradually from 1:21 in 1990-2000 to 1:26 in 2001-2002 and further to
1:32 in 2003-2004. The Doctor-Patient ratio in the indoor services is stated to  be
1:35. The Committee feel that this Doctor-Patient ratio is abnormally high and needs
to be brought to a reasonable level. The Committee are of the opinion that the strength
of doctors in various Departments of the Institute needs to be reviewed and refixed on
the basis of well-determined norms and guidelines so as to enable them to render
satisfactory services to patients coming for treatment in the Institute. The Committee
further note that owing to certain specific reasons, many key posts in the Institute
were filled up through ad hoc appointments, which has brought administrative
inefficiency in the Institute and consequently, the patient-care services have received
a serious jolt. Since adhocism has dented the reputation of the Institute, the Committee
feel that the problem needs to be urgently addressed to ensure that the Institute
continues to be one of the best in the world in providing specialized health care.

51
177. The Audit Review has revealed that a large number of equipment for use for
diagnosis and treatment were installed late, not installed at all or lying damaged. No
wonder that patients in AIIMS, especially outdoor ones, which have increased manifold
without corresponding increase in diagnostic facilities and equipments, are compelled
to wait considerably for various tests/investigations. Needless to say that without
proper and early tests and investigations the patients cannot  be given timely and
exact treatment. The Ministry have taken the stand that since priority is given to
Emergency/indoor patients, the OPD patients may have to wait. The Committee do not
agree with the Ministry's view point and feel that notwithstanding all the steps taken
by the Institute's authorities to minimize excessive waiting time, the problem continues
to persist. The Committee are of the view that though certain delays are unavoidable
and  inevitable, yet the problem has to be tackled boldly and effectively so as to minimize
the inconvenience and anxiety caused to the patients and their relatives due to
agonizing wait in queues. The Committee cannot but over emphasise the need for
early suitable steps to ensure that waiting time for the patients to get diagnostic tests
is reduced to bare minimum. For this, proper diagnostic facilities with the installation
of more and more machines and equipment is the need of the hour. At the same time,
the Committee would like the Institute to ensure that various machines and equipment
are optimally utilized and are repaired immediately and put to use again, in case any
of those goes out of order. The Committee would like to be apprised of the precise
steps taken in this regard.
178. Another significant features in the patient care services in AIIMS, which
the Committee have noted, is inadequate number of beds which, at present, is 1853 for
indoor  patients. The Committee  understand that while the Institute faces a huge
attendance in OPD, the possibility of getting beds in most of the Wards is generally
remote for a large number of patients requiring in-door treatment. Although 465
beds are proposed to be augmented next year, still the number of beds available  would
be far short considering the fact that 7000 patients attend the OPD  per day and a good
number out of these needs indoor treatment. The Committee have been given to
understand that various ward facilities in AIIMS are proposed to be augmented in the
near future. The Committee would like the authorities to keep the bed requirements
in view when the additional facilities are planned. The Committee desire that urgent
measures should be taken to augment the availability  of beds as the Institute is
gravely short of the requisite number of beds.
179. The Committee are of the opinion that casualty/emergency services of a
hospital is gaining increasing importance on account of the stressful modern life in
urban conditions where people are subject to different types of accidents/medical
emergencies requiring immediate attention and care. This, obviously, puts pressure
on the casualty/emergency wings  of Delhi Hospitals. The Committee learn that
AIIMS has one of the largest such facilities in Delhi. However, the Committee feel
that Specialists are generally not available for immediate consultation, particularly,
for cases  involving head injuries, cardiac arrests, kidney problems  of paediatric
emergencies. The Committee feel that  in Emergency/Casualty Wing, where patients
and their relatives remain under emotional strain and anxiety, it is imperative that
these wings are manned by experienced and competent doctors who can render timely

52
and effective medical aid under trying circumstances. The Committee would further
like to point out that Emergency Wards are always managed by Junior doctors and
Senior Resident/Specialists, who, generally, are either not bothered or arrive
considerably late. This usually  compels  the relatives of patients to rush  to private
hospitals for prompt treatment. It is, therefore, of paramount importance that there
ought to be a system to ensure availability of Senior doctors regularly  in Emergency
Wards. This can only be possible if a Senior Doctor/Specialist in each discipline  is
present  round the clock so that best possible  medical treatment  is made available to
patients, who are rushed to emergency wards in serious/critical conditions.
180. The Committee note that AIIMS, being a premier super-speciality
Government Hospital-cum-Research Institute, receives a huge influx of patients not
only from Delhi but also from outside Delhi for outdoor as well as indoor treatment.
this puts tremendous pressure  on the Institute's infrastructure, which, in turn,
adversely affects the Institute's endeavour towards medical research and education.
The Committee find that AIIMS was envisaged to be a referral hospital catering to the
needs of patients requiring specialized treatment and not for those who can be
successfully treated in a routine manner in other hospitals as well. The Committee,
therefore, desire that AIIMS should retain its original character by serving  as a
super-speciality referral hospital only for serious patients referred by select hospitals
all over the country. For this, it is also imperative that basic conditions in other
hospitals of the country must be upgraded/improved to such an extent so that patients
are easily and successfully treated there and need not rush to the Institute for treatment
of minor/manageable illnesses. The Committee hope that this would help the AIIMS
to pay requisite attention to the more serious and complicated cases.
181. The Committee are disappointed to note the extremely tardy progress in
setting up of various Centres of the Institute particularly the Institute Rotary Cancer
Hospital (IRCH), which was conceived to serve as a comprehensive cancer centre in
entire North India and the Centralised Accident and Trauma Centre. the IRCH project,
which was started 12 years ago in 1992, remains incomplete as on date as on 96 beds
are operational in the Centre. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry
that another 104 beds are yet to be made functional. In another case, the Committee
have been distressed to find that the Centralized Accident and Trauma Centre, which
was approved by the Government in May, 1984 is yet to be completed. The Committee
note that the project suffered inordinate delay due to its transfer from the Delhi
Administration to the Central Government. The Committee have further been given
to understand that due to treamendous paucity of funds, a revised EFC Memo could be
placed for the first phase of construction only in March, 2001, which was stated to be
completed by March, 2003. However, the Committee understand that the project could
not be completed as the scope of work had increased. The revised estimate of
Rs. 132.82 crores is awaiting the approval of Cabinet Committee onEconomic Affairs.
The Committee feel that this is yet another instance of inordinate delay and lack of
coordination on the part of the Ministry with concerned agencies to make such a
significant Centre operationalised. The Committee, therefore, urge the authorities
concerned to draw up a time-bound programme for completion of both the
aforementioned projects and take necessary action without further loss of time. The

53
Committee would like to be informed of the exact dates when these two Centres
became operational.
182. Various irregularities in the purchase and disposal of machinery and
equipment have come to the notice of the Committee during the examination of  the
subject. These included auction of equipment A SM 100 X-Ray Generator in working
condition, extra expenditure of Rs. 23.97 lakh on Cath Lab. I, II & III and Gamma
Knife due to placing of orders without availability of funds; a machine known as
Counter Chamber costing Rs. 46.55 lakh procured in 1994-95 having remained
unutilized right from its installation and also not taken in stock. It was further noted
that the equipment Copper Laser Vapours with Dye Laser was not selected according
to the requirements; the purchase of Non-Invesive continuous hemodynamic
monitoring system was done without calling for tenders and proper records were not
maintained to keep a watch over the receipt and working of foreign equipment. The
Committee desire that the Institute should be careful in future while buying such
machinery and equipment.
183. Various instance of losses and mismanagement of resources were noticed
in the administration of the Institute. The Institute failed to collect at least Rs 2.43
crore as Registration Fees from 64 per cent of the OPD patients. The Institute
allowed a drug store and a provision store to function in its premises at a loss of
revenue of at least Rs 55.38 lakh. Instances of manipulation of records were noticed
in the auctioning of an equipment in working condition. Moreover, the Institute failed
to reflect Rs 2.57 crore of outstanding advances against private firms on its books of
accounts. In certain cases, the Institute continued to keep an amount of Rs 18.73
crore in its cash balance though it was shown as debit in the final head of accounts.
The Committee consider these irregularities as a reflection on the part of the
administrative efficiency of the AIIMS. The Committee would like the Institute
Management to draw appropriate lessons from these lapses with a view to avoid the
same in future.
184. The Committee were informed that the Institute was allotted 32.09 acres
of land at Masjid Moth during 1966-69 for construction of the projects out of which
22 acres land was encroached upon by JJ (Jhuggi Jhomapri) dwellers as the land
remained unutilized for quite some time due to paucity of funds. The Committee
were informed that later an amount of Rs. 17.15 crore was fixed for the relocation of
those JJ families and it was decided to shift JJ cluster by March 1998. The Committee
observe that despite the Institute paying Rs. 9.97 crore to MCD for getting possession
of land, the jhuggis could not be relocated till April 2001. The Committee find that the
proposal to build residential quarters on this land had to be shelved and the same had
to be built at Ayurvigyan Nagar. They further note that it is now planned to utilize the
said land for construction of super-speciality centres and hostels. The land use is,
therefore, required to be changed from 'Residential' to 'Institutional'. According to
the Ministry, the matter has been taken up with the Ministries concerned and
permission is awaited. The Committee recommend that the matter be pursued
vigorously so that this land, which is a part of development in the Master Plan for
AIIMS, could be utilized effectively. The Committee strongly believe that it requires

54
co-ordination and co-operation at all levels in Government. Hence there is a need to
secure better collaboration between various Government Departments, agencies and
services.
185. The Committee note from the Audit findigs that a computerization system
was set up at a cost of Rs. 2.03 crore at the Institute in April 1989 for Patient Care
System, Administration, Library, Academic & Research and Teaching. The software
of the patient care system was developed by Tata consultancy Services at a cost of
Rs. 25 lakh in May 1990. The Committee, however, find that the Patient Care System
had not been used successfuly as the mainframe computer system was rendered
obsolete and thus was unable to handle more than 25 online users, whereas, the
number of users on the network had increased beyond 100. The Committee are of the
opinion that Institute, being a Research Centre in advanced Medicine, should have a
system in place to periodically study their software requirements vis-a-vis available
technology and recommend updating of the system. It appears that the institute
continued to maintain a system which was obsolete in terms of requirement and was
incurring heavy expenditure on its maintenance. The Committee regret to observe
that AIIMS, despite being a leading super Speciality Hospital, does  not have a modern
information system. The Committee, therefore, recommend that necessary mechanism
be developed to keep the Institute in-sync with the latest computer technology, which
would support the day-to-day working of the Institute.
186. The Committee note with grave concern that various advertisements from
quacks claiming to give immediate relief from various diseases regularly appear in
National Dailies which take gullible patients for a ride. The Committee would like to
point out that as per the provisions of  The Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable
Advertisements) Act, 1954, no person is to take any part in the publication of any
advertisement referring to any drug/magic remedies which suggest any diagnosis,
cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of  any disease, disorder or condition specified
in the Schedule of the Act that includes epilepsy, leprosy, fits, insanity, paralysis,
leucoderma etc. Imprisonment extending to six months in the case of first conviction
and upto one year in case of subsequent conviction has been provided as penalty for
any offence committed under this Act. The Committee, however, regret to observe that
no effective system exists to enforce the provisions of this Act to check the malpractices,
which could be one of the reasons as to why quacks enjoy flourishing business in a
short span of time. The Committee have been given to understand that there is a
proposal in the Ministry to   provide a statutory regulatory framework specifying the
procedure for an Expert committee to examine the claims made by quacks. It is also
intended to have a penalty clause for such offences. The Committee desire that the
Ministry should take urgent steps to enforce the provisions epecified under the
Drugs and Magic Remedies Act of 1954 as well as ensrue that the proposed regulatory
framework is opertionalised at the earliest.
187. The Committee have been given to understand that Six Research-Cum-
Referral Hospitals are proposed to be set up by the Government in Bhopal, Jodhpur,
Raipur, Rishikesh, Patna and Bhubaneswar with the same standards of that of AIIMS.
According to the Ministry, particular States in which these Hospitals are to be set up,
have been selected primarily on the basis of their socio-economic development

55
parameters and availability of health infrastructure.  The main objective of these
Institutes will be to provide:
*** State-of-the-art medical care in 39 specialities and super-specialities;
*** A fillip for raising the prevailing standards of medical education;
*** A referral system that will ensure that all health institutions are optimally
utilized;
The Ministry of Health proposed to place before EFC for clearance of these
proposals shortly after which approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
would be sought. According to the Ministry, the State Governments would provide
 100 acres of free-land, road connectivity, electricity and water supply for these
Institutes. The likely construction time from the date of commencement is stated to
be 36 months. The Committee appreciate these  proposals of the Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare and desire that concerted, effective and timely steps should be
taken to ensure early commencement and completion of these Institutes which would
go a long way in helping the population of the States with the added benefit of bringing
super-speciality services practically to their doorsteps. The Committee also feel that
these steps would be instrumental in decreasing the excessive patient load on AIIMS,
Delhi and thus, desire that the project must be completed within the set target date
without any cost overruns. The Committee further desire that once the experiment is
successful, the Ministry may explore the possibility of further expanding these
facilities in other deprived regions of the country as well.
188. The Committee also understand that there is a proposal to upgrade one
medical college each in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Jammu & Kashmir,
Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal to the level of the proposed AIIMS like
institutions. This would be a one time exercise wherein the Central Government
would render estimated assistance of Rs. 120 crores to each existing institution to
bring it to the level of AIIMS like facilities. The Committee welcome this proposal
also and desire that this should be followed up and implemented at the earliest as it
would provide a fillip for raising the prevailing standards of medical education and
provide a capable medical workforce of not only medical graduates but also well-
trained specialist and super-specialists comparable to the level of the AIIMS.
189. The Committee note that AIIMS has Vishram Sadans for the relatives/
attendants of patients coming from outside Delhi. As a large number of relatives of
patients admitted in the Hospital from outside Delhi have to stay in the Hospital
premises, the Committee feel that the existing arrangements by the Institute need to
be augmented further to cater to their requirements. The Committee would also like
the Institute to ensure adequate canteen facilities and 24 hrs. chemist shop in the
premises of the Institute so that the attendants of the patients do not face any difficulty
on this account.
190. The Committee note that  the Ministry has taken action to fill up vacancies
in the posts of teaching staff, nurses, technical staf and other supporting staff. In this
connection, the Committee would like to point out that several vacancies continue to

56
exist in these categories thereby  affecting services rendered by the Institute. A large
number of vacancies in AIIMS dilute the efficiency of the organization which also
results in considerable inconvenience to patients in one form or the other. It is
desirable that appropriate action is taken to fill these vacancies  by advance planning
and periodical monitoring at an appropriately higher level. The Committee desire
that a study may be undertaken in the Institute to examine that the Doctor/Teacher/
Staff  provided in various Departments are commensurate with the work load. The
Committee express concern over the fact that there is some resentment among
researchers, doctors, nurses and supporting staff regarding their pay structure,
service conditions, facilities etc. The Committee hope that suitable measures would
be taken by the Ministry/Institute for the redressal of their grievances.
191. The Committee understand that many ad-hoc appointments have been made
against Group 'C' and 'D' posts in the Institute in the past. The problem of large
number of ad-hoc employees working in these categories has been brought to the
notice of the Committee. The Committee recommend that the Government should
devise a rational method to deal with the problem of regularization of ad-hoc employees.
Further the Committee desire that no ad-hoc appointments should be made in future
in these categories.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
13 January, 2005 Chairman,
23 Pausa, 1926 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX  I
PARAGRAPH NO. 1 OF THE REPORT OF C & AG OF INDIA FOR THE YEAR
ENDED 31 MARCH, 2000
(No. 4 of 2001)
Department of Health
1. All India Institute of Medical Sciences
Highlights
Ø The All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS), established in 1956 as
a teaching hospital for developing excellence in medical education and
research has by 2000, grown into a large hospital without adequate emphasis
on teaching or research. Teaching has suffered due to shortage of teaching
staff, and to overcome the problem large scale adhoc recruitment has been
made by the Institute in deviation of the norms. Evidently adhoc recruitment
would not attract sufficiently qualified professionals. The magnitude of the
problem can be estimated from the fact that more than hundred Assistant
Professors are currently on adhoc appointment and all of them are continuing
as such without any further career prospects.
Ø The Institute has failed to emphasize medical research though this was one
of its major objectives. Barely one to two per cent of allocation of funds to
the Institute is being earmarked for research. The results of research have
not brought in the benefits in terms of improved methodology, patenting or
commercialisation. In purely quantitative terms 339 research projects
commissioned during the decade 1991 to 2000 have been completed, but no
final reports have been received in respect of 153 projects. Atleast 54 out of
these 153 projects were completed on paper during the period 1991—95.
Since there is no evidence of the utilisation or dissemination of research
findings, it has to be concluded that even the small efforts at promoting
innovation have gone waste due to lack of will and application. Higher
allocation would also not improve matters until the institutional arrangements
improve and the projects are monitored for result.
Ø Career profile of doctors trained by the Institute showed that 49 per cent of
doctors trained at AIIMS have found their vocations abroad, while the
country suffers from a lack of trained medical professionals. Large investments
in providing subsidised medical education for developing excellence and
sufficiency have gone substantially unreturned. The Institute has failed to
review and assess the cost of medical education subsidised by the
Government despite the recommendations of the Estimates Committee since
1987. The Estimates Committee had expected that medical professionals
57

58
trained at the Institute would develop a sense of obligation when they know
that the country invests its scarce resources for their training.
Ø The Institute, as a teaching hospital, failed on the one hand in developing
academic excellence and innovation in technology, and on the other failed to
provide quality treatment as a specialised referral hospital of national
importance. Large shortages in the cadre of doctors and nurses have resulted
in depriving the patients of the quality time in diagnosis, treatment and
medical care. The doctor-patient ratio is very high in as much as a patient
gets barely four to nine minutes of attention from the doctor at the OPD.
Waiting time for surgery ranges from two and a half months to 34 months. If
the waiting time for diagnostic tests are added, the waiting time would be
even longer. A large number of equipments, procured for use in specialised
diagnosis and treatment were installed late, not installed at all or are lying
damaged. In a significant disclosure it was noticed that the Institute could
not use a substantial part of resources it received from the National Illness
Assistance Fund for providing treatment to the poorest of the poor. A small
amount of Rs. 10 lakh received in 1997 remained deposited till October 1999
and thereafter until March 2000 only Rs. 4.85 lakh could be used. Patient
care, a crucial element in the de-addiction treatment has suffered as
deployment of nurses is at half of what is required and further casualty,
emergency and intensive care facilities are not available. The Institute
surprisingly did not possess a modern hygienic kitchen and there was no
facility for testing dietary articles.
Ø While most of the resources of the Institute have gone towards the upkeep
of the hospital, the infrastructure continues to be deficient. The specialised
centre for treatment of cancer remains partially operational as only two out
of proposed eight floors have been constructed, even though the building
was scheduled to be completed in 1995. A painful consequence of this has
been that atleast three to four terminally ill cancer patients are turned away
daily for lack of facility. The specialised centre for treatment of trauma has
not materialised even though the plan was approved in 1995. In the treatment
of socially disadvantage drug addicts, the Institute failed to provide the
much needed infrastructure at its Drug De-Addiction Centre.
Ø Various instances of losses and mismanagement of resources were noticed
in the administration of the Institute. The Institute failed to collect at least
Rs. 2.43 crore as Registration Fees from 64 per cent of the OPD patients. The
Institute allowed a drug store and a provision store to function in its premises
at a loss of revenue of at least Rs. 55.38 lakh. Instances of manipulation of
records were noticed in the auctioning of an equipment in working condition.
The Institute failed to reflect Rs. 2.57 crore of outstanding advances against
private firms on its books of accounts. In certain cases the Institute continued
to keep an amount of Rs. 18.73 crore in its cash balance though it was shown
as debit in the final head of accounts. In an instance of mismanagement of
Government funds the Institute spent Rs. 9.97 crore on the vacation and
possession of a piece of land at Masjid Moth.

59
1.1 Introduction
AIIMS1 (Institute) was established in New Delhi in June 1956 through an Act of
Parliament as an autonomous institution under the administrative control of Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare.
1.2 Objectives
The objectives of the Institute are:
(a) To develop patterns of teaching in under-graduate and post-graduate
medical education in all its branches so as to demonstrate a high standard
of medical education to all medical colleges and other allied institutions in
India;
(b) To bring together in one place educational facilities of the highest order
for the training of personnel in all important branches of health activity;
and
(c) To attain self-sufficiency in post-graduate medical education.
The Institute is envisaged  to have comprehensive facilities for teaching, research
and patient-care. As provided in the Act, the Institute conducts teaching programmes
in medical and para-medical courses both at under-graduate and post-graduate levels
and awards its own degrees. Teaching and research are conducted in 42 disciplines.
1.3 Organisational set-up
As per clause 7(1) of the Act, the Central Government nominates from among the
members of the Institute the President of the Institute who is also the ex-officio Chairman
of the Governing Body. At present, the Minister of Health and Family Welfare is
nominated by Name as a member of the Institute and also nominated as the President
of the Institute. The Director is the Chief Executive Officer. There are 36 departments in
the Institute providing inpatient and outpatient services in addition to training and
research in selected areas. Besides, the Institute has five specialised centres: namely
the Centre for Community Medicine, the Cardiothoracic Science Centre, Institute Rotary
Cancer Hospital, Neurosciences Centre and Dr. R.P. Centre for Ophthalmic Sciences.
1.4 Scope of Review
The accounts and records of the Institute for the years 1995-96 to 1999-2000
were test checked in audit during June 2000 to November 2000. The review was
conducted with the object of evaluating the performance of the Institute as a centre of
excellence in teaching, research and patient care.
1.5 Evaluation indicators
On the basis of the range of activities, the infrastructural system available and
the pattern of delivery of services, Audit adopted the following evaluation indicators
for the review:
Ø Has the Institute been functioning as a centre of excellence?
Ø Has research received the desired emphasis?
1 All India Institute of Medical Sciences

60
Ø Is the academic infrastructure adequate?
Ø Is patient care satisfactory?
1.6 Results of Review
1.6.1 Administration of resources
The trend of receipts and expenditure over the period 1995-96 to 1999-2000
(summary of Receipts and Payments Accounts at Appendix I) brought out that:
Ø During the period, receipts have grown from Rs. 243.8 crore to Rs. 625 crore.
The growth is principally due to substantial increase in non-plan grants from
the Central Government (from Rs. 66 crore in 1995-96 to 160 crore in
1999-2000). Plan grants have however grown at a moderate pace rising from
Rs. 53 crore in 1995-96 to Rs. 80 crore in 1999-2000. Evidently large resources
are being made available to the Institute for its functioning without specifying
the objectives. In 1995-96 the ratio of non-plan to plan resources was close
to 1:1, while in 1999-2000 it is 2:1. Increasing the non-plan grant allocation
while allowing the plan grant allocation to grow at a slow pace has resulted
in defocusing the emphasis.
Ø Specific purpose grants have increased by a moderate Rs. 5 crore in five
years, donations are insubstantial and hospital receipts are almost static in
the range of Rs. five-six crore during the last five years.
Ø Unspent balances at the end of the year have grown from Rs. 3.82 crore at
the beginning of 1995-96 to Rs. 95.94 crore at the beginning of 1999-2000.
Similarly investment of surplus funds went up from Rs. 31.6 crore in 1995-96
to Rs. 96  crore in 1999-2000. This must be seen in the background of the fact
that a large number of projects remain incomplete.
Ø Funding of Specialised Centres which is depicted by contra entries in the
Accounts have increased from Rs. 36 crore to Rs. 94 crore, without any
corresponding change in the quality of delivery. Evidently, most of the
resources have gone to provide services to a larger number of patients
without ensuring quality infrastructure.
Ø Capital expenditure has grown from Rs. 12 crore in 1995-96 to Rs. 19 crore in
1999-2000, while miscellaneous contingent expenditure has grown from
Rs. 16 crore to Rs. 36 crore during these indicative periods. Pay and
allowances have increased from Rs. 44 crore to Rs. 115 crore.
1.6.2 The Institute as a centre of excellence
The Institute was conceived as a centre of excellence in the areas of medical
research and medical education while serving as a hospital for specialised medical
services. The review brought out that over the years the Institute has grown in terms
of delivery of general medical services at the expense of research, education and
required specialisation. As a result, the objectives remain largely unfulfilled while
additional resources continue to be deployed with the expectation that the Institute is

61
growing in the direction visualised. The succeeding paragraphs would show that
adequate attention has not been paid in building the required infrastructure and to
research, training and education. The Institute's commitment to develop and nurture
trained medical professionals has failed as no survey has been conducted and no
steps have been taken to arrest brain drain. Construction of the building of the Regional
Cancer Centre has not been completed though the Institute has projected its full
fledged functioning by the end of the eighth five year plan leading to a situation where
three to four cancer patients have to be refused admission daily. The proposed centre
for Dental Education at the instance of the Estimates Committee has not materialised.
The existing centres have not been performing satisfactorily considering the span of
attention available and large number of specialised equipments remaining unutilised.
A large number of research projects remain incomplete. This is particularly significant
in the background of the fact that the Institute has been investing only Rs. 7 crore to
Rs. 12 crore annually on research programmes against its annual budget of around
Rs. 600 crore. Thus research works out to barely one to two per cent of the total
expenditure. This should be considered very poor in the context of the avowed objective
of the Institute to develop medical research with the intention of using research output
in enhancing both teaching standards and specialised areas of medical treatment.
Patients do not get the quality time of the doctors largely because of the reasons that
the hospital is receiving patients at all levels, its referral character having been largely
lost. Detailed audit findings on all these aspects are furnished in the succeeding
paragraphs.
1.6.2.1.  Academic infrastructure
Following was the position of sanctioned strength and men in position of the
faculty members as on 31.3.2000:
Table 1.6.2.1: Sanctioned strength and men in position of faculty members
S. Category Sanctioned Men in Vacant
No. strength position posts
1. Director 01 01 Nil
2. Professors 110 108 0 2
3. Additional Professor 40 119 (+)79
4. Associate Professor 115 82 33
5. Assistant Professor 199 0 7 192
6. Medical Superintendent 02 01 01
7. Principal, College of Nursing 01 01 Nil
8. Lecturer in Nursing 07 05 02
Total 475 324 151
Against the sanctioned strength of 475 faculty members as on 31st  March, 2000,
only 324 members were in position resulting in a shortage of 151 (32 per cent). It may
be seen that the largest shortages are in the cadre of Assistant Professors. These
posts were not filled up on regular basis after September 1993 due to orders passed by
the Hon'ble Hight Court of Delhi in November 1994. However, 115 adhoc Assistant
Professors were appointed between 1993-94 to 2000-01, out of which 52 were appointed

62
on adhoc basis three to seven years back. The adhoc arrangement dilutes the staffing
norms while not contributing effectively to excellence in education.
1.6.2.2 The Institute neither proceeded on a definite organised
basis, to creat the requisite impact on the functioning of medical
institutions elsewhere in the country nor formed any committee to
achieve the above objectives. No exercise had been done to correlate
the production of any category of professional, para medical or
non-medical staff to meet specific identified needs.
1.6.2.3 Survey of graduates/post-graduate who passed out from
Institute
The Estimate Committee in their 102
nd report (Fifth Lok Sabha)
had recommended that steps should be taken to complete studies
for ascertaining the cost of education and training in the Institute
and to bring home to students the cost incurred by Government on
their training so as to instil in them a sense of obligation to the
country. The Institute had not conducted studies to ascertain the
cost of training graduate and post-graduate doctor since 1987. The
academic section of the Institute never conducted any survey of
graduates/post-graduates who qualified from the Institute and the
Institute was not able to provide any detail of that. However, on
going through report on review of extra-mural funded projects from
different funding agencies which were closed as on 31.3.1992 in a
pilot study based on 390 respondents, 49 per cent were practising/
employed abroad. To that extent specialised medical attention has
been denied to the beneficiaries.
1.6.2.4 Centre for dental education
The Estimate Committee of the Fifth Lok Sabha in their
recommendation had suggested the establishment of a centre for
post-graduate education and research in Dental Sciences in the
Institute. It was envisaged to establish such a centre during sixth
five-year plan (1980-85) but it has not been set up so far. The Institute
stated (August 2000) that academic committee had approved the
proposal in July 1998 for establishment of centre for dental education
and research, that the EFC memo has been prepared and approved
by the project committee constituted by the Institute and that the
proposal was ready for placing before the Finance  Committee/
Governing Body for its approval.
1.6.3 Research programmes
The faculty members undertake research schemes related to health and medical
subjects on behalf of national and international agencies. Agency-wise receipt and
expenditure incurred during the last five years was as under:
Institute failed to
create impact on
other medical
institutions in the
country.
Institute had not
conducted studies
to ascertain the
cost of training.
Centre for post-
graduate research
in Dental Sciences
not set up even
after the  15th
year of targeted
period.

63
Table 1.6.3: Research programmes undertaken
(Rs. in lakh)
Name of 1995-96 1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000
Agency Rec. Exp. Rec. Exp. Rec. Exp. Rec. Exp. Rec. Exp.
Government 601.65 549.14 565.69 593.52 683.66 655.29 752.12 737.27 792.96 779.19
agencies/
Autonomous
bodies
International 130.87 168.43 165.17 209.68 302.55 231.99 358.27 324.27 403.38 389.22
agencies
Private 15.43 12.47 23.72 17.47 36.16 29.44 23.42 29.29 57.34 42.21
agencies
Total 747.95 730.04 754.58 820.67 1022.37 916.72 1133.81 1090.83 1253.68 1210.62
1.6.3.1 Review of research projects
The Estimate Committee recommended that the research
projects conducted  at the Institute should be reviewed by the
Director and Dean half yearly with reference to the progress made,
expenditure incurred and time spent and likely time and expenditure
required to achieve the desired results. It was seen in audit that
review of research projects was conducted for one year (1997-98)
only. The review for the years 1995-96, 1996-97, 1998-99 and
1999-2000 was not conducted.
1.6.3.2 Projects/Schemes sponsored by Indian Council of
Medical Research (ICMR)/Department of Science and
Technology (DST)
As per terms and conditions of the grants released by the
ICMR/DST, for permanent and semi-permanent assets acquired
solely out of the grant, a separate register of assets was required to
be maintained by the Institute. The Institute did not produce the
asset register in respect of asset acquired by it out of the grants-in-
aid received for research schemes/projects, which had been
completed. It could not, therefore, be checked in audit whether the
said assets had been returned to the funding agency or utilised by
the Institute with the permission of funding agencies after accounting
for the same in the Institute's stock register.
1.6.3.3 Research schemes of the Institute
All members of faculty are entitled to the grant of research funds for (a) inter-
departmental research projects, (b) projects connected with national health priorities
and (c) projects, involving development/acquisition of new techniques or skill not
undertaken by the Institute. The number of projects/schemes undertaken by the Institute
and completed since 1995-96 was as indicated below:
Half-yearly review
of research
projects not done
by the Director
and Dean.
In the absence of
centralised asset
register, the assets
could not be
checked.

64
Table 1.6.3.3: Position of Research Schemes undertaken during preceding five years
Year No. of Funds No. of No. of projects/ No. of projects/
Projects/ allotted/ projects/ schemes schemes in
Schemes Released schemes completed but which final
undertaken (Rs. in lakh) completed final report not report
submitted submitted
1995-96 43 12/10.02 43 17 26
1996-97 46 12/11.18 46 17 29
1997-98 37 12/8.63 37 16 21
1998-99 26 12/6.46 26 19 7
1999-2000 33 12/8.57 33 30 3
Total 185 60/44.86 185 99 86
Since 1995-96, the Institute claimed to have completed 185
projects/schemes (March 2000). In 86 of these, final reports were
submitted by the principal investigator and in remaining 99 projects/
schemes, though stated to have been completed, the final reports
were not submitted by the principal investigators. None of the
research findings were got patented/commercialised. It was further
observed that out of 154 projects/schemes undertaken during
1991—95, 54 projects/schemes stated to have been completed, no
final report has been submitted by the Principal Investigators till
March, 2001. There is a real risk that the research projects output
would go waste after lapse of such a long period. The Institute does
not seem to be concerned on such lapses.
1.6.3.4 Non-accounting of research projects
A test check of records of research section revealed that
investigators of projects were given advances to undertake the
projects and amounts were posted in the ledgers. In certain cases,
the investigators did not render the account even after completion
of projects resulting in accumulation of money in the hands of
investigators. There were cases the investigators had either retired
or had left the Institute without clearing the advances. Year-wise
break-up of such outstanding advances is given below:
Table 1.6.3.4: Y ear-wise Advance of Investigators
Y ear Amount No. of projects Closed projects
1990-91 10475.00 2 2
1991-92 78445.00 7 7
1992-93 45100.00 7 7
1993-94 66100.00 7 7
1994-95 30623.00 7 7
1995-96 98011.00 9 9
1996-97 213690.00 3 3
1997-98 78988.00 7 -
1998-99 85020.00 5 -
1999-2000 3479442.00 56 -
4185894.00 110 42
Out of 185
projects under-
taken only in 86
cases final report
submitted.
In respect of
54 projects
undertaken/
completed during
1991—95, final
report not
submitted till
March, 2001.

65
While Rs. 41.86 lakh were outstanding with Investigators in respect of
110 projects, Rs. 5.42 lakh was outstanding in respect of 42 projects which were closed
four to ten years ago.
1.6.4. Hospital services
The Institute provides medical care to patients either by admitting them to private
and general wards or through the OPD.
The Institute has 25 clinical departments including four
superspeciality centres to manage practically, all types of disease
except burn cases, dog-bite cases and cases of infectious diseases.
The Institute also manages a 60-bedded hospital in the form of
Comprehensive Rural Health Centre at Ballabhgarh in Haryana
and provides health cover to abut 2.5 lakh local population through
the Centre for Community Medicine.
1.6.4.1 Out Patient Departments (OPD)
Number of Patients, number of Specialists available and time taken per patient
during March 2000 in six main OPDs (Dental, Paediatric Surgery, Neurology, Cardiology,
IRCH, and ENT) was as follows:
Table 1.6.4.1
S. Speciality T otal No. Total No. Duration No. of No. of Time
No. (OPD) of of days in of OPD on Specialists Patients taken
Patients March w orking who seen per per
seen in 2000 day in attended hour per patient
March March OPD in specialist/ in
2000 2000 M arch doctor Minutes
(In hours) 2000
1, Dental 5862 25 6 6 7 9
2. Paediatric 1702 25 5 1 13 4
Surgery
3. Neurology 2842 14 4 7 7 9
4. Cardiology+ 9443 25 4 14 7 9
CTVs
5. IRCH 4133 20 7 4 7 9
6. ENT 9635 25 4 6 16 4
As seen from the table above, on an average seven to sixteen patients were
examined per hour, taking four to nine minutes per patient.
Though the Public Accounts Committee (Sixth Lok Sabha) in
their 49th Report had recommended that the strength of doctors be
suitably fixed to bring down the waiting time of out patients to half
an hour at the most, the Institute had not fixed so far any norms for
deployment of doctors in OPD on the basis of workload to ensure
satisfactory patient care.
Institute is not
treating burn
cases, dog-bite
cases and
infectious diseases.
Norms for
deployment of
doctors in OPD
were not fixed.

66
1.6.4.2 Patients awaiting surgery
The position of patients awaiting surgery as on March 2000 was as under:
Table 1.6.4.2: Patients awaiting surgery
S. Name of the Number of Period by which Rem arks
No. department patients backlog will be
awaiting cleared
surgery
1. Department of
Otorthinolaryngology
(a) Surgery under GA 5000 34 months Disease like cancer and aggressive
benign disease adjusted early against
patients already awaiting surgery
under  GA  (One  and  half  month)
(b) Surgery under LA 7000 34 months Patients for biopsies and other
procedure in main OT who need
adjustment against patients already
awaiting surgery under LA (Seven
and half months)
2. Dental 75 Will  be  cleared
in six months if
extra   OT   and
beds     will     be
provided, other-
wise it can never
be cleared seven
3. Department of 60 months
Nephrology
4. Department of
Neurosurgery
(a) Unit I 446 eight months
(b) Unit II 206 six months
5. Department of 68 two and half
Gastrointestinal Surgery  months
From the above table it is apparent that waiting time for patients awaiting surgery
ranged between 2 ½ months to 34 months. However, actual waiting time may be much
higher if the waiting time for Ultra Sound, C.T. Scan, MRI-Scan, are added.
1.6.4.3 Deployment of nurses
The number of nurses deployed to look after in-patients, vis-a-vis the sanctioned
strength and new posts created during last six years was as under:
Table 1.6.4.3
Year Sanctioned No. of T otal In Shortfall Percentage
strength new posts position shortfall
created
1993-94 1453 — 1453 983 470 32
1994-95 1453 119 1572 983 589 37
1995-96 1572 39 1611 1004 607 38
1996-97 1611 8 1619 1166 453 28
1997-98 1619 15 1634 1188 446 27
1998-99 1634 138 1772 1249 523 30
Note: The Institute did not furnish the sanctioned strength and men in position of the Institute for the
year ending March 2000.

67
Though 319 new posts have been created during 1994-99,
it has not served any purpose. Even the sanctioned strength of
1994-95 is not yet fully utilised. As seen from the table above, the
shortage in cadre of nurses ranged between 27 to 38 per cent during
review period. It was also seen that at present nurses are trained in
two courses only (1) B.Sc. Nursing (Post Certificate) & (2) B.Sc.
(Hons.) Nursing. Both courses provide general training and no
specialised training in critical areas are provided.
1.6.4.4 Surgical items available with the hospital but patients
asked to purchase from the market
The Institute was pruchasing surgical consumables for supply
to the patients undergoing surgery free of cost and a few patients
were being asked to purchase certain items not available with the
hospital. On test check it was observed that in the month of March
2000 a patient was asked to purchase certain items from the market
which included 21 surgical items which were available with the main
store and out of which 15 items were issued by the main store on
indents of the concerned department.
1.6.4.5 Diet
The hospital dietary service provides food to the indoor
patients of the main Hospital and all the Centres. The diet covers
normal diet, private diet, semi-solid diet, modified liquid diet and
therapeutic and modified diet, being prescribed by the dieticians.
The Institute had no basic facilities for testing dietary articles,
which were being examined visually by staff on duty before supply
to patients. For testing food there was no composite testing
laboratory. The Institute prescribed the scale of diet in February
1991 in terms of ingredients given to patients. But the scales were
different for general patients and private patients. The institute was
providing per patient per day diet worth Rs. 20.50 to general patients
whereas diet worth Rs. 49.15 was given to private patient. The
reasons for discrimination could not be explained in the light of the
therapeutic indicator prescribed by the dietician.
It was also noticed that a proposal for modernisation of main
kitchen of the Institute, was moved in the year 1993-94 which was
got approved in October 1994 by the dietary Advisory Committee.
The estimate for construction of new kitchen amounted to Rs. 2.07
crore. However, no action has been taken till date (December 2000)
due to non-finalisation of the alternate site for shifting the existing
kitchen. Thus, due to delay in dedicing alternate site, modernisation
of kitchen has been delayed by more than six years. In the meantime
the kitchen continues to operate with outmoded and unhealthy
working arrangements.
No rational to
create new posts
when institute
failed to fill the
existing
vacancies.
Shortfall ranged
between 27 to 38
percent.
Patient was asked
to bring surgical
items which were
available with the
Institute.
No basic facility
exists for testing
dietary articles.
Delay in deciding
site resulted in
non-moderni-
sation of kitchen.

68
1.6.5 Poor patient account/patient treatment account
The Institute has been receiving grants/Financial assistance provided by the
Ministry and the Prime Minister's Relief Fund besides other agencies, by cheques
drawn in favour of the Director of the Institute for treatment of individual poor patients.
Money thus received are kept in patient treatment account. Apart from this, money is
also received in the form of cash donations from individuals, religious trusts and
through donation boxes in various wards and OPDs of the hospital for which the
Institute maintains poor patients account.
(i) A test check of poor patient account of Institute (Main), revealed
that a shortage of cash of Rs. 1.17 lakh was depicted in the
accounts for the month of November, 1993. The misappropriated
amount has not been recovered as yet. The Institute stated in
may 1999 that disciplinary proceedings against concerned
individual have been completed and the report submitted to
disciplinary authority for final decision.
(ii) NIAF
3 was established in January 1997 with a view to provide
financial assistance to poor patients living below the poverty
line for treatment of life threatening diseases. Under this scheme,
the Government of India provided an advance payment of Rs. 10
lakh to the Medical Superintendent of the Institute to enable
him to sanction an amount upto Rs. 25000 immediately to each
deserving case for treatment in the Institute. Cases requiring
more than Rs. 25000 were required to be sent to Managing
Committee of NIAF for approval/sanction. This amount would
be replenished as and when utilisation certificate/report was
submitted to the Government. Financial assistance is given only
on the request of the patient in requisite proforma application
duly recommended by the treating physician alongwith
supportive documents which is subject to the scrutiny of sub-
committee. Poverty line is determined by the sub-committee as
per Ministry's guidelines according to the list of per capita income
per head notified by them.
It was noticed that an amount of Rs. 10 lakh received in
December 1997 through the Ministry under the NIAF Scheme
remained deposited in the bank account till October 1999. Rs. 4.85
lakh was utilised by the different departments of the Institute between
November 1999 and March 2000 leaving credit balance of Rs. 5.15
lakh at the close of March 2000.
1.6.6 Machinery and Equipments
Various irregularities were noticed in the purchase and disposal of machinery
and equipment:
(i) SM100 X-Ray generator was installed in Room No. 75 of the
department of Radio Diagnosis on which certain tests were
conducted. Similar types of tests were done on another similar
Final action is still
awaited in case of
shortage of cash
for the month of
November 1993.
Financial
assistance for
poor patients not
utilised upto
October 1999.
Auction of
equipment in
working
condition.

69
machine installed in Room No. 44 of the same department.
In April, 1999, the department submitted a proposal for
condemnation of the said equipment (in Room No. 75) which
was pruchased at cost of Rs. 12.33 lakh in 1982, stating that it
was completely worn out. The said equipment was auctioned.
The upgraded version of the said equipment was purchased
at  a cost of Rs. 30.27 lakh and was installed in August 1999.
As per the service report (March 1999) and statistical register
of different machines between March 1999 to August 1999,
the machine was in good working condition and tests were
continued to be done on that machine. In reply to the
observations the department stated that to keep the continuity
of records the number of investigations were kept as before.
But on comparison it was observed that between March 1999
to August 1999 the outlived machine had performed even
better than the machine installed in Room No. 44.
(ii) As per Appendix 8, Rule 7 of General Financial rules,
availability of funds is a pre-requisite for placing an order for
the procurement of the stores. It was noticed that for purchase
of Cath Lab. I & II—each costing Rs. 2.75 crore, Gamma knife
costing Rs. 11 crore and Cath Lab. III costing Rs two crore,
Institute paid Rs. 2.20 crore to the State Bank of India for
opening of Letters of Credit and the balance amount was to be
paid on the receipt of the funds from Government. The bank
charged interest of Rs. 23.97 lakh. Thus placing of order and
opening of Letters of Credit without availability of funds
resulted in extra-additional expenditure of Rs. 23.97 lakh.
(iii) The Institute purchased one machinery/equipment known as
'Counter Chamber' used as sample analyser for Department of
Pharmacology in the year 1994-95 at a cost of Rs. 46.55 lakh
out of German grant. The machine is stated to be non-
functioning. The machine was neither taken in the stock
register of the department nor anybody knows about its
working and where about of the local agent. Non-accounting
of this machine in the department's store indicates that institute
has no proper control to ensure that prescribed procedure
was being followed for recording and smooth running of the
machine. non-functioning of this machine has not only resulted
in the non-utilisation of an asset of Rs. 46.55 lakh but also in
depriving genuine patients of essential care.
(iv) Department of Dermatology and Venerology procured Copper
Laser Vapours with Dye Laser at a cost of Rs. 18.00 lakh.
When the equipment was received in the department in
February 1994, it was realised that this laser was inadequate
Extra expenditure
of Rs. 23.97 lakh
due to placing of
orders without
availability of
funds.
3National illness Assistance Fund.
Machine costing
Rs. 46.55 lakh
procured in
1994-95 remained
unutilised right
from its
installation and
also not taken in
stock.
Equipment not
selected according
to the require-
ments.

70
for dermatology treatment, it also required high running cost
and needed isolated space for running because high intensity
of noise. The equipment remained in crated condition for six
years and was transferred to Bhabha Atomic Research Centre
through a Memorandum of Understanding against which
Rs. 15.50 lakh was received.
(v) A repeat order for 'Non-Invasive continuous hemodynamic
monitoring system' costing Rs. 13.86 lakh was placed in August
1997 on the basis of purchase made in May, 1996 without calling
for tenders for the Department of Anaesthesiology. A perusal of
records revealed that the earlier equipment purchased in 1996
was not being used by the department. There was no justification
for making the second purchase. Further, the equipment was
software based and in view of the rapid improvement in software
not only the cost would have been reduced but also a newer and
upgraded version would have been available. The purchase of
the equipment on the basis of more than one year old purchase
without ascertaining the price could not be justified by the
department.
(vi) Store section of the main Institute was making purchases of
foreign equipments for different departments of the Institute
(Main). After making payment for opening of Letter of Credit
and placement of supply order no centralised record was kept to
watch the receipt and installation of the equipment. No
adjustment bills were being submitted to accounts branch
indicating the stock entry/difference of amount due to fluctuation
in the exchange rate at the time of releasing payment by the
bank. In the absence of maintenance of proper and complete
records by the Institute, the receipt of the equipments and
payments made thereof could not be vouch safed in audit. A test
check of records revealed that for purchase of 2-D hardware/
software package costing DM-20000 equivalent to Rs. five lakh
approx. Letter of Credit was opened in March, 1996 and supply
order was placed in May 1996. Out of three cartons said to have
been loaded, only one carton was received in March, 1997. The
Institute reminded cargo, Air India in February, 1998, no action
was taken thereafter.
(vii) Scrutiny of challan files for the year 1998-99 and 1999-2000
revealed that 851 consignments were received. Of these, in 655
cases, the consignments were got cleared very late and the delays
in clearance ranged upto 448 days resulted in payment of
demurrage charges of Rs. 17.25 lakh.
Purchase of
equipment which
was not justified.
Proper records
not maintained to
keep watch over
receipt and
working of
equipments.
Delay upto 448
days in clearance
of consignments.

71
1.6.6.1 Delay in utilisation, installation and functioning of equipment
The Institute purchased/imported a large number of expensive equipments and
machines for running various departments of the Hospital Wing. No centralised
monitoring was done to watch the receipt, installation and utilisation of these
equipments. On being asked by Audit the Institute could collect information from
19 departments only in four months. Scrutiny of that information and other records
brought out the following:
1.6.6.2 Equipment not installed
Four vital equipments costing Rs. 2.30 crore purchased/imported during 1993 to
March 2000 were not installed due to non-supply of essential parts to run the system,
equipments supplied other than ordered etc.
1.6.6.3 Equipments not working
Four equipments costing Rs. 34.70 lakh and one costing 42650 Swiss Francs
installed during September 1989 to March 1998 remained out of order for most of the
time upto June 2000.
1.6.6.4 Delay in installation of equipment
28 equipments costing Rs. 23.11 crore+US$131400 were purchased/imported
during August 1993 to September 1998 and installed during February 1995 to April
2000. The delay in installation of equipment ranged between four to thirty one months.
1.6.6.5 Department of Rehabilitation and Artificial Limbs
The Department of Rehabilitation and Artificial limbs attended to the requirements
of handicapped patients and helped them to return to their normal lives by providing
physiotherapy, occupational therapy services and by providing them with artificial
limbs. A Prosthetic and orthotic workshop was also attached with the department for
production and distribution of limbs, callipers, shoes, repair and modification etc.
B.Sc. (Nursing) and Physiotheray students were also provided clinical training,
fieldwork alongwith under-graduate and post-graduate medical students.
It was seen in audit that the number of patients, especially the number of old
patients; showed increase since 1995-96, but the production of appliances (artificial
limbs, calliper, shoes etc.) remained stagnant except during 1998-99 and 1999-2000
which showed downward trend as detailed below:
Table 1.6.6.5
Y ear Number of Patients Production of
New Old Total Appliances
1995-1996 7518 20212 27730 1195
1996-1997 10720 18604 29324 1226
1997-1998 17340 29665 47005 1228
1998-1999 12266 31116 43382 928
1999-2000 17755 36091 53846 975

72
Test check of records further revealed that:
(a) No norms for deployment of doctors, paramedical and workshop staff had
been fixed. Further, no targets were fixed for evaluating the performance of
the department.
(b) The waiting period of patients in prosthetic workshop ranged between
12 months to 15 months.
(c) Equipments costing Rs. 43.35 lakh were also awaiting installation due to
reasons either the essential parts were not supplied or the equipment
supplied was other than the specification and looked damaged.
1.6.7 Establishment of Rotary Cancer Hospital
The Institute, with the collaboration of Cancer Foundation
Society of India established a Rotary Cancer Hospital. The
construction work upto first floor of proposed eight storeyed building
was completed (civil work only) in may 1981. With the rising public
demands for services in the field of Oncology and need for diagnosis,
prevention and treatment of cancer to fulfil the objectives of National
Cancer Control Programme, the expansion of IRCH to a full fledged
cancer centre was considered essential. In 1992, the Institute
responded to the need to develop a comprehensive cancer centre in
north India at IRCH as at that time the north zone had only 35 beds
at IRCH, the only cancer centre of the region as compared to 1100
beds in west zone, 787 in south zone, 370 in east zone and 65 in
central zone. The patients attending IRCH come from diffeent parts
of the country namely Uttar Pradesh, Bihar, Punjab, Rajasthan and
some time from neighboring countries but the waiting period for
admission and treatment of cancer patients was inordinately long.
Therefore, it was decided to construct six additional storeys above
the existing block and one additional block. With a view to
establishing a full fledged regional cancer centre the Institute while
submitting memorandum for EFC approval in 1992 had projected
completion of construction of building in three years and functioning
of the hospital by the end of the eighth five year plan. The proposal
for extension of IRCH was approved by EFC and first instalment of
Rs. 2.85 crore was received during 1992-93 and next instalment of
Rs. 1.65 crore during 1993-94 by the Institute.
It was observed that while submitting the EFC memorandum
the Institute had projected completion of construction by 1995 while
as per the Architectural Consultant to whom four per cent charges
on actual cost were to be paid, the likely date of completion of
building was January 1997. The building plans were approved by
NDMC in December, 1995 but the construction work was taken up
only in January, 1999. The project which was expected to be
Only two floors of
the eight storeyed
building were
completed.
Three to four
critically ill
patients were
refused admission
daily.

73
completed for Rs. 4.60 crore in 1992 was awarded at a cost of  Rs. 14.91
crore and actual cost of the construction taking price escalation etc.
can be known only after the completion of the building. Reasons for
delay were not made available to audit. The safeguard of liquidated
damages was not provided in the contract. In the meantime lack of
facility has resulted in the refusal of admission to three to four
critically ill patients daily for the last five years. The accumulated
impact could be enormous.
1.6.8 Establishment of Trauma Centre
In the context of rapid industrialisation, increase in vehicular traffic, use of
machinery and equipment and growing social tensions, the AIIMS prepared a scheme
for the establishment of a CATS
4 for the city of Delhi which would include the
establishment of an Apex Centre and Peripheral Hospitals with the following objectives:
(i) to provide trauma services to the injured; preferably the treatment to be
started at the site of the accident;
(ii) to train personnel to deal with such emergencies;
(iii) to establish a research centre in collaboration with transport,
communication, law and police authorities to prevent accidents by constant
data evaluation and public education; and
(iv) to use rehabilitation techniques for effective treatment in the shortest
possible time and also to make invalid victims useful citizens.
The approval of the Government for setting up a CATS project under the aegis
of AIIMS at a cost of Rs. 16.65 crore was conveyed in May 1984 subject to condition,
among others, that the construction work of the Centralised Accident Hospital (Apex
Centre) should be taken up immediately, and the Centre should be made functional
within five years. The possession of land measuring about 14.5 acres near Safdarjung
Hospital was taken in January 1986. The scheme was reviewed by Ministry in 1989 and
keeping in view the requirement of multi-sectoral coordination with number of agencies,
mostly under Delhi Administration, it was decided that the scheme may be transferred
from the Central Sector to the Delhi Administration and be implemented by a society
registered for the purpose and supported by Delhi Administration. It was, however,
felt in 1991 that it would not be feasible to set up the CATS by Delhi Administration
considering the aspects of cost and utility. The centre envisaged under CATS was
necessarily to be a part and parcel of a multi-disciplinary hospital like AIIMS or
Safdarjung Hospital. New Delhi Municipal Committee and Delhi Urban Art Commission
in 1995 approved the drawings of Trauma Centre. The construction has not started till
date (November 2000), though an expenditure of Rs. 13.56 crore had already been
incurred towards payment of land charges, consultancy fee etc.
4Centralised Accident and Trauma Service.

74
1.6.9 Drug De-Addiction Centre
Drug De-Addiction Centre was established at Deen Dayal Upadhyaya Hospital
under the aegis of the Institute and necessary funds, as required, were provided to the
Institute during Seventh Plan with the following objectives:
(i) to establish system for continuous monitoring which can evaluate changing
trends in substance abuse over a period of time, specially in vulnerable
section;
(ii) to develop rational strategies for reducing and preventing drugs alcohol
related disabilities so that the centre would become a centre of excellence
and resource for SAARC and South-East countries for training, research
and other related  aspects.
The inputs include strengthening of the staff teaching, training and research as
well as for health education. Suitable administrative staff, clinical laboratories and
other staff were also employed.
The centre does not have its own casualty/emergency and ICU facilities. Patients
of casualty/emergency were being sent to the casualty department of Deen Dayal
Upadhyaya Hospital for treatment. The number of nurses deployed for the treatment
of in-patient, sanctioned strength and shortfall was as under:
Table 1.6.9(i)
Y ear Sanctioned strength Actual posted V acant
1993-94 41 20 21
1994-95 41 18 23
1995-96 41 16 25
1996-97 41 16 25
1997-98 41 20 21
1998-99 41 20 21
The shortfall was more than 50  per cent  during the years
1993-94 to 1998-99, which adversely affected the patient care.
Number of OPD cases and in-patient admission during 1993-94 to 1998-99 was as
under:
Table 1.6.9(ii)
Y ear OPD patients Admissions
New Old Total (in-patients)
1993-94 2664 8160 10824 492
1994-95 2103 7263 9366 495
1995-96 2434 8234 10668 499
1996-97 2713 10105 12818 478
1997-98 3393 13565 16928 529
1998-99 3927 15438 19365 458
More then 50 per
cent short fall in
deployment of
nurses.

75
Though there was a considerable increase in number of new
and old patients since 1995-96, but the in-patients admissions
remained almost stagnant. The Institute did not furnish the data for
1999-2000.
1.6.10 Accounts
1.6.10.1 Un-reconciled expenditure
In the balance sheet as of March, 2000 Rs. 21.98 crore were shown as advances
paid for foreign purchases under the head Machinery & Equipment of Institute (Main).
But a scrutiny of records revealed that advances of Rs. 21.39 crore only were made
during the year. The Institute could not reconcile the difference of Rs. 59 lakh.
1.6.10.2 Wrong booking of expenditure of Rs. 18.73 crore in March 2000
Out of the aforesaid Rs. 21.39 crore, Rs. 18.73 crore were debited in the accounts
on 31 March, 2000. But a scrutiny of records revealed that the letters of credit thereof
for making advance payments to the foreign suppliers were opened from April to
August, 2000. The expenditure was thus wrongly shown as incurred in 1999-2000 as
cheques drawn on that account remained with the Institute itself.
1.6.10.3 Levy stamps
From April 1995 the Institute prescribed a registration fee of Rs. 10 for new
patients in Out Patient Department (OPD). This is collected by affixation of levy stamps
by the Institute on registration card. These stamps are also fixed on old cards after one
year of registration. EHS patients referred from their dispensary for these specialities
and the patients referred from one OPD to another are exempted from payment of Rs. 10
on this account. For this purpose the levy stamps are got printed by the Institute and
kept with the cashier of the Institute, who issues the stamps to the OPD/Centres for
affixation on the registration cards. A counter check of the stock and issue register of
levy stamps with the figure of new OPD patients in different centres revealed the
following discrepancies:
Table 1.6.10.3: Discrepancy in the stamps account
Y ear No. of New Amount of Levy Levy stamps sold
cases in OPD stamps chargeable@ as per record
Rs. 10 per patient (in Rs.)
1995-96 708641 7086410 2575740
1996-97 759971 7599710 2931150
1997-98 770370 7703700 2818850
1998-99 732474 7324740 2450280
1999-2000 827828 8278280 2958460
Total 37992840 13734480
Thus, there is a difference of Rs. 2.43 crore, which could not
be explained by the Institute. Since the levy stamps provide revenue
to the Institute, the difference between the chargeable amount and
the amount actually collected, established the volume (almost 63.68
per cent) of revenue foregone.
2Out Patient Department.
Revenue of Rs.
2.43 crore
foregone.
Number of in-
patients remained
almost stagnant.

76
1.6.10.4 Outstanding advances against private firms
The Institute had been making advance payments to various firms through
departments/store for purchase of material, stores etc. The department/stores in turn
render accounts in respect of these advances. The Institute did not furnish the records
of these advance payments. However, as per list furnished by the Institute, outstanding
advances as on 31 March 2000 were as under:
Table 1.6.10.4: Outstanding advances
                                                                                   (Rs. in lakh)
Y ear Amount
1990-91 4.5
1991-92 1.74
1992-93 48.37
1993-94 8.58
1994-95 6.40
1995-96 14.83
1996-97 13.69
1997-98 27.39
1998-99 30.13
1999-2000 102.14
Total 257.79
The Institute did not furnish the reasons for aforesaid
outstanding. However, long outstanding advances were indicative
of the fact that no sincere steps to adjust/recover these outstanding
advances were taken by the Institute. Further, by the passage of
time the possibility of their becoming bad debts cannot be ruled out.
It was further noticed that these advances were not reflected in the
annual accounts.The accounts were thus gravely deficient to that
extent.
1.6.10.5 Un-reconciled amount of Rs. 14.69 lakh under
Cardiothoracic Vascular Surgery accounts
Scrutiny of accounts of the Institute for the year 1990-91
revealed that cash receipt from heart surgery patients was not being
accounted for in the Institute's accounts since the inception of
Cardiothoracic Vascular Surgery (CTVS) i.e. from 1979. The matter
was taken up with the Ministry in February 1993 to incorporate
these transactions and to revise the accounts for the year 1991-92.
Accordingly the Institute revised its accounts after incorporating
therein the total receipts and expenditure as worked out from the
cash registers and patients file etc. available with the Institute, which
revealed a difference of Rs. 25.47 lakh. Out of this Rs. 3.64 lakh and
Rs. 7.14 lakh were reconciled during 1993-94 and 1994-95 respectively
leaving un-reconciled difference of Rs. 14.69 lakh. As the balance
amounting to Rs. 14.69 lakh was not physically available with the
institute it was shown as un-reconciled balance in the accounts.
Advances of Rs.
2.57 crore not
reflected in the
annual accounts.
Rs. 14.69 lakh
not physical
available shown as
un-reconciled
balance in the
accounts.

77
The Institute stated (August 2000) that the concerned official was charge sheeted
under Rule 14 of CCS (CCA) Rules. A departmental enquiry was conducted and
disciplinary authority (Director, AIIMS) imposed the penalty to withhold his increment
since September, 1990 and the individual retired on same basic pay on 30.9.1997. The
Institute could not make any case for misappropriation against the official and it was
decided that this un-reconciled amount of Rs. 14.69 lakh may be made good out of the
interest earned by short term investments of CT Patients Fund. It was authorised by
standing finance committee in its meeting (August, 1998) and was approved by Chief
of Cardio thoracic Centre (December, 1999).
1.6.11 Miscellaneous
1.6.11.1 Unauthorised occupation of land
The Institute was allotted 32.09 acres land at Masjid Moth
during 1966-69, out of which about 22 acres was under encroachment
by the Jhuggi Jhompari  dwellers as the land remained vacant due to
paucity of funds for construction of the projects. A joint survey of
this cluster was carried out in 1992-93 by the officers of the slum
department of Delhi Development authority now Municipal
Corporation of Delhi and the Institute, which revealed that the number
of JJ dwellers who were eligible for alternate site were 2456.
Resettlement charges were to be paid by the land owning agencies
(Institute) which were revised by the MCD from Rs. 10000 per Jhuggi
to Rs. 29000 per Jhuggi from April, 1993. Institute deposited first
instalment of Rs. 2.97 crore with slum department of MCD as their
share of relocation cost (upto September 1993). A cursory survey
conducted by the slum wing of MCD revealed that in addition to
2456 eligible JJ dweller; there existed 4500 ineligible JJ dwellers in
the cluster. After detailed deliberations in the meeting held in
December 1996 under the chairmanship of Secretary (Urban
Development), Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment it was
decided that 2456 eligible JJ families and about 4500 ineligible JJ
families (as on March 1996) needed to be shifted from the site
belonging to the Institute. The Institute would pay Rs. 4.28 crore
(Rs. 7.25 crore — Rs. 2.97 crore already paid)  for relocation of
eligible JJ families and  Rs. 9.90 crore for ineligible JJ families.Thus
the Institute would pay a total sum of  Rs. 17.15 crore to the MCD as
relocation cost. The additional amount could be paid in two
instalments. Accordingly the Institute paid Rs. seven crore to MCD
in August 1997. The time schedule for shifting the JJ cluster was
fixed as March 1998 or 12 months from the date of depositing the
amount of Rs. seven crore to the slum department of the MCD. The
Institute would then protect the land and start development. As
such the Institute paid Rs. 9.97 crore to MCD for giving possession
of land. However, neither the vacation nor the possession of land
was attained (July, 2000).
Despite payment
of relocation cost
of Rs. 9.97 crore
vacant possession
of land was still to
be obtained.

78
This has resulted not only in blockage of funds of Rs. 9.97 crore but also affected
the construction of quarters defeating the very purpose ought to be achieved.
1.6.11.2 Non-realisation of electricity bills for Rs. 13.23 lakh from outside
agencies
Some private agencies are running their business in the
Institute premises. These agencies are provided facilities of electricity
and water. It was noticed that electricity bills for Rs. 9.29 lakh in
respect of State Bank of India for the period May, 1993 to August,
2000 and bills for Rs. 3.94 lakh in respect of Super Bazar drug shop
for the period March, 1994 to January, 2000 were raised between
November, 1998 and September, 2000 but payment has not been
received till date (November, 2000).This has resulted in non-
realisation of electricity bills to the tune of Rs. 13.23 lakh. Reasons
for raising late demand were not furnished by the Institute.
1.6.11.3 Loss of revenue of Rs. 55.38 lakh towards licence fee
(a) In 1975 the Institute handed over two garages with water supply and
electricity connection located on the ground floor of the private wards to
Super Bazaar for the opening of a drug and medical appliances shop at a
nominal licence fee of Re. one per month only. The matter for charging
licence fee was reconsidered in 1977 and it was decided to charge Rs. 400
per month towards licence fee instead of Re. one per month from Super
Bazaar. The Super Bazaar paid Rs. 400 per month till may 1997 towards
licence fee.  After May, 1997 no licence fee was recovered from Super
Bazaar. A proposal for second-outlet of drug shop was initiated in
December, 1993. A private party quoted Rs. four lakh per month towards
licence fee for the space, which had lesser area than that occupied by
Super Bazaar. Super Bazaar had also quoted licence fee of Rs. 25000 per
month for the same space. The contract was, however, not finalised due to
the plea that the location of the proposed shop was not proper in view of
traffic and VIP movement considerations, though existing Super Bazaar
drug shop was functioning at the same place. Audit was of the view that
even if this contract could not be finalised due to aforesaid reason Super
Bazaar should have been charged licence fee for Rs. 25000 per month for
the space which was already occupied by them. No efforts have been
made to recover the licence fee @ Rs. 25000 from the Super Bazaar which
has resulted in a loss of Rs. 18.59 lakh (March 2000).
The Institute had not accepted the licence fee @ Rs. 400 p.m. from December
1997 onwards and asked (January 1998) Super Bazaar to vacat the premises
which had not yet been vacated. No alternate site could be finalised by the
Institute.
(b) A provision store at Ayurvigyan Nagar is being managed by Super Bazaar
Co-operative Stores Ltd. on a token licence fee of Rs. 200 per month. It was
decided to charge Super Bazaar @Rs. 50 per square feet as licence fee from
Payment of
Rs. 13.23 lakh
has not been
received.

79
September 1994. Accordingly the licence fee worked out to Rs. 50600 per
month which was duly approved by the Director of the Institute. However,
in July 1997 Director revoked his earlier order and decided to charge Rs. 200
per month as earlier fixed and treated the entire period on contract and
extended the contract upto December, 1997 on existing rates. The contract
was extended retrospectively in September, 2000 for the period for January,
1998 to September, 2000. Super Bazaar being a commercial organisation
should have been charged as per CPWD norms.Thus the revocation of
orders for not realising the licence fee at current rates has resulted in loss
of Rs. 36.79 lakh till September 2000. Super Bazaar was asked to vacate the
occupied premises at Ayurvigyan Nagar on or before September, 2000.
The store is not vacated till October, 2000.
Thus, total loss on account of licence fee amounted to Rs. 55.38 lakh
(Rs. 18.59 lakh + Rs. 36.79 lakh).
1.6.11.4 Over payment of transport allowance
As per Ministry of Finance order of 3.10.97 effective from
1.8.97, the transport allowance shall not be admissible to those
employees who are provided with Government accommodation
within a distance of one kilometre or within a campus housing the
place of work and residence and also to those employees who have
been provided with the facility of Government transport. It was,
however, noticed that in contravention to these orders the Institute
was making payment of transport allowance to those employees
who were residing in Government accommodation within a distance
of one kilometre or within the Institute's campus and also those
employees who were availing the facility of Government transport.
The Institute did not furnish the full details of those employees.
However, as on March 2000, 938 number of employees were found
availing the facility of Government transport and the Institute was
maintaining 888 quarters in its campus at Ansari Nagar. The over
paid transport allowance during the period from August 1997 to
October 2000 worked out to Rs. 1.30 crore.
1.6.11.5 Infructuous expenditure of Rs. 3.99 crore on computerisation
The Institute acquired a computer system at a cost of Rs. 2.03 crore in April 1989.
The software of patient care system (one of the modules of the computerisation
programme) was developed by Tata Consultancy Service at a cost of Rs. 25 lakh in
May, 1990). In August, 1996 Institute realised that the patient care system had not
been used sucessfully due to bottlenecks and lack of direction and coordinated efforts
for the implementation of patient care system. Accordingly, it was decided that there
should not be extension to the annual maintenance contract. There was no record to
Overpayment of
Rs. 1.30 crore
towards transport
allowance in
contravention of
Government is
orders.

80
exhibit how far the requirements, which were shown at the time of initiation of
computerisation were achieved. The break up of expenditure incurred on computer
system and its maintenance, which is lying idle since May, 1996 was as under:
Table 1.6.11.5: Break up of expenditure on computer system
(Rs. in lakh)
Purchase of computer system 202.64
Development of PCS software 25.00
Annual maintenance charges 143.26
Purchase of terminals (as per the stock register from 27.64
March 1988 to March 1996 excluding cost of 27 terminals)
The institute itself was unable to keep up its decision regarding replacement of
the computerised system timely due to which even the data stored during its functioning
could not be further utilised. Thus despite incurring an expenditure of Rs. 3.99 crore,
the Institute could not be benefited of the computerisation.
1.6.12 Evaluation and monitoring
1.6.12.1 Performance review not conducted
Government's decision 5(C) below GFR 150 envisaged that a review of the
performance of the grantee Institute, in respect of grant-in-aid would be undertaken by
the sanctioning authority concerned at least once in three to five years. No such
review of performance was ever conducted by the Ministry.
The matter was referred to the Ministry in December 2000; their reply was awaited
as of February, 2001.

APPENDIX-I
(Referred to in paragraph 1.6.1)
Receipt and Payment Account
Receipt account
(Rs. in Lakh)
Sl. Receipts 1995-96 1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000
No Non-Plan/ Non-Plan/ Non-Plan/ Non-Plan/ Non-Plan/
Plan Plan Plan Plan Plan
1. Opening balance 382.00# 2190.74^ 3650.81 5538.83 9593.81
2. Grants from Government 6629.00 7353.00 8921.00 14950.00 16000.00
(including all centres) 5306.77 7714.77 6155.99 7723.88 8017.36
3. Grants received for
specific purpose 774.41 826.73 1069.35 1254.89 1277.09
4. Donations received from
outside agencies 2 7.17 36.91 32.59 5 6.37 52.14
5. Hospital receipts 548.52 525.81 591.63 546.80 656.24
6. Miscellaneous receipts 366.28 246.32 562.88 320.79 1031.31*
7. Provident fund
(including Insurance) 643.11 703.69 905.49 1446.77 2202.93
8. Deposits 106.97 150.55 173.16 201.66 208.96
9. Recoverable advances 4 6.05 51.75 53.60 6 5.09 111.28
10. Outside recoveries 7 5.78 66.48 57.86 234.30 662.40
11. Investment 3160.09 5603.70 3000.00 3800.00 9600.00
12. Revolving fund 113.91 111.42 105.75 153.65 176.64
13. Interest on investment 113.03 123.39 155.63 181.56 353.67
out of Grant/Donation/
Recoverable advances
14. Patient treatment account 2468.75 2594.75 2921.59 2638.32 3161.27
15. Poor Patient account 5.01 5.44 8.23 2.41 2.14
16. Contra entries 3617.00 6368.00 5147.81 7730.47 9422.56
Total 24383.85 34673.65 33513.37 46845.79 62529.80
# Excludes Rs. 0.78 lakh pertaining to scheme account for the year 1994-95.
^ Includes Rs. 200.00 lakh FDR of CT Patient account depicted as opening balance, omitted to
be included in the closing balance for the year 1995-96.
* Includes Rs. 42.53 lakh on account of defective machinery returned.
81

Payment account
(Rs. in lakh)
S No.Payments 1995-96 1996-97 1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000
(a) Revenue Expenditure               Including Non-Plan & Plan
(including all centres)
1. Pay & Allowances 4447.51 5171.20 6520.62 11002.91 11551.81
2. Machinery & equipment 2328.75 4711.03 2034.56 2238.61 6107.15
3. Material & supply 2226.63 2117.79 2459.32 2749.10 3294.08
4. Miscellaneous 1602.44 1908.57 2180.37 2754.19 3595.74
expenditure/contingencies
(Including maintenance of
building)
5. Recoverable advances 81.05 73.99 65.24 208.87 306.80
6. Outside recoveries 169.56 205.49 221.00 496.37 1059.06
7. Investments 3004.25 5510.38 3003.25 3800.00 9602.00
8. Expenditure out of grants for 736.98 841.28 920.64 1093.54 1221.16
specific purposes
9. Provident fund (including
insurance) 550.03 599.48 762.82 1243.30 1829.65
10. Deposits/refunds 60.88 100.51 140.55 175.57 142.41
11. Revolving fund 208.10 70.12 102.28 115.97 90.97
12. Patient treatment account 2130.72 2034.51 2389.88 2179.24 2870.62
13. Poor patient account 1.21 3.80 15.98 4.14 6.50
(b) Capital Expenditure 1228.00 1306.69 2010.22 1459.70 1944.03
Construction of building and
advances for building,
specialised services, mobile
ophthalmic units etc.
Contra entries 3617.00 6368.00 5147.81 7730.47 9422.56
Closing balance 1990.74 3650.81 5538.83 9593.81 9485.26
Total 24383.85 34673.65 33513.37 46845.79 62529.80
82

APPENDIX-II
STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/ Conclusions & Recommendations
No. No. Department
12 3 4
1. 164 Health and The Committee note that the All India Institute of
Family Medical Sciences was set up in 1956 by an Act of
Welfare Parliament as an autonomous institution of national
importance with the objectives of developing patterns
of teaching in under-graduate and post-graduate
medical education in all its branches so as to demonstrate
a high standard of medical education to all medical
colleges and other allied institutions in India; to bring
together at one place educational facilities of the highest
order for the training of personnel in all important
branches of health activity; and to attain self-sufficiency
in post-graduate medical education.
2. 165 Health and The Committee note that the foremost objective behind
Family setting up of the All India Institute of Medical Sciences
Welfare (AIIMS) in the year 1956 was to establish a Centre of
excellence in Medical Research while serving as a
hospital for specialised Medical Services. The Committee
are constrained to point out that All India Institute of
Medical Sciences (AIIMS) established as a teaching
hospital for developing excellence in medical education
and research has grown into a large hospital without
adequate emphasis on teaching or research. The
Institute has failed to emphasize medical research
though this was one of its major objectives. The results
of research have not brought in the benefits in terms of
improved methodology, patenting or commercialisation.
The Committee further note that a very small amount
has been earmarked every year as Institute Research
Grant from the budget allocated to the Institute during
the period 1994-95 to 2003-2004. Though there has been
increase in the annual extra mural funds from the Non-
Government/International Agencies for Research from
Rs. 9.86 crores in 1994-95 to Rs. 20.38 crores in 2003-
2004, there has been hardly any increase in the allocation
83

84
from the budget allocation of the Institute of Rs. 12 lakh
being made every year for the purpose. Thus, barely
one to two per cent of allocation of funds to Institute is
being allotted for research. Though the total budget
allocated under Non-Plan has increased from Rs. 53
crores in 1994-95 to 218.18 crores in 2003-2004, the
inability of the Institute to allocate appropriate
commensurate increase of the budget for research
purposes indicate that the Institute has failed to put
adequate emphasis on medical research.
3. 166 Health and V arious Research projects related to health care are
Family undertaken by the members of AIIMS Faculty on behalf
Welfare of national and international agencies. All Members are
entitled to grant of funds for (a) inter-departmental
research projects (b) projects connected with national
health priorities and (c) projects involving development/
acquisition of new techniques or skills not undertaken
by the Institute. The Committee regret to observe that
research in AIIMS has been adversely affected not only
for want of funds but also due to certain laxity shown
by the Institute authorities to review/monitor the
projects. In purely quantitative terms, 339 research
projects commissioned during the decade 1991 to 2000
have been completed, but no final reports was received
in respect of 153 projects. Atleast 54 out of these 153
projects were completed on paper during the period
1991-95.
4. 167 Health and The Committee are surprised that most of the Research
Family Projects undertaken in AIIMS are not reviewed despite
Welfare a recommendation from the Estimates Committee made
in their 102nd
 Report of Fifth Lok Sabha. The Committee
note the Estimates Committee had recommended that
the research projects conducted at the Institute should
be reviewed by the Director and Dean half yearly with
reference to the progress made, expenditure incurred
and time spent and likely time and expenditure required
to achieve the desired results. However, the Audit Review
has revealed that review of research projects was
conducted for one year (1997-98) only. The review for
the year 1995-96, 1996-97, 1998-99 and 1999-2000 was
not conducted.
12 3 4

85
5. 168 Health and Further as there is no evidence of the utilisation or
Family dissemination of research findings, the Committee are
Welfare inclined to conclude that even the small efforts at
promoting innovation have gone waste due to lack of
will and application. Higher allocation would also not
improve matters until the intitutional arrangements
improve and the projects are monitored for desired
results. The Committee regret to point out that the
Institute has failed to carry out the reviews as
recommended by the Estimates Committee of Parliament.
The Committee have now been informed that Director,
AIIMS has constituted a Research Review Presentation
Committee, which would review the Research Projects.
The Committee hope that the monitoring and review of
all Research Projects would be undertaken by the Review
Committee with a regular periodicity so as to assess the
progress and viability of Research Projects. Although
the Committee have been apprised of an impressive list
of various research activities undertaken in AIIMS in
the last few years, it is felt that there is need for timely
submission of investigation reports. The Committee
recommend that it is essential to ensure that all Reports
of research work funded by Government/Non-
Government/International Agencies are invariably
submitted to the Institute. The Institute should ensure
that the research findings are patented/commercialized
timely so as to use them to the best advantage of the
nation and humanity. A national research agenda may
be formulated to meet the emerging and resurgent
medical needs of the country and also to strengthen the
capacity to investigate and successfully handle
outbreaks of hitherto unkonwn diseases for instance,
AIDS, SARS etc. In order to meet this objective, the
Committee desire that the Institute should develop
necessary infrastructure for surveillance, rapid
laboratory diagnosis and timely interventions, which,
in turn, would enable the country to effectively handle
any health catastrophe. In this connection, the
Committee strongly feel that grants for Research in
AIIMS need to be augmented suitably.
6. 169 Health and The Committee would like to point out that the purpose
Family of medical research is to apply the results thereof for
Welfare practical use in the fight against diseases with exemplary
12 3 4

86
promptitude so that benefits of research reach the ailing
humanity. The Committee, therefore, desire that time-
bound programme for completion of ongoing research
projects should be formulated and the pace of research
and their practical applications in the medical field
should be intensified. A mechanism needs to be evolved
expeditiously so that research efforts of AIIMS and other
Central Medical Research Institutes in the country and
newer models of medical education developed by AIIMS
are available to the Medical Council of India (MCI) to
be adopted nationwide. It is imperative that there should
be a system to ensure that AIIMS and the other
advanced Central Institutes in the field transfer all their
experiences to the MCI from time to time to enable the
Council to incorporate some of those, as are approved
by the Council in its recommendations, on under-
graduate and post-graduate medical education.
7. 170. Health and As per the latest information furnished by the Ministry,
Family  there are 444 faculty members in position as against the
Welfare sanctioned strength of 509. The Committee note that
All India Institute of Medical Sciences was to function
as a Teaching Hospital to develop excellence in Medical
Education and Research. However, teaching has
suffered on account of shortage of teaching staff and
the employment of teaching staff on ad-hoc basis due
to the matter remaining subjudice for seven years. For
instance, the Committee note that against the
sanctioned strength of 475 faculty members as on
31st March 2000, only 324 members were in position
resulting in a shortage of 151 (32 per cent). Considerable
shortage of faculty members existed in the cadre of Assistant
Professors. These posts were not filled up on regular
basis after September 1993 due to orders passed by the
Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in November 1994. However,
115 adhoc Assistant Professors were appointed between
1993-94 to 2000-01, out of which 52 were appointed on
ad-hoc basis three to seven years back. It may not be
out of place to mention that an ad-hoc arrangement
dilutes the staffing norms while contributing adversely
to attaining excellence in education. The Committee feel
that such a situation, if left unattended, would gradually
degenerate thereby seriously hampering the Institute's
reputation as a Premier Teaching Institution. The
12 3 4

87
Committee, however, have been given to understand
that of late all ad-hoc appointments have been stopped
and would not be made in future also. The Committee
feel that not only the sanctioned strength of the faculty
members should be filled up with suitable persons at
the earliest but it is necessary to review the sanctioned
strength periodically to meet the growing demand
resulting from increase in number of students from time
to time.
8. 171 Health and The Committee find it very disappointing that Doctors
Family employed in the Institute invariably go on  study leave
Welfare abroad but seldom return on time for a substantial period
in order to earn money. The Audit review of the
extramural funded projects from different funding
agencies, which were closed as on 31.3.1992 in a pilot
study based on 390 respondents, showed that 49 per
cent were practicing/employed abroad. The Committee
regret to observe that large investments in providing
subsidised medical education for developing excellence
and sufficiency have gone substantially unreturned.
Though the Committee agree that the opportunities for
self-progression through exposures to advancements
in the bio-medical field should not be denied yet they
feel that it is unethical to use the country's meagre
resources for training just to enable the trained personnel
leave the country later in search of greener pastures
abroad. The Committee are further surprised to find that
the Institute did not undertake any study to ascertain
the costs incurred by the Government on providing
world-class education to Medical professionals, despite
the recommendations of the Estimates Committee in
1987. The Estimates Committee had expected that
medical professionals, trained at the Institute would
develop a sense of obligation when they know that the
country invests its scare resources for their training.
The Committee are of the opinion that such a study is
imperative. This, the Committee further feel, could
prevent the exodus of the skilled personnel to a certain
extent. They, therefore, desire that the Government must
make a study to assess the cost of subsidized medical
education to doctors. The Committee have been
informed that AIIMS has now started formulating
necessary guidelines for doctors going abroad on study
12 3 4

88
leave or assignments and would enforce its strict
compliance. The Committee feel that the Ministry may
also explore the possibility of stipulating a provision in
the existing procedures that the doctors trained and
absorbed in AIIMS will have to serve the Institute for a
minimum number of years before they are considered
eligible to apply for study leave to go abroad. The
Committee further desire that appropriate action, penal
or otherwise, should be taken against the doctors who
overstay while on study leave abroad. In this
connection, it is pertinent to note the statement of the
Driector, AIIMS that any person over staying/extending
his stay of a maximum period of two years in one go will
be treated as having resigned from the AIIMS. The
Committee view this as a welcome step which needs to
be sustained with same vigour. The Committee also hope
that the Institute will take specific steps in regard to
certain particular super-speciality disciplines for example
Neurology, Cardiology, Nephrology, Oncology etc. to
ensure that services in their Departments do not suffer
due to absence of doctors who proceed on study leave.
The Committee are apprehensive that if the brain-drain
is not checked well in time then the Institute would drift
away from the avowed objective of being a Centre of
Excellence to train highly qualified manpower to look
after the nation's expanding health care scenario.
9. 172 Health and One of the objectives of the Institute is to demonstrate
Family a high standard of medical education to all medical
Welfare coll eges and allied institutions in the country. The
Committee note that the methods adopted for
dissemination of information regarding high standards
of medical education evolved by AIIMS include
publication of such information in the Annual Reports
of the Institute, organization of workshops and symposia
on different aspects of medical education, offering short-
term courses to teachers, publication of Memoranda
and Text books on medical education, etc. The above
methods are, in the opinion of the Committee, not
adequate by themselves. Mere supply of information to
all medical colleges and allied institutions can not be
considered sufficient unless the high standard of medical
education perported to be achieved through models
evolved by AIIMS is actually attained. This will need a
systematic evaluation of the standards achieved by these
12 3 4

89
colleges vis-a-vis those in existence in AIIMS so that
deficiencies noticed, if any, are rectified with
promptitude. It will be desirable to have a periodic test-
check of the standards of few medical colleges to
undertake the necessary evaluation. The Committee
desire that AIIMS should endeavour to keep itself
apprised of medical advancements in the international
field also so as to play a dominating role in bringing
about a qualitative improvement in under-graduate and
post-graduate medical education in the country.
10. 173 Health and An instance of casual attitude of the Ministry as well as
Family Institute in the field of Medical Education is evident
Welfare from the fact that the Centre for Post Graduate Education
and Research in Dental Services, which was proposed
to be established during Sixth Five Y ear Plan (1980-1985)
is yet to be set up. The proposal for this Centre, approved
as early as in 1979, was again considered and approved
by the Academic Committee in July, 1998. The Centre is
now planned to be completed by September, 2005. The
inordinate delay in completion of this Centre is nothing,
but inexplicable. At this stage, the Committee cannot
but strongly emphasise the need for taking suitable
steps to ensure that this Centre is completed and made
functional by the target date.
11. 174 -do- The Committee are aware of the serious debate currently
doing the rounds over the level of autonomy enjoyed
by the Institute. They note that AIIMS was established
as an autonomous institution to serve as a Centre of
Excellence in the areas of medical service and education
while serving as a super-speciality hospital. However,
the Committee are concerned to note that by and large
various activities undertaken in AIIMS are dependent
on the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for grants
and thus, autonomy, which was meant to spell out
'freedom of action', as envisaged during the setting up
of AIIMS, has been somewhat hampered. During
evidence, the Institute expressed reservations over the
limited autonomy available to them and informed the
Committee that their functioning has been adversely
affected for want of complete 'functional' and 'financial'
autonomy. The Committee are in agreement with the
apprehensions expressed that excessive Government
12 3 4

90
control as well as political influence erodes the efficiency
and growth capacity of an Institute. They, therefore, are
of the view that complete autonomy in conducting bio-
medical research is an essential pre-requisite for the
growth of AIIMS so as to reach the standards of
excellence envisaged in the Act of 1956. The Committee
desire that the question of autonomy of AIIMS may be
carefully examined by appointing an external agency
immediately which ought to ensure, in the process, the
outstanding character of the Institute. Further the
Committee stress that, if need be, the Act of 1956 may
be suitably amended in the light of ground realities
particularly for constitution of the Governing Body of
AIIMS, and immediate reforms be implemented in the
light of study conducted by the aforesaid expert body.
The Committee feel that these measures would go a
long way in reviving the glory of this Premier Institute
and would help it in the achievement of its avowed
objectives.
12. 175 Health and The Committee note that the Institute was conceived
Family as a centre of excellence in the areas of medical research
Welfare and medical education while serving as a hospital or
specialised medical services. The Audit review has
revealed that over the years the Institute has grown in
terms of delivery of general medical services at the
expense of research, education and specialisation. As a
result, the objectives remain largely unfulfilled while
additional resources continue to be deployed with the
expectation that the Institute is growing in the direction
visualised. The Institute, as a teaching hospital, failed,
on the one hand in developing academic excellence and
innovation in technology, and on the other, in providing
quality treatment as a specialised referral hospital of
national importance. Large shortages in the cadre of
doctors and nurses have resulted in depriving the
patients of the quality time in diagnosis, treatment and
medical care. The doctor-patient ratio is very  high in as
much as a patient gets barely four to nine minutes of
attention from the doctor at the OPD. Waiting time for
surgery ranges from two and a half months to 34 months.
If the waiting time for diagnostic tests are added, the
waiting time would be even longer. The Committee are
of the view that various factors responsible for this
state of affairs are resource constraints, adhocism and
12 3 4

91
shortfalls in adequate strength of doctors, nurses and
skilled personnel, overcrowding of outdoor and indoor
patients, inadequacy of beds and inappropriate
diagnostic facilities, poor quality patient-care-facilities
etc. available in the Institute. The Committee feel that
concerted action needs to be taken to overcome
infrastructural problems, including those of staffing and
providing better facilities for patients thronging the
Hospital. The Institute needs to develop a modern
patient administration system, appoint patient co-
ordinators and increase co-operation between its
various departments.
13. 176 Health and The Committee feel that the Out Patient Department
Family (OPD) of a hospital is the most important unit where
Welfare almost all patients suffering from mild to severe
conditions report first. It is here that a patient forms his
first impression of the type of service that he should
expect to get from the hospital. On an average about
7,000 patients attend the OPD of the Institute per day.
Though the Public Accounts Committee (Sixth
Lok Sabha) in their 49th Report had recommended that
the strength of doctors be suitably fixed to bring down
the waiting time of out patients to half an hour at the
most, the Institute had not fixed so far any norms for
deployment of doctors in OPD on the basis of workload
to ensure satisfactory patient care. The Committee are
concerned to point out the average Doctor-Patient ratio
in the OPD in the AIIMS has increased gradually from
1:21 in 1990-2000 to 1:26 in 2001-2002 and further to 1:32
in 2003-2004. The Doctor-Patient ratio in the indoor
services is stated to be 1:35. The Committee feel that
this Doctor-Patient ratio is abnormally high and needs
to be brought to a reasonable level. The Committee are
of the opinion that the strength of doctors in various
Departments of the Institute needs to be reviewed and
refixed on the basis of well-determined norms and
guidelines so as to enable them to render satisfactory
service to patients coming for treatment in the Institute.
The Committee further note that owing to certain specific
reasons, many key posts in the Institute were filled up
through ad hoc appointments, which has brought
administrative inefficiency in the Institute and
consequently, the patient-care services have received a
serious jolt. Since adhocism has dented the reputation
12 3 4

92
of the Institute, the Committee feel that the problem
needs to be urgently addressed to ensure that the
Institute continues to be one of the best in the world in
providing specialized health care.
14. 177 Health and The Audit Review has revealed that a large number of
Family equipments for use for diagnosis and  treatment were
Welfare installed late, not installed at all or lying damaged. No
wonder that patients in AIIMS, especially outdoor ones,
which have increased manifold without corresponding
increase in diagnostic facilities and equipments, are
compelled to wait considerably for various tests/
investigations. Needless to say that without proper and
early tests and investigations the patients cannot be
given timely and exact treatment. The Ministry have
taken the stand that since priority is given to Emergency/
indoor patients, the OPD patients may have to wait.
The Committee do not agree with the Ministry's view
point and feel that notwithstanding all the steps taken
by the Institute's authorities to minimize excessive
waiting time, the problem continues to persist. The
Committee are of the view that though certain delays
are unavoidable and inevitable, yet the problem has to
be tackled boldly and effectively so as to minimize the
inconvenience and anxiety caused to the patients and
their relatives due to agonizing wait in queues. The
Committee cannot but over emphasise the need for early
suitable steps to ensure that waiting time for the patients
to get diagnostic tests is reduced to bare minimum. For
this, proper diagnostic facilities with the installation of
more and more machines and equipment is the need of
the hour. At the same time, the Committee would like the
Institute to ensure that various machines and
equipments are optimally utilized and are repaired
immediately and put to use again, in case any of those
goes out of order. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the precise steps taken in this regard.
15. 178 -do- Another significant feature  in the patient  care services
in AIIMS, which the Committee have noted, is
inadequate number of beds which, at  present, is 1853
for indoor patients. The Committee understand that while
the Institute  faces a huge attendance in OPD, the
possibility of getting beds in  most  of the Wards is
generally remote for a large number of patients  requiring
12 3 4

93
indoor treatment. Although 465 beds are proposed to
be augmented next year,  still the number  of beds
available would  be far  short  considering the fact that
7000 patients attend the OPD per day and a good  number
out of these need indoor treatment. The Committee have
been given to understand that  various ward facilities in
AIIMS are proposed to be augmented in the near future.
The  Committee would like the authorities to  keep the
bed requirements in view when the additional facilities
are planned. The Committee desire that urgent measures
should be taken to augment  the availability of beds  as
the Institute  is gravely short  of the requisite number of
beds.
16. 179 Health and The Committee are of the opinion that casualty/emergency
Family services of a hospital is gaining increasing importance
Welfare on account of the stressful modern life in urban
conditions  where people are subject to different types
of accidents/medical emergencies requiring  immediate
attention and care. This, obviously, puts pressure on
the casualty/emergency wings of Delhi Hospitals. The
Committee learn that  AIIMS has one of the largest  such
facilities in Delhi. However, the Committee feel that
Specialists  are generally not available for immediate
consultation, particularly, for cases  involving head
injuries,  cardiac arrests, kidney problems  or paediatric
emergencies. The Committee feel that in Emergency/
Casualty Wing, where patients and their relatives remain
under  emotional strain and anxiety, it is imperative that
these wings are manned by experienced and competent
doctors who can render timely and effective medical aid
under trying circumstances. The Committee would
further like to point out that emergency wards are always
managed by Junior  doctors and Senior Resident/
Specialists, who, generally, are either not bothered  or
arrive considerably late. This usually compels  the
relatives of patients to rush to private hospitals for
prompt treatment. It is, therefore, of paramount
importance that there ought  to be a system to ensure
availability of Senior doctors regularly in Emergency
Wards. This can only be possible if  a Senior Doctor/
Specialist in each  discipline is  present round the clock
so that best possible  medical treatment is made available
to patients, who are rushed to emergency wards in
serious/critical conditions.
12 3 4

94
17. 180 Health and The Committee note that AIIMS, being a premier super-
Family speciality Government Hospital-cum-Research Institute,
Welfare receives  a huge influx of patients not only  from Delhi
but also  from outside Delhi for outdoor as well as indoor
treatment. This puts tremendous pressure on the
Institute's infrastructure, which, in turn, adversely
affects the Institute's endeavour  towards medical
research and education. The  Committee find that AIIMS
was  envisaged to be a referral hospital catering to the
needs of  patients requiring specialized treatment and
not for those who can be successfully treated in  a
routine manner in other hospitals as well. The Committee,
therefore, desire that AIIMS should  retain its original
character by serving as a super-speciality referral
hospital only for  serious patients referred by select
hospitals all over the country. For this, it is also
imperative that basic conditions in other  hospitals of
the country must be upgraded/improved to such an
extent so that patients are easily and successfully
treated there and need not rush to the Institute for
treatment of minor/manageable  illnesses. The
Committee hope that this  would help the AIIMS to pay
requisite attention to the more serious and complicated
cases.
18. 181 -do- The Committee are disappointed to note the extremely
tardy progress in setting up of various Centres of the
Institute particularly the Institute  Rotary Cancer
Hospital (IRCH), which was  conceived to serve as a
comprehensive cancer centre in entire North India and
the Centralised Accident and Trauma Centre. The IRCH
project, which was started 12 years ago in 1992, remains
incomplete as on date as only 96 beds  are operational
in  the Centre. The Committee have been informed by
the Ministry that another 104 beds  are yet to be made
functional. In another case, the Committee have been
distressed to find that the Centralized  Accident and
Trauma Centre,  which was approved  by the
Government in May, 1984 is yet to be  completed. The
Committee note that the project suffered inordinate
delay due to its transfer from the Delhi Administration
to the Central Government. The Committee have  further
been given  to understand that due  to tremendous
paucity of funds, a revised EFC Memo could be placed
for the first phase of construction only in March, 2001,
12 3 4

95
which was stated to be completed by March, 2003.
However, the Committee understand that the  project
could not be completed as the scope of  work had
increased. The revised estimate of Rs. 132.82 crores is
awaiting the approval of Cabinet  Committee on
Economic Affairs.  The Committee feel  that this is yet
another instance of inordinate delay and lack of
coordination on the part  of the Ministry with concerned
agencies to make such a significant Centre
operationalised. The Committee, therefore,  urge the
authorities concerned to draw up a time-bound
programme for completion  of both the aforementioned
projects   and  take necessary action without  further
loss of time. The Committee would like to be informed of
the exact dates when these two Centres became
operational.
19. 182 Health and Various irregularities in the purchase and disposal of
Family machinery and equipment have come to the notice of
Welfare the Committee during the examination of the subject.
These included auction of equipment A SM 100 X-Ray
Generator in working condition, extra expenditure of
Rs. 23.97 lakh on Cath Lab. I, II & III and Gamma Knife
due to placing of orders without availability of funds; a
machine known as Counter Chamber costing Rs. 46.55
lakh procured in 1994-95  having remained unutilized
right from its installation and also not taken in stock. It
was further noted that the equipment Copper Laser
Vapours with Dye Laser was not selected according to
the requirements; the purchase of Non-Invasive
continuous hemodynamic monitoring system was done
without calling for tenders and proper records were not
maintained to keep a watch over the receipt and working
of foreign equipment. The Committee desire that the
Institute should be careful in future while buying such
machinery and equipment.
20. 183 -do- V arious instances of losses and mismanagement of
resources were noticed in the administration of the
Institute. The Institute failed to collect at least Rs 2.43
crore as Registration Fees from 64 per cent of the OPD
patients. The Institute allowed a drug store and a
provision  store to function in its premises at a loss of
revenue of atleast Rs. 55.38 lakh. Instances of
manipulation of records were noticed in the auctioning
12 3 4

96
of an equipment in working condition. Moreover, the
Institute failed to reflect Rs. 2.57 crore of outstanding
advances against private firms on its books of accounts.
In certain cases, the Institute continued to keep an
amount of Rs. 18.73 crore in its cash balance though it
was shown as debit in the final head of accounts. The
Committee consider these irregularities as a reflection
on the part of the administrative efficiency of the AIIMS.
The Committee would like the Institute Management to
draw appropriate lessons from these lapses with a view
to avoid the same in future.
21. 184 Health and The Committee were informed that the Institute was
Family allotted 32.09 acres of land at Masjid Moth during 1966-
Welfare 69 for construction of the projects out of which 22 acres
land was encroached upon by JJ (Jhuggi Jhompari)
dwellers as the land remained unutilized for quite some
time due to paucity of funds. The Committee were
informed that later an amount of Rs. 17.15 crore was
fixed for the relocation of those JJ families and it was
decided to shift JJ cluster by March, 1998. The Committee
observe that despite the Institute paying Rs. 9.97 crore
to MCD for getting possession of land, the jhuggis
could not be relocated till April, 2001. The Committee
find that  the proposal  to build residential quarters on
this land had to be shelved and the same had to be built
at Ayurvigyan Nagar. They further note that it is now
planned to utilize the said land for construction of super-
speciality centres and hostels. The land use is, therefore,
required to be changed from 'Residential' to 'Institutional'.
According to the Ministry, the matter has been taken
up with the Ministries concerned and permission is
awaited. The Committee recommend that the matter be
pursued vigorously so that this land, which is a part of
development in the Master Plan for AIIMS, could be
utilized effectively. The Committee strongly believe that
it requires co-ordination and co-operation at all levels
in Government. Hence there is a need to secure better
collaboration between various Government
Departments, agencies and services.
22. 185 -do- The Committee note from the Audit findings that a
computerization system was set up at a cost of Rs. 2.03
crore at the Institute in April, 1989 for Patient Care
System, Administration, Library, Academic & Research
12 3 4

97
and Teaching. The software of the patient care system
was developed by Tata Consultancy Services at a cost
of Rs. 25 lakh in May, 1990. The Committeee, however,
find that the Patient Care System had not been used
successfully as the mainframe computer system was
rendered obsolete and thus was unable to handle more
than 25 online users, whereas, the number of users on
the network had increased beyond 100. The Committee
are of the opinion that Institute, being a Research Centre
in advanced Medicine, should have a system in place
to periodically study their software requirements vis-a-
vis available technology and recommend updating of
the system. It appears that the Institute continued to
maintain a system which was obsolete in terms of
requirement and was incurring heavy expenditure on its
maintenance. The Committee regret to  observe that
AIIMS, despite being a leading Super Speciality
Hospital, does not have a modern information system.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that necessary
mechanism be developed to keep the Institute in-sync
with the latest computer technology, which would
support the day-to-day working of the Institute.
23. 186 Health and The Committee note with grave concern that various
Family advertisements from quacks claiming to give immediate
Welfare relief from various diseases regularly appear in National
Dailies which take gullible patients for a ride. The
Committee would like to point out that as per the
provisions of the Drugs and Magic Remedies
(Objectionable Advertisements) Act, 1954, no person is
to take any part in the publication of any advertisement
referring to any drug/magic remedies which suggest
any diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention
of any disease, disorder or condition specified in the
Schedule of the Act that includes epilepsy, leprosy, fits,
insanity, paralysis, leucoderma etc. Imprisonment
extending to six months in the case of first conviction
and upto one year in case of subsequent conviction
has been provided as penalty for any offence committed
under this Act. The Committee, however, regret to
observe that no effective system exists to enforce the
provisions of this Act to check the malpractices, which
could be one of the reasons as to why quacks enjoy
flourishing business in a short span of time. The
Committee have been given to understand that there is
12 3 4

98
a proposal in the Ministry to provide a statutory
regulatory framework specifying the procedure for an
Expert committee to examine the claims made by quacks.
It is also intended to have a penalty clause for such
offences. The Committee desire that the Ministry should
take urgent steps to enforce the provisions specified
under the Drugs and Magic Remedies Act of 1954 as
well as ensure that the proposed regulatory framework
is opertionalised at the earliest.
24. 187 Health and The Committee have been given to understand that Six
Family Research-cum-Referral Hospitals are proposed to be set
Welfare up by the Government in Bhopal, Jodhpur, Raipur,
Rishikesh, Patna and Bhubaneswar with the same
standards of that of AIIMS. According to the Ministry,
particular States in which these Hospitals are to be set
up, have been selected primarily on the basis of  their
socio-economic development parameters and availability
of health infrastructure. The main objective of these
Institutes will be to provide:
**** State-of the-art medical care in 39 Specialities and
super-specialities;
****A fillip for raising the prevailing standards of
medical education;
****A referral system that will ensure that all health
institutions are optimally utilized.
The Ministry of Health proposed to place before EFC
for clearance of these proposals short after which
approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs
would be sought. According to the Ministry, the State
Governments would provide 100 acres of free-land, road
connectivity, electricity and water supply for these
Institutes. The likely construction time from the date of
commencement is stated to be 36 months. The
Committee appreciate these proposals of the Ministry
of  Health and Family Welfare and desire that concerted,
effective and timely steps should be taken to ensure
early commencement and completion of these Institutes
which would go a long way in helping the population of
the States with the added benefit of bringing super-
speciality services practically to their doorsteps. The
Committee also feel that these steps would be
instrumental in decreasing the excessive patient load
12 3 4

99
on AIIMS, Delhi and thus, desire that the project must
be completed within the set target date without any
cost overruns. The Committee further desire that once
the experiment is successful, the Ministry may explore
the possibility of further expanding these facilities in
other deprived regions of the country as well.
25. 188 Health and The Committee also understand that there is a proposal
Family to upgrade one medical college each in the States of
Welfare Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Jammu & Kashmir, Tamil
Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal to the level of the
proposed AIIMS like institutions. This would be a one
time exercise wherein the Central Government would
render estimated assistance of Rs. 120 crores to each
existing institution to bring it to the level of AIIMS like
facilities. The Committee welcome this proposal also
and desire that this should be followed up and
implemented at the earliest as it would provide a fillip
for raising the prevailing standards of medical education
and provide a capable medical workforce of not only
medical graduates but also well-trained specialists and
super-specialists comparable to the level of the
AIIMS.
26. 189 -do- The Committee note that AIIMS has Vishram Sadans
for the relatives/attendants of patients coming from
outside Delhi. As a large number of relatives of patients
admitted in the Hospital from outside Delhi have to stay
in the Hospital premises, the Committee feel that the
existing arrangements by the Institute need to be
augmented further to cater to their requirements. The
Committee would also like the Institute to ensure
adequate canteen facilities and 24 hrs. chemist shop in
the premises of the Institute so that the attendants of
the patients do not face any difficulty on this account.
27. 190 -do- The Committee note that the Ministry has taken action
to fill up vacancies in the posts of teaching staff, nurses,
technical staff and other supporting staff. In this
connection, the Committee would like to point out that
several vacancies continue to exist in these categories
thereby affecting services rendered by the Institute. A
large number of vacancies in AIIMS dilute the efficiency
of the organization which also results in considerable
inconvenience to patients in one form or the other. It is
desirable that appropriate action is taken to fill these
12 3 4

100
12 3 4
vacancies by advance planning and periodical
monitoring at an appropriately higher level. The
Committee desire that a study may be undertaken in the
Institute to examine that the Doctor/Teacher/Staff
provided in various Departments are commensurate with
the work load. The Committee express concern over the
fact that there is some resentment among researchers,
doctors, nurses and supporting staff regarding their
pay structure, service conditions, facilities etc. The
Committee hope that suitable measures would be taken
by the Ministry/Institute for the redressal of their
grievances.
28. 191 Health and The Committee understand that many ad-hoc appoint-
Family ments have been made against Group 'C' and 'D' posts
Welfare in the Institute in the past. The problem of large number
of ad-hoc employees working in these categories has
been brought to the notice of the Committee. The
Committee recommend that the Government should
devise a rational method to deal with the problem of
regularization of ad-hoc employees. Further the
Committee desire that no ad-hoc appointments should
be made in future in these categories.

PART-II
MINUTES OF THE EIGHTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2002-2003) HELD ON 03 OCTOBER, 2002
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1330 hrs. on 03 October, 2002 in Committee
Room "D", Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Sardar Buta Singh — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri M.O.H. Farook
3. Dr. Madan Prasad Jaiswal
4. Shri Bhartuhari Mahtab
5. Dr. K. Malaisamy
6. Shri N. Janardhana Reddy
7. Shri Chinmayanand Swami
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Santosh Bagrodia
9. Shri K. Rehman Khan
10. Dr. Alladi P. Rajkumar
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Devender Singh — Deputy Secretary
3. Shri R.C. Kakkar — Under Secretary
4. Shri B.S. Dahiya — Under Secretary
Officers of the Office of C & AG of India
1. Shri N. Sunder Rajan — ADAI (Reports-Central)
2. Shri H.P. Das — Director General of Audit
3. Shri H. Pradeep Rao — Pr. Director of Audit (RC)
Representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare (Department of Health) and AIIMS
1. Shri S.K. Naik — Secretary
2. Shri G.R. Patwardhan — Special Secretary
3. Dr. P.K. Dave — Director (AIIMS)
4. Shri Rakesh Behari — JS & FA
5. Smt. Sujata Prasad — Sr. Financial Adviser (AIIMS)
101

102
2. The officers of Comptroller & Auditor General of India briefed the Committee
on Paragraphs 1 of the Report of C&AG of India for the year ended March 2000, No. 4
of 2001, [Union Govt.(Civil)-Autonomous Bodies] relating to "All India Institute of
Medical Sciences".
3. After the briefing by Audit and preliminary discussion amongst the Members,
the representatives of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare (Department of Health)
and AIIMS were called and the Committee took their evidence on the subject.
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE THIRD SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005) HELD ON 28 SEPTEMBER, 2004
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1745 hrs. on 28 September, 2004 in Room
No. "139", Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
6. Shri Ram Lakhan Singh
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
9. Shri R.K. Dhawan
10. Shri V . Narayanasamy
11. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
12. Shri Jairam Ramesh
13. Prof. R.B.S. Verma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Office of C&AG of India
1. Smt. Anusua Basu — ADAI
2. Dr. A.K. Banerjee — Director General
3. Shri Roy S. Mathrani — Pr. Director of Audit
2. **** **** ****
3. **** **** ****
4. **** **** ****
5. **** **** ****
103

104
6. Thereafter, the Officers of the Office of C&AG of India briefed the Committee
on the specific points arising out of Paragraph No. 1 of Audit Report No. 4 of  2001. The
representatives of the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (Department of Health) and
AIIMS were called and the Committee commenced the oral evidence. The evidence on
the subject was not completed and the Committee decided to continue it on
29
th September, 2004.
7. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE FOURTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005) HELD ON 29 SEPTEMBER, 2004
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1235 hrs. on 29 September, 2004 in Committee
Room "E", Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
6. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
7. Shri Ram Lakhan Singh
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri R.K. Dhawan
9. Shri Jairam Ramesh
10. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Office of C&AG of India
1. Smt. Anusua Basu — ADAI
2. Dr. A.K. Banerjee — Director General
3. Shri Roy S. Mathrani — Pr. Director of Audit
2. To begin with the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members of the Committee,
the representatives of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare (Department of Health) and
All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) and the Officials of C&AG to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. As the evidence on the subject had remained inconclusive on 28 September,
2004, the Committee resumed oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare (Department of Health) and AIIMS on Paragraph 1 of Report
of the C&AG of India for the year ended March, 2000, Union Government (Civil-
105

106
Autonomous Bodies) No. 4 of 2001 on "AIIMS" and other related matters in
continuation to the evidence held on 28th September, 2004. The Secretary, Department
of Health and Director, AIIMS explained to the various points and queries raised by
the Members.
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
5. **** **** *****
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE ELEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2004-2005) HELD ON 03 JANUARY, 2005
The Committee sat from 1600 to 1635 hours on 3rd January, 2005 in Committee
Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Dr. M. Jagannath
4. Shri Naveen Jindal
5. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
6. Dr. R. Senthil
7. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
8. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
9. Kunwar Revati Raman Sing
10. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
12. Shri R.K. Dhawan
13. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
14. Shri Jairam Ramesh
15. Prof. R.B.S. Verma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comproller and Auditor General of India
Dr. A.K. Bannerjee — Director-General of Audit (CR)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the
sitting of the Committee and wished every one on the occasion of New Year.
3. *** *** ***
4. *** *** ***
5. *** *** ***
107

108
6. *** *** ***
7. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption of the draft
Report on Paragraph 1 of the Report of C&AG of India for the year ended March 2000
Union Government (Civil-Autonomous Bodies), No. 4 of 2001 relating to "All India
Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)". The Committee adopted the same with minor
changes and authorized the Chairman to finalise the draft Report in the light of the
changes suggested and present the Report to House in the next session of Parliament.
8. *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
MGIPMRND—4089LS—17-02-2005.