44
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF
MEDICAL SCIENCES (AIIMS)
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND
FAMILY WELFARE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2006-2007
FORTY-FOURTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

FORTY-FOURTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
ALL INDIA INSTITUTE OF MEDICAL
SCIENCES (AIIMS)
MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND
FAMILY WELFARE
[Action Taken on 7th Report of Public Accounts
Committee (14th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 27.04.2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.04.2007
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
April, 2007/Chaitra-Vaisakha, 1929 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1829
Price: Rs. 52.00
 2007 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2006-07) .............................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ..................................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ..................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by Government ....................................................................... 8
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government ............................................................................ 32
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration .................................................. 35
C
HAPTER V Observations / Recommendations  in  respect  of   which
Government have furnished interim replies ............................ 39
PART  II
Minutes of the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2006-07) held on 19.04.2007................................................... 40
APPENDIX
Observations and Recommendations .................................... 42

COMPOSITION OF THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri R.L. Jalappa
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Prof. M. Ramadass
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Mohan Singh
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri S. K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
5. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Forty-fourth Report on action taken by Government on the
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 7th Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on "All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS)".
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee
at their sitting held on 19th April, 2007. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the
Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the Officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the
Committee.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
19 April, 2007 Chairman,
29 Chaitra, 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Seventh
Report (Fourteenth  Lok  Sabha) on “All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS).”.
2. In the Seventh Report, the Committee had dealt with various issues concerning
All India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) like the aims/objects of the Institute,
its research activities, achievements of the research projects, academic infrastructure
that was prevalent in the Institute, autonomy of AIIMS, patient care services, hospital
services, strength of doctors and nurses, diagnostic facilities, establishment of various
Centres and AIIMS-like Institutes etc . The Report contained twenty-eight
Observations/Recommendations.
3. The action taken notes have been received from the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare in respect of all the 28 Observations/ Recommendations and these
have been categorised as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by Government;
Sl.Nos. 1- 10, 12-13, 16,19, 20, 22 -  27 and 28
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from Government;
Sl. Nos. 14 and 15
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Govern-
ment have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration;
Sl. Nos. 11, 17, 18  and 21
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies;
  – NIL –
4.The action taken notes furnished by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
have been reproduced in the subsequent Chapters of this Report.  The Committee will
now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their Observations/
Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.

2
A. Gist of Committee’s Observations/Recommendations in 7th Report
(14th Lok Sabha)
5. The important Observations/Recommendations made by the Committee in
their 7th  Report on the subject are as follows:
l Barely one to two percent of funds allotted is being earmarked for medical
research.  Though the total budget allocated under Non-Plan head has
increased from Rs. 53 crore in 1994-95 to Rs. 218.18 crore in 2003-04, the
inability of the Institute to allocate increased  budget for research purposes
indicate that the Institute has failed to put adequate emphasis on medical
research.  The Grants for research in AIIMS need to be augmented.
l Research in AIIMS  has been adversely afflicted not only for want of funds
but also due to the laxity shown by the Institute authorities to review/monitor
the projects.
l The sanctioned strength of the faculty members should be filled up at the
earliest and also sanctioned strength should be reviewed periodically to
meet the growing demand on account of increase in the number of students
from time to time.
l Considering that excessive Government control erodes the efficiency and
growth capacity of the Institute,  the Committee opined that complete
autonomy in conducting bio-medical research is an essential pre-requisite
for the growth of AIIMS.  If need be, the AIIMS Act of 1956 may be suitably
amended in the light of ground realities, particularly for the constitution of
the Governing Body and reforms be implemented based on an expert study
to be conducted by an external agency.
l Concerted steps need to be taken to overcome information related problems,
including those of staffing and for providing better facilities for patients
thronging the hospital.  The Institute needs to develop a modern patient
administration system, appoint patient coordinators and increase co-operation
among its various Departments.
l The strength of doctors in various Departments of the Institute needs to be
reviewed and refixed  on the basis of  well-determined norms and guidelines.
l Proper diagnostic facilities with the installation of larger number of machines
is the need of the hour.  Simultaneously, the machines already installed
should be optimally utilized and maintained properly.
l A time-bound programme should  be drawn up for the completion of the
various centers of the Institute including the development of the Institute
land at Masjid Moth.
l The proposal to set up six Research-cum-Referral Hospitals in Bhopal,
Jodhpur, Raipur, Rishikesh, Patna and Bhubneshwar with the same standards
as that of AIIMS should be concretized early.

3
B. Functional/Professional Autonomy
(Recommendation Sl. No. 11 - Para No. 1 74)
6. In their 7th Report, the Committee had noted that AIIMS which was established
as an autonomous institution was dependent on the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare for grants and thus autonomy was somewhat hampered.  The Committee had
desired that the question of autonomy of AIIMS be carefully examined by an external
agency so that the glory of this premier Institute could be revived.
7. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have responded vide their Action
Taken Notes stating that the Government has taken initiative in the matter of studying
the need for functional and financial autonomy.  It is proposed to conduct a Peer
Review and Organizational Study of AIIMS and Study of Finance and Accounts of
AIIMS.  The Government has entrusted the task of studying the functioning of the
Institute to the Management Development Institute, Gurgaon.  This study also covers
the financial management of the Institute including expenditure control, internal audit
and costing. The specific issues relating to grant of further functional/financial
autonomy will be considered subsequently.
8. The Committee are keen that a premier Institute like AIIMS should get the
requisite functional autonomy and professional independence while discharging their
mandate under the statute.  The apprehensions of the Committee on this count increase
particularly in the light of recent events highlighting disagreement and conflict
between the administrative Ministry and the Institute.  Although the Committee have
been informed that an external agency,  as recommended by the Committee, has been
appointed to conduct an overall study about the functioning of the Institute including
various financial aspects, it is not clear whether the terms of reference of the study
include aspects of functional and professional autonomy vis-à-vis the role of the
Ministry.  The Committee desire that even these aspects which are crucial for
maintaining the standards of the Institute together with changes, if any, required in
the governing statute should be included in the purview of the aforesaid study.  The
Committee would like to be apprised about the action taken in the matter.
C. Manpower Management – augmenting strength of Doctors/Faculty
(Recommendation Sl. Nos.  7 & 13 -  Para Nos.  170 & 176)
9. In their 7th  Report on the subject,  the Committee had noted that  AIIMS was
to function as a Teaching Hospital to develop excellence in Medical Education and
Research.  The Committee had found that teaching had suffered on account of shortage
of teaching staff and employment of teaching staff on ad hoc basis.  It was also observed
that there was considerable shortage of faculty members in the cadre of Assistant
Professors.  The Committee had felt that such ad hoc arrangements not only diluted the
staffing norms but also affected the standards of education.  The Committee had thus
opined that if such a situation was left unattended, then education would gradually
degenerate and this would tarnish the Institute’s image as a Premier Teaching Institution.
The Committee had therefore desired that the sanctioned strength of the Faculty Members
should not only be filled up with suitable persons at the earliest but also the sanctioned
strength itself should be reviewed periodically to meet the growing demand of  students.

4
10.The Committee had also expressed serious concern over the fact that the Doctor-
Patient ratio in the Out Patient Department (OPD) had increased from 1:21 in 1999-2000 to
1:32 in 2003-2004 and had urged the Government to bring it down to a reasonable level.
The Committee had opined that the strength of the Doctors in various Departments of
the Institute was to be reviewed and refixed on the basis of well-determined norms and
guidelines so as to enable them to render satisfactory service to patients.  In Committee’s
view ad-hoc appointments had brought about administrative inefficiency in the Institute
which in turn  had affected the patient-care services.
11.The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in their Action Taken Notes have
inter alia replied as under:—
“At present, the sanctioned strength of faculty is 510.  425 faculties are in position.
In addition, 18 Assistant Professors are working on ad-hoc basis.  The vacant
posts were advertised and recruitment process have been completed.  As regards
non filling of entry level posts of Assistant Professor from 1993, it is submitted that
the Faculty Association, AIIMS had filed a suit against reservation and the Hon’ble
High Court of Delhi had passed an interim order dated 15.11.1994. The Hon’ble
High Court dismissed the aforesaid Writ Petition on 26.11.2001.   Subsequently, 170
vacant posts of Assistant Professors in various disciplines were advertised.
Selections were held in February/March/April 2003.   Appointments were made in
June 2003.   Out of 152 Assistant Professors on ad-hoc basis at that time, 123 were
selected and appointed on regular basis.   12 posts of Assistant Professors remained
unfilled due to non-availability of suitable candidates. Since July 2003, no ad-hoc
appointments to the faculty posts had been made.
The faculty posts are created in accordance with the established procedure.
It is now ensured that in the event of vacancies recruitment is to be made
expeditiously.  In June-July 2005, 124 faculty posts were advertised against
which the posts have been filled on regular basis.  The vacancies are being
regularly reviewed for filling them on regular basis”
The Ministry have further stated that:
 “AIIMS has been providing excellent clinical services to patients from all
over India and even from neighbouring countries. Because of its good
reputation, number of patients visiting various Out Patients Departments
and indoor facilities has been rising steadily.
For ideal functioning it would be preferable if the number of patients coming
to the hospital could be regulated in order that proper Doctor-Patient Ratio is
maintained.  One of the ways to reduce the patient load would be by making
AIIMS as a referral tertiary care hospital.  However, if AIIMS is made a referral
tertiary care hospital, then it would not be possible to continue with the
MBBS students at AIIMS because for teaching MBBS students we need
general patients also. However, as per the Act, AIIMS has to conduct courses
in Undergraduate and Postgraduate medical disciplines.
It may also be seen that 60% of the patients to AIIMS are coming from other
States of India.  One of the reasons why patients travel such a long distance

5
and come to the Institute is because of non-availability of proper health care
facilities in other states.  If more specialized centres could be built up in the
various states, it would help in reducing patients load at AIIMS.
Under Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana, it is envisaged to set up
six AIIMS like Institutions in under-served areas and upgrade 13 existing
medical institutions.  The proposal of setting up of these Institutions will go
a long way in reducing patient load on AIIMS.
The Governing Body has recently approved the recommendation of Selection
Committee for various posts in AIIMS.  With the filling up of all these posts,
the situation would improve.”
12. The Committee are concerned about the adequacy or otherwise of  the
number of posts of faculty as well as doctors working in the Institute.  Although the
Ministry and the Institute have taken  steps to fill the posts on regular basis, the
Committee would like to emphasize that the concerned authorities should not at any
event keep any post unfilled in the Institute as this will adversely affect  patient-care
services.  As regards the Committee’s suggestion for reviewing and augmenting the
strength of doctors, the Ministry have not put forward any proposal in this regard.
Instead, they have tried to side-step the issue by seeking to lower the patient-doctor
ratio on the premise of lesser number of patients visiting the Institute, when the
proposal to build six AIIMS –like Institutions in various States fructifies.  As the
Committee are not convinced about this plea advanced by the Ministry,  they would
like to reiterate that the Ministry and the Institute should take immediate steps to not
only fill up the existing vacant posts of faculty and doctors on regular basis but also
review the existing sanctioned strength with a view to augmenting the number of
faculty members and doctors with a leave reserve for ensuring a better patient-doctor
ratio and consequent improvement in patient services especially in the Super-
Speciality disciplines like Neurology, Cardiology, Nephrology, Oncology etc.
D. Tardy progress in setting up of  Centres/Facilities
(Recommendation Sl. Nos.  18 and 21,  Para Nos. 181 and 184]
13.The Committee in their 7th  Report had expressed their disappointment over
the  tardy progress in setting up various Centres by the Institute, particularly the
Institute Rotary Cancer Hospital (IRCH), which was started in 1992 and remained
incomplete.  The Committee had also noted that the Centralised Accident and Trauma
Centre, approved in 1984, also remained incomplete.  The Committee had further
recommended that re-development of land at Masjid Moth should be vigorously
pursued  and the Master Plan of the Institute implemented accordingly. The Committee
had urged the authorities concerned to draw up a time-bound programme for completion
of all these projects and take necessary action without further loss of time.
14.In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry while  apprising the Committee
about the progress made in the operationalisation of  the various projects/centres
have stated that the Trauma Centre, which has already been approved by the
Government is likely to be completed by the end of 2005. It will cater to the requirement

6
of all trauma cases including emergency cases and it will have the latest and state-of-
art diagnostic facilities. Similarly, a separate Dental Centre is coming up at the AIIMS,
which will reduce the waiting time of patients suffering from dental problems. A new
Cardio-Neuro Tower is also under construction. This will provide 63 more beds for
cardiac and neuro patients and four new Operation Theatres. As regards the Institute
Rotary Cancer Hospital (IRCH), the Ministry have informed that a new building with a
bed strength of 104 has been made functional. The remaining 96 beds could not be
made functional due to shortage of additional staff and machinery and equipment. In
this regard, the revised estimate amounting to Rs. 98.41 crore has already been
recommended for approval by the Expenditure Finance Committee of the Ministry.
15.As regards the re-development of Masjid Moth campus, the Ministry in their
Action Taken Note have informed that :—
“AIIMS is in process of preparing a re-development plan and more super
speciality centres shall be constructed in existing Masjid Moth/Ansari Nagar
campus.  Once the project is completed, the bed strength will also increase
substantially. In addition, the pressure on AIIMS will be considerably reduced
once the six new AIIMS like Institutions and upgradation of Medical Institutes
is approved under PMSSY in the different under-served States.”
16. The Committee are unhappy over the tardy progress in the construction
and operationalisation of various centres/projects of the Institute like the Institute
Rotary Cancer Hospital and re-development of Masjid Moth/Ansari Nagar campus
etc. Although the Ministry have sought to assure the Committee about the Centres
being made functional soon, considering their track record in this matter, the
Committee urge the Ministry to show greater urgency on this issue and render all
possible assistance and cooperation to the Institute for ensuring the setting up of the
proposed Centres and completion of the projects so that the schedule stipulated in the
AIIMS Master Plan is closely adhered to without  leading to cost-overruns. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the conclusive action taken in regard to
completion of all the projects including operationalisation of the Master Plan envisaged
for re-development of the  Masjid Moth/Ansari Nagar campuses. As regards the
augmentation of the existing facilities like diagnostics, OPD and beds, the Committee
hope that the Institute will take effective steps and constraints, if any, faced by them
will be promptly addressed by the Ministry.
E. Early setting up of AIIMS-like Institutes
(Recommendation Sl. Nos. 17 and 24, Para Nos. 180 and 187)
17.The Committee had desired that AIIMS should retain its original character by
serving as a super-speciality referral hospital only for serious patients referred by
select hospitals from all over the country. Towards this end, it was imperative that
basic condition in other hospitals in the country must be upgraded to such an extent
that patients are easily and successfully treated there and are not required to rush to
the Institute for treatment of minor/manageable illness. This would help AIIMS to pay
requisite attention to the more serious and complicated cases. In this connection, the
Committee had desired that concerted and timely steps should be taken to ensure early
commencement and completion of the proposed six Research-cum-Referral Hospitals
in Bhopal, Jodhpur, Raipur, Rishikesh, Patna and Bhubneshwar with the same standards
as that of AIIMS.

7
18.The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have informed vide their Action
Taken Notes that:—
“To address the problem of huge influx of patients, from other parts of India,
the Government has taken steps to establish six Super-Speciality Hospitals in
under-served States, under Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana
(PMSSY).  Besides the above, it also envisages upgradation of Institutions
and grant of financial assistance to State Governments for upgradation of
medical Colleges. Thus, the fresh creation of tertiary care facilities and
upgradation would greatly ease the present problems being faced by AIIMS.”
19.Further, the Ministry have also apprised the Committee about the current
status of the proposal for setting up of AIIMS – like Institutions in the other parts of
the country as under:—
“A Project management committee has been constituted under the
Chairmanship of Secretary (H&FW) with   representatives from  M/o Finance,
Planning Commission, Airports Authority of India, Director (AIIMS) and
officials of this Ministry to oversee the effective and timely implementation
of the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY).   Various start-
up activities like construction of boundary wall, the process for selection of
Project Consultant for providing comprehensive consultancy services and
selection of   architectural concepts/designs for the setting up of AIIMS like
institutions in six States have been taken up.
Hospital Services and Consultancy Corporation (India) Limited, a PSU under the
Ministry, has been appointed as the in-house consultant for assisting the Ministry
for start-up activities. For establishing and running all the six institutes, it is
proposed to set up a Central Apex Society under Societies registration Act 1860.
Draft Memorandum of Association (MoA), prepared for the Central Apex Society,
contains a provision that if necessary, the Society would be competent to   consider
the establishment of more such institutions in other parts of the country.
The proposal for implementation of PMSSY has been cleared by the
Expenditure Finance Committee of the Ministry and the same is pending
approval of the competent authority.”
20. The Committee are not satisfied with the progress made by the Ministry so
far in the setting up of the proposed Institutions in various States with the same
standards as AIIMS. The Committee have been informed that the aforesaid proposal
has been cleared by the Expenditure Finance Committee of the Ministry, but it is still
pending for approval by the competent authority. It is a matter of concern and dismay
for the Committee that this proposal has been hanging fire with the Ministry so long.
The Committee would now like the Ministry  to take up this proposal in right earnest
and concretise the same without further delay. The Committee hope that with the
implementation of this proposal, the functioning of AIIMS as a super speciality referral
hospital of excellence will be facilitated.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
GOVERNMENT
Action taken report on the recommendations contained in Seventh Report of
Public Acccounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha)
Recommendation
The Committee note that the All India Institute of Medical Sciences was set up
in 1956 by an Act of Parliament as an autonomous Institution of national Importance
with the objectives of developing patterns of teaching in under-graduate and post-
graduate medical education in all its branches so as to demonstrate a high standard of
medical education to all medical colleges and other allied Institutions in India; to bring
together at one place educational facilities of the highest order for the training of
personnel in all important branches of health activity; and to attain self-sufficiency in
post-graduate medical education.
[Sl. No 1 Appendix II Para 164 of Seventh Report of PAC  (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The AIIMS was declared as the  Institution of National Importance as has been
envisaged in Section 5 of the AIIMS Act, 1956 and the Institute has legitimately
established its supremacy in medical education, research and patient care in India and
abroad. AIIMS has achieved its present eminent stature not only in the country but
throughout the world by virtue of its untiring commitment.
It is universally recognized that AIIMS has not only succeeded in its objectives
but has in many ways, gone beyond its original mandate. The Institute has attracted
the attention of the Hon'ble Prime Ministers and the Presidents in the past also and
these eminent personalities of the country have held the Institute not only the country's
most prestigious teaching Institution in medicine but also the best-known hospital.
Various luminaries have laid emphasis that the AIIMS have special responsibility to
set standards of excellence in all areas of medical studies and services. As a result
AIIMS has become an epitome of excellence in the field of medical education, research
and patient care services.
At present , AIIMS is involved in more than 375 research projects some of which
in collaboration with leading research centres abroad, in areas of national importance
like leprosy, tuberculosis, malaria, age-related cataract, corneal blindness, iodine
deficiency disorders and childhood diarrhoea, both at the basic as well as the applied
levels. Other advanced areas of research include: diagnosis and identification of risk
genes infectious diseases, developmental neurology, cancer, HIV , male contraception,
heart disease, life style intervention, chronic hepatitis, thalassemia, leukemia, stem-
cell, In-vitro Fertilization, etc.
8
Server 3 \ Report 2004 \ 1915LS \ 1915LS1

9
At  AIIMS 25 clinical departments including four superspeciality centres, manage
practically all types of disease conditions with support from pre and para-clinical
departments. AIIMS has over 2000 hospital beds and more beds are likely to be added
to its total bed strength. There are over 60 laboratories in which over 45 lakhs routine
as well as advanced investigations are performed every year. Two full-fledged blood
banks collect, process and deliver approximately 40,000 units blood per annum
maintaining rigorous quality control. Over 3,25,000 routine and special radiological
procedures, including X-rays, fluoroscopy, CT scans, MRIs  Ultrasounds etc. are
performed every year. A staggering 1,15,000 surgical operations are conducted at
AIIMS. Organ transplant programme for heart, kidney, cornea and bone marrow are a
routine at AIIMS. All types of open heart surgery, surgery of congential defects of
heart and neonatal cardiac surgery, arterial bypass graft and total arterial bypass
revascularization surgery are performed at AIIMS regularly. Various advanced
neurosurgical procedures are routinely undertaken. Interventional neuroradiology is
practiced on a regular basis. Sutureless cataract surgery has been standardized. Laser
is also in use for various operative procedures and corneal transplantation programme.
Endoscopic surgery, spinal surgery, joint replacement surgery, orthoscopic and micro-
surgery have attained world class expertise at AIIMS. AIIMS caters to a tremendous
load of patients every day as there is influx of patients towards AIIMS not only from
every nook & corner of the country, but also from neighbouring countries. The patients
load at AIIMS is more than double of its capacity and also more than double in
proportion of its resources and existing manpower.
The Institute has been called upon to respond to several challenges of national
inmportance — be it plague or dengue epidemic, iodine deficiency and goitre or hepatitis
control. The Institute has been providing medical cover to VVIPs besides taking care
of an enormous load of patients coming from different parts of the country. It is the
excellence of the Institute by virtue of team work  of its staff, the country has always
expected the Institute to perform at its best and the Institute has endeavoured hard to
come up to the expectations of the country.
The said argument is not based on facts since other such organizations have
not been given the status of National Importance and none of them has achieved the
stature of "Centre of Excellence" and also neither of them has attained the world
fame and reached such a height as the AIIMS has, by virtue of the collective
responsibility, endeavour, devotion and enthusiasm of all categories of its staff. Such
an argument is also not tenable in view of the fact that within the territory of India,
no other Institution/Medical College cater to the needs of the people, coming from
every nook & corner of the country coming to AIIMS for their best treatment.
This is the only Insitution, perhaps not only in the country, but in the world which
caters three-tier treatment viz. primary, secondary and tertiary. Perhaps, every Indian
wants to get treatment in AIIMS even for a primary nature of disease without any peril to
get oneself treatment at other dispensaries, Government Hospital/Medical Colleges.
AIIMS has been providing excellent clinical services to patients from all over
India and even from neighbouring countries. Because of its good reputation, number
of patients visiting various Out Patients Departments and indoor facilities has been
rising steadily. At present more than 7000 patients have been attending various OPDs
every day. Catering to such a heavy patient load consumes most of the time of the faculty

10
members. In spite of this heavy patient load, faculty members have been carrying out
excellent research and publishing the results in national and international journals and
also teach undergraduate and postgraduate students and look after other clinical duties.
A large number of publications — national and international, in indexed journals
were published by faculty members based upon their research status. During
2003-2004, almost 1300 papers were published in various journals. In a survey carried out
by the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, only 8 Indian scientific institutions
could be classified as high impact institution. AIIMS was the only medical institution
which came in the category, AIIMS was at No. 4 in this list, higher than any IIT.
Even though AIIMS  is not a technology institution it has 12 patents, and 4 products
attributed to its research workers in the last 5 years. Also 12 indigenous, cheap and
reliable diagnostic kits, and 4 new diagnostic techniques, for diseases relevant to our
population, have been designed by AIIMS researchers. The rota virus vaccine and the
HIV vaccine — both undergoing trials are also contributions from AIIMS research workers.
A large number of faculty members have received several awards based upon
their research activities. This includes awards of ICMR, Ranbaxy Science Foundations
and Fellowships of various scientific academies.
It is creditable that AIIMS is being nominated as the best medical college in the
country by 'India Today' over the many years in the past. A survey carried out &
published (April 2005) by  'The Week' has also rated AIIMS as the best hospital and
top medical college in the country.
The patient care system is severely constrained with a very heavy load of
patients. Large numbers of patients, almost all over the country, come to the OPDs,
which has resulted in over crowding, long queues and long waiting list for admission
and surgical procedures etc. Efforts of the Institute to make it a completely referral
hospital have not yielded any results, even though the Institute Body and many
Parliamentary Committees have recommended the implementation of referral system at
the Institute many a times.  If the AIIMS becomes a completely referral hospital, these
constraints could be removed. AIIMS as a referral tertiary care hospital will have better
inpatient care services.
Recommendation
The Committee note that the foremost objective behind setting up of the All
India Institute of Medical Sciences (AIIMS) in the year 1956 was to establish a Centre
of excellence in Medical Research while serving as a hospital for specialized Medical
Services. The Committee are constrained to point out that  All India Institute of Medical
Sciences (AIIMS) established as a teaching hospital for developing excellence in
medical education and research has grown into a large hospital without adequate
emphasis on teaching or research. The Institute has failed to emphasize medical research
though this was one of its major objectives. The results of research have not brought
in the benefits in terms of improved methodology, patenting or commercialization. The
Committee further note that a very small amount has been earmarked every year as
Institute Research Grant from the budget allocated to the institute during the period
1994-95 to 2003-2004. Though there has been increase in the annual extra mural funds
from the Non-Government/International Agencies for Research from Rs. 9.86 crores in
1994-95 to Rs. 20.38 crores in 2003-2004, there has been hardly any increase in the
allocation from the budget allocation of the Institute of Rs. 12 lakhs being made every

11
year for the purpose. Thus, barely one to two per cent of allocation of funds to
Institute is being allotted for research. Though the total budget allocated under
Non-Plan has increased from Rs. 53 crores in 1994-95 to 218.18 crores in 2003-2004, the
inability of the Institute to allocate appropriate commensurate increase of the budget
for research purposes indicate that the Institute has failed to put adequate emphasis
on medical research.
[Sl. No. 2, Appendix II, Para 165 of Seventh Report of PAC  (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The All India Institute of Medical Sciences is a premier Institute, which has been
carrying out research on topics of national/international importance since its inception.
The nature of research at the AIIMS is largely clinical research and basic research as
applied to patient needs. The results of these researches carried out are being published
in national and international journals, which are peer reviewed. Even though AIIMS is
not a technology institution it has 12 patents and 4 products attributed to its research
workers in the last 5 years. Also 12 indigenous, cheap and reliable diagnostic kits, and
4 new diagnostic techniques for diseases relevant to our population, have been
designed by AIIMS researchers. The Rota virus vaccine and the HIV vaccine—both
undergoing trials are also contributions from AIIMS researchers.
With regard to meagre allocation of funds for research activities from the budget
allocated to the Institute, it is stated that  patient care services are research activities
are complementary to each other. The normal grant to the Institute caters to the research
activities and patient care activities simultaneously. During the year 2005-06 funds for
research activities have been enhanced to Rs. 50 lakhs from the earlier allocation of
Rs. 12 lakhs per year. Additionally every year about Rs. 25 crores is spent on
procurement of Machinery & Equipment meant for both research and patient care. The
state of the art Position Emission Tomography (PET) machine costing Rs. 16 crores will
provide landmark results in the area of bio-medical research and patient care. Further,
the research activities have never been hampered due to the paucity of funds as there
has been increase in the annual extra mural funds from the Non-Government/
international agencies. A grant of Rs. 9.80 crores was received during the year 1994-95,
which has been increased to Rs. 20.3 crores during the year 2003-04.
The vast reservoir of skilled manpower and the advanced medical equipment
available in the Institute afford excellent support base for any research. Thus, the
adequate emphasis on medical research is taken care of by the Institute.
Recommendation
Various Research projects related to health care are undertaken by the members
of AIIMS Faculty on behalf of national and international agencies. All Members are
entitled to grant of funds for (a) inter-departmental research projects (b) projects
connected with national health priorities and (c) projects involving development/
acquisition of new techniques or skills not undertaken by the Institute. The Committee
regret to observe  that research in AIIMS has been adversely affected not only for
want of funds but also due to certain laxity shown by the Institute authorities to
review/monitor the projects. In purely quantitative terms, 339 research projects

12
commissioned during the decade 1991 to 2000 have been completed, but no final
reports was received in respect of 153 projects. Atleast 54 out of these 153 projects
were completed on paper during the period 1991-95.
[Sl. No. 3,  Appendix II Para 166 of Seventh Report of PAC  (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Research reporting is an ongoing process. The final research outcome in many
cases take years to materialize. Regarding non-furnishing of final report, it is submitted
that now it has been made mandatory that final report is also required to be furnished
to the Institute. Earlier it was being sent to the funding agency only. As regards
monitoring/review of the projects, a research committee under the chairmanship of
Dean and members from different specialities has been reconstituted to oversee the
working of the research section/project. Funds for Research works has also been
enhanced for Rs. 12.00 lakhs to Rs. 50.00 lakhs per annum for the financial year 2005-06.
Additionally every year about Rs. 25 crores is spent on procurement of Machinery &
Equipment which have dual utility of research & patient care.
Recommendation
The Committee are surprised that most of the Research Projects undertaken in
AIIMS are not reviewed despite a recommendation from the Estimates Committee
made in their 102nd Report of Fifth Lok Sabha. The Committee note the Estimates
Committee had recommended that the research projects conducted at the Institute
should be reviewed by the Director and Dean half yearly with reference to the progress
made, expendituture incurred and time spent and likely time and expenditure required
to achieve the desired results. However, the Audit Review has revealed that review of
Research projects was conducted for one year (1997-98) only. The review for the year
1995-96, 1996-97, 1998-99 and 1999-2000 was not conducted.
[Sl. No. 4  Appendix II  Para 167 of Seventh Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As per recommendations of the Estimate Committee, review of research projects
completed between 1992-95 was conducted by a Committee comprising of the Director,
Dean(Chairman, Research Committee), Co-ordinator and Invited Experts on yearly
basis. The Research Review Presentation for the year 1998-99 to 2003-04 has been
completed on 24.1.2005 and 28.2.2005 respectively. In this regard it is also stated that a
Research Committee under the chairmanship of Dean and members from different
specialities has since been re-constituted to oversee the working of the Research
Section/Project.
Recommendation
Further as there is no evidence of the utilization or dissemination of research
findings, the Committee are inclined to conclude that even the small efforts at promoting
innovation have gone waste due to lack of will and application. Higher allocation
would also not improve matters until the institutional arrangements improve and the
projects are monitored for desired results. The Committee regret to point out that the

13
Institute has failed to carry out the reviews as recommended by the Estimates Committee
of Parliament. The Committee have now been informed that Director AIIMS has
constituted a Research Review Presentation Committee, which would review the
Research Projects.
The Committee hope that the monitoring and review of all Research Projects
would be undertaken by the Review committee with a regular periodicity so as to
assess the progress and viability of Research Proejcts. Although the Committee have
been apprised of an impressive list of various Research activities undertaken in  AIIMS
in the last few years, it is felt that there is need for timely submission of investigation
report. The Committee recommend that it is essential to ensure that all Reports of
research work funded by Government/non-Government/International Agencies are
invariably submitted to the Institute. The Institute should ensure that the research
findings are patented/commercialized timely so as to use them to the best advantage of
the nation and humanity. A national research agenda may be formulated to meet the
emerging and resurgent medical needs of the country and also to strengthen the
capacity to investigate and successfully handle outbreaks of hitherto unknown diseases
for instance, AIDS, SARS etc. In order to meet this objective, the Committee desire that
the Institute should develop necessary infrastructure for surveillance, rapid  laboratory
diagnosis and timely interventions, which, in turn, would enable the country to
effectively handle any health catastrophe. In this connection, the Committee strongly
feel that grants for Research in AIIMS need to be augmented suitably.
[Sl. No. 5 Appendix II  Para 168 of Seventh Report of PAC  (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It is mandatory for all the investigators to submit a copy of final report to the
Institute. Further, as per recommendations of the Estimate Committee, review of research
projects completed between 1992—95 was conducted by a Committee comprising of
the Director AIIMS, Dean (Chairman, Research Committee), Coordinator and Invited
Expert on yearly basis. The Research Review presentation for the year 1998-99 to 2003-
04 has also been completed on 24.1.2005 and 28.2.2005. In future, review of all completed
research projects will be carried out yearly by external technical experts. As regards the
control of epidemics of communicable diseases like AIDS, SARS etc., the National
Institute of Communicable Disease is made exclusively responsible for this purpose.
However, AIIMS is not lagging behind. A number of research projects on various
aspects of tuberculosis, AIDS, Leprosy, Diarrhoeal diseases are being undertaken.
Efforts are going on for developing Kit for diagnosis of AIDS and Tuberculosis etc.
Further, the AIIMS may provide inputs to NICD and ICMR for diagosis of communicable
diseases. It is further stated that the Cell has already been established at the AIIMS.
Although the AIIMS is not a technology institution, it has 12 and 4 products attributed to
its research workers in the last 5 years. Regarding augmentation of grants for research, the
Institute Research Grant has since been increased from Rs. 12.00 lakhs to Rs. 50.00 lakhs
per annum from the financial year 2005-06. This was in addition  to about Rs. 25 crores
spent on Machinery & Equipment used for both research & patient care.

14
The priority areas of research for the 10th Plan period have been identified by
ICMR. A continuous review of priorities and priority-setting mechanism is essential
since research priorities change over time as a result of epidemiological, demographic
and economic changes.
Training courses are being organized by Council's National Institute of
Epidemiology, Chennai for outbreak investigations and outbreak responses.
A high containment laboratory (Biosafety level 3+) has been set up at Pune to
handle new and emerging infectious diseases. Three more are planned for Mumbai,
Chennai and Kolkata respectively.
Recommendation
The Committee would like to point out that the purpose of medical research is to
apply the results thereof for practical use in the fight against diseases with exemplary
promptitude so that benefits of research reach the ailing humanity. The Committee,
therefore, desire that time-bound programme for completion of ongoing research
projects should be formulated and the pace of research and their practical applications
in the medical field should be intensified. A mechanism needs to be evolved expeditiously
so that research efforts of AIIMS and other Central Medical Research Institutes in the
country and newer models of medical education developed by AIIMS are available to
the Medical Council of India (MCI) to be adopted nationwide. It is imperative that
there should be a system to ensure that AIIMS and the other advanced Central Institutes
in the field transfer all their experiences to the MCI from time to time to enable the
Council to incorporate some of those, as are approved by the Council in its
recommendations, on under-graduate and post-graduate medical education.
[Sl. No., 6 Appendix II,  Para 169  of Seventh Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Medical Council of India (MCI) is not directly concerned with all research
activities. Research may be in the field of basic research, operational research,
epidemiological research or research in educational methodology. Informing about
research in the field of education to MCI is a good idea as then it could be disseminated
in the country.
Most of the research projects at AIIMS are funded by outside agencies like
ICMR, DBT, DST, CSIR etc. and are time bound programme. All the project investigators
submit their annual reports and final reports to these agencies. However, it has now
made mandatory to submit a copy of the final report to the Institute also.
The results of various research activities are being presented at various scientific
meetings and published/disseminated through the Annual Report of the Institute and
research publications in various national and international journals.

15
It is ensured that information about such research findings are widely
disseminated so that more people gain from the knowledge/latest development.
The ICMR has formulated a draft National Health Research Policy, wherein it is
proposed to set up a National Health Research Management Forum, which will have
representation of all stakeholders with ICMR as its Secretariat. One of its functions
would be to review the biomedical and health research management, and suggest
strategies to overcome problem in implementing the outcome of research conducted in
the country. To facilitate utilization of research results the Foundation would be chaired
by Union Minister for Health & Family Welfare.
Recommendation
As per the latest information furnished by the Ministry, there are 444 faculty
members in position as against the sanctioned strength of 509. The Committee note
that All India Institute of Medical Sciences was to function as a Teaching Hospital to
develop excellence in Medical Education and Research teaching.  However, teaching
has suffered on account of shortage of teaching staff and the employment of teaching
staff on ad-hoc basis due to the matter remaining subjudice for seven years. For
instance, the Committee note that against the sanctioned strength of 475 faculty
members as on 31st March 2000, only 324 members were in position resulting in a
shortage of 151 (32 per cent). Considerable shortage of faculty members existed in the
cadre of Assistant Professors. These posts were not filled up on regular basis after
September 1993 due to orders passed by the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in November
1994. However, 115 adhoc Assistant Professors were appointed between 1993-94 to
2000-01, out of which 52 were appointed on ad-hoc basis three to seven years back. It
may not be out of place to mention that an ad-hoc arrangement dilutes the staffing
norms while contributing adversely to attaining excellence in education. The Committee
feel that such a situation, if left unattended, would gradually degenerate thereby
seriously hampering the Institute's reputation as a Premier Teaching Institution. The
Committee, however, have been given to understand that of late all ad-hoc appointments
have been stopped and would not be made in future also. The Committee feel that not
only the sanctioned strength of the faculty members should be filled up with suitable
persons at the earliest but it is necessary to review the sanctioned strength periodically
to meet the growing demand resulting from increase in number of students from time to
time.
[Sl. No. 7, Appendix II, Para 170 of Seventh Report of PAC  (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
At present, the sanctioned strength of faculty is 510. 425 faculties are in position.
In addition, 18 Assistant Professors are working on ad-hoc basis. The vacant posts
were advertised and recruitment process have been completed. As regards non filling
of entry level posts of Assistant Professor from 1993, it is submitted that the Faculty
Association, AIIMS had filed a suit against reservation and the Hon'ble High Court
had passed an interim order dated 15.11.1994 as under:-
 "Till next date, reservation be not given effect to".

16
The Hon'ble High Court of Delhi dismissed the aforesaid Writ Petition on
26.11.2001. 170 vacant posts of Assistant Professors in various disciplines were
advertised. Selections were held in February/March/April 2003. Appointments were
made in June 2003. Out of 152 Assistant Professors on ad-hoc basis at that time, 123
were selected and appointed on regular basis. 12 posts of Assistant Professors remained
unfilled due to non-availability of suitable candidates. Since July 2001, no ad-hoc
appointments to the faculty posts had been made.
The faculty posts are created in accordance with the established procedure. It is
now ensured that in the event of vacancies recruitment is to be made expeditiously. At
present the screening process for recruiting 124 faculties has been completed & selection
committee is likely to be held shortly.
Recommendation
The Committee find it very disappointing that Doctors employed in the Institute
invariably go on study leave abroad but seldom  return on time for a substantial period
in order to earn money. The Audit review of the extramural funded projects from
different funding agencies, which were closed as on 31.3.1992 in a pilot study based on
390 respondents, showed that 49 per cent were practicing/employed abroad. The
Committee regret to observe that large investment in providing subsidized medical
education for developing excellence and sufficiency have gone substantially
unreturned. Though the Committee agree that the opportunities for self-progression
through exposures to advancements in the bio-medical field should not be denied yet
they feel that it is unethical to use the country's meagre resources for training just to
enable  the trained personnel  leave the country later in search of greener pastures
abroad. The Committee are further surprised to find that the Institute did not undertake
any study to ascertain the costs incurred by the Government on providing world-class
education to Medical professionals, despite the recommendations of the Estimates
Committee in 1987. The Estimates Committee had expected that medical professionals,
trained at the Institute would develop a sense of obligation when they know that the
country invests its scarce resources for their training. The Committee  are of the
opinion that such a study is imperative. Thus, the Committee further feel, could prevent
the exodus of the skilled personnel to a certain extent. They, therefore, desire  that the
Government must make a study to assess the cost of subsidized medical education to
doctors. The Committee have been informed that AIIMS has now started formulating
necessary guidelines for doctors going abroad on study leave or assignments and
would enforce its strict  compliance. The Committee feel that the Ministry may also
explore the possibility of stipulating a provision in the existing procedures that  the
doctors trained and absorbed in  AIIMS will have to serve the Institute for a minimum
number of years before they are considered eligible to apply for study leave to go
abroad. The Committee further desire that appropriate action, penal or otherwise,
should be taken against  the doctors who overstay while on study  leave abroad. In
this connection, it is pertinent to note the statement of the Director, AIIMS that any
person over staying/extending his  stay of a maximum period of two years in one go
will be treated as having resigned from the AIIMS. The Committee view this as a
welcome step which need to be sustained with same vigour. The Committee also hope

17
that the Institute will take specific steps in regard to certain particular super-speciality
disciplines for example Neurology, Cardiology, Nephrology, Oncology etc. to ensure
that services in their Departments do not suffer due to absence of doctors who proceed
on study  leave. The Committee are apprehensive that if the brain-drain is not checked
well in time then the Institute would drift away from the avowed objective of being  a
Centre of Excellence to train highly qualified manpower to look after the nation's
expanding health case scenario.
[(Sl. No. 8, Appendix  II,  Para 171 of  Seventh Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The faculty members of the Institute are permitted for fellowship/training and to
accept assignments abroad in accordance with the guidelines, which provides as
under:—
Guideline No. 4 foreign Visits.
(i) The application/requests of the faculty members for assignment/fellowship
etc. be forwarded by the Director after looking into the requirements of the
concerned department  to which the faculty member  belongs and also
after taking into consideration the requirements/interest of the Institute as
a whole.
(ii) A member of the faculty may be permitted by the Institute to accept short
term fellowship/assignment; long term fellowship/assignments, visiting
scientist to UN or other international agencies; visiting faculty or research
centre/training programme/schloarship in India or abroad  not exceeding a
total period of 5 years during the entire service as a faculty member at this
Institute.
(iii) Entitlement shall accrue at the rate of 1 year per 5 years of service. A
member of the faculty may not be permitted to take up any above fellowship/
assignment for more than 2 years at a time (short or long) before completion
of 2 years service at AIIMS (as 2 years is the probation period). The
services of a  faculty member rendered on ad-hoc basis would also be
counted for this purpose. However, the faculty member should be working
on regular basis  before he/she is permitted to take up above fellowship/
assignment. There should be a gap of 3 years (bond period) between two
long-term assignments (beyond six months). Any request for extension
after completion of maximum permitted duration, i.e. two  years will be
considered as resignation letter, which will be processed by the competent
authority immediately.
(iv) At a given time, one faculty member from a particular department may be
permitted for a long term assignment/fellowships etc. and one faculty
member for a short term assignment/fellowship upto 3 months keeping in
view  the strength of the concerned department, so that the work of the
department may not suffer.

18
(v) The resignation/voluntary retirement of a faculty member will not be
accepted if he/she  is on assignment/fellowship training. In case such
request is received then the concerned person is required to join back
duty and then submit his/her resignation/voluntary retirement. Institute
will allow this to the concerned person subject to the condition:
(a) That the Bond money  is deposited, i.e. Rs. 5.00 lac for long term
assignments/fellowships etc.  and Rs. 3 lacs for short term; and other
usual notices requirement or salary in lieu thereof. The resignation/
voluntary retirement of the concerned person will not be considered
until & unless he/she deposits full amount in this regard.
(vi) The provision of SR-12 will not apply where extraordinary leave without
pay is availed of by  a person for accepting the assignments/fellowship/
training etc.
(vii) The member of the faculty/staff may not be permitted to take up the
assignment/fellowship/training etc. of a private organization, which are
running on commercial basis in India. They can be permitted to avail of the
assignment/fellowship/training abroad where the Institution/Colleges are
associated recognized by the concerned government.
Bond
(viii) Faculty Members/staff members who are permitted to avail of fellowship/
training/assignment etc. for a period exceeding 45 days including transit
period will be required to execute a  bond for a sum of Rs. 3 lacs for short
term assignments/fellowships etc. (up to 6 months) and Rs. 5 lacs for long
term assignments/fellowships etc. (beyond six months) binding themselves
to serve the Institute for a period of one year and three years respectively
or up to the date of superannuation, whichever is earlier, on their return
from the assignment/fellowship/training etc. failing which a sum of Rs. 3
lacs or Rs. 5 lacs as the case may be, will be payable to the Institute by the
concerned person.
There will be no Bond in case of deputation with the organization in pursuance
of the obligation under agreement entered into by the Govt. of India or by the AIIMS
etc. BPKIHS, Dharan, Nepal etc.
The aforesaid guidelines are strictly complied with while processing the requests
of the faculty members for availing of fellowships/training/assignments abroad.
Five faculty members were removed from the service of the Institute on account
of their overstay abroad. Penalty of withholding of  two increments without cumulative
effect was also imposed on a  faculty member for his un-authorized absence abroad.
The Government is in the process of reviewing the  tuition fee structure of
Central Government Medical College Institutions including Autonomous Institutions
like, AIIMS, New Delhi and PGIMER, Chandigarh. Government is examining the
incentive/disincentive to CHS Doctors and AIIMS, New Delhi, PGIMER doctors going

19
abroad for training/assignment to prevent them from leaving, without serving the
Institute. The Government is also reviewing the tuition  fee structure.
Recommendation
One of the objectives of the Institute is to demonstrate a high standard of
medical  education to all  medical colleges and allied  institutions in the country. The
Committee note that the methods adopted for dissemination of information regarding
high standards of medical education evolved by AIIMS include publications of such
information in the Annual Reports of the Institute, organization of workshops and
symposia on different aspects of medical education, offering short-term courses to
teachers, publication of memoranda and Text books on medical education, etc. The
above methods are, in the opinion of the Committee, not adequate by themselves.
Mere supply of information to all medical colleges and allied institutions can not be
considered sufficient unless the high standard of medical education purported to be
achieved through models evolved by AIIMS is actually attained. This will need a
systematic evaluation of the standards achieved by these colleges vis-a-vis those in
existence in AIIMS so  that deficiencies noticed, if any, are rectified with promptitude.
It will be desirable to have a periodic test-check of the standards of   few medical
colleges to undertake the necessary evaluation. The Committee desire that AIIMS
should endeavour to keep itself apprised of medical advancements in the international
field also so as to play a dominating role in bringing about a qualitative improvement
in undergraduate and post-graduate medical education in the country.
[Sl. No. 9, Appendix II, Para 172 of  Seventh Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Institute has comprehensive facilities for teaching, research and patient-
care. AIIMS conducts  teaching programmes in medical and para-medical courses both
at undergraduate and postgraduate levels and awards its own degrees. Teaching and
research are conducted in 50 disciplines. In the field of medical research AIIMS is the
leader, having more than 1300 research publication by its faculty and researchers in a
year. AIIMS also runs a College of Nursing, training for the students for B.Sc. Nursing
(Post-Certificate) degrees.
The AIIMS for the first time introduced one year internship in the MBBS course
which was later on implemented by the Medical Council of India (MCI) as well as all
other medical colleges in India. AIIMS was the first Institution which restricted its
MBBS Course  to include 1 year for pre-clinical subjects, 1
1
2  years for para-clinical
subjects and 2 years for clinical subjects. This model has been subsequently adopted
by MCI. AIIMS was the first Institution to launch 3 months residential rural posting
during internship. The incorporation of integrated seminars across the undergraduate
curriculum and introduction of an objective assessment strategy are also novel
modifications to undergraduate teaching brought about by AIIMS. The AIIMS at
present is awarding degrees in 18 super specialities courses besides postgraduate and
undergraduate. The AIIMS was the first medical institution to start a 3 years post-
graduate  course  and  also  was  the  first  to  start  3  years  super-specialities   courses.

20
The AIIMS has raised the period of super-specialities courses from 2 years to 3 years
viz.  DM/MCh. This has been implemented by all other medical  colleges as well as
MCI. The AIIMS has an established syllabus for  post-graduate courses as well as
super-speciality courses, while the Medical Council of India is still in the process of
preparing the syllabus for post-graduate courses in India. The AIIMS has an established
syllabus for  all the other academic courses which are running at this Institute.
Further practical training for developing model education training programmes
for under-graduates and post-graduates are being done through workshops, seminars,
symposia. Hands on Training programmes for participants of different national and
international standards are done at the AIIMS regularly.
We agree to the PAC recommendation on the need for proper dissemination/
inculcation of high standards of Medical Education achieved in AIIMS to other Medical
Colleges/Institutions.
Recommendation
An instance of casual attitude of the Ministry as well as Institute in the field of
Medical Education is evident from the fact that the Centre for Post Graduate Education
and Research in Dental Services, which was proposed to be established during Sixth
Five Year Plan (1980—1985) is yet to be set up. The proposal for this Centre, approved
as early as in 1979, was again considered and approved by the Academic Committee in
July, 1998. The Centre is now planned to be completed by September, 2005. The
inordinate delay in completion of this Centre is nothing, but inexplicable. At this stage,
the Committee cannot but strongly emphasize the need for taking suitable steps to
ensure that this Centre is completed and made functional by the target date.
[Sl.No. 10,  Appendix II, Para 173 of Seventh Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In this regard it is stated that the construction work of Centre for Dental Education
& Research at AIIMS has started in March, 2005 and the Centre is likely to be made
functional by next year.
Recommendation
The Committee note that the Institute was conceived as a centre of excellence in
the areas of medical research and medical education while serving as hospital or
specialized medical services. The Audit review has revealed that over the years the
Institute has grown in terms of delivery of general medical services at the expense of
research, education and specialization. As a result, the objectives remain largely
unfulfilled while additional resources continue to be deployed with the expectation
that the Institute is growing in the direction visualized. The Institute, as a teaching
hospital, failed on the one hand in developing academic excellence and innovation in
technology, and on the other, in providing quality treatment as a specialized referral
hospital of national importance. Large shortages in the cadre of doctors and nurses
have resulted in depriving the patients of the quality time in diagnosis, treatment and
medical care. The doctor-patient ratio is very high in as much as a patient gets barely

21
four to nine minutes of attention from the doctor at the OPD. Waiting time for surgery
ranges from two and a half months to 34 months. If the waiting time for diagnostic tests
are added, the waiting time would be even longer. The Committee are of the view that
various factors responsible for this state of affairs are resource constraints, adhocism
and shortfalls in adequate strength of doctors, nurses and skilled personnel,
overcrowding of outdoor and indoor patients, inadequacy of beds and inappropriate
diagnostic facilities, poor quality patient-care facilities etc. available in the Instittute.
The Committee feel that concerted action needs to be taken to overcome infrastructure
problems, including those of staffing and providing better facilities for patients
thronging the Hospital. The Institute needs to develop a modern patient administration
system, appoint patient coordinators and increase co-operation between its various
departments.
[Sl.No. 12,  Appendix II, Para 175, of Seventh Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
AIIMS has been providing excellent clinical services to patients from all over
India and even from neighbouring countries. Because of its good reputation, number
of patients visiting various out patients Departments and indoor facilities has been
rising steadily. At present more than 7000 patients have been attending various OPDs
every day. Catering to such a heavy patient load consumers most of the time of the
faculty members. In spite of this heavy load, faculty members have been carrying out
excellent research and publishing the results in national and international journals and
also teach undergraduate and postgraduate students and look after other clinical
duties.
The AIIMS faculty members has been generating research funds to the tune of
Rs. 23 crores approximately per year from various governmental and international
funding agencies like DST, CSIR, ICMR, WHO etc. In addition there are many grants
bilateral collaboration programme such as Indo-US, French & Indo-German etc. All
these funding agencies give research grant on a competitive basis based upon the
project.
A large number of publications—national and international, in indexed journals
were published by faculty members based upon their research status. During 2003-
2004, almost 1300 papers were published in various journals. In survey carried out by
the Department of Scientific and Industrial Research, only 8 Indian scientific Institutions
could be classified as high impact institutions. AIIMS was only medical institutions,
which came in the category,  AIIMS was at no. 4 in the list, higher than any IIT.
Even though AIIMS is not a technology Institution, it has 12 patents, and
4 products attributed to its reasearch workers in the last 5 years. Also 12 indigenous,
cheap and reliable diagnostic kits, and 4 new diagnostic techniques, for diseases
relevant to our population, have been designed by AIIMS researchers. The rota virus
vaccine and the HIV vaccine—both undergoing trials are also contributions from
AIIMS research workers.

22
A large number of faculty members have received several awards based upon
their research activities. This includes awards of ICMR, Ranbaxy Science Foundations
and Fellowships of various scientific academies.
However, for ideal functioning it would be preferable if the number of patients
coming to the hospital could be regulated. One of the ways to reduce the patient load
would be by making AIIMS as a referral tertiary care hospital. However, if AIIMS is
made a referral tertiary care hospital, then it would not be possible to continue with the
MBBS students at AIIMS because for teaching MBBS students we need general
patients also. However, as per AIIMS Act, the Institute has to conduct courses in
Undergraduate and Postgraduate medical disciplines.
It is creditable that AIIMS is being nominated as the best medical college in the
country by "India-Today" over many years in the past. A survey carried out and
published (April 2005) by "The Week" has also rated AIIMS as the best hospital and
top medical college in the country.
The problems of long waiting time and over crowding of indoor and outdoor
patients are due to large influx of patients coming from various States. It is proposed to
develop more centres of excellence under PMSSY in the underserved areas to serve as
a counter magnet to increasing inflow of patients to  AIIMS. Further, within AIIMS
also, the re-development of AIIMS is an ongoing exercise and the increase in bed
strength/creation of new super speciality Centre will be considered in the 11th Plan.
However, projection of expansion of services to cope up with the increasing
workload has been made from time to time in the areas like Emergency Ward/Private
Ward beds where the number of beds have been increased by about  167 beds. Capacity
utilization of support service has been made, so that it copes up with the workload.
The projection of additional manpower is under consideration of different statutory
bodies constituted for the purpose.
Recommendation
The Committee feel that the Out Patient Department (OPD) of a hospital is the
most important unit where almost all patients suffering from mild to severe conditions
report first. It is here that patient forms his first impression of the type of service that
he should expect to get from the hospital. On an average about 7,000 patients attend
the OPD of the Institute per day. Though the Public Accounts Committee
(Sixth Lok Sabha) in their 49th Report had recommended that the strength of doctors
be suitably fixed to bring down the waiting time of out patients to half an hour at the
most, the Institute had not fixed so far any norms of deployment of doctors in OPD on
the basis of workload to ensure  satisfactory patient care. The Committee are concerned
to point out the average Doctor-Patient ratio in the OPD in the AIIMS has increased
gradually from 1:21 in 1990-2000 in 1:26 to 2001-2002 and further to 1:32 in 2003-2004.
The Doctor-Patient ratio in the indoor service is stated to be 1:35. The Committee feel
that this Doctor-Patient ratio is abnormally high and needs to be brought to a reasonable
level. The Committee are of the opinion that the strength of doctors in various
Departments of the Institute needs to be reviewed and refixed on the basis of well-

23
determined norms and guidelines so as to enable them to render satisfactory service to
patients coming for treatment in the Institute. The Committee further note that owing
to certain specific reasons, many key posts in the Institute were filled up through
ad-hoc appointment, which has brought administrative inefficiency in the Institute
and consequently, the patient-care services have received a serious jolt. Since adhocism
has dented the reputation of the Institute, the Committee feel that the problem needs to
be urgently addressed to ensure that the Institute continues to be one of the best in
the world in providint specialized health care.
[SI. No. 13, Appendix. II, Para  176 of Seventh Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
AIIMS has been providing excellent clinical services to patients from all over
India and even from neighbouring countries. Because of its good reputation, number
of patients visiting various Out Patients Departments and indoor facilities has been
rising steadily. At present more than 7000 patients have been attending various OPDs
every day. Catering to such a heavy patient load consumes most of the time of the
faculty members. Inspite of this heavy load, faculty members have been carrying out
excellent research and publishing the results in national and international journals and
also teach undergraduate and postgraduate students and look after other clinical
duties.
However, for ideal functioning it would be preferable if the number of patients
coming to the hospital could be regulated in order that proper Doctor-Patient Ratio is
maintained. One of the ways to reduce the patient load would be by making AIIMS as
a referral tertiary care hospital. However, if AIIMS is made a referral tertiary care hospital,
then it would not be possible to continue with the MBBS students at AIIMS because
for teaching MBBS students we need general patients also. However, as per the Act,
AIIMS has to conduct courses in Undergraduate and Postgraduate medical
disciplines.
It may also be seen that 60% of the patients to AIIMS are coming from other
states of India. One of the reasons why patients travel such a long distance and come
to the Institute is because of non-availability of proper health care facilities in other
States. If  more specialized centres could be built up in the various States, it would help
in reducing patients load at AIIMS. The proposal of setting up of 6 AIIMS like
Institutions will go a long way in reducing patients load at AIIMS.
The Governing Body has recently approved the recommendation of Selection
Committee for various posts in AIIMS. With the filling up of all these posts, the
situation would improve.
However, the workload of casualty has been increased by more than 25 per cent
in the last 4 years. With a view to provide the best medical treatment round the clock in
each discipline of Casualty/Emergency services in addition to the above, 21 posts of

24
Senior Residents and 39 posts of Junior Residents (Non-Acad.) have been sanctioned
by the Standing Finance Committee of the Institute on 20-06-2005 as per details below:—
Senior Residents Junior Residents
(Non-Acad.) (Non-Acad.)
Medicine - 8
Surgery - 6 Jr. Residents - 39
Anaesthesia - 4
Paediatrics - 3
N. Surgery - 4
Anatomy - 2
Total - 27 - 39
However, the situation needs to be assessed on continuous basis so as to
deploy more senior doctors/specialists to manage the Casualty/Emergency Wards.
Recommendation
Various irregularities in the purchase and disposal of machinery and equipment
have come to the notice of the Committee during the examination of the subject. These
included auction of equipment ASM 100 X-Ray Generator in working condition, extra
expenditure of Rs. 23.97 lakhs on Cath Lab. I, II & III and Gamma Knife due to placing
of orders without availability of funds; a machine known as Counter Chamber costing
Rs. 46.55 lakhs procured in 1994-95 having remained unutilized right from its installation
and also not taken in stock. It was further noted that the equipment Copper Laser
Vapours with Dye Laser was not selected according to the requirements; the purchase
of Non-Invasive continuous homodynamic monitoring system was done without calling
for tenders and proper records were not maintained to keep a watch over the receipt
and working of foreign equipment. The Committee desire that the Institute should be
careful in future while buying such machinery and equipment.
[Sl. No. 19, Appendix II,  Para 182 of  Seventh Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In this regard it is stated that all the Chief of the Centres and Head of the Departments
have been instructed to prioritize and procure machinery & equipments on strict merits
and only those which are genuinely required. Further, either there should be no additional
requirement of site, water, space, manpower etc. or it should be ensured that all these pre-
installation requirements are arranged simultaneously so that machinery & equipments
could be utilized optimally right from their arrival/installation.
Recommendation
Various instances of losses and mismanagement of resources were noticed in
the administration of the Institute. The Institute  failed to collect at least Rs. 2.43 crores
as Registration Fees from 64 per cent of the OPD patients. The Institute allowed a drug
store and a provision store to function in its premises at a loss of revenue of atleast

25
Rs. 55.38 lakhs. Instances of manipulation of records were noticed in the auctioning of
an equipment in working condition. Moreover, the Institute failed to reflect Rs. 2.57
crores of outstanding advances against private firms on its books of accounts. In
certain cases, the institute continued to keep an amount of Rs. 18.73 crores in its cash
balance though it was shown as debit in the final head of accounts. The Committee
consider these irregularities as a reflection on the part of the administrative efficiency
of the AIIMS. The Committee would like the Institute management to draw appropriate
lessons from these lapses with a view to avoid the same in future.
[Sl. No. 20, Appendix II,  Para 183 of  Seventh Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Regarding loss of revenue on account of levy of stamps it is submitted that as of
date no revenue loss has been noticed by the Institute. As already stated in the cases
of a vast majority of patients, like referred patients from general OPD departments to
another OPD, E.H.S. beneficiaries, patients attending through casualty OPDs and in
some cases very poor patients are not required to pay registration fee. This system of
registration might have been perceived as loss of revenue. However, steps are being
taken to ensure a better management information system and separate record
maintenance for the paying and exemption categories.
As regards loss of revenue towards licence fees, the Super Bazar being a
cooperative sector venture was given the space at nominal licence fee to ensure the
availability of drugs at reduced cost rather than starting a commercial venture. Similarly
in case of provision of store at Ayurvigyan Nagar managed by Super Bazar Co-operative
Stores Ltd; it was allowed to continue the contract on existing terms and conditions
keeping in view the services being provided by the Super Bazar at reasonably fair
prices being a Cooperative Society under the Ministry of Food and Civil Supplies.
However, both the sites have already been evicted.
With regard to auctioning of an equipment in working condition it is submitted
that SM-100 was proposed for upgradation after utilizing it for 16 years. Whenever a unit
is malfunctioning and repairing is difficult it is proposed for replacement/upgradation.
However, efforts are being made to keep the equipment in working condition by all
means till it is ready for replacement so that patient care does not suffer. Most of the
equipment needs to be replaced after 10-15 years. Further, the Generator Room No. 75
was closed down from 15-4-99 to 16-8-99 for replacement of the machine.
During this time the fluoroscopic studies  of indoor patients were performed in
other fluoroscopy rooms. Therefore, it is not true that the equipment was auctioned
while it was in working condition.
As regards outstanding advances to the private firms/parties, it is submitted
that all the advances have been adjusted and in future due to close monitoring and
regular review of the advances, it will be ensured that the advances are adjusted with
in a  very short span.
Regarding keeping of Rs. 18.73 crores in its cash balances it is submitted that all
the concerned centres/departments/units etc. have been instructed to streamline the
purchase procedure so that such type of lapse could be avoided/minimized.

26
Recommendation
The Committee note from the Audit findings that a computerization system was
set up at a cost of Rs. 2.03 crores at the Institute in April, 1989 for Patient Care System,
Administration, Library, Academic & Research and Teaching. The software of the
Patient Care System was developed by Tata Consultancy Services at a cost of Rs. 25
lakhs in May, 1990. The Committee, however, find that the Patient Care System had not
been used successfully as the mainframe computer system was rendered obsolete and
thus was unable to handle more than 25 online users, whereas, the number of users on
the network had increased  beyond 100. The Committee are of the opinion that Institute,
being a Research Centre in advanced Medicine, should have a system in place to
periodically study their software requirements vis-a-vis available technology and
recommend updating of the system. It appears that the Institute continued to maintain
a system which was obsolete in terms of requirement and was incurring heavy
expenditure on its maintenance. The Committee regret to observe that AIIMS, despite
being a leading Super Speciality Hospital, does not have a modern information system.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that necessaary mechanism be developed to
keep the Institute in-sync with the latest computer technology, which would support
the day-to-day working of the Institute.
[Sl. No. 22 Appendix II  Para 185 of  Seventh Report of  PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In this regard it is stated that with a view to  incorporate with the latest computer
technology which would support the day to day working of the Institute, the proposal
for inviting tenders from the interested firms has been finalized. The global tender
process is expected to be completed by the end of  December, 2005. This will be
followed by operationalization of the Computer System at AIIMS.
As regards development of modern information system in-sync in latest
technology, it may be stated that the Government is considering a proposal to study
the organizational set up of AIIMS through a Management Institution. While entrusting
the study, the observation of the Committee would be kept in mind to remove the
deficiency.
Recommendation
The Committee note with grave concern that various advertisements from quacks
claiming to give immediate relief from various diseases regularly appear in National
Dailies which take gullible patients for a ride. The Committee would like to point out
that as per the provisions of the Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable
Advertisements) Act, 1954, no person is to take any part in the publication of any
advertisement referring to any drug/magic remedies which suggest any diagnosis,
cure, mitigation, treatment or prevention of any disease, disorder or condition specified
in the Schedule of the Act that includes epilepsy, leprosy, fits, insanity, paralysis,
leucoderma etc. Imprisonment extending to six months in the case of first conviction
and upto one year in case of subsequent conviction has been provided as penalty for
any offence committed under this Act. The Committee, however, regret to observe that

27
no effective system exists to enforce the provisions of this Act to check the malpractices,
which could be one of the reasons as to why quacks enjoy flourishing business in a
short span of time. The Committee have been given to understand that there is a
proposal  in the Ministry to provide statutory regulatory framework specifying the
procedure for an Expert Committee to examine the claims made by quacks. It is also
intended to have a penalty clause for such offences. The Committee desire that the
Ministry should take urgent steps to enforce the provisions specified under the Drugs
and Magic Remedies Act of 1954 as well as ensure that the proposed regulatory
framework is operationalised at the earliest.
[Sl. No. 2 Appendix II  Para 186 of  Seventh Report of  PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Drugs and Magic Remedies (Objectionable Advertisements) Bill for the
amendment of Drugs and Magic Remedies(Objectionable Advertisements) Act to make
responsive to present day needs is under consideration of the Ministry of Health for
finalization.
Recommendation
The Committee have been given to understand that Six Research-cum-Referral
Hospitals are proposed to be set up by the Government in Bhopal, Jodhpur, Raipur,
Rishikesh, Patna and Bhubneshwar with  the same standards of that of AIIMS. Ac-
cording to the Ministry, particular States in which these Hospitals are to be set up,
have been selected primarily on the basis of their socio-economic development param-
eters and availability of health infrastructure. The main objective of these Institutes
will be to provide:
1. State-of the-art medical care in 39 Specialities and super-specialities;
2. A fillip for raising the prevailing standards of medical education;
3. A referral system that will ensure that all health institutions are optimally
utilized.
The Ministry of Health proposed to place before EFC for clearance of these
proposals short after which approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs would
be sought. According to the Ministry, the State Governments would provide 100 acres
of free-land, road connectivity, electricity and water supply for these Institutes. The
likely construction time from the date of commencement is stated to be 36 months. The
Committee appreciate these proposals of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
and desire that concerted, effective and timely steps should be taken to ensure early
commencement and completion of these Institutes which would go a long way in
helping the population of the States with the added benefit of bringing super-special-
ity services practically to their doorsteps. The Committee also feel that these steps
would be instrumental in decreasing the excessive patient load on AIIMS, Delhi and
thus, desire that the project must be completed within the set target date without any
cost overruns. The Committee further desire that once the experiment is successful,

28
the Ministry may explore the possibility of further expanding these facilities in other
deprived regions of the country as well.
[Sl. No. 24 Appendix II  Para 187 of  Seventh Report of  PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha Yojana (PMSSY) launched in 2003
envisages to offer specialities and super-specialities medical care and quality medical
education in under-served States. Under PMSSY inter-alia, it is proposed to set up
one AIIMS-like institution each in the States of Bihar (Patna), Raipur, Madhya Pradesh
(Bhopal), Orissa (Bhubaneshwar), Rajasthan (Jodhpur) and Uttaranchal (Rishikesh)
and to manage them.
A Project Management Committee has been constituted under the chairmanship
of Secretary (H&FW) with representative from M/o Finance, Planning Commission,
Airport Authority of India, Director (AIIMS) and officials of this Ministry to oversee
the effective and timely implementation of the Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Suraksha
Yojana (PMSSY). Various start-up activities like construction of boundary wall, the
process for selection of Project Consultant for providing comprehensive consultancy
services and selection of architectural concepts/designs for AIIMS like institution
have been taken up.
HSCC(I) Ltd. a PSU under the Ministry, has been appointed as the in-house
consultant for assisting the Ministry  for start up activities. For establishing and
running all the six institutes, it is proposed to set up a Central Apex Society under
Societies registration Act, 1860. Draft Memorandum of Association (MoA) prepared
for the Central Apex Society, contains a provision that if necessary, Society would be
competent to consider the establishment of more such institutions in other parts of the
country.
The proposal for implementation of PMSSY has been cleared by the Expenditure
Finance Committee and pending approval of the competent authority.
Recommendation
The Committee also understand that there is a proposal to upgrade one medical
college each in the States of Andhra Pradesh, Jharkhand, Jammu & Kashmir,
Tamil Nadu, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal to the level of the proposed AIIMS like
institutions. This would be a one time exercise wherein the Central Government would
render estimated assistance of Rs. 120 crores to each existing institution to bring it to
the level of AIIMS like facilities. The Committee welcome this proposal also and desire
that this should be followed up and implemented  at the earliest as it would provide a
fillip for raising the prevailing standards of medical education and provide a  capable
medical workforce  of not only medical graduates but also well-trained specialists and
super-specialists comparable to the level of the AIIMS.
[(Sl. No. 25 Appendix II  Para 188 of  Seventh Report of  PAC (Lok Sabha)]

29
Action Taken
The revised PMSSY proposal envisages inter-alia upgradation of one existing
Medical Institute each in the State of Jharkhand, Jammu & Kashmir, Tamil Nadu,
Uttar Pradesh,  West Bengal and two existing medical institutes in the State of Andhra
Pradesh.  The proposal for implementation of PMSSY has been cleared by the Expen-
diture Finance Committee and is pending approval of the competent authority.
Recommendation
The Committee note that  AIIMS has Vishram Sadans for the relatives/atten-
dants of patients coming from outside Delhi. As a large number of relatives of patients
admitted in the Hospital from outside Delhi have to stay in the Hospital premises, the
Committee feel that the existing arrangements by the Institute need to be augmented
further to cater to their requirements. The Committee would also like the Institute to
ensure adequate canteen facilities and 24 hrs. chemist shop in the premises of the
Institute so that the attendants of the patients do not face any difficulty on this
account.
[(Sl. No. 26 Appendix II  Para 189 of  Seventh Report of  PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In this regard it is stated that the Institute with the help of volunteer organiza-
tions has created 400 beds by constructing three vishram sadans namely  Rajgharia
Vishram Sadan, Sai Vishram Sadan and Sulekha Vishram Sadan in the Western Campus
of Ansari Nagar. These are functioning for the benefit of patients and relatives.
Regarding adequate canteen facilities it is stated that the Institute has licensed two
canteens near the main entrance gate for the supply of the food items to the patients
and their relatives. As regards 24 hours chemist shop it is once again submitted that
patients  and their  relatives are not facing any difficulty on  this account as number of
drug shops are opened  round the clock in the subway adjacent to the Institute.
Recommendation
The Committee note that the Ministry has taken action to fill up vacancies in the
posts of teaching staff, nurses, technical staff and other supporting staff. In this
connection, the Committee would like to point out that several vacancies continue to
exist in these categories thereby affecting services rendered by the Institute. A large
number of vacancies in AIIMS dilute the efficiency of the organization which also
results in considerable inconvenience to patients in one form or the other. It is desirable
that appropriate action is taken to fill these vacancies by advance planning and
periodical monitoring at an appropriately higher level. The Committee desire that a
study may be undertaken in the Institute to examine that the Doctor/Teacher/Staff
provided in various Departments are commensurate with the work load. The Committee
express concern over the fact that there is some resentment among researchers, doctors,
nurses and supporting staff regarding their pay structure, service conditions, facilities
etc. The Committee hope that suitable measures would be taken by the Ministry/
Institute for the redressal of their grievances.
[Sl. No. 27 Appendix II  Para 190 of  Seventh Report of  PAC (Lok Sabha)]

30
Action Taken
The Institute has made serious efforts to fill up the existing vacancies. During
the last two years 1165 number of vacancies at various levels have been filled up.
Currently the process to fill up the vacancies of the faculty is on. Regarding advance
planning, from the last over a year the Institute has started doing DPCs six-months in
advance to ensure that the vacancies by promotion are filled-up immediately upon
creation. Besides this there are many proposals for creation of posts which are under
consideration. Efforts are on to expedite these proposals.
Even though there are vacancies in the Institute, but it is not a fact that the
services of the Institute have been affected/suffered. The AIIMS has been providing
excellent clinical services to patients from all over India and even from neighbouring
countries and there are no compromises in providing better services to the patients. It
is creditable that "India Today" has nominated AIIMS as the best medical college in
the country in last many years. A survey carried out and published in April, 2005 by
"The Week" has also rated AIIMS as the best hospital and top medical college in the
country.
As regards, the suggestion of the Committee for a study, an organizational
study is under consideration.
Regarding resentment among researchers, doctors, nurses and supporting staff
for their pay structure, service conditions, facilities are concerned, it is stated that as
per the provision of AIIMS Act, the Institute has to create posts, on scales of pay
applicable to similar posts under the Government or on scales of pay approved by the
Government, classify them into grades and specify their designations and service
conditions applicable to the Central Government Employees are applicable to the
employees of the institute mutatis mutandis. Therefore, the Institute is giving pay
scales and all other service conditions, facilities accordingly. As far as Faculty staff is
concerned, the Government have already implemented the recommendations of the
Bakshi Committee.
The staffing pattern and the working environments of AIIMS staff are totally
different from that of Central Government Dispensaries/Hospitals.
Recommendation
The Committee understand that many ad-hoc appointments have been made
against Group 'C' and 'D' posts in the Institute in the past. The problem of large number
of ad-hoc employees working in these categories has been brought to the notice of the
Committee. The Committee recommend that the Government should devise a rational
method to deal with the problem of regularization of ad-hoc employees. Further the
Committee desire that no ad-hoc appointments should be made in future in these
categories.
[Sl. No. 28 Appendix II  Para 191 of Seventh Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]

31
Action Taken
In this context, it is stated that a proposal with regards to regularization of
Group C & D staff working as Ad-hoc/Temporary Status/Daily Wages was placed
before the Standing Finance Committee of the Institute in its meeting held on 06.10.2004.
However, the Standing Finance Committee did not approve the said proposal. In view
of that there was no provision to regularize ad-hoc employees automatically & these
ad-hoc employees have to go through regular selection process as Departmental
Candidates against the vacancies. During the last two years 398 ad-hoc employees &
123 ad-hoc faculty have been regularized. It is further stated that the Institute has
totally banned ad-hoc appointment & no such ad-hoc appointments have been made
by the Institute during the last 2 years.

CHAPTER  III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Audit Review has revealed that a large number of equipments for use for
diagnosis and treatment  were installed late, not installed at all or lying damaged. No
wonder that patients in AIIMS, especially outdoor ones, which have  increased manifold
without corresponding increase in diagnostic facilities and equipment,  are compelled
to wait considerably for various test/investigations.  Needless to say that without
proper and early tests and investigations the patients cannot be given timely and exact
treatment. The Ministry have taken the stand that since priority is given to Emergency/
indoor patients, the OPD  patients may have to wait. The Committee do not agree with
the Ministry's view point and feel that notwithstanding all the steps taken by the
Institute's authorities to minimize  excessive waiting time, the problem continues to
persist. The Committee are of the view that though certain delays are unavoidable and
inevitable, yet the problem has to be tackled  boldly and effectively so as to minimize
the inconvenience and anxiety caused  to the patients and their relative due to agonizing
wait in queues. The Committee  cannot but over emphasise the need for early suitable
steps to ensure that waiting time for the patients to get diagnostic tests is reduced to
bare minimum. For this, proper diagnostic facilities with the installation of more and
more machines and equipment is the need of  the hour. At the same time, the Committee
would  like the Institute to ensure that various machines and equipments are optimally
utilized and are repaired immediately, and  put to use again, in case  any of those goes
out of order. The Committee would like to be apprised of the precise steps taken in this
regard.
[Sl. No. 14 Appendix II  Para 177 of  Seventh Report  of  PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The  Institute has taken  note of the concern of the Committee. As has been
explained earlier the waiting period in the diagnostic procedures  is mainly for outdoor
patients because priority is given to the patients in the Casualty/Emergency (where
there is no waiting period) and for indoor patients. The existing facilities at the Institute
have been stretched to the limit due to heavy increase in the number of patients who
arrive in  the OPDs.  At present, approximately  7,000 patients  per  day report in the
OPDs and the Casualty of AIIMS. A large number of patients are from the poor   section
of  the society and,  hence, the diagnostic  and other facilities at the AIIMS are mainly
used for their benefit.
However,  keeping in view  the ever-increasing number  of patients certain
immediate steps  have been  taken to address the problem of  waiting list. A latest
state-of-the-art MRI machine has been procured which  takes less time compared to
32

33
the old machine.  The number of working  hours for  the MRI have  been  increased to
12 hours  per day.  Secondly, a separate diagnostic facility is being created at the
AIIMS to take care of the patients in the private wards. This will make the diagnostic
facilities already existing in the AIIMS available for a longer period of time for general
patients. In the long term 12 independent advanced facilities in various super-specialities
have been planned at the AIIMS, which will have additional diagnostic facilities. The
Trauma Centre which has already been approved by the Government is likely to be
completed by the end of 2005. It will cater to the requirement of all trauma cases
including emergency cases and it will have the latest and state-of-the-art diagnostic
facilities. Similarly, a separate Dental Centre is coming up at the AIIMS. It will reduce
the waiting time of patients suffering from dental problems. A new Cardio-Neuro Tower
is also under construction. This will provide 63 more beds for cardiac and neuro
patients and four new Operation Theatres. The Dr. B.R. Ambedkar Institute Rotary
Cancer Hospital is likely to be approved shortly. This will add another over 100 beds
for cancer patients. Besides some more facilities already added/going to be added are
as follows:—
* Decongestion of OPD Block—AIIMS gets about 7000 patients per day in the
OPD. This led to lots of congestion in the OPD Block. A new fully air
conditioned OPD Block for Medicine and Paediatrics was commissioned
having separate registration counters, 30 consultation rooms, large waiting
hall with sitting arrangements, immunization room, X-ray facility etc. This has
resulted in de-congestion of existing OPD as over 1000 patients per day
benefit from this additional facility.
* Streamlining of Emergency Services—A new emergency ward with 60 beds,
including 2 High Dependency Units, has been constructed adjacent to the
medicine emergency. This has been segregated into three functional support
areas i.e. Surgery and Orthopaedics, Medicine and Paediatrics Emergency. A
large waiting area has been constructed just near the Casualty with facilities
like tea, coffee and snacks, sitting arrangements, toilet facilities, PCO, Public
Address System etc.
* Augmentation of New Private Wards Facility—An additional 60 bed private
ward has been commissioned. The waiting list has been virtually eliminated
and more beds are now available in general wards for poor patients. Another
57 rooms have been completed.
* In-Vitro Fertilisation Facility (IVF)—A new IVF facility is going to be started
within this year providing a ray of hope to childless couples. This will be the
first IVF facility in any civilian government hospital in India.
Thus during the coming year another 450 bed will be added to the existing
bed strength of 1953 beds raising the total bed strength to 2403. Last year 118
beds were added.
* Positron Emission Tomography (PET)—This ultra modern state-of-the-art
diagnostic facility has been finalized at the cost of about Rs. 18 crores. This
will be fully commissioned shortly. This will provide diagnostic facility in the

34
field of Cardiology, Oncology and Neurology and will predict a disease even
before its onset. This is the only facility of its kind in any government hospital
in the country.
The situation will be reviewed periodically and necessary action will be initiated
to address this problem in future also.
Recommendation
Another significant feature in the patient care services in AIIMS, which the
Committee have noted, is inadequate number of beds which, at present, is 1853 for
indoor patients. The Committee understand that while the Institute faces a huge
attendance in OPD, the possibility of getting beds in most of the Wards is generally
remote for a large number of patients requiring Indoor treatment. Although 465 beds
are proposed to be augmented next year, still the number of beds available would be far
short considering the fact that 7000 patients attend the OPD per day and a good
number out of these need Indoor treatment. The Committee have been given to
understand that various ward facilities in AIIMS are proposed to be augmented in the
near future. The Committee would like the authorities to keep the bed requirements in
view when the additional facilities are planned. The Committee desire that urgent
measures should be taken to augment the availability of  beds as the institute is
gravely short of the requisite number of beds.
[Sl. No. 15 Appendix II Para 178 of  Seventh Report of  PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
AIIMS is in process of preparing a re-development plan and more super speciality
centres shall be constructed in existing Masjid Moth/Ansari Nagar campus. Once the
project is completed, the bed strength will also increase substantially. In addition, the
pressure on AIIMS will be considerably reduced once the six new AIIMS like Institutions
and upgradation of Medical Institutes is approved under PMSSY in the different
under-served States.

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation
The Committee are aware of the serious debate currently doing the rounds over
the level of autonomy enjoyed by the Institute. They note that AIIMS was established
as an autonomous Intitution to serve as a Centre of Excellence in the areas of medical
service and education while serving as a super-speciality hospital. However, the
Committee are concerned to note that by and large various activities undertaken in
AIIMS are dependent on the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for grants and
thus, autonomy, which was meant to spell out 'freedom of action', as envisaged during
the setting up of AIIMS, has been somewhat hampered. During evidence, the Institute
expressed reservations over the limited autonomy available to them and informed the
Committee that their functioning has been adversely affected for want of complete
'functional' and 'financial' autonomy. The Committee are in agreement with the
apprehensions expressed that excessive Government control as well as political
influence erodes the efficiency and growth capacity of an institute. They therefore, are
of the view that complete autonomy in conducting bio-medical research is an essential
pre-requisite for the growth of AIIMS so as to reach the standards of excellence
envisaged in the Act of 1956. The Committee desire that the question of autonomy of
AIIMS may be carefully examined by appointing an external agency immediately which
ought to ensure, in the process, the outstanding character of the Institute. Further the
Committee stress that, if need be, Act of 1956 may be suitably amended in the light of
ground realities particularly for constitution of the Government Body of AIIMS, and
Immediate reforms be implemented in the light of study conducted by the aforesaid
expert body. The Committee feel that these measures would go a long way in reviving
the glory of this Premier Institute and would help it in the achievement of its avowed
objectives.
[Sl. No. 11 Appendix II Para 174 of  Seventh Report of PAC  (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Government has taken initiative in the matter of studying the need for
functional and financial autonomy. It is proposed to conduct a Peer review and
Organizational Study of AIIMS and study of Finance and Accounts of AIIMS. It is
also proposed to get various aspects of financial management including expenditure
control; internal audit  and costing, evaluated by an independent external agency. The
specific issues relating to grant of further functional/financial autonomy will be
considered subsequently.
35

36
The Government has given sufficient autonomy to AIIMS in the matter of
conducting Bio Medical Research and its endeavour to reach the standards of excellence
in Medical Education. Since the Institute is completely dependent upon the Consolidated
Fund of India/Government of India for its existence, there has to be some accountability
to the Parliament/Exchequer. Therefore, till such time the Institute is financially
dependent upon the exchequer it will have to continue to remain accountable and
follow general economy instructions.
Recommendation
The Committee note that AIIMS, being a premier  super-speciality Government
Hospital-cum-Research Institute, receives a huge influx of patients not only from Delhi
but also from outside Delhi for outdoor as well as indoor treatment. This puts tremendous
pressure on the Institute's infrastructure, which, in turn, adversely affects the Institute's
endeavour towards medical research and education. The Committee find that AIIMS
was envisaged to be a referral hospital catering to the needs of patients requiring
specialized treatment and not for those who can be successfully treated in a routine
manner in other hospitals as well. The Committee, therefore, desire that AIIMS should
retain its original character by serving as a super-speciality referral hospital only for
serious patients referred by selected hospitals all over the country for this, it is also
imperative that basic conditions in other hospitals of the country must be upgraded/
improved to such an extent so that patients are easily and successfully treated there
and need not rush to the Institute for treatment of minor/manageable illnesses. The
Committee hope that this would help the AIIMS to pay requisite attention to the more
serious and complicated cases.
[Sl. No.  17 Appendix II Para  180  of Seventh Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
To address the problem of huge influx of patients, from other parts of India, the
Government has taken steps to establish six Super-Speciality Hospitals in under-
served States, under Pradhan Mantri Swasthya Surakasha Yojana (PMSSY). Besides
the above, it also envisages upgradation of Institutions and grant of financial assistance
to State Governments for upgradation of Medical Colleges. Thus, the fresh creation of
tertiary care facilities and upgradation would greatly ease the present problems being
faced by AIIMS.
Recommendation
The Committee are disappointed to note the extremely tardy progress in setting
up of various Centres of the Institute particularly the Institute Rotary Cancer Hospital
(IRCH), which was conceived to serve as a comprehensive Cancer Centre in entire
North India and the Centralised Accident and Trauma Centre. The IRCH project, which
was started 12 years ago in 1992, remains incomplete as on date as only 96 beds are
operational in the Centre. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that
another 104 beds are yet to be made functional. In another case, the Committee have
been distressed to find that the Centralized Accident and Trauma Centre, which was
approved by the Government in May, 1984 is yet to be completed. The Committee note

37
that the project suffered inordinate delay due to its transfer from the Delhi Administration
to the Central Government. The Committee have further been given to understand that
due to tremendous paucity of funds, a revised EFC Memo. could be placed for the first
phase of construction only in March, 2001 which was stated to be completed by
March, 2003. However, the Committee understand that the project could not be
completed as the scope of work had increased. The revised estimate of Rs. 132.82
crores is awaiting the approval of Cabinet Committee on Economic Affairs. The
Committee feel that this is yet another instance of inordinate delay and lack of
coordination on the part of the Ministry with concerned agencies to make such a
significant Centre operationalised. The Committee, therefore, urge the authorities
concerned to draw up a time-bound programme for completion of both the
aforementioned projects and take necessary action without further loss of time. The
Committee would like to be informed of the exact dates when these two Centres became
operational.
[Sl. No.  18  Appendix  II Para 181 of Seventh  Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The status of the IRCH and Trauma Centre is as under:—
(i) IRCH:— A new building with a bed strength of 104 has been functional.
The remaining 96 beds could not be made functional due to shortage of
additional staff and machinery and equipment. The revised EFC amounting
to Rs. 98.41 crores has already been recommended by the EFC in the
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. As soon as it is approved remaining
beds will be made functional.
(ii) Trauma Centre:— The necessary approval to revised EFC has been
given by the CCEA. The Centre is likely to be functional by end 2005.
Recommendation
The Committee were informed that the Institute was allotted 32.09 acres of land
at Masjid Moth during 1966—69 for construction of  the projects out of which 22 acres
land was encroached upon by JJ (Jhuggi Jhompari) dwellers as the land remained
unutilized for quite some time due to paucity of funds. The Committee were informed
that later an amount of Rs. 17.15 crores fixed for the relocation of those JJ families and
it was decided to shift JJ cluster by March, 1988. The Committee observe that despite
the Institute paying Rs. 9.97 crores to MCD for getting possession of land, the jhuggis
could not be relocated till April, 2001. The Committee find that the proposal to build
residential quarters on this land had to be shelved and the same had to be built to
Ayurvigyan Nagar. They further note that it is now planned to utilize the said land for
construction of super-speciality centers and hostels. The land use is, therefore, required
to be changed from ‘Residential’ to ‘Institutional’. According to the Ministry, the
matter has been taken up with the Ministries concerned and permission is awaited.
The Committee recommend that the matter be pursued vigorously so that this land,
which is a part of development in the Master Plan for AIIMS, could be utilized effectively.
The Committee strongly believe that it requires co-ordination and co-operation at all

38
levels in Government. Hence there is a need to secure better collaboration between
various Government Departments, agencies and services.
[Sl. No.  21  Appendix  II Para 184 of  Seventh  Report of PAC (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As regards to encroachment it is submitted that jhuggi dwellers have been
relocated and land is now free from any encroachment. Regarding change of land use
it is submitted that matter has been taken up with the concerned Ministries. It is
ensured that proper-co-ordination and co-operation at all levels will be tried at best. All
efforts will be made to ensure better collaboration between various Government
Departments, agencies and services.

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HA VE  FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES:
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
19 April, 2007 Chairman,
29 Chaitra, 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
39

PART-II
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY-FIRST SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2006-2007) HELD ON 19TH  APRIL,  2007
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. on 19th April, 2007 in
Room  No. ‘‘53’’, Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri Raghunath Jha
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
6. Shri Kharabela Swain
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri R.K. Dhawan
9. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
OFFICERS OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri P.K. Kataria — Pr. Director of Audit (RC)
2. Shri Nand Kishore — Pr. Director of Audit (AB)
3. Ms. Sudha Krishnan — Pr. Director of Audit (DT)
4. Shri Jayanti Prasad — Pr. Director of Audit (INDT)
5. Ms. Subhashini Srinivasan — Pr. Director of Audit (Railways)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee. Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the following draft
Reports:—
(A) Draft original Reports on the following subjects:
(i) Concession Meant for Small Scale Industries availed of by Large Scale
Manufacturers;
Server 3 \ Report 2004 \ 1915LS \ 1915LS2
40

41
(ii) Allotment of land to Educational Institutions by Delhi Development
Authority;
(iii) Performance Audit of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA);
(B) Draft Action Taken Reports on Action Taken by the Government on the
following Reports:—
(i) 7th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to ‘‘All India Institute of
Medical Sciences (AIIMS)’’;
(ii) 21st Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to ‘‘Excesses Over V oted
Grants and Charged Appropriations (2003-04)’’;
(iii) 24th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to ‘‘Kendriya Vidyalaya
Sangathan’’;
(iv) 29th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to ‘‘Status of improvement
of efficiency through the 'Restructuring' of Income Tax Department’’.
The Chairman invited suggestions of the Members on the Draft Reports. After
discussing the contents of the draft Reports in brief, the Committee adopted the same.
3. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these Reports in the light
of verbal discussion and consequential changes arising out of factual verification by
the Audit or otherwise and present the same to Parliament.
4. As the term of the Committee ends on 30th April, 2007, the Chairman apprised
the Members of the work done by the Committee in their current term. He stated that
during the present term, the Committee have finalized twenty Reports (11 Original and
9 Action Taken), out of which thirteen reports have already been presented and the
remaining seven will be presented in the current Session of Parliament. He expressed
his thanks to all the Members for the co-operation extended by them in making this
possible and hoped that this momentum would be carried through to the next Committee.
5. The Chairman specially expressed his thanks to the Members namely,
Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy, Shri Madan Lal Sharma, Shri K.V . Thangkabalu and
Shri R.K. Dhawan, for their co-operation and contribution in the successful working of
the Committee. These Members will not be part of the Public Accounts Committee in
the next term beginning from 1st May, 2007.
6. On behalf of the Committee, the Chairman placed on record their appreciation
of the Officers/Staff of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the Committee for their
hard work and dedication in rendering Secretarial assistance to the Committee.
7. The Committee also expressed their thanks to the C&AG of India and his team
for providing assistance to the Committee.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/Department Observations/Recommendations
No. No.
12 3 4
1. 8 Health and Family The  Committee  are  keen  that a premier
Welfare Institute like AIIMS should get the
requisite functional autonomy and
professional independence while
discharging their mandate under the
statute.  The apprehensions of the
Committee on this count increase
particularly in the light of recent events
highlighting disagreement and conflict
between the administrative Ministry and
the Institute.  Although the Committee
have been informed that an external
agency,  as recommended by the
Committee, has been appointed to
conduct an overall study about the
functioning of the Institute including
various financial aspects, it is not clear
whether the terms of reference of the
study include aspects of functional and
professional autonomy vis-à-vis the role
of the Ministry.  The Committee desire
that even these aspects which are crucial
for maintaining the standards of the
Institute together with changes, if any,
required in the governing statute should
be included in the purview of the
aforesaid study.  The Committee would
like to be apprised about the action taken
in the matter.
2. 12 -do- The Committee are concerned about the
adequacy or otherwise of  the number of
posts of faculty as well as doctors
working in the Institute.  Although the
42
Server 3 \ Report 2004 \ 1915LS \ 1915LS2

43
Ministry and the Institute have taken
steps to fill the posts on regular basis,
the Committee would like to emphasize
that the concerned authorities should
not at any event keep any post unfilled
in the Institute as this will adversely
affect  patient-care services.  As regards
the Committee’s suggestion for
reviewing and augmenting the strength
of doctors, the Ministry have not put
forward any proposal in this regard.
Instead, they have tried to side-step the
issue by seeking to lower the patient-
doctor ratio on the premise of lesser
number of patients visiting the Institute,
when the proposal to build six AIIMS –
like Institutions in various States
fructifies.  As the Committee are not
convinced about this plea advanced by
the Ministry, they would  like to reiterate
that the Ministry and the Institute should
take immediate steps to not only fill up
the existing vacant posts of faculty and
doctors on regular basis but also review
the existing sanctioned strength with a
view to augmenting the number of
faculty members and doctors with a leave
reserve for ensuring a better patient-
doctor ratio and consequent
improvement in patient services
especially in the super speciality
disciplines like Neurology, Cardiology,
Nephrology, Oncology etc.
3. 16 Health and Family The Committee are unhappy over the
Welfare tardy progress in the construction and
operationalisation of various centres/
projects of the Institute like the Institute
Rotary Cancer Hospital and re-
development of Masjid Moth/Ansari
Nagar campus etc. Although the Ministry
have sought to assure the Committee
about the Centres being made functional
soon, considering their track record in
12 3 4

44
this matter, the Committee urge the
Ministry to show greater urgency on
this issue and render all possible
assistance and cooperation to the
Institute for ensuring the setting up of
the proposed Centres and completion
of the projects so that the schedule
stipulated in the AIIMS Master Plan is
closely adhered to without  leading to
cost- overruns. The Committee would
like to be apprised about the conclusive
action taken in regard to completion of
all the projects including
operationalisation of the Master Plan
envisaged for re-development of the
Masjid Moth/Ansari Nagar campuses.
As regards the augmentation of the
existing facilities like diagnostics, OPD
and beds, the Committee hope that the
Institute will take effective steps and
constraints, if any, faced by them will be
promptly addressed by the Ministry.
4. 20 Health and Family The Committee are not satisfied with the
Welfare progress made by the Ministry so far in
the setting up of the proposed
Institutions in various States with the
same standards as AIIMS. The
Committee have been informed that the
aforesaid proposal has been cleared by
the Expenditure Finance Committee of
the Ministry, but it is still pending for
approval by the competent authority. It
is a matter of concern and dismay for
the Committee that this proposal has
been hanging fire with the Ministry so
long. The Committee would now like the
Ministry  to take up this proposal in right
earnest and concretise the same without
further delay. The Committee hope that
with the implementation of this proposal,
the functioning of AIIMS as a super
speciality referral hospital of excellence
will be facilitated.
12 3 4
MGIPMRND—1915LS—1-6-2007.