25
NON-REALISATION OF FOREIGN
EXCHANGE
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
TWENTY-FIFTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH   LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

TWENTY-FIFTH  REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH   LOK  SABHA)
NON-REALISATION OF FOREIGN
EXCHANGE
MINISTRY OF  FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
[Action Taken on 61st  Report of Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha) ]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 01 March, 2006
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 01 March, 2006
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW   DELHI
February, 2006/ Magha, 1927 (Saka)

PAC No. 1804
Price: Rs. 46.00
©2006 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by the Manager, Govt. of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2005-2006)… ............... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............ ………………………………………………………….             (v)
CHAPTER  I Report ............................................................................ 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by Government………………………............. 9
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from Government........................................................... 20
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration ................ 21
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies .................. 30
PART II
Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2005-06) held on  19.1.2006.......................................... 31
APPENDIX
Statement of  Observations and Recommendations...... 33

COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2005 - 2006)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Dr. R. Senthil
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
12. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
13. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
14. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Dr. K. Malaisamy
19. Shri V . Narayanasamy
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
*21. V acant
22. Prof. R.B.S. V arma
S
ECRETARIAT
1.  Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2.  Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3.  Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4.  Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
5.  Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Committee Officer
*Shri Jairam Ramesh, M.P. ceased to be Member w.e.f. 29th January, 2006 on his appointment as
Minister in the Union Government.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Twenty-Fifth Report on action taken by Government on the
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 61st  Report
(13th Lok Sabha) on “Non-realisation of foreign exchange”.
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 19th January, 2006. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the
Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY  KUMAR  MALHOTRA,
15 February, 2006 Chairman,
26 Magha, 1927 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER   I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in their 61 st Report (13 th Lok Sabha) on
Chapter 3 of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the period
ended 31 March, 2001 (No. 10 of 2002), Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Customs)
relating to ‘Non realisation of Foreign Exchange’.
2. The Original Report was based on the Audit review which had pointed out that
the Government has been sacrificing a significant amount of Customs Revenue through
the several export promotion schemes as Duty drawback, Export Oriented Units/Export
processing zones, Advance licences Duty Entitlement Pass Book and Export promotion
of capital goods scheme etc.  Despite the primacy accorded to realization of foreign
exchange as the one and only yardstick for the efficacy of export incentives, the
Government had not been able to devise an appropriate institutional framework to
ensure monitoring and follow up action in cases of default.  The control instrument of
Export Outstanding Statement (XOS) generated by RBI had failed to contribute
significantly in this regard.   It was considered essential to utilize the full potential of
IT/EDI (Electronic Data Interchange) environment to facilitate an early generation of
export incentive related cases of non-realisation and effective follow up action to
ensure that export incentives are not misused.
3. The Committee in their Original Report had dealt with various aspects of the
aforesaid issues and made suitable Observations/Recommendations.
4. The 61
st Report contained six Observations/Recommendations.   The Action
Taken Notes have been received in respect of all Observations/Recommendations and
these have been broadly categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted by Government;
Paragraph Nos. 7.3, 7.5 and 7.6
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from Government;
 -  NIL -
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 7.1, 7.2 and 7.4
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
- NIL -

2
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue) have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report.   The Committee
will now deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their Observations/
Recommendations.
Monitoring Mechanism to ensure full realization of export proceeds
(Sl. Nos. 1-2, Paras  7.1-7.2)
6. The Committee in Paragraph 7.1 of their Original Report had expressed alarm at
the grim scenario wherein the Government’s policy to facilitate, promote and sustain
growth in the country’s export get derailed by the inability of the administrative and
regulatory machinery to monitor and ensure full realization of the export proceeds.
The Committee had observed non-repatriation of foreign exchange aggregating to a
whopping amount of Rs.11,735 crore as on June, 2000, two third of  which remained
outstanding for more than two years; notwithstanding the plenary enabling provisions
in this regard in the Exim Policy (2002 – 2007), the Customs Act, 1962 as well as the
Customs and Central Excise Duties Drawback Rules, 1995.   A major portion of
Rs. 11,735 crore involved export where export incentives were availed by the exporters.
The Committee had therefore, sought factual report specifying current unrealized export
proceeds from the Government on the issue.
7. The Ministry in their action taken note have stated that, as reported by RBI, the
export outstanding as on 31.12.2003 is Rs. 20,930.74 crore (which is cumulative figure
of outstanding) against realisation of Rs. 3,30,555.79 crore during the year ended on
31.12.2003, which works out to only 6% of the export realisation.  The DGFT has
reported that the total outstanding foreign exchange, against which export incentives
namely Duty Exemption Entitlement Scheme (DEEC) & Duty Entitlement Pass Book
(DEPB) Schemes have been availed, are Rs. 3,660.17 crore as on 31.12.2003.   The
reports received from the field formations of Customs show that the total outstanding
export proceeds against which drawback has been availed of comes to Rs. 757.62 crore
as on 31.12.2003.
8. In terms of RBI regulations, every exporter is required to realize and repatriate
full export value of goods or software within six months from the date of Export.   It had
come to the notice of the Committee that substantial amount of export proceeds were
pending realization beyond permissible  period of 180 days.  According to the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue) the export outstanding as on 31 December, 2003
was Rs. 20,930.74 crore against realisation of Rs. 3,30,555.79 crore during the year
ended on 31 December 2003.  The Ministry have contended that this works out to only
6% of the total realization.  Similarly, the total outstanding foreign exchange, against
which export incentives under DEEC and DEPE and drawback have been availed of,
stood at Rs. 3,660.17 crores and Rs. 757.62  crore respectively as on the same date.
The Committee are constrained to point out that the Ministry have not intimated to
the Committee precise reasons for the non-realisation of this amount as well as steps
taken to ensure full realization of the export proceeds.  The Committee are of the view
that the Ministry should not find solace in the fact that foreign exchange unrealised
against export so far is just 6 per cent of the total realisation,  since the export
outstanding amount is still a staggering figure of more than Rs. 20,000 crore,

3
realisation of which should have been timely made.  The weaknesses in the prevailing
monitoring mechanism in the Customs, Directorate General of Foreign Trade and
RBI need to be identified with a view to ensuring timely realization of foreign exchange.
There ought to be close coordination among these agencies.  The Committee therefore,
desire that the existing administrative and regulatory machinery should be
strengthened to ensure expeditious realisation of export  proceeds, which, in turn,
would help facilitate, promote and sustain the export growth commensurate with the
Government Policy in this regard.   The Committee hope that DGFT and the Customs
would take immediate action for realization of the outstanding export proceeds against
which export incentives and drawback have been availed.
9. In  Paragraph 7.2 of their earlier Report, the Committee had observed that there
were several shortcomings in the Exports Outstanding Statements(XOS) to be furnished
by all authorized dealers of foreign exchange to the RBI, giving details of all export bills
outstanding beyond the period prescribed for realization. The Committee had pointed
out lack of coordination and cooperation between the departments and weak monitoring
by Administrative Departments.  The Committee had desired  that the RBI, which plays
a pivotal role in the monitoring of the realization of foreign exchange against export by
putting the defaulting exporter on the caution-list and referring the cases to Enforcement
Directorate for investigation, would pay greater attention to the aspects of monitoring
of  realization of foreign exchange/export proceeds in fulfillment of its statutory
responsibility.  The Committee had specifically desired that Ministry of Finance should
assume the responsibility of nodal agency so that the lingering problem of coordination
and cooperation is ironed out.  On the question of not maintaining records by the
Custom Houses as pointed out by Audit, the Committee had observed that leaving
aside Delhi, no other Commissionerate block the payments of drawback in their
Electronic Data Interchange (EDI) system and the EDI environment has not been
utilized for effectively monitoring the realization of export proceeds and linking it with
the incentives availed. The Committee had accordingly, recommended that the
connectivity to the EDI system should be streamlined so that the monitoring of realization
of export proceeds is linked with the incentives availed.
10. In their action taken notes, the Ministry have stated that the system of receipt
of XOS statements and consequent recovery of export incentives availed against
unrealized export proceeds has been thoroughly reviewed in consultation with the
field formations of Customs and DG (Systems & Data Management), Customs &
Central Excise to increase the efficacy of XOS statement in order to recover the export
incentives in case of non-realization of foreign exchange.
11. The Ministry have also stated that in pursuance  of the recommendations of
the PAC, Coordination Committees  have been constituted  by the nodal Custom
Houses  with the representatives of Customs, RBI, DGFT, prominent Authorized Dealer
Banks and the Directorate General of Systems (Customs & Central Excise) and meetings
of the Coordination Committees are being held from time to time at various places.
Moreover, the Chief Commissioners/Commissioners of Customs have been requested
to ensure proper monitoring  of XOS statements and recovery of export incentives
availed against unrealized exports proceeds.

4
12. The Ministry have further stated that with a view to overcome  shortcomings in
recovery of export incentives availed against unrealized export proceeds, the RBI was
requested to consider inclusion of certain information/details in the XOS statements,
for instance, Shipping Bill No. & date, Nature of Shipping Bill (Scheme-wise), Date of
export, FOB value, Port of shipment (Customs Port Code), Commodity details, name of
exporter, IEC No. of exporters,  Details of Customs House Agent, extension granted,
write offs permitted, Amount of Forex realized and Outstanding Forex. RBI was also
requested to make the format of XOS Statement uniform having fixed number of
characters as well as to develop the forma in consultation with the Directorate General
(System), Customs & Central Excise & NIC.  Provision of XOS data in CDs to Customs
Houses for loading on to EDI systems, sending XOS data separately to each Custom
House in addition to the nodal Custom House and availability of XOS data on RBI
website for easy use and prompt decision making were also requested for consideration
of RBI. Further, in order to further improve the system, Directorate General (Systems &
Data Management) Customs & Central Excise was requested to consider suggestions
regarding EDI connectivity to all Customs Commissionerates and Central Excise,
extension of EDI facility to DGFT & RBI and upgradation of EDI system.
13. In a subsequent communication dated 1
st March, 2005, the Ministry have
informed the Committee that the RBI has rejected most of the above mentioned
suggestions on the ground that XOS has been designed primarily for the purpose of
fulfilling the obligation cast on the RBI under FEMA to follow up export realisation as
well as to meet their requirements to modify the XOS statement.   In this connection,
the Ministry of Finance have informed that the RBI have  directed the authorized
dealers not to report in the XOS Statements their outstanding exports of value upto
US $ 25000 or its equivalent falling due on 31.12.2004 and thereafter. The Ministry of
Finance have further informed in this regard that by virtue of the aforesaid RBI directive,
on an average 80 to 90 percent of the volume of export consignments would fall
outside the purview of the XOS and also  outside the monitoring mechanism for
realization of export proceeds.  The Ministry have conveyed their reservations on this
aspect to the RBI.  The RBI response is still awaited in this regard.
14. The Committee note that  pursuant to their recommendations, certain measures
are being initiated by the Ministry to prevent the lacunae in the expeditious recovery
of export incentives availed against unrealized export proceeds.  These measures
include Constitution of Coordination Committees by the nodal Customs Houses with
representatives of Customs, RBI, DGFT, prominent authorized dealer Banks and the
Directorate General of Systems (Customs & Central Excise).  The Chief
Commissioners/Commissioners of Customs are stated to have been requested to
ensure proper monitoring of XOS statements etc.   The Committee feel that this
belated but desirable step can eliminate avoidable delays in recovery of export incentives
availed against unrealised export proceeds if the proposed Committees meet frequently
and remove the identified bottlenecks.    Further,  continuous effective monitoring of
the XOS statements, being the prime instrument of control, is essential to identify
the defaulters.  The Committee hope that the momentum sought to be  initiated in this
regard would  not be lost at any point of time.

5
15. The Committee are however, disappointed to note that the RBI has rejected
most of the suggestions made by the Department of Revenue to modify the XOS on one
pretext or the other,  which, according to them, was essential to overcome the
shortcomings in the recovery of export incentives availed against unrealized export
proceeds.   RBI has expressed inability to make changes in the XOS  format as per the
suggestion of the Department of Revenue on the ground that XOS has been designed
primarily for the purpose of fulfilling the obligation cast on the RBI under FEMA to
follow up export realisation as well as to meet their requirements.  What has irked
the Committee more is the indifference and insensitivity on the part of RBI who have
outrightly rejected even some of the very basic and essential suggestions like hosting
the XOS data on the RBI website and  sending XOS data in CDs and to each Customs
House separately on the ground that the XOS data is programmed to be compatible
with their systems and they are not in favour of hosting the XOS data on their website.
The Ministry had informed the Committee on 1
st March, 2005 that they had conveyed
their reservation on these aspects to the RBI.  The Committee regret to observe that
the Ministry have not subsequently intimated to the Committee indicating any progress
in the matter till date.  The fact that the Ministry simply informed that RBI does not
agree to their proposal and no effort was made by them to sort out the differences, is
nothing but regrettable.  Further, it is a matter of great concern  that the RBI have
directed their Authorised dealers not to report in the XOS statements their outstanding
exports of value upto US $ 25, 000 or equivalent falling due on 31.12.2004 and
thereafter, which according to the Ministry would eventually result in around 80-
90% of the volume of export consignments falling outside the purview of the XOS.
The Ministry are understood to have conveyed their reservations to RBI on this
aspect too.  Inability of the Ministry and RBI to arrive at a consensus in revising the
XOS statement  and other related issues is deplorable particularly when some of the
exporters have been able to successfully circumvent the systems due to various
shortcomings that exist in the formation and transmission of the XOS statement.
The Committee would like the RBI to reconsider the suggestions made by the
Department of Revenue and, if necessary, discuss with them so that the efficacy of the
XOS statement is substantially enhanced and the oft-noticed problems of coordination
and cooperation is ironed out.
Export incentives availed but Proceeds unrealized
(Sl. No. 3, Paragraph 7.3)
16. In the aforesaid paragraph the Committee had highlighted irregularity of non-
realisation   of  export  proceeds  when incentives were availed of  by  exporters under
various schemes.  Neither Customs nor DGFT had taken action to recover the amount
of incentives amounting to Rs. 521.58 crore alongwith interest of Rs. 188.63 crore.
Exporter-wise analysis revealed that almost half of the outstanding forex was on account
of 20 firms which accounted for almost 60% of the duty benefits and half of the interest
due . The Committee were informed by the Ministry of Finance that they have issued
show-cause notices involving export incentives to the tune of Rs. 1338.90 crore, out of
which Rs. 108 crore have already been recovered DGFT have also informed that in
some of the cases recovery has been reported and in many cases the matter has been
referred to local administration for recovery and in some cases the units were ‘sick’ or

6
‘non-existent’.  The Committee had expressed the concern that such staggering amounts
of government revenue by way of export incentives availed on unrealized export
proceeds remained un-recovered.  Almost sixty per cent of the duty benefits and fifty
per cent of outstanding forex was against twenty firms, which indicated possibilities of
connivance rather than systemic flaws.  The Committee had therefore asked the
Department of Revenue to examine this festering issue thoroughly so that revenue
offenders do not go scot free.  The Committee had also recommended that the
government should consider suitably empowering the DGFT even by making statutory
changes, if necessary, so as to enable them to go the whole hog in effecting recoveries
from defaulting exporters instead of referring the cases to  District Administration time
and again which will only prolong the process to the obvious advantage of the defaulter.
17. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in their Action Taken Note
have stated:—
“The DGFT has informed that monitoring of export obligation (EO) is an item of
high priority in DGFT and that the same is being monitored  regularly.  The
export obligation under various schemes implemented by DGFT namely,
advance licence, EPCG, etc.  are being monitored carefully and promptly and
that MIS reports are being submitted to DGFT in the 1
st week of every month.
As for action taken against 20 firms which have failed  to realize  export proceeds,
it is reported that action has been taken in all the cases.  The present status of
cases against the 20 firms is given in Annexure-III.  One of the recommendations
of the PAC is that DGFT should be empowered even by making statutory
changes, if necessary, so as to enable them to effectively make recoveries from
defaulting exporters instead of referring the cases to District Administration
time and again.  The DGFT has informed that in pursuance of the
recommendations of PAC necessary steps have already been taken  in
consultation with the concerned  administrative Ministry/Deptt. for amending
Section 11 of the Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) Act’ 1992”.
18. The Committee had adversely commented upon the failure on the part of the
concerned agencies to recover export incentives along with interest thereon in case
of non-realisation of export proceeds.  The Ministry have tried  to explain by saying
that monitoring of export obligation is an item of high priority in DGFT  and the same
is being monitored regularly.   However, this contention is unacceptable as substantial
amount of Government revenue, by way of export incentives availed on unrealized
export proceeds, has remained unrecovered.    A perusal of the statement furnished by
the Ministry, indicating the present status of cases against each of the 20 firms,
which account for almost 60%  of the duty benefits and half of the interest thereon,
reveals that in several  cases the matter has been referred to the concerned land
revenue authorities for recovering the customs duty, penalty etc.   Similarly, in some
other cases, show cause notices have been issued for recovery of the outstanding
amount.   In this context, the Committee would like to impress upon the Ministry to
expedite the cases pending with the concerned land revenue authorities as well as
cases under show-cause notices so that huge amount of Government revenue, in
terms of export  incentives availed on outstanding export proceeds, does not remain
unrealised  for long.

7
The Committee note that pursuant to their recommendation, the Directorate
General of Foreign Trade has taken necessary steps in consultation with the concerned
administrative Ministry/Department for amending Section 11 of the Foreign Trade
(Development & Regulation) Act, 1992.   It is expected that the amendment would
leave no  scope of possibilities  of connivance as well as  systemic flaws.   The Committee
would like this amendment to be carried out expeditiously so that recovery of incentives
from defaulting exporters are made by DGFT promptly and effectively.
Writing off unrealised Export Bills
(Sl. No. 4, Para 7.4)
19. In their earlier Report,  the Committee had observed that during the period from
1995 to 2001 there were write-offs of unrealized export bills amounting to Rs. 229.61
crore allowed by the authorized dealer banks in contravention of the stipulated
conditions. Such write-off orders were endorsed to Customs/DGFT without ensuring
that the export incentives availed of in respect of these exports were surrendered.   The
RBI had also conceded that there would be a problem of reconciliation faced by the
Customs. Finding a glaring communication gap between the RBI on one side and the
Customs and the DGFT on the other, the Committee had recommended that the RBI
should play a proactive role keeping in view its mandate vis-à-vis  the Authorised
Dealer Banks in order to ensure surrender of export incentives before allowing
write-off of unrealised foreign exchange as per the stipulated condition.
20. The Ministry in their action taken notes have stated  that according  to RBI the
XOS statements prepared by Authorised Dealer (AD) Banks give the position of
outstanding exports as on June and December of each year which are being forwarded
to Customs authorities by the Regional Offices (ROs) of the RBI.   The RBI has
repeatedly emphasized in their APDIR circulars and also in the letters to their ROs that
all write-off, whether by RBI or AD would be subject to surrender of export incentives.
The last communication to the ADs in this regard was issued vide AP(DIR Series)
Circular No. 61 dated December 14, 2002 wherein they were advised to obtain
document(s) evidencing surrender of export incentives availed of before permitting
“write –off” for the relevant outstanding bills.
21. The Committee had emphasized in their earlier Report that the RBI,
commensurate with its mandate, should play a proactive role in impressing upon the
Authorised Dealer Banks to resort to write–off of unrealised foreign exchange only
after securing the surrender of export incentives.  The Committee are surprised  to
find that despite frequent reiteration  on the part of RBI  in their APDIR circulars and
also in the letters to their ROs that all write–offs whether by RBI or AD Banks would
be subject to surrender of export incentives, such write-off of unrealised export Bills
have amounted to Rs. 229.61 crore during the period from 1995 to 2001, in
contravention of the stipulated conditions. RBI is stated to have issued APDIR circulars
and letters to their RO’s advising to obtain document (s) evidencing surrender of
export incentives availed of before permitting write off for the relevant outstanding
Bills.  The Committee feel that mere advice by RBI to its Regional Offices as well as
to the Authorised Dealer Banks in this regard will not yield the desired result, until
and unless stringent measures are initiated by RBI against its defaulting ROs and

8
Authorised Dealer Banks, whenever cases of violation of the stipulated conditions in
this regard are brought to its notice.   Appropriate deterrant/penal action should have
been taken against the Regional Offices & Authorised Dealer Banks for violating
the prescribed norms in this regard.  The Committee feel that it is high time that the
RBI ensured strict adherence to the prescribed norm by the ROs  and AD Banks so
that surrender of export incentives is actually obtained before permitting any
write-offs for the outstanding bills.   The Committee hope that RBI would sensitise
itself to the need of the hour and would, at least now, take appropriate steps so that the
country does not lose its share of foreign exchange in future.

CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY GOVERNMENT
Recommendation (Para No. 7.3)
Yet another irregularity revealed by test checked cases by audit was non-realisation
of export proceeds when incentives were availed under various schemes. According
to Audit, neither Customs nor DGFT had taken action to recover the amount of
incentives amounting to Rs. 521.58 crore alongwith interest of Rs. 188.63 crore. Exporter-
wise analysis revealed that almost half of the outstanding forex was on account of
20 firms which accounted for almost 60% of the duty benefits and half of the interest
due. The Committee were informed by the Ministry of Finance that the status of
non-realization of export proceeds keeps on changing. However, they have issued
show-cause notice involving export incentives to the tune of Rs. 1338.90 crore, out
of which Rs. 108 crore have already been recovered. DGFT have also informed the
status of cases where export incentive other than drawback were availed by the
defaulting exporters. According to them, in some of the cases recovery has been
reported, in many cases the matter has been referred to local administration for
recovery and in some cases the units were 'sick' or 'non-existent'. The Department of
Revenue have, as a follow up of oral evidence, directed all the Chief Commissioners/
Commissioners of customs to constitute coordination Committees consisting of
representatives of RBI, authorized dealer banks, DGFT and Customs for conducting
quarterly meetings for improving the system of recovery from defaulting exporters.
The Secretary (Revenue) during evidence conceded that the XOS  statement lacked
the requisite information which they were trying to reconcile with RBI. The
Committee are dismayed to note that such staggering amounts of governments
revenue by way of export incentives availed on unrealized export proceeds remain
unrecovered. It is also surprising that almost sixty per cent of the duty benefits and
fifty per cent of outstanding forex was against twenty firms only thereby suggestions
possibilities of connivance rather than systemic flaws. Keeping this in view, the
Committee, therefore, would like the Department of Revenue to examine this
festering issue thoroughly so that revenue offenders do not go scot free. As regards
the recovery of incentives from defaulting exporters to be made by DGFT, the
Committee recommend that the government should consider suitably empowering
the DGFT even by making statutory changes, if necessary, so as to enable them to go
the whole hog in effecting recoveries from defaulting exporters instead of referring
the cases to District Administration time and again which will only prolong the
process to the obvious advantage of the defaulter. The recoveries to be made by
Customs should also be effected in a time-bound manner by taking vigorous and
effective steps.
9

10
Action Taken Note
The DGFT has informed that monitoring of export obligation (EO) is an item of
high priority in DGFT and that the same of being monitored regularly. The export
obligation under various schemes implemented by the DGFT namely, advance licence,
EPCG , etc. are being monitored carefully and promptly and that MIS reports are
being submitted to DGFT in the 1
st week of every month.
2. As for action taken against 20 firms which have failed to realize export
proceeds, it is reported that action has been taken in all the cases. The present status
of cases against the 20 firms is given in Annexure-III.
3. One of the recommendations of the PAC is that DGFT should be empowered
even by making statutory changes, if necessary, so as to enable them to effectively
make recoveries from defaulting exporters instead of referring the cases to District
Administration time and again. The DGFT has informed that is pursuance of the
recommendations of PAC necessary steps have already been taken in consultation
with the concerned administrative Ministry/Deptt. for amending Section 11 of the
Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) Act, 1992.

ANNEXURE III
Details of Individual Cases
S.No. 1 of Para 3.6—M/s J.T.S. Technology Limited
It has been reported by the Chief Commissioner of Customs, Chennai that the
unit falls under the jurisdiction of Development Commissioner MEPZ, and it has
been closed. The Letter of Undertaking given to the Development Commissioner
towards non-realisation of foreign exchange and non-fulfillment of export obligation
has not been enforced till date as the firm is under liquidation.
S.No. 2 of Para 3.6—M/s Wool Worth
It has been reported by the Chief Commissioner of Customs, Kolkata that out of
Rs. 156.72 crore, foreign exchange of Rs. 154.07 crore has already been realized.
Further, it has been reported by the RBI that the case is under investigation by the
Enforcement Directorate. No extension has been granted after 30.9.2002.
S.No. 3 of Para 3.6—M/s Sabara Impex
It has been reported by DGFT that the firm had not availed of any DEEC benefit
against the shipping bills mentioned in the audit memo. It is been further stated that in
respect of exports covered by the said shipping bills, the foreign exchange has been
realized.
S.No. 4 of Para 3.6—M/s Viplav Trading
It has been reported by DGFT that the firm had not availed of any DEEC benefit
agaisnt the shipping bills mentioned in the audit memo. It is been further stated that in
respect of exports covered by the said shipping bills, the foreign exchange has been
realized.
S.No. 5 of Para 3.6—M/s Rajindra Brothers
It has been reported by DGFT that 47 shipping bills of the exporter involving
foreign exchange of Rs. 46.46 crore remained unrealized beyond the stipulated period.
The competent authority issued the show cause notice and adjudicated the case
imposing penalty of Rs. 23 crore on 24.3.2003. the case has been referred to the land
revenue authority for recovering the customs duty, penalty etc.
S.No. 6 of Para 3.6—M/s Orchid Chemicals & Pharmaceuticals
It has been reported by the Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise, Tambaram
Division, Chennai that the exporter has realized the Foreign Exchange in respect of the
Shipping Bills involved in the Audit Objection. The exporter has also furnished
documents in proof of the same.
11

12
S.No. 7 of Para 3.6—M/s  Harshita Organics
It has been reported by DGFT that 127 shipping bills of the exporter involving
foreign exchange of Rs. 48.85 crore remained unrealized beyond the stipulated
period. The competent authority issued show cause notice and adjudicated the
case imposing penalty of Rs. 18 crore alongwith interest of Rs. 7.82 crore on
21.3.2003. The case has been referred to the land revenue authority for recovering
customs duty, penalty etc.
S.No. 8 of Para 3.6—M/s DSO Software Ltd, Chennai
RBI vide letter No NRF/AD667/10.19.0099/2003 dated 17.3.2003 has intimated that
the firm has no outstanding foreign exchange towards realization as per XOS statement
for the half year ended on 31.12.2002.
S.No. 9 of Para 3.6—M/s Kanhaiya Exports, Kolkata
It has been reported by DGFT that nothing remains outstanding/unrealized in respect
of the firm.
S.No. 10 of Para 3.6—M/s Premier Vinyl Flooring
It has been reported by DGFT that 201 shipping bills of the exporter involving
foreign exchange of Rs. 64.36 crore remained unrealized beyond the stipulated period.
The competent authority issue show cause notice and adjudicated the case imposing
penalty of Rs. 20 crore on 11.12.2002. The case has been referred to the land revenue
authority for recovery of customs duty, penalty etc. The Chief Commissioner of
Customs, Delhi has also reported that action against the exporter was initiated to
recover the duty amount of Rs. 3.84 crore for not fulfilling the export obligation by
issuing a Show Cause Notice and confirming the demand through the process of
adjudication. In this case, certificate action under Section 142 of Customs Act, 1962
has been initiated to recover the duty. In another case of the same exporter a show
cause notice has been issued for recovery of an amount of Rs, 30,15,954/- which is
under adjudication.
S.No. 11  of Para  3.6—M/s Beeta Exports, Delhi
It has been reported by DGFT  that 80  shipping bills of the exporter involving
foreign exchange  of Rs. 33.99  crore remained unrealized beyond the stipulated
period. The  competent authority issued the show cause notice and  adjudicated
the case imposing penalty  of Rs. 11  crore alongwith interest of Rs. 4.72 crore. The
case has been referred to the land revenue authority for recovering customs duty,
penalty, etc.
S. No. 13 of Para 3.6—M/s Fab Worth
It has been reported  by  the Chief Commissioner of Customs, Kolkata that
out of Rs. 25.60  crore of unrealized foreign exchange, Rs. 22.90  crore  has
already  been realized. Further it has been reported by  the RBI  that the case is
under investigation by the Directorate of Enforcement. No extension has been
granted after September, 2002.

13
S. No. 14 of Para 3.6—M/s G.R. Magnets, Kolkata
It has been reported by DGFT  that since the firm did not furnish documentary proof
of realization of the sale proceeds, adjudication proceedings etc. were initiated against
the firm and a penalty amounting to Rs. 11.55  crore has been imposed. The case has
been referred to the land revenue authority for recovering customs duty, penalty, etc.
S. No. 15 of Para 3.6— M/s Sol Pharmaceuticals Ltd., Hyderabad
It has  been reported by DGFT  that the company has become sick and all their
outstanding cases have been taken for adjudication under the ECA
(enforcement-cum-adjudication) angle. It has been further reported that 8  cases have
been referred to EOM  (export obligation  monitoring)  and 69  show cause  notices are
under  adjudication. It has been further added that 76  show cause notices have been
adjudicated imposing penalty of Rs. 172.74  crore.  Further progress will be intimated in
due course.
S. No. 16 of Para 3.6—M/s Sahil  Trends
It has been reported by DGFT  that 38  shipping bills of the firm involving foreign
exchange of Rs. 25.76  crore remained unrealized beyond the stipulated period. The
competent authority issued  the Show Cause Notice and adjudicated the case imposing
penalty of Rs. 13  crores. The case has been referred to the land  revenue authority for
recovering customs duty, penalty, etc.
S. No. 17  of Para 3.6—M/s M.S. Shoes
It has been reported by DGFT  that 33  shipping bills  of the firm involving foreign
exchange of Rs. 22.08  crore remained unrealized beyond the stipulated period. The
competent authority issued the Show Cause Notice and adjudicated the case imposing
penalty  of Rs. 11 crore. The case has been referred to the land revenue authority for
recovering customs duty, penalty, etc.
S. No. 18 of Para 3.6—M/s Dr. Reddy's Laboratories Ltd., Hyderabad
It has been reported by DGFT  that foreign exchange has been realized in  respect of
36  shipping bills and in respect of 52  shipping bills DEPB  benefits have been
surrendered. The firm has surrendered SIL against 7 shipping bills pertaining to Russian
exports. It has been further reported that out of the remaining 33  shipping bills,
8  shipping bills  pertain to drawback. It has been further stated that foreign exchange
unrealized GRs are  25  and the Jt DGFT, Hyderabad has demanded one percent of the
total FOB  value (Rs. 1,60,230)  in lieu of SIL for  regularization as per the policy. It has
also been informed that the firm vide their letter dated 19.1.2003  has submitted pay
order for the said amount.
S. No. 19 of Para 3.6— M/s Shanti Associated
It has been reported by DGFT that 28  shipping bills of the firm involving foreign
exchange of Rs. 14.55  crore remained unrealized beyond  the stipulated period. The
competent authority adjudicated the case imposing penalty of Rs. 7  crores. The case
has been referred to the land revenue authority to recover customs duty. penalty, etc.

14
S. No. 20 of Para 3.6—M/s Yatin Prints
It has been reported by the Chief Commissioner of Customs, Delhi that a Demand
notice of Rs. 1,19,69,366/- has been issued  to M/s. Yatin Prints. It has been further
reported that Certificate Action has been taken against the exporter.
Recommendation (Para No. 7.5)
The Committee find that Reserve Bank of India can grant short extensions for
realization of foreign exchange, if it is satisfied that the exporter will be able to realize
proceeds in the extended period. Extension can ordinarily be granted if RBI is convinced
that the exporter is in no way responsible for the delay in realization of proceeds. Audit
scrutiny, however, revealed cases where realization  was pending for several years
without extension orders. There were  certain cases wherein extension were granted
for a period upto five  (05) years but the exporters had not been able to realize the
proceeds even after the expiry of extended periods. Audit  scrutiny also revealed that
RBI granted extension in 873 cases and export proceeds amounting to Rs. 199 crore
were pending realization for upto 22 years. Astonishingly, RBI was unaware of the
findings of the audit. They had no information of the cases until the examination of the
subject by the Committee at Mumbai in the month of November, 2002 during the
course of their study visit. During evidence, the representative of RBI, while conceding
that 873  cases were pending for 22 years, stated that there were only 119  cases now
pending involving an amount of Rs. 6  crore. The Committee would expect RBI  to
accord top most priority to such cases henceforth. The Committee recommended that
in future RBI  should grant extensions judiciously and in accordance with the RBI
manual. On the question of XOS  not  containing particulars of extensions, the RBI
have tried to shift the responsibility to the   various bank branches all  over the
country, who are stated to be reporting the facts incorrectly. The Committee find this
response rather lackadaisical and would now  expect the RBI  to streamline their
systems of reporting and control both internal as  well as external so that extensions of
time for realization of foreign exchange are judiciously permitted and duly reflected in
the XOS statement, which remains the key and the only document available for use by
all the agencies concerned. The XOS  may also  be amended suitably to be a
comprehensive and efficacious document containing  all the relevant particulars, namely,
export incentives availed, write-offs and extensions permitted etc.
Action Taken Note
RBI  has stated that the extension of time for realization of export proceeds is
granted by RBI  or AD  only if realization of exports is beyond  the control of the
exporter.  In case the overseas buyer does not pay/delay  payment to the Indian
exporter, the latter is generally helpless and such cases have to be treated as any other
bad debt. Extension is normally granted for three to six months at a time. However, in
the case of exports to countries with 'externalization' problems (where  the bill has been
paid in local currency but not repatriated due to foreign exchange problems of the
importing country)  extension for five years is granted so as to avoid repeated paper
work for  the exporter and the AD. The discretionary powers are therefore used
judiciously keeping in view the circumstances of each  case.

15
It  has been further stated that ADs  have been sensitized through workshops and
communications from ROs, regarding the need for timely and error free reporting in
XOS statements. Regional Offices of RBI  have also  been advised in various  forums
and through DO  letters to give top priority to this item of work. Regarding the
Committee's  suggestion to amend the XOS  to include particulars of export incentives
availed, RBI  has clarified that incentives are disbursed/granted  to the exporter directly
and the AD  handling export documents of the exporter may not be aware if an exporter
has availed incentives, for any particular export shipment. Hence, details of export
incentives are not incorporated in the XOS statement.
Recommendation (Para No. 7.6)
 The Committee note that the instances of export frauds including over-invoicing,
fictious exports and irregular availment of incentives, have taken place. The
representative of the Ministry during evidence tried to brush aside this issue and
sought to present a rosy picture by observing that only "a small portion of the total
export repatriation, which should have come, is not accounted for", and that "no
matter what scheme there is or what order there is, we cannot say that there would not
be one or two abuses, frauds take place and people keep on forging things". However,
the Department of Revenue in a written communication reported 154 cases of export
frauds during 2002-2003 on misuse of various incentive schemes like Drawback/DEPB
etc.  involving an amount of Rs. 62.83 crore. According to the Ministry, the investigation
in all these cases have been completed by local Custom Houses and Directorate of
Revenue Intelligence and during the year 18 persons have been arrested and 14 have
been detained under the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of
Smuggling Activites Act, 1974. The Ministry have also assured the Committee that
they will endeavor through various agencies to see that the schemes are used only for
the purpose for which these were intended. The Committee are of the considered view
that the incidences of export fraud is not as inconsequential as projected by the
Chairman CBEC. They do not approve of such a causal approach of the Department on
such serious matters impinging not only on government revenue but also on the
Government policy to promote exports as an engine of economic growth. The Committee
recommend that Government should gear-up their enforcement machinery to prevent
fraudulent exports and consequent leakage of export incentives. The Committee would
expect the Ministry to ensure that the benefits of the schemes announced by them
accrue to the deserving persons for which these were intended and not cornered by
unscrupulous elements.
Action Taken Note
DGFT has stated that to deal with exporters who default in fulfilment of export
obligation under various export promotion schemes Enforcement Division  of DGFT
has issued detailed guidelines vide circular dated 31.12.2003. A copy of the said Circular
is enclosed as Annexure-IV. In this connection DGFT has been requested to consider
the following additional suggestions in order to prevent export related frauds:—
(i) The bonafides and antecedents of the exporters may be thoroughly checked/
verified before granting IEC Codes/BIN Numbers.

16
(ii) An yearly summary of all Alert Notices issued by DGFT may be circulated to
all the Commissionerates of Customs.
In the recent past, the Customs and DRI have detected serveral cases of export
related frauds and show cause notices have been issued to the offenders. Besides
issue of show cause notices denying the unintended export benefits, arrests and
preventive detentions under COFEPOSA have also been made in deserving cases.

ANNEXURE IV
F.No. 18/24/HQ/99-2000/ECA-II
DIRECTORATE GENERAL OF FOREIGN TRADE
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE & INDUSTRY
Udyog Bhavan, New Delhi
Enforcement Division
To
All Port Offices
Mumbai Date: December 31, 2003
S
UBJECT: Guidelines for maintaining the denied entities list (DEL)
The Denied Entities List (earlier called Black List) is drawn under the provision of
Rule 7 of Foreign Trade (Regulation) Rules 1993 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules').
A total of 14 conditions have been described for invocation under sub-Rule 7 (1)
before a firm can be refused a license. The licensing authorities may deny license to a
person if any one or more of the above referred conditions are satisfied. Besides under
sub-Rule 7(2) of the Rules, the refusal of a license under sub-Rule 7(1) shall be without
prejudice to any action that may be taken against an applicant by the licensing authority
under the Foreign Trade (Development & Regulation) Act, 1992 (hereinafter referred to
as "the Act"). The word 'license' has been defined under sub-section 2(g) of the Act.
These conditions cover a vast variety of offences/contraventions leading to refusal of
licensee to an entity. Guidelines in this regard were last issued vide enforcement
guidelines No. 5/99-2000 dated 3.7.2000 with these guidelines, the said circular as well
as the standing instructions issued earlier, if any, stand repealed.
A. General instances leading to refusal of license
Even though the conditions prescribed under Rule 7 of the Rules are comprehensive
and will constitute the basis of any denial of license, a brief description of most
common instances has been given below:
1. Generally most common instance of action leading to refusal of license
occurs when firms default in Export Obligation (e.o.) fulfilment
committee under various export promotion schemes. The licensing
authorities in sub-cases will place the firm in DEL after serving a demand
notice to the entity to submit evidence of e.o. fulfilment within a resonable
time. This demand notice shall indicate that the firms' inability to submit
documents with prescribed duration will lead to refusal of license under
Rule 7 of the Rules and the firm's name will be placed in the DEL
Subsequent to the action of placing the firm in the DEL, file will be
transferred to the enforcement division for investigations/adjudications.
17

18
2. Instances have come to notice when external agencies such as DRI, CBI,
ED etc. request for information in connection with some investigations or
sometimes recommend licensing authorities to withhold further licensing
facilities to the firms under investigation. In such cases if routine information
has been called for, the same should be provided. If recommendations to
suspend/cancel licenses are also contained in the communication then the
information supplied should be adequately examined from the point of view
denial of benefits under the Rules/Act. If evidence is found to be insufficient,
agencies may be informed that more evidence will be needed before denial of
the benefits can be pronounced under the Rules/Acts and will mention the
reasons why the licensing authority thinks that  there is no sufficient evidence
to invoke rules relating to the refusal of license. If external agencies have
supplied evidence to the satisfaction of the licensing authority, he shall place
the firm in the DEL after issuing a speaking order against the erring firm
without disclosing the source of information in the denial order.
3. Sub-rule 7(1) (c) of the Rules deals with cases of fraud and mis-declaration.
Whenever it comes to the notice of  the licensing authority that a license has
been obtained by fraud, forgery, mis-declaration etc., the firm shall be
immediately placed in the DEL by issuing an order and licensing authority shall
also suspend the IE Code of the firm. The head of the office will thereafter
enquire into the case and submit the report within 15 days to the Headquarters
to indicate if connivance of any officials was found in perpetrating the fraud.
Simultaneously complaint under the Indian Penal Code for fraud/forgery will be
lodged with the local police. In cases where head of the office was a party to the
decision to grant the license, the file shall immediately be sent to Headquarters.
B. Suspension, cancellation of a license
The procedure and policy leading to suspension and cancellation of licenses shall
be governed by Section 9 of the Act read with Rule 9 (suspension) and Rule 10
(cancellation) of the Rules.
C. Right to be heard before passing an order
The powers related to refusal, suspension or cancellation of licenses will also
require, as is the case while exercising any executive authority under the statute. Strict
adherence to the principle of natural justice. Implying thereby that licensing authority
will refuse, suspend or cancel any license after giving the holder of  license a  reasonable
opportunity of being heard and thereafter by passing reasoned  order to be recorded
in writing.
D. DEL Management Procedures
1. The DEL order will explicitly mention that an appeal against the refusal
license will lie under Section 15 of the Act.
2. The DEL maintained by port offices will contain names of the firms, the
registered office address including those of branch offices, names of  the partners,
proprietor, directers and their residential addresses alongwith IEC No. of the

19
firm and will be maintained as a computerized database Licensing benefits
will not only be denied to the firms as legal entities but also to the individuals/
persons owning/controlling these entities.
3. A centralized computerized data  is being prepared at the Headquarters
and port offices shall be required to manage the respective DEL components
as per the authorization protocol to be announced separately.
4. The order removing any entity from the DEL will likewise be a speaking order
by the listening authority mentioning the grounds of removal.
This issues with the approval of the DGFT.
Sd/-
(P. C. TRIPATHI)
Jt. Director General of Foreign Trade

CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
RECEIVED FROM GOVERNMENT
- NIL -
20

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation (Para No. 7.1)
In terms of Reserve Bank of India regulation, every exporter is  required to realize
and repatriate full export value of goods or software within six months from the date of
export. The Exim Policy (2002-07) also provides for realization of export proceeds and
renders the exporter liable to action in the event of his failure to do so. The provisions
of the Customs Act, 1962 and the Customs & Central Excise Duties Drawback Rules,
1995 also provide for recovery of amount of drawback paid to the exporter on the
export of goods manufactured in India wherever export proceeds in respect of such
exports have not been realized within the stipulated period. Such plenary enabling
provisions notwithstanding, Audit review as reported n chapter 3 of Report No. 10 of
2002(Indirect Taxes—Customs) of C&AG of India has brought into light the incidence
of non-repatriation of foreign exchange aggregating to a whopping Rs. 11,735 crore as
on June 2000, two third of which remained outstanding for more than two years. A
major portion of this amount involved exports where export incentives were availed by
the exporters According to the Ministry of Finance, the total amount of export bills
outstanding  beyond 180 days as on 30 June, 2003 comes to Rs. 19440.79 crore. The
Committee are alarmed at such a grim scenario wherein the Government's policy to
facilitate, promote and sustain growth in the country's exports get derailed by the
inability of the administrative and regulatory machinery to monitor and ensure full
realization of the proceeds from our exports. The Committee seek a factual report from
the Government on this issue stating the current pending position (beyond the
stipulated period) of the unrealized export proceeds, mentioning separately the quantum
of proceeds where export incentives have been availed specifying the proportion
thereof.
Action Taken Note
The RBI has reported that the export outstanding as on 31.12.2003 is
Rs. 20930.74 crore (which is cumulative figure of outstanding) against realization
of Rs. 330555.79 crore during the year ended on 31.12.2003 which works out to
only 6% of the export realization.
2.The DGFT has reported that the total outstanding foreign exchange against which
export incentives namely DEEC & DEPB schemes have been availed are 3660.17 crore
as on 31.12.2003. The reports received from the field formations of Customs show that
the total outstanding export proceeds against which drawback has been availed of
comes to Rs. 757.62 crore as on 31.12.2003.
21

22
Recommendation (Para No. 7.2)
The Committee note that the pivotal role in monitoring of realization of foreign
exchange against exports has been entrusted to the RBI. All authorized dealers of
foreign exchange are required to furnish to the RBI, half-yearly a consolidated statement
called Export Outstanding Statement (XOS) giving details of all export bills outstanding
beyond the period prescribed for realization within 15 days from the close of the half
year i.e. June/December. In case the bills remain outstanding for more than six months
from the date of shipment, the authorized Dealers are required to take up the matter
with the exporters and report the same to the RBI, which has the power to put the
defaulting exporters on the caution-list and further refer the cases for investigation to
the Enforcement Directorate. In spite of these regulations several shortcomings in the
XOS format and statement have been brought to light by the audit scrutiny. XOS
statement being the prime instrument of control, any deficiency in their formations and
transmission is likley to adversely impact the effectiveness of the administrative
machinery. Weak monitoring has been cited by Audit as a major reason for the incidence
of non-realization of foreign exchange by exporters. The RBI has informed the Committee
that the matter has been taken up with the Directorate of Systems, Customs and
Central Excise to incorporate the relevant codes containing the details pointed out by
audit. The Department of Revenue informed the Committee that prior to examination of
the subject by the Committee, the receipts of XOS in the Custom Houses were not
regularly monitored. It was also conceded by Secretary (Revenue) during evidence
that there were shorfalls in the monitoring system. However, they have now toned up
the system of coordination with the RBI to ensure timely receipt of XOS. The Committee
expect a marked improvement in the efficacy of XOS as an instrument of control from
next XOS onwards. The Committee also hope that the RBI would pay greater attention
to the aspects of monitoring of realization of foreign exchange/export proceeds in
fulfillment of its statutory responsibility. According to the RBI they have initiated a
process of workshops to be jointly conducted with Customs and local offices of DGFT
to explain to the banks the rationale of submission of correct and speedy data. The
Committee desire that the Ministry of Finance should assume the responsibility of
nodal agency so that the lingering problem of coordination and cooperation is ironed
out. On the question of not maintaining records by the Custom Houses as pointed out
by Audit, the Committee observe that leaving aside Delhi, no other Commissionerate
block the payment of drawback in their EDI system and the EDI environment has not
been utilized for effectively monitoring realization of export proceeds and linking it
with the incentives availed. The Committee recommend that the connectivity to the
EDI system should be streamlined so that the monitoring of realization of export proceeds
is linked with the incentives availed.
Action Taken Note
The system of receipt of XOS statements and consequent recovery of export
incentives availed against unrealised export proceeds has  been thoroughly reviewed
in consultation with the field formations of Customs and DG (Systems & Data
Management), Customs & Central Excise to increase the efficacy of XOS statement in
order to recover the export incentives in case of non-realization of foreign exchange.

23
Some of the Commissionerates have reported late receipt of the XOS statements as the
reasons for not being able to take timely action to recover export incentives availed
against unrealized export proceeds. It has also been brought to the notice of the
Ministry that one of the major hurdles that comes in the way of recovery of drawback
amount from exporters where export proceeds are not realized within the stipulated
period is due to incorrect addresses mentioned in the Shipping Bills. In certain cases
where the address is correct, the exporter is found to have closed down from the
declared address. Another problem is where the exporters do not submit any copy of
invoice/other documents to their bankers and undertake exports. They are able to
successfully circumvent the system as, due to non submission of copies of shipping
bills/invoices to their bankers, their names do not appear in the XOS statement published
and circulated by RBI. It has also been reported that the frauds related to claim for
drawback are often committed by exporters who undertake exports for a short period
under one firm and then abandon the firm to float a new firm with new names of
proprietors etc. Keeping in view the shortcomings in recovery of export incentives
availed against unrealized export proceeds the RBI has been requested to consider
inclusion of the following information/details in the XOS statement:—
(a) Shipping Bill No. & date
(b) Nature of Shipping Bill. (Scheme-wise)
(c) Date of Export
(d) FOB Value
(e) Port of shipment (Customs Port code)
(f) Commodity details
(g) Name of Exporter
 (h) IEC No. of Exporter
(i) Details of Customs House Agent
(j) Extensions Granted
(k) Write offs permitted
(l) Amount of Forex realized
(m) Outstanding Forex
2. Apart from incorporation of the aforesaid details/information in the XOS statement
RBI has been requested to consider the following suggestions:—
(a) The format of XOS statement may be made uniform having fixed number of
columns for each character. The format may be developed in consultation
with the Director General (Systems), Customs & Central Excise & NIC.
(b) XOS data may be sent to Custom Houses in CDs which can be loaded on to
EDI system.
(c) XOS data may be sent to each Custom House separately apart from sending
them to the nodal Custom House.
(d) XOS data may be made available on RBI website which should be compatible
with EDI data base format for easy use and prompt decision making.
(e) It has been observed that some of the exporters are not presenting the Shipping

24
Bills/Invoices to the AD banks and as a result, information regarding non-
realization of such exports is not being forwarded to RBI  for compilation of
XOS statement. Consequently, such cases do not figure in XOS statement.
The RBI should, therefore, adopt a mechanism to receive the Shipping Bill
data of various Ports/Airports through the Customs ICEGATE System. The
same data can be stored AD Code-wise and forwarded either through CDs
and E-mailed to the respective Authorized Dealers. The XOS statement then
would include cases of un-realized export proceeds even if the exporter do
not submit documents to the banks.DG (Systems & Data management) has
reported that an option has now been provided in the ICES system which
enables the Custom Houses to block disbursement of drawback amount to
the exporters identified as defaulters in the XOS statement. There is an option
to block the disbursal to the extent of benefit accrued on the amount
outstanding against the exporter. In order to further improve the system the
Director General (Systems & Data Management) Customs & Central Excise
has been requested to consider the following suggestions:—
(i) EDI connectivity may be provided to all the Commissionerates of
Customs and Commissionerates of Customs & Central Excise.
(ii) The scope of EDI facility may be extended and on-line connectivity
with DGFT and RBI may be provided so that wrongful/fraudulent claims
of various export incentives could be checked.
(iii) EDI system may be upgraded so as to provide foreign exchange
realization details against each shipping bill. In that eventualty wherever
such realization details are not forthcoming, the concerned exporters
can be taken to the 'Caution List’.
4. In pursuance of the recommendations of the PAC, Coordination Committees
have been constituted by the nodal Custom Houses with the representatives of
Customs, RBI, DGFT, prominent authorized dealer banks and the Diretorate General of
Systems (Customs & Central Excise). In this regard a detailed  Circular was issued by
the Department of Revenue vide F.No. 603/30/2002-DBK dated 21.1.2003. A copy of the
same is enclosed as Annexure-I. In accordance with the instructions contained therein
meetings of the Coordination Committees are being held from time to time at various
places. In order to properly monitor XOS statements and to recover export incentives
availed against unrealised exports proceeds the aforesaid instructions have been
reiterated vide letter F.No.603/30/2002-DBK dated 9.12.2004. Vide the aforesaid
instructions the Chief Commissioners/Commissioners of Customs have been requested
to ensure that the instructions contained in the letter dated 21.1.2003 are followed
scrupulously. A copy of the aforesaid instructions dated 9.12.2004 is enclosed as
Annexure-II.

ANNEXURE I
F.No. 603/30/2002-DBK
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE & COMPANY AFFAIRS
Department of Revenue
New Delhi, the 21st. January, 2003.
To
All the Chief Commissioners of Customs,
All the Commissioners of Customs
The Director General of Systems (Customs & Central Excise, New Delhi.)
Sir,
 S
UBJECT:- Non-realisation of export proceeds—Need for effective monitoring.
Attention is invited to Rule 16A of the Customs & Central Excise Duties Drawback
Rules, 1995 which prescribes measures for recovery of drawback from the exporters in
the event of non-realisation export proceeds within the period/extended period allowed
by the Reserve Bank of India. Attention is also invited to this Ministry's Circulars
No.5/97-Customs dated 4.2.1997 (F.No. 602/5/91-DBK) and No. 30/97-Customs dated
12.8.1997 (F.No. 602/5/91-DBK) outlining the actions to be initiated by the Custom
Houses in this regard on receipt of Export Outstanding Statement (XOS) from the
Reserve Bank of India.
2. During the course of Oral Evidence held on 17th December, 2002 the Public
Accounts Committee have expressed serious concern about non-realisation of sale
proceeds on exports made under various export promotion schemes including drawback
(as detailed in Chapter 3 of the Report of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India for
the year ended March, 2001) and have emphasised the need for recovery of export
incentives alongwith interest from the defaulting exporters.
3. In deference to the concern of the Public Accounts Committee, the existing
system of initiating proceedings for recovery of export incentives has been reviewed
in detail and it has been observed that inter alia  increasing the efficacy of XOS
Statements from the R.B.I., reference of the export promotion scheme and the port of
export in XOS Statements and confirmation regarding fulfillment of export obligations
and information regarding issue of redemption certificate are the arrears which need to
be beefed up on priority basis.
4. With this backdrop, therefore, it has been decided to the tone up the existing
coordination mechanism amongst the concerned departments/organisations namely
25

26
Customs, DGFT, RBI and prominent Authorised Dealer Banks. The zonal Chief
Commissioner of Customs are, therefore, requested to ensure:—
(i) Constitution of a Co-Ordination Committee (consisting of representatives of
the Customs Deptt., D.G.F.T, R.B.I, prominent authorised Dealer Bank and the
Directorate General of Systems) (Customs & Central Excise), on regular basis.
(ii) Convening of the meetings of the Co-Ordination Committee on quarterly
basis.
(iii) Examination of the findings of the Committee for taking requisite remedial
steps within the ambit of the existing rules/schemes at his level and in co-
ordination with the concerned agencies/Deptt.
(iv)  Submission of suggestions, if considered necessary, for amending/clarifying
the existing rules/schemes inter alia to this Ministry for consideration and
issue of suitable amendment/clarification.
(v) Submission of detailed report (including the statistical report regarding the
no. of cases in which foreign exchange has not been realised, amount of
drawback/duty incentive granted and status of the action taken for  recovery
of drawback/duty incentive from the defaulting exporters) to this Ministry
within a month of the meeting of the Co-Ordination Committee.
Receipt of this letter may please be acknowledged.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(S.S. Renjhen)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India
Copy to:-
1. The Reserve Bank of India, Exchange Control Department Central Office,
Central Office Bldg. Fort, Mumbai-400 001.
 2. The Director General of foreign Trade, Udyog Bhawan, New Delhi.
Sd/-
(S.S. Renjhen).
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India

ANNEXURE II
F.No. 603/30/2002-DBK
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE & COMPANY AFFAIRS
Department of Revenue
New Delhi, the 9th December, 2004.
To
All the Chief Commissioners of Customs.
All the Chief Commissioners of Customs & Central Excise.
All Commissioners of Customs.
Sir/Madam,
S
UBJECT:- Non-realisation of export proceeds—Need for effective monitoring.
   The Public Accounts Committee in their 61st report on Non-Realisation of Foreign
exchange has taken adverse note of instances of export frauds including over-invoicing,
fictitious exports and irregular availment of incentives and has recommended that the
Government should gear-up their enforcement machinery to prevent fraudulent exports
and consequent leakage of export incentives. The Committee has desired that steps
may be taken to ensure that the benefits of the export promotion schemes accrue to the
deserving persons for which these were intended and not cornered by unscrupulous
elements. The Committee has also desired that the Ministry of  Finance should assume
the responsibility of nodal agency so that the lingering problem of coordination and
cooperation among various agencies viz. RBI, DGFT and Customs is ironed out.
2. In this connection, it may be recollected that the Ministry vide letter F.No.603/30/
2002-DBK dated 21.1.2003 had brought to your notice the concern expressed by the
Public Accounts Committee in regard to non-realization of export proceeds and had
emphasized the need to take timely action for recovery of export incentives from the
defaulting exporters. In that context the Zonal Chief Commissioners were assigned the
following responsibilities:—
(i) Constitution of a Co-ordination Committee (consisting of representatives of
the Customs Deptt; D.G .F.T, prominent Authorized Dealer Bank and the
Directorate General (Systems & Data Management), Customs & Central Excise.
(ii) Convening of the meetings of  the Co-ordination Committee on quarterly
basis.
 (iii) Examination of the findings of the Committee for taking requisite remedial
steps within the ambit of the existing rules/schemes at his level and in
co-ordination with the concerned agencies/Deptt.
27

28
(iv) Submission of suggestions, if considered necessary, for amending/clarifying
the existing rules/schemes inter alia to this Ministry for consideration and
issue of suitable amendment/clarification.
(v) Submission of detailed report (including the statistical report regarding the
number of cases in which foreign exchange has not been realized, amount of
drawback/duty incentive granted and status of the action taken for recovery
of drawback/duty incentive from the defaulting exporters) to this Ministry
within a month of the meeting of the Co-ordination Committee.
3. In order to properly monitor XOS statements and to recover export incentives
availed against unrealised export proceeds the aforesaid instructions are reiterated
and you are requested to ensure that the said instructions are followed scrupulously.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(P.K. Mohanty)
Joint Secretary (Drawback)
Copy forwarded to:—
(1) The Ministry of Commerce, Director General of Foreign Trade, Udyog Bhawan,
New Delhi.
(2) The Reserve Bank of India.
(3) The Director General (Systems & Data Management) Customs & Central
Excise, Samrat Hotel, New Delhi.
Sd/-
(P.K. Mohanty)
Joint Secretary (Drawback)

29
Recommendation (Para No. 7.4)
Another serious lapse pointed out by Audit relates to write-offs allowed by the
authorised dealer banks in contravention of the stipulated conditions. Audit has
observed that the write-off orders were endorsed to Customs/DGFT without ensuring
that the export incentives availed in respect of those exports were surrendered. Audit
has highlighted specific cases involving write-offs of unrealized export bills amounting
to Rs. 229.61crore during the period 1995 to 2001. Custom Houses/DGFT also could
not confirm  to audit whether the incentives availed by the  exporters had been recovered
in such cases. While claiming that Customs are kept informed of the write-offs, in the
same vain, RBI also conceded that there could be a problem of reconciliation faced by
Customs. The Committee find here another instance of yawning communication gap
between RBI on the one side and Department of Revenue (Customs) and DGFT on the
other. The Committee, therefore, desire that the RBI should play a proactive role in
keeping with its mandate vis-a-vis the Authorized Dealer Banks to ensure that write-
offs of unrealised forex are permitted scrupulously and only after securing the interest
of  Revenue by way of surrender of export incentives availed by the defaulting exporter.
This aspect should be suitably incorporated in the proposed on-line system involving
all the organizations concerned including the Authorised Dealer Banks, which are the
cutting edge agency in the whole process.
Action Taken Note
The RBI has stated that the XOS statements prepared by Authorised Dealer (AD)
Banks give the position of outstanding exports as on June and December of each year
which are being forwarded to Customs authorities by the Regional Offices (ROs) of the
RBI. The RBI has repeatedly emphasized in their APDIR circulars and also in the letters
to their ROs that all write-off, whether by RBI or AD would be subject to surrender of
export incentives. The last communication to the ADs in this regard was issued vide
AP(DIR Series) Circular No. 61 dated December 14, 2002 wherein they were advised to
obtain documents evidencing surrender of export incentives availed of before permitting
"write-off'' for the relevant outstanding bills.

CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
-NIL-
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA ,
15 February, 2006 Chairman,
26 Magha, 1927 ( Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
30

PART II
MINUTES OF THE  EIGHTEENTH  SITTING OF THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2005-2006) HELD ON
19th JANUARY , 2006
The Committee sat from 1630 hrs. to 1730 hrs. on  19th January, 2006  in
Committee Room  “A”, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. R. Senthil
3. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
4. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
5. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Dr. K. Malaisamy
8. Shri V . Narayanasamy
9. Shri Jairam Ramesh
10. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2.  Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3.  Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Officers of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Smt. Mohua Chatterjee — ADAI
2. Dr. A.K. Banerjee — Director General
3. Shri Jayanti Prasad — Principal Director
Representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue)
1. Shri K.M. Chandrashekhar — Revenue Secretary
2. Shri M. Jayaraman — Chairman (CBEC)
3. Shri V .P. Singh — Member
31

32
4. Smt. Chitra Saha — Member
5. Shri Gautam Ray — Joint Secretary
6. Shri Ramtirath — Commissioner
Representatives of the Ministry of Small-Scale Industries
1. Shri A.S. Nikhade —Addl. Development Commissioner & Economic
Advisor
2. Shri Praveen Mahto— Addl. Economic Advisor
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the
sitting. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the Draft
Report on “Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan” and the Draft Report on Action Taken on
61st Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha) relating to “Non-realisation of foreign
exchange”. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted these draft Reports
and authorised the Chairman to present the same to Parliament.
3. ***** ***** *****
4. ***** ***** *****
5. ***** ***** *****
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF OBSERVATIONS  AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para No. Ministry/Department Observations/Recommendations
No.
12 3 4
1. 8 Ministry of Finance In terms of RBI regulations, every exporter
(Department of is required to realize and repatriate full export
Revenue) value of goods or software within six months
from the date of Export.   It had come to the
notice of the Committee that substantial
amount of export proceeds were pending
realization beyond permissible  period of
180 days.  According to the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) the export
outstanding as on 31 December, 2003 was
Rs. 20,930.74 crore against realisation of
Rs. 3,30,555.79 crore during the year ended
on 31 December 2003.  The Ministry have
contended that this works out to only 6%
of the total realization.  Similarly, the total
outstanding foreign exchange, against
which export incentives under DEEC and
DEPE and drawback have been availed of,
stood at Rs. 3,660.17 crores and Rs. 757.62
crore respectively as on the same date.   The
Committee are constrained to point out that
the Ministry have not intimated to the
Committee precise reasons for the non-
realisation of this amount as well as steps
taken to ensure full realization of the export
proceeds.  The Committee are of the view
that the Ministry should not find solace in
the fact that foreign exchange unrealised
against export so far is just 6 per cent of the
total realisation,  since the export
outstanding amount is still a staggering
figure of more than Rs. 20,000 crore,
realisation of which should have been timely
made.  The weaknesses in the prevailing
33

34
monitoring mechanism in the Customs,
Directorate General of Foreign Trade and
RBI need to be identified with a view to
ensuring timely realization of foreign
exchange.  There ought to be close
coordination among these agencies.  The
Committee therefore, desire that the existing
administrative and regulatory machinery
should be strengthened to ensure
expeditious realisation of export  proceeds,
which, in turn, would help facilitate, promote
and sustain the export growth
commensurate with the Government Policy
in this regard.   The Committee hope that
DGFT and the Customs would take
immediate action for realization of the
outstanding export proceeds against which
export incentives and drawback have been
availed.
2. 14 Ministry of Finance The Committee note that  pursuant to their
(Department of recommendations, certain measures are
Revenue) being initiated by the Ministry to prevent
the lacunae in the expeditious recovery of
export incentives availed against unrealized
export proceeds.  These measures include
Constitution of Coordination Committees
by the nodal Customs Houses with
representatives of Customs, RBI, DGFT,
prominent authorized dealer Banks and
the Directorate General of Systems
(Customs & Central Excise). The Chief
Commissioners/Commissioners of
Customs are stated to have been requested
to ensure proper monitoring of XOS
statements etc.   The Committee feel that
this belated but desirable step can
eliminate avoidable delays in recovery of
export incentives availed against unrealised
export proceeds if the proposed
Committees meet frequently and remove
the identified  bottle necks. Further,
continuous effective monitoring of the XOS
statements, being the prime instrument
of control, is essential to identify the
12 3 4

35
defaulters.  The Committee hope that the
momentum sought to be  initiated in this
regard would  not be lost at any point of
time.
3. 15 Ministry of Finance The Committee are however, disappointed
(Department of to note that the RBI has rejected most of
Revenue) the suggestions made by the Department
of Revenue to modify the XOS on one
pretext or the other,  which, according to
them, was essential to overcome the
shortcomings in the recovery of export
incentives availed against unrealized export
proceeds.   RBI has expressed inability to
make changes in the XOS  format as per the
suggestion of the Department of Revenue
on the ground that XOS has been designed
primarily for the purpose of fulfilling the
obligation cast on the RBI under FEMA to
follow up export realisation as well as to
meet their requirements.  What has irked
the Committee more is the indifference and
insensitivity on the part of RBI who have
outrightly rejected even some of the very
basic and essential suggestions like
hosting the XOS data on the RBI website
and  sending XOS data in CDs and to each
Customs House separately on the ground
that the XOS data is programmed to be
compatible with their systems and they are
not in favour of hosting the XOS data on
their website.   The Ministry had informed
the Committee on 1st  March, 2005 that they
had conveyed their reservation on these
aspects to the RBI.  The Committee regret
to observe that the Ministry have not
subsequently intimated to the Committee
indicating any progress in the matter till date.
The fact that the Ministry simply informed
that RBI does not agree to their proposal
and no effort was made by them to sort out
the differences, is nothing but regrettable.
Further, it is a matter of great concern  that
the RBI have directed their Authorised
12 3 4

36
dealers not to report in the XOS statements
their outstanding exports of value upto
US $ 25,000 or equivalent falling due on
31.12.2004 and thereafter, which according
to the Ministry would eventually result in
around 80-90% of the volume of export
consignments falling outside the purview
of the XOS.  The Ministry are understood
to have conveyed their reservations to RBI
on this aspect too.  Inability of the Ministry
and RBI to arrive at a consensus in revising
the XOS statement  and other related issues
is deplorable particularly when some of the
exporters have been able to successfully
circumvent the systems due to various
shortcomings that exist in the formation and
transmission of the XOS statement.  The
Committee would like the RBI to reconsider
the suggestions made by the Department
of Revenue and, if necessary, discuss with
them so that the efficacy of the XOS
statement is substantially enhanced and the
oft-noticed problems of coordination and
cooperation is ironed out.
4. 18 Ministry of Finance The Committee had adversely commented
(Department of upon the failure on the part of the
Revenue) concerned agencies to recover export
incentives along with interest thereon in
case of non-realisation of export proceeds.
The Ministry have tried  to explain by saying
that monitoring of export obligation is an
item of high priority in DGFT  and the same
is being monitored regularly.   However, this
contention is unacceptable as substantial
amount of Government revenue, by way of
export incentives availed on unrealized
export proceeds, has remained
unrecovered.    A perusal of the statement
furnished by the Ministry, indicating the
present status of cases against each of the
20 firms, which account for almost 60%  of
the duty benefits and half of the interest
thereon, reveals that in several  cases the
matter has been referred to the concerned
12 3 4

37
land revenue authorities for recovering the
customs duty, penalty etc.   Similarly, in
some other cases, show cause notices have
been issued for recovery of the outstanding
amount.   In this context, the Committee
would like to impress upon the Ministry to
expedite the cases pending with the
concerned land revenue authorities as well
as cases under show-cause notices so that
huge amount of Government revenue, in
terms of export  incentives availed on
outstanding export proceeds, does not
remain unrealised  for long.
The Committee note that pursuant to their
recommendation, the Directorate General of
Foreign Trade has taken necessary steps
in consultation with the concerned
administrative Ministry/Department for
amending Section 11 of the Foreign Trade
(Development & Regulation) Act, 1992.   It
is expected that the amendment would  leave
no  scope of possibilities  of connivance as
well as  systemic flaws.   The Committee
would like this amendment to be carried out
expeditiously so that recovery of incentives
from defaulting exporters are made by DGFT
promptly and effectively.
5. 21 Ministry of Finance The Committee had emphasized in their
(Department of earlier Report that the RBI, commensurate
Revenue) with its mandate, should play a proactive
role in impressing upon the Authorised
Dealer Banks to resort to write–off of
unrealised foreign exchange only after
securing the surrender of export incentives.
The Committee are surprised  to find that
despite frequent reiteration  on the part of
RBI  in their APDIR circulars and also in the
letters to their ROs that all write–offs
whether by RBI or AD Banks would be
subject to surrender of export incentives,
such write-off of unrealised export Bills have
amounted to Rs. 229.61 crore during the
period from 1995 to 2001, in contravention
12 3 4

38
of the stipulated conditions. RBI is stated
to have issued APDIR circulars and letters
to their RO’s advising to obtain documents
(s) evidencing surrender of export
incentives availed of before permitting write
off for the relevant outstanding Bills.  The
Committee feel that mere advice by RBI to
its Regional Offices as well as to the
Authorised Dealer Banks in this regard will
not yield the desired result, until and unless
stringent measures are initiated by RBI
against its defaulting ROs and Authorised
Dealer Banks, whenever cases of violation
of the stipulated conditions in this regard
are brought to its notice.   Appropriate
deterrant/penal action should have been
taken against the Regional Offices &
Authorised Dealer Banks for violating the
prescribed norms in this regard.  The
Committee feel that it is high time that the
RBI ensured strict adherence to the
prescribed norm by the ROs  and AD Banks
so that surrender of export incentives is
actually obtained before permitting any
write-offs for the outstanding bills.   The
Committee hope that RBI would sensitise
itself to the need of the hour and would, at
least now, take appropriate steps so that
the country does not lose its share of
foreign exchange in future.
12 3 4