37
REVIEW OF NORMS FOR
RE-APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2006-2007
THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

THIRTY-SEVENTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
REVIEW OF NORMS FOR RE-APPROPRIATION
OF FUNDS
[Action Taken on 23 rd Report of Public Accounts Committee
(14th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)
Presented  to Lok Sabha  on........................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on..................................
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1822
Price : Rs. 20.00
© 2006 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok  Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and  Printed by the Manager, Government of India
Press, Minto Road, New Delhi - 110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2006-2007) ...................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report...............................................................................................    1
CHAPTER II Action Taken Notes received from the Ministry of Finance
(Deptt. of Economic Affairs —Budget Division) on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in 23rd Report
of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)............................................................. 3
PART - II
Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2006-07) held on
16.11.2006............................................................................................................... 11
A
PPENDIX
Statement of Observations and Recommendations........................................... 13
Server5\3311ls\3311ls.P65

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2006 - 2007)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri R.L. Jalappa
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Prof. M. Ramadass
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Mohan Singh
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri K.V. Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Assistant Director

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee,
do present this 37th  Report on action taken by Government on the recommendations
of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 23rd  Report (14th Lok Sabha)
on “Review of norms for re-appropriation of funds ”.
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee
at their sitting held on 16th November, 2006. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of
the Report.
3 . For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of
the Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to
the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
 N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
17 November, 2006 Chairman,
26 Kartika, 1928 ( Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
A Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement was laid before the Parliament by the Finance
Minister on 26th February, 2005 under the mandate of the Fiscal Responsibility and
Budget Management Act, 2003. Pursuant to this, the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Expenditure) sought approval of the PAC for revision of norms for re-appropriation
of funds. The proposals of the Ministry inter-alia  included that the limit of Rs. 1
crore and more for re-appropriation of funds under various sub-heads of the Grant,
which required approval of Secretary (Expenditure), may be enhanced to Rs. 5 crore
or more. Also, full powers were sought to be delegated to the Ministries/Departments
to re-appropriate funds from the head ‘Salary’ for augmentation of head ‘Salary’
across the schemes (sub-heads) within a grant. It was further proposed that financial
limits for obtaining approval of Parliament under New Service/New Instrument of
Service may be enhanced/revised. The revised norms were stated to be aimed at
enabling Administrative Departments in having efficient management of their
departmental budgets with a view to improving the quality of implementation, and
enhancing the ‘efficiency’ and ‘accountability’ of delivery mechanism through quicker
decision making.
2. On receipt of this proposal from the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure), the Committee considered the justification and need for a review of
the financial norms and finalized their Twenty-third Report (14th Lok Sabha) on the
subject, viz.,“Review of norms for re-appropriation of funds” which was presented
to Lok Sabha on 22nd December, 2005. The Twenty-third Report contained three
Recommendations. Action Taken Notes on all the three recommendations have been
received from Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs—Budget
Division). A scrutiny of these Action Taken Notes reveals that the Recommendations
of the Committee made in their earlier Report have been accepted by Government.
3. This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty-
third Report. The Action Taken Notes received from the Ministry are reproduced in
Chapter-II of the Report.
4. The Committee in their original Report had expressed their agreement with
the proposed revision in the norms for re-appropriation of funds and recommended
as follows:—
“As these proposals have been finalized after consulting various Ministries
and obtaining the concurrence of the Office of the Comptroller & Auditor
General of India, and there is adequate justification and need therefore,
the Committee are in agreement with the proposed revision in the norms
for re-appropriation of funds. At the same time, the Committee would like

2
to impress upon the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) to
devise an effective mechanism for proper and continuous monitoring of
the revised norms in order to ensure strict adherence to the same by each
and every Ministry/Department. The Committee also expect the Financial
Advisors of all the Ministries/Departments to ensure that there is no
violation in implementation of the said revised norms for re-appropriation
of funds and any slackness in complying with the said norms is strictly
dealt with”.
5. In their Action Taken Note the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs—Budget Division) have stated as under:—
“The recommendations contained in Para No. 15 of Twenty-third Report of
the Public Accounts Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on “Review of
norms for re-appropriation of funds” in so far as they are concerned with
the revision/enhancement of financial limits for obtaining approval of
Parliament under ‘New Service’/‘New Instrument of Service’, have been
considered by the Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance.
Revised Guidelines incorporating the Observations/Recommendations of
the Public Accounts Committee on Financial Limits to be observed in
determining cases relating to ‘New Service’/‘New Instrument of Service’
have been issued vide this Department’s Office Memorandum No. F.1(23)-
B(AC)/2005 dated 25.5.2006”.
6. While agreeing with the proposed revision in the norms for re-appropriation
of funds, the Committee had impressed upon the Ministry of Finance to devise an
effective mechanism for proper and continuous monitoring of the revised norms
in order to ensure strict adherence by every Ministry/Department. The revised
guidelines incorporating the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee on
financial limits to be observed in determining cases relating to ‘New Service’/‘New
Instrument of Service' are stated to have been issued by the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Economic Affairs—Budget Division). The Committee hope that
Government would take effective steps to ensure strict observance of these
guidelines by the Ministries/Departments on the subject.  They would also like
the Government to make an analysis of the position prior to and after
implementation of the revised norms and apprise the Committee about the extent
of improvement brought about as a result thereof.

CHAPTER II
ACTION TAKEN NOTES RECEIVED FROM M/O FINANCE
(DEPTT. OF ECO. AFFAIRS)
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
Recommendations
The Committee have been given to understand that a Fiscal Policy Strategy
Statement was laid before the Parliament by the Finance Minister on 26th February,
2005 under Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement Responsibility and Budget Management
Act, 2003. Pursuant to this, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
have sought approval of the PAC for revision of norms for re-appropriations of
funds. The proposals inter-alia include that the limit of Rs. 1 crore or those for re-
appropriation of funds under various sub-heads of the Grant, which require approval
of Secretary (Expenditure), may be enhanced to Rs. 5 crore or more. Also, full powers
are sought to be delegated to the Ministries/Departments to re-appropriate funds
from the head 'Salary' for augmentation of head 'Salary' across the schemes (sub-
heads) within a grant. It is further proposed that financial limits for obtaining approval
of Parliament under New Service-New Instrument of Service may be enhanced/
revised.
[Para No. 13 of Twenty-third Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on "Review of norms for re-appropriation of funds"]
Action Taken
The recommendations contained in para No. 13 of Twenty-third Report of the
Public Accounts Committee (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on "Review of norms for
re-appropriation of funds" in so far as they are concerned with the revision/
enhancement of financial limits for obtaining approval of Parliament under 'New
Service'/'New Instrument of Service', have been considered by the Department of
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance. Revised Guidelines incorporating the
observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee on Financial Limits
to be observed in determining cases relating to 'New Service'/'New Instrument of
Service' have been issued vide this Department's Office Memorandum No. F.1(23)-
B(AC)/2005 dated 25.5.2006.
2. This note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. RR-II/I-6/2006-07/808
dated 14.6.2006.
[Ministry of Finance, DEA, U.O. No. F.1(23)-B(AC)/2005 dated 16.06.2006.]
3

IMMEDIATE
No. F.1(23)-B(AC)/2005
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
New Delhi, the 25th May, 2006.
Office Memorandum
Subject: Revised Guidelines on Financial Limits to be observed in
determining cases relating to 'New Service'/'New Instrument of
Service'.
In accordance with the commitment made in the Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement
(Budget 2005-06) under the mandate of the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget
Managment (FRBM) Legislation and in pursuance of the approval of Public
Accounts Committee (2005-2006) in the twenty-third report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)
on the proposal for review of Financial Limits to be observed in determining the
cases relating to 'NEW SERVICE/NEW INSTRUMENT OF SERVICE' for
reappropriation of funds (Annex.), which has the concurrence of the C&AG , the
following revised guidelines for re-appropriation of funds are hereby conveyed, in
modification of this Ministry's Office Memorandum No. F.7(15)-B(RA)/82 dated 13th
April, 1982.
2. Definition of the terms 'New Service'/'New Instrument of Service' and its
application:
(i) 'New Service': As appearing in article 115(1)(a) of the Constitution of India,
this has been held as referring to expenditure arising out of a new policy
decision, not brought to the notice of Parliament earlier, including a new
activity or a new form of investment.
(ii) 'New Instrument of Service': Refers to relatively large expenditure arising out
of important expansion of an existing activity.
(iii) While using these terms and applying the financial limits as indicated in the
Annex., it needs to be noted that no expenditure can be incurred from the
Consolidated Fund of India on a 'New Service'/‘New Instrument of Service'
without prior approval of Parliament through supplementary demands for
grants. Further, the determination of these financial limits will be with
reference to Primary Unit of Appropriation.
(iv) Where in an emergent case of 'New Service'/‘New Instrument of Service' it is
not possible to wait for prior approval of  Parliament, the Contingency Fund
of India can be drawn upon for meeting the expenditure pending its
authorisation by Parliament. Recourse to this arrangement should normally
4

5
be taken only when Parliament is not in session. Such advances are required
to be recouped to the Fund by obtaining a Supplementary Grant in the imme-
diate next session of Parliament. However, when Parliament is in session, a
Supplementary Grant should preferably be obtained before incurring any
expenditure on a 'New Service'/'New Instrument of Service'. That is to say,
recourse to Contingency Fund of India should be taken only in cases of
extreme urgency; in such cases the following procedure recommended by the
Sixth Lok Sabha Committee on Papers Laid in their 4th Report should be
observed:
"As far as possible,before such withdrawal is made, the concerned Minister
may make a statement on the floor of the Lok Sabha for information giving
details of the amount and the scheme for which the money is needed. In
emergent cases, however, where it is not possible to inform the Members
in advance, the withdrawal may be made from the Contingency Fund and
soon thereafter a statement may be laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha for
the information of the Members".
It has been suggested by the Rajya Sabha Secretariat that the above
procedure may also be observed in Rajya Sabha.
3. Checks to be observed by the Ministries/Departments to ensure compliance
of the provisions of this Office Memorandum are as under:
(i) By Integrated Finance Division/Budget Unit: A specific certificate should be
recorded in each case involving aurmentation of sanctioned provision on
receipt of related proposals, to the effect that the proposed augmentation
attracts/does not attract financial limits of 'New Service'/'New Instrument of
Service'.
(ii) By PAOs: Each expenditure sanction to be examined by PAOs from the 'New
Service'/'New Instrument of Service' angle keeping in view the financial limits
indicated in the Annex.
(iii) Where any doubt arises about the application of financial limits of 'New
Service'/'New Instrument of Service', the PAO would seek decision from CCA/
FA of appropriate jurisdiction.
4. Circumstances for obtaining Supplementary grants for expenditure
qualifying as 'New Service'/'New Instrument of Service' and the reporting
procedure thereof are as follows:
(i) If sufficient savings are available within the same section of the relevant
grants for meeting additional expenditure to the extent mentioned in column
2 of the annex., re-appropriation can be made, subject to report to Parliament.
(ii) The Report to Parliament should ordinarily be made through the ensuing
batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants, failing which by adding an
Annex. in the Detailed Demands of the Ministry/Department for the ensuing
year.

6
(iii) A suitable write-up of such cases where possible, may also be made in the
Notes on Demands for Grants of the Ministry/Department.
(iv) Mere depiction of augmented provisions in the Revised Estimates included
in the Demands for Grants will not be adequate to meet the requirement to
incur expenditure. In cases where the financial limits of 'New Service'/'New
Instrument of Service' are attracted, approval of Parliament may be obtained
for incurring such expenditure through supplementary demands for grants.
(v) The provisions in the 'V ote on Account' are not intended to be used for
expenditure on any 'New Service'. In cases of urgency, expenditure on a
'New Service' during V ote on Account period can, therefore, be incurred
only by obtaining an advance from the Contingency Fund in the manner
recommended by the Sixth Lok Sabha Committee on the Papers Laid on
the Table already referred to in para 2(iv) of this OM. Such advances will
be resumed to the Contingency Fund on enactment of Appropriation Act
in respect of expenditure for the whole year.
5. Exceptions:
(i) Having regard to the volume and nature of Government transactions, it is not
possible to list out all such cases which are not attracted by 'New Service'/
'New Instrument of Service' limits. Broadly, however, expenditure on normal
activities of Government (such as normal administrative expenditure—
including that resulting from re-organization of Ministries/Departments, hold-
ing of conferences, seminars, exhibitions, surveys, feasibility studies, etc.
assistance to foreign Governments, contributions to international bodies
and fulfilment of Government guarantee on its invocation) are not attracted
by the limits of 'New Service'/'New Instrument of Service'.
(ii) T ransfer to State and Union Territory Governments are also exempt from
these limits provided the scheme is not new.
(iii) Further, these limits are applicable only to expenditure which is subject to
V ote of Parliament.
6. Doubtful cases:
In case of disagreement between the Integrated Finance Wing and Pay and
Accounts Office, the Ministry/Department may send a self-contained communication
to the Budget Division, Ministry of Finance bringing out the specific point of doubt
incorporating their Financial Advisor's views thereon. The decision taken by the
Budget Division in the matter will be final.
7. Conclusion:
While agreeing to the revision of norms for re-appropriation of funds as
annexed, the Public Accounts Committee in its twenty-third report (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha) has concluded by stating as under:
"The Committee also expects the Financial Advisors of the Ministries/
Departments to ensure that there is no violation in implementation of the

7
said revised norms for re-appropriation of funds and any slackness in
complying with the said norms is strictly dealt with."
8. Hindi version will follow.
Sd/-
(Dakshita Das)
Director (Budget)
To
1. All Ministries/Departments of the Government of India.
2. Financial Commissioner (Railways), Financial Advisor (DS), Member Finance
(Telecom) and all other Financial Advisers.
3. Finance Secretaries of Union Territory Administrations (Chandigarh, Andaman
and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep).
4. Controller General of Accounts, Controller General of Defence Accounts and
Chief Controllers of Accounts.
Copy forwarded for information to:
1. Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC) Branch/Rajya Sabha Secretariat.
2. Comptroller and Auditor General of India and all Directors of Audit/Accoun-
tants General.
3. Finance Secretaries of all State and Union Territory Governments.
Sd/-
(Dakshita Das)
Director (Budget)

8
Annex to Ministry of Finance O.M. No. F. 1(23)-B(AC)/2005 dated 25.05.2006
Financial limits to be observed in determining the cases relating to
'NEW SERVICE'/'NEW INSTRUMENT OF SERVICE'
Nature of transaction Limits upto which expenditure Limits beyond which
can be met by reappropriation prior approval of
of savings in a Grant subject Parliament is required
to report to Parliament for expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund
12 3
I. CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
A. Departmental Undertakings
(i) Setting up a new under- — All cases
taking, or taking up a new
activity by an existing
undertaking.
(ii) Additional investment in Above Rs. 2.50 crore but Above Rs. 5 crore
an existing undertaking not exceeding Rs. 5 crore.
B. Public Sector Companies/Corporations
(i) Setting up of a new — All cases
Company, or splitting up
of an existing Company,
or amalgamation of two
or more Companies, or
taking up a new activity
by an existing Company
(ii) Additional investment
in/loans to an existing
company
(a) Where there is no Above Rs. 50 lakhs but Above Rs. 1 crore
Budget Provision  not exceeding Rs. 1 crore
(b) Where Budget Provision
exists for investment and/
or loans
Note: Where a lumpsum provision is made for providing 'Loans' under a particular scheme,
the details of substantial apportionment (10% of lumpsum or Rs. 1 crore, whichever
is higher) should be reported to Parliament. In the case of lumpsum provision of
loans to States, the State-wise distribution should be reported to Parliament.

9
12 3
Paid up capital of the Company
(i) Upto Rs. 50 crore 20% of appropriation Above 20% of
already voted or appropriation
Rs. 10 crore, whichever already voted or
 is less Rs.10 Crore,
whichever is less
(ii) Above Rs. 50 crore 20% of appropriation Above 20% of
already voted or appropriation
Rs. 20 crore, already voted or,
whichever is less Rs. 10 crore,
whichever is less
C. All bodies or authorities within the administrative control/management of
Central Government or substantially financed by the Central Government
Loans Upto 10% of the More than 10% over
appropriation already the appropriation
voted or Rs. 10 crore, already voted by
whichever is less Parliament or Rs. 10
crore, whichever is less
D. Expenditure on new  Above Rs. 50 lakhs but not Above Rs. 2.5 crore or
Works  (Land, exceeding Rs. 2.5 crore or above 10% of the
Buildings and/or not exceeding 10% of the appropriation already
Machinery) appropriation already voted, voted.
whichever is less
II. REVENUE EXPENDITURE
E . Grants-in-aid to any body — All cases
or authority
Note: Where a lumpsum provision is made for providing grants-in-aid under a particular
scheme, the details of substantial apportionment (10% of lumpsum or Rs. 1 crore,
whichever is higher) should be reported to Parliament. In the case of lumpsum provision
of grants to States, the State-wise distribution should be reported to Parliament.
F. Subsidies
(i) New Cases — All cases
(ii) Enhancement of Upto 10% of More than 10% of the
provision in the existing the appropriation appropriation already
appropriation already approved voted by Parliament
by the Parliament or  Rs. 10 crore,
or Rs. 10 crore, whichever is less
whichever is less

10
123
Payments against cess Limits as applicable to All cases
collections grants-in-aid to
statutory or public
institutions will apply
New Commissions or — Above Rs. 20 lakhs (total
Committees of Enquiry expenditure)
G. Write off of Government Above Rs. 50,000 but Above Rs. 1 lakh
loans not exceeding Rs. 1 lakh (individual cases)
(individual cases)
H .  Other cases of Each case to be considered on merits.
Government expenditure
I. Posts The aforesaid limits, The aforesaid limits,
including those relating including those relating
to Works expenditure, to Works expenditure
Railways will also apply to these will also apply to these
Departments subject to Departments subject to
considerations of security considerations of security
Defence in the case of Defence in the case of  Defence
Services Estimates.
Note 1: For investment in Ordnance Factories, the limit of Rs. 5 crore mentioned in item
A (ii) will be applicable with reference to investment in all the factories as a whole.
Note 2:  Civil Works, which do not form part of any project of the departmental undertakings
(Ordnance Factories) should be treated as ordinary Defence works. As such, prior
approval of Parliament will be necessary if the cost of individual works exceeds
Rs. 2.5 crore and in cases where the individual works cost Rs. 50 lakhs or more but
not exceeding Rs. 2.5 crore, a report to Parliament will be required. A list of such
works should, however, be supplied to Director of Audit, Defence Services .
NEW D ELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
17 November, 2006 Chairman,
26 Kartika, 1928 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

PART II
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007) HELD ON 16th NOVEMBER, 2006
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Committee Room 'D',
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Brajesh Pathak
7. Shri Mohan Singh
8. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
9. Shri Kharabela Swain
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri R.K. Dhawan
12. Shri Janardhana Poojary
13. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
14. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri B.K. Chattopadhyay — ADAI(RC)
2. Shri Nand Kishore — Principal Director (AB)
3. Shri Sanjay Kumar — Director (DT-II)
111111

12
Representatives of the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways
(Department of Shipping)
* * * * * * *
Representatives of Chennai Port Trust
* * * * * * *
Representatives of Dredging Corporation of India Limited
* * * * * * *
2. At the outset, the Chairman-welcomed the Member and the officers of C&AG
of India to the sitting. The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption
of the following draft Reports:—
(i) Action Taken on 14th Report of the Public Accounts Committee
(14th Lok Sabha) relating to "Assessment of Private Schools, Colleges and
Coaching Centres", and
(ii) Action Taken on 23rd Report of Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha)
relating to "Review of Norms for Re-appropriation of Funds".
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted these draft Reports without
any amendments/modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalise and present
the same to Parliament in the light of factual verification by Audit.
3 . * * * * * * *
4 . * * * * * * *
5 . * * * * * * *
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/Department Observations/Recommendations
No. No.
1. 6 Finance (Deptt. While agreeing with the proposed revision in the
of Expenditure) norms for re-appropriation of funds, the
Committee had impressed upon the Ministry of
Finance to devise an effective mechanism for
proper and continuous monitoring of the revised
norms in order to ensure strict adherence by
every Ministry/Department. The revised
guidelines incorporating the Observations/
Recommendations of the Committee on financial
limits to be observed in determining cases
relating to ‘New Service’/ 'New Instrument of
Service' are stated to have been issued by the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs—Budget Division). The Committee hope
that Government would take effective steps to
ensure strict observance of these guidelines by
the Ministries/Departments on the subject.
They would also like the Government to make
an analysis of the position prior to and after
implementation of the revised norms and apprise
the Committee about the extent of improvement
brought about as a result thereof.
13
MGIPMRND—3312LS—30-11-2006.