56
NON-RECOVERY OF GUARANTEE
FEE FROM AIR INDIA AND
INDIAN AIRLINES
MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2007-2008
FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH   LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

FIFTY-SIXTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
NON-RECOVERY OF GUARANTEE FEE
FROM AIR INDIA AND INDIAN AIRLINES
MINISTRY OF CIVIL A VIATION
[Action Taken on 30th Report of Public Accounts Committee ( 14th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 21 August, 2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 21 August, 2007
LOK  SABHA   SECRETARIA T
NEW   DELHI
August, 2007/Sravana, 1929 (Saka)

PAC  No. 1842
Price:  Rs. 25.00
© 2007 LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2007-2008)............................  (iii)
INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ..................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER  II Observations/Recommendations  that  have  been  accepted
by Government....................................................................... 4
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations  which  the  Committee  do
not  desire to pursue  in  view  of  the  replies  received  from
Government............................................................................ 11
C
HAPTER  IV Observations/Recommendations  in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by  the  Committee
and  which require reiteration ................................................ 12
C
HAPTER  V Observations/Recommendations   in    respect    of     which
Government have furnished interim replies/no replies .......... 13
PART II
Minutes   of  the  Ninth  Sitting   of   Public   Accounts
Committee (2007-08) held on 7th August, 2007 ..................... 14
APPENDIX
Statement of Conclusions and Recommendations ................ 16

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
Prof Vijay Kumar Malhotra  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
14. Shri Kharabela Swain
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya  Sabha
16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Prof. P.J. Kurien
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Shri S. Lakshmikanta Singh — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Fifty-Sixth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Observations
and Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 30th Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on “Non-recovery of Guarantee Fee from Air India and Indian
Airlines.”
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 7th August, 2007. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the Report.
3. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
4. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the
Committee.
N
EW DELHI;   PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
16 August, 2007 Chairman,
25 Sravana, 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their
Thirtieth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Paragraph 2.1 of the Report of the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India for the year ended 31 March, 2004 (No. 2 of  2005), Union
Government (Transaction Audit Observations) relating to "Non-recovery of guarantee
fee from Air India and Indian Airlines".
2. The Thirtieth Report of the Public Accounts Committee, which was presented
to Lok Sabha on 7th August, 2006, contained 9 Observations/Recommendations. The
Action Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received
from the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic
Affairs) and these have been categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations, which have been accepted by
Government: Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9
(ii) Observations/Recommendations, which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from Government:
-Nil-
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
-Nil-
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
-Nil-
3. The Action Taken Notes as furnished by the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs) have been reproduced in the
Chapter II of this Report.
4. The Committee in their Thirtieth Report had brought out that the Ministries of
Civil Aviation and Finance were at loggerheads in resolving the issues relating to
payment of guarantee fee by Air India and Indian Airlines. On taking up the matter by
the Committee, the issue was resolved. The Committee had asked the Ministry of
Finance to sort out such matters with other Ministries in future.

5. The Committee deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of
their Recommendations made in the Thirtieth Report.
Waiver of guarantee fee
(Recommendation Sl. Nos. 6, 7 & 9)
6. The Committee in their Thirtieth Report on the subject had lamented over
laxity and apathy shown by the Ministry of Civil Aviation and the rigidity displayed by
the Ministry of Finance on the issue of payment of guarantee fee by Air India and
Indian Airlines leading to a stalemate in recovery of guarantee fee for the period from
January 1989 to March, 2004. No guarantee fee could be recovered from the two public
sector airlines from 1993 till 2005. It was only after the Public Accounts Committee took
up the subject for detailed examination in May 2005 that both the Ministries took
initiative for resolving the issue of payment of guarantee fee.
7. The Committee had pointed out that levying of guarantee fee at the flat rate of
1.2 per cent per annum on the outstanding amounts in respect of all loans borrowed by
Air India and Indian Airlines irrespective of stipulations made in the original sanctions
issued by the Ministry of Finance at the time of extension of guarantees was not
proper. Since guarantee fee at the normal rates had already been paid by the both PSUs
and in view of the difficult financial conditions of these PSUs on account of fierce
competition from the private airlines the Committee had felt that it would not perhaps
be appropriate on the part of Ministry of Finance to insist on payment of guarantee fee
at penal rates. They, therefore, had recommended that Government should treat this
matter as closed and had desired that in future any such disputes should be
expeditiously and amicably settled between the Ministry of Finance and the concerned
administrative Ministry.
8. The Ministry of Civil Aviation in their Action Taken Note have, inter-alia,
stated as under:—
"Ministry of Civil Aviation have taken up the matter with the Ministry of
Finance for acceptance of guarantee fee paid by Air India and Indian Airlines
at the normal rates for those cases where stipulations have been made in the
sanction orders issued at the time of extension of guarantee. However, Air
India and Indian Airlines have already deposited the guarantee fee in
Government account in respect of those guarantees where there is a stipulation
of Ministry of Finance for payment of guarantee fee. Ministry of Finance has
also been requested not to insist upon payment of guarantee fee on all the
sanctions issued from time to time and no penal rates of guarantee fee be
imposed. As recommended by the Public Accounts Committee, in future,
Ministry of Civil Aviation will settle any dispute of such kind in the shortest
possible time."
9. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Finance have, inter-alia, stated as
under:—
"Ministry of Finance as accepted the recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee that the guarantee fee be waived in respect of all loan
2

agreements of Air India and Indian Airlines, prior to 4.6.1993 where there is no
stipulation of the same in the original sanction since guaratnee fee at normal
rates have already been paid by both PSUs where stipulated. Accordingly,
Ministry of Civil Aviation need to work out the quantum of guarantee fee
(including penalty thereof) to be waived and get the accounting adjustments
relating to such waiver approved by the Parliament in the First batch of
Supplementary Demands for Grants, 2007-08. However, in future, Ministry of
Finance shall insist on the payment of guarantee fee according to the
stipulations made from time-to-time, and shall ensure that the Ministry of
Civil Aviation enforce these stipulations strictly."
10. The Committee are satisfied to note that the Ministries of Civil Aviation and
Finance have accepted all the Recommendations made by the Committee in their
Thirtieth Report. The Committee are also happy to note that the contentious issue of
payment of guarantee fee by Air India and Indian Airlines for the period from January
1989 to March 2004 has been amicably resolved by the two Ministries. The Committee
expect that in future National Airlines(s) will take necessary steps for prompt and
timely payment of guarantee fee to the Ministry of Finance as per the stipulation laid
down under the agreements so that there are no occasions for disputes between the
two Departments of the Government. The Committee recommend that an institutional
coordination mechanism may be set up by the Ministry of Finance and other
administrative Ministries for resolving outstanding issues relating to inter-
Ministerial payments/adjustments.
————
3

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  THAT  HAVE  BEEN  ACCEPTED
 BY  GOVERNMENT
Observation/Recommendation
Under Article 292 of the Constitution of India, the Union Government has been
empowered to give guarantees upon the security of the Consolidated Fund of India in
respect of loans (both internal and external) raised by various organizations within
such limits as may be fixed from time-to-time by an Act of Parliament, for which Guarantee
Fee is levied in consideration of the contingent liability undertaken by the Government.
The Government charges guarantee fee on such guarantees at the rates prescribed
from time-to-time which forms part of non-tax revenue of the Government. The
Government guarantees facilitates the borrower organizations to procure loans from
lending institutions at softer terms with lower rates of interest than what the borrower
can procure on the strength of its own credit rating.
[Sl. No. 1, Appendix II, Para 48 of 30th Report of PAC
(14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Facts of the case, hence no comments are required.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
Statement of facts, hence no comments.
Observation/Recommendation
Initially, the question of levy of guarantee fee on the borrowings/loans raised by
Public Sector Undertakings/Enterprises was examined by the concerned Administrative
Ministry and the rate of guarantee fee was to be determined on case-to-case basis. In
April, 1992 instructions were issued by the Ministry of Finance, fixing guarantee fee
 @ 1 per cent annum in respect of internal borrowings. In respect of guarantee fee for
external borrowings, it was decided that it will be determined on case-to-case basis.
They further decided that since the proposals for guarantee amounted to undertaking
a contingent liability, all cases of extending Government guarantees should be referred
to the Ministry of Finance by the Administrative Ministries before taking a final decision.
[Sl.No. 2, Appendix II, Para 49 of 30th Report of PAC
(14th Lok Sabha)]
4

Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Facts of the case, hence no comments are required.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
Statement of facts, hence no comments.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that Air India and Indian Airlines have been financing their
aircraft acquisition projects through External Commercial Borrowings (ECBs). The
Government guarantees issued by the Ministry of Finance to Air India and Indian
Airlines in pre-1993 period in connection with external commercial borrowings did not
carry stipulations for payment of any guarantee fee. It was only in 1993 that Ministry
of Finance issued instructions for charging guarantee fee at the flat rate of 1.2 per cent
per annum on the oustanding amount of principal plus interest in respect of external
borrowings. As per these instructions, the guarantee fee was to be levied in respect of
guarantee already issued but still partially outstanding. The instructions further
stipulated that where the guarantee fee was not paid on due dates, fee should be
charged at double the normal rates for the period of default.
[Sl.No. 3, Appendix II, Para 50 of 30th Report of PAC
(14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Facts of the case, hence no comments are required.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
Statement of facts, hence no comments.
Observation/Recommendation
As per Audit calculation the Air India and Indian Airlines had outstanding loans
and interest thereon amounting to Rs. 24171 crore and Rs. 18392 crore respectively as
on March, 2004 and the guarantee fee payable by these PSUs for the period from
January, 1989 to March, 2004 amounted to Rs. 290.05 crore and Rs. 220.70 crore
respectively at normal rates and Rs. 580.10 crore and Rs. 441.40 crore at double the
normal rate in case of default. However, according to the Ministry of Civil Aviation, as
on 31st March, 2004, the total outstanding loan on Air India for aircraft purchase
was Rs. 921.77 crore, out of which only Rs. 391.24 crore was guaranteed by the
Government of India. In the case of Indian Airlines, an amount of USD 64.20 million
(Rs. 283.90 crore) was outstanding towards foreign currency loans as on 31st March,
2004. The Committee were informed by Ministry of Civil Aviation that while calculating
the amount of guarantee fee due on Air India, they had excluded one loan which had
been refinanced by the Ministry of Finance, wherein there was a specific mention in
the sanction order stating guarantee fee would not be payable in respect of earlier loan
being refinanced. The Ministry of Civil Aviation further clarified that the guarantee fee
payable in respect of cases prior to 1989 for both Air India and Indian Airlines was not
5

calculated since they had represented to the Ministry of Finance for not charging the
guarantee fee in those cases where there was no stipulation requiring payment of the
same had been made at the time of giving the guarantee.
[Sl. No. 4, Appendix II, Para 51 of 30th Report of PAC
(14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Facts of the case, hence no comments are required.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
Statement of facts, hence no comments.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee have been informed that both Air India and Indian Airlines did
not accept the stipulation made by Ministry of Finance for payment of guarantee fee at
the rate of 1.2 per cent in all cases of external borrowing extended on or after 1.1.1989
irrespective of stipulation made in the sanction issued by the Ministry of Finance at
the time of extension of guarantees. Citing their difficult financial position, Air India
and Indian Airlines also expressed their inability to pay the guarantee fee to the
Government even in those cases, where stipulations requiring payment of the guarantee
fee were made by the Ministry of Finance at the time of extending guarantees. In view
of the dispute raised by the two PSUs, the guarantee fee could not be recovered.
[Sl.No. 5, Appendix II, Para 52 of 30th Report of PAC
(14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Facts of the case, hence no comments are required.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
Statement of facts, hence no comments.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee feel that the issuance of conditions in the Ministry of Finance
O.M. in June, 1993 that all Government guarantees in respect of external borrowings
would be subject to guarantee fee of 1.2 per cent per annum on the outstanding
amount of principle plus interest was perhaps not correct as the terms and conditions
of the contracts cannot be changed retrospectively. What is surprising is the fact that
Ministry of Civil Aviation took more than five years to represent to the Ministry of
Finance, i.e. on 20.10.1998, for clarification with regards to liability of Air India and
Indian Airlines to pay guarantee fee in those cases which did not carrying any stipulation
requiring payment of guarantee fee in the sanctions issued by Ministry of Finance at
the time of giving the guarantee. The Committee are constrained to point out that the
Ministry of Civil Aviation failed to adduce convincing reasons in support of their
6

request from the very beginning. In the letter dated 9.8.1999 addressed to the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Expenditure), the Secretary, Ministry of Civil Aviation
projected Contradictory views. While on the one hand, it was contended that the
stand taken by the Ministry of Finance was illogical on the plea that the sanctions
accorded by the Government at the time of extending guarantees were in the nature of
agreement and the terms of the agreement should not be changed at a later date to the
disadvantage of the concerned Public Sector Undertakings. On the other hand, it was
emphasized that in case of guarantees given on or after 1.1.1989, there was no reason
for the concerned PSUs to withhold payment of guarantee fees at that stage as that
was a committed liability and they were being advised to make payment of guarantee
fees in accordance with the instructions of the Government on the subject. The response
of Ministry of Finance dated 28.9.1999 was further disquitening as they took an
uncompromising stand that guarantee fee could not be waived merely because it as
not part of the initial agreement, as the levy of guarantee fee was a subsequent policy
dispensation and both the undertakings had an opportunity at the time of such
dispensation to opt out of the guarantee cover if they felt the guarantee fee would
adversely affect their financial health. The Committee feel that the approach adopted
by the Ministry of Finance is some what rigid and uncompromising and had apparently
led to a stalemate. The Ministry of Finance are fully aware that Indian Airlines and Air
India approached them through their administrative Ministry for guarantee because
they could not manage the credit themselves. At this stage, the Air India and the
Indian Airlines had not option but to continue with the loans/guarantees and Ministry
of Finance had only to re-examine or settle the issue. The Committee feel that sincere
efforts were not made by both the Ministries to come to an amicable solution.
[Sl. No. 6, Appendix II, Para 53 of 30th Report of PAC
(14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation
With regard to the observations to the Committee regarding period of 5 years
taken by Ministry of Civil Aviation to represent to the Ministry of Finance, it is stated
that Ministry of Civil Aviation immediately brought to the notice of Air India and
Indian Airlines on receipt of instructions from Ministry of Finance. In this connection,
an exercise to assess the amount of guarantee fee payable by Air India and Indian
Airlines in terms of guidelines of the Ministry of Finance was also initiated and thereafter
Airlines were accordingly advised to take necessary steps for payment of the guarantee
fee in accordance with the instructions of the Ministry of Finance. However, both the
Airlines did not accept the stipulation made by the Ministry of Finance for extending
of guarantee fee on all the guarantees irrespective of the stipulations made in the
sanctions issued by them at the time of extension of guarantee. Air India and Indian
Airlines also expressed their difficult financial position due to which they were not in
a position to pay the guarantee fee as desired by Ministry of Finance.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
The stand taken by Ministry of Finance has been consistent with the policy
instructions on the issue of levy of guarantee fee. However, the entire issue of waiving
7

off of guarantee fee has not been re-examined and the Ministry of Finance has accepted
the recommendation of the Public Accounts Committee that the guarantee fee in respect
of all loan agreements prior to 4.6.1993 should be waived.
Observation/Recommendation
From the foregoing the Committee are inclined to conclude that the matter
continued to shuttle between the Ministries of Civil Aviation and Finance for years
and no amount of guarantee fee could be recovered from Air India and Indian Airlines
till mid-2005 as the two Ministries could not reach at a mutually acceptable solution.
Whatever steps have now been initiated were taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation
only after the Public Accounts Committee took up the subject for detailed examination
in May 2005. Air India paid Rs. 24.91 crore during July-August, 2005 and Indian Airlines
began payment of Rs. 8.50 crore in August, 2005 as guarantee fee. The Ministry of
Finance on 5.8.2005 and subsequently on 1.9.2005, for waiver of guarantee fees in
those cases where a clear stipulation had not been made at the time of sanction of
guarantees as well as for waiver of penalty, with the submission that recovery of
guarantee fee from Air India and Indian Airlines would be regulated in accordance with
the final decision of the Ministry of Finance. The Committee are surprised to note that
the matter had been lingering on for several years and both the Ministries could not
arrive at a consensus on this issue from 1993 till 2005 i.e. even after the lapse of
12 years. They feel that the two Ministries could and should have reached at a mutually
acceptable solution, had there been sustained and concerted efforts on their part to
resolve the matter. That this was not done is nothing but regrettable.
[Sl. No. 7, Appendix II, Para 54 of 30th Report of PAC
(14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Observation have been noted for future compliance.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
The stand taken by Ministry of Finance has been consistent with the policy
instruction on the issue of levy of guarantee fee. However, as already explained in
Action Taken to Para 53 Ministry of Finance has already taken a decision to waive off
the guarantee fee together with penalty thereof in respect of those guarantees, where
there was no stipulation in the guarantee agreement for payment of guarantee fee.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee has now been informed that Air India had since paid the entire
amount of guarantee fee amounting to Rs. 24.91 crore calculated at normal rate and as
per the original sanction of Ministry of Finance and similarly, the Indian Airlines had
paid the total dues of Rs. 34.38 crores in instalments.
[Sl. No. 8, Appendix II, Para 55 of 30th Report of PAC
(14th Lok Sabha)]
8

Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Facts of the case, hence no comments are required.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs)
Statement of facts, hence no comments.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are of the view that the levying of guarantee fee at the flat rate of
1.2 per cent per annum on the outstanding amounts in respect of all loans borrowed by
the Indian Airlines and the Air India irrespective of stipulations made in the original
sanctions issued by the Ministry of Finance at the time of extension of guarantees was
not proper. Since guarantee fee at the normal rates have already been paid by the both
PSUs and in view of the difficult financial conditions of these PSUs on accounts of
fierce competition from the private airlines the Committee feel that it would not perhaps
be appropriate on the part of Ministry of Finance to insist on payment of guarantee fee
at penal rates. They, therefore, recommend that Government should treat this matter as
closed. That this issue could not be settled in an amicable manner and allowed to linger
on for years together till Public Accounts Committee were seized of the matter speaks
volumes about the laxity, apathy and rigidity on the part of both Departments is
nothing but regrettable. The Committee hope that in future any such disputes would
be expeditiously and amicably settled between the Ministry of Finance and the
concerned administrative Ministry.
[Sl. No. 9, Appendix II, Para 56 of 30th Report of PAC
(14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Civil Aviation
Ministry of Civil Aviation have taken up the matter with the Ministry of Finance
for acceptance of guarantee fee paid by Air India and Indian Airlines at the normal
rates for those cases where stipulations have been made in the sanction orders issued
at the time of extension of guarantee. However, Air India and Indian Airlines have
already deposited the guarantee fee in Government account in respect  of those
guarantees where there is a stipulation of Ministry of Finance for payment of guarantee
fee. Ministry of Finance has also been requested not to insist upon payment of guarantee
fee on all the sanctions issued from time-to-time and no penal rates of guarantee fee be
imposed. As recommended by the PAC, in future, Ministry of Civil Aviation will settle
any dispute of such kind in the shortest possible time.
This note has been vetted by Audit vide their PDA, E&SM, U.O. No. AMG-I/
Rep.I-14(2)/A TN/M/OCA/PAC/2007-08/19-21 dated 20th April, 2007.
Sd/-
(RAGHU  MENON)
ADDL. SECRETARY & FINANCIAL  ADVISER
Ministry of Civil Aviation,
O.M. No. 12/3/2006-F.I. dated 28th April, 2007.
9

Action taken by the Ministry of Finance  (Department of Economic Affairs)
Ministry of Finance has accepted the recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee that the guarantee fee be waived in respect of all loan agreements of Air
India and Indian Airlines, prior to 4.6.1993 where there is no stipulation of the same in
the original sanction since guarantee fee at normal rates have already been paid by
both PSUs where stipulated. Accordingly, Ministry of Civil Aviation need to work out
the quantum of guarantee fee (including penalty thereof) to be waived and get the
accounting adjustments relating to such waiver approved by the Parliament in the
First batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants, 2007-08. However, in future, Ministry
of Finance shall insist on the payment of guarantee fee according to the stipulations
made from time to time, and shall ensure that the Ministry of Civil Aviation enforce
these stipulations strictly.
This note has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. AMG-I/Rep. 1-14(2)/
ATN/M/o CA/PAC/2007-08/22-24 dated 20th April, 2007.
Sd/-
(L.M. VAS)
Joint Secretary
Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs,
(Budget Division),
O.M. No. F. 12(29)-B(SD)/2005 dated 4th May, 2007
10

CHAPTER  III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
 DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
RECEIVED FROM GOVERNMENT
— NIL —
11

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  IN  RESPECT  OF  WHICH  REPLIES  OF
GOVERNMENT  HAVE  NOT  BEEN  ACCEPTED  BY  THE  COMMITTEE  AND
WHICH  REQUIRE  REITERATION
—NIL—
12

CHAPTER  V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  IN  RESPECT  OF  WHICH
GOVERNMENT  HA VE  FURNISHED  INTERIM  REPLIES
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
16 August, 2007 Chairman,
25 Sravana, 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
13

PART  II
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008) HELD ON 7TH AUGUST, 2007
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs. on 7th August, 2007 in Room
No. 51 (Chairman's Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Raghunath Jha
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
5. Shri Mohan Singh
6. Shri Kharabela Swain
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri V . Narayanasamy
9. Prof. P.J. Kurien
10. Shri Janardhana Poojary
11. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
4. Shri N.K. Jha — Under Secretary
Representative of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Shri P.K. Kataria — P r. Director (RC)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers
to the sitting of the Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration
and adoption the following draft Reports:
(i) Draft Report on "Excesses Over Voted Grants and Charged Appropriations
(2005-2006)"; 14

(ii) Draft Report on "Development of Land by the Delhi Development
Authority"; and
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken on the 30th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)
relating to "Non-recovery of Guarantee Fee from Air India and Indian
Airlines".
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted these draft Reports without
any amendments/modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalize and present
the same to Parliament in the light of factual verification, if any, done by the Audit.
The Committee then adjourned.
————
15

APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF CONCLUSIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/ Conclusions/Recommendations
No. No. Department
1. 10 Ministries of The Committee are satisfied to note that the
Civil Aviation Ministries of Civil Aviation and Finance have
and Finance accepted all the recommendations made by the
(Department Committee in their Thirtieth Report. The
of Economic Committee are also happy to note that the
Affairs) contentious issue of payment of guarantee fee
by Air India and Indian Airlines for the period
from January 1989 to March 2004 has been
amicably resolved by the two Ministries. The
Committee expect that in future national
Airline(s) will take necessary steps for prompt
and timely payment of guarantee fee to the
Ministry of Finance as per the stipulation laid
down under the agreements so that there are no
occasions for disputes between the two
Departments of the Government. The Committee
recommend that an institutional coordination
mechanism may be set up by the Ministry of
Finance and other administrative Ministries for
resolving outstanding issues relating to inter-
Ministerial payments/adjustments.
16
MGIPMRND—3738LS—12-10-07.