76
FUNCTIONING OF EMPLOYEES'
STATE INSURANCE
CORPORATION (ESIC)
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND
EMPLOYMENT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
2008-2009
SEVENTY-SIXTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


SEVENTY-SIXTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
FUNCTIONING OF EMPLOYEES' STATE INSURANCE
CORPORATION (ESIC)
[Action Taken  on 48th Report of Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF LABOUR AND EMPLOYMENT
Presented to Lok Sabha on ........................................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ...............................................
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
August, 2008/Sravana, 1930 (Saka)

©  2008 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and Printed by the  General Manager, Government of
India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi.
PAC No. 1878
Price: Rs 34.00

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2008-2009) ................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
PART I
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government ............................................................. 5
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from the
Government ........................................................................ 24
C
HAPTER  IV Recommendations / Observations  which  has  not
been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration ............................................................................ 25
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations  in  respect  of  which
Government have furnished interim replies/no replies ..... 27
PART II
Minutes  of  the  sitting  of  Public  Accounts  Committee
(2008-09) held on  14.08.2008 .......................................... 28
APPENDIX
Statement of Recommendations and Observations ........... 30

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-2009)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Furkan Ansari
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
12. Shri Sita Ram Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
15. Shri Arun Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Raashid Alvi
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Prof. P.J. Kurien
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Seventy-sixth Report on action taken by Government on the
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 48th Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on “Functioning of Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC)”.
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 14th August, 2008. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the
Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and have
also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable assistance
rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the Committee.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
21 August, 2008                                                                                   Chairman,
       30 Sravana, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their Forty-eighth
Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on Chapter I of  Report No. 2 of 2006 of the C&AG of
India for the year ended March 2005 (Performance Audit), Union Government (Civil—
Autonomous Bodies) relating to " Functioning of Employees' State Insurance
Corporation (ESIC)".
2. In their Forty-eighth Report presented to Lok Sabha on 21st August, 2007, the
Committee had dealt with various issues concerning the functioning of the ESIC. The
Report contained 18 Recommendations/Observations.
3. The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Labour and
Employment in respect of all the 18  Recommendations/Observations and these have
been categoriesd as under:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Recommendations Sl. Nos. 1-4, 7-9, 11-17 and 18 (Para Nos. 143-146,
149-151, 153-159 and 160)
Total: 15
Chapter II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the reply received from the Government:
Recommendation Sl. No. 6
(Para No. 148)
Total:1
Chapter III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 5 and 10
(Para Nos. 147 and 152)
Total:2
Chapter IV
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government has
furnished interim reply:
—NIL—
NIL
Chapter V

2
A. Important  Recommendations/Observations contained in the 48th Report of
PAC (14th Lok Sabha)
4. The gist of the important Recommendations/Observations made by the Committee
in their 48th Report on the subject are as follows:—
The Government may consider amending the ESI Act suitably so as to make
it compulsory to associate the elected representatives including Members of
Parliament with the Regional Boards of the Corporation for overseeing the
implementation of the Scheme.
Government was asked to expand the scope of ESI Scheme to cover maximum
number of employees and to impart the quality of services to the beneficiaries.
ESI should adopt a target oriented approach for covering all the eligible
employees in the country under the scheme. ESIC should also investigate
the reasons for decline in the unmber of beneficiaries under the scheme
despite the overall growth in the industrial activity in the country and take
appropriate remedial measures.
Creation of a database of insured persons in order to prevent misuse of
medical benefits. An effective management information system should also
be evolved for ensuring timely settlement of claims.
The Government have been  asked to amend the ESI Act with a view to
ensuring optimum-utilization of its medical infrastructure by making them
accessible for the general public/uninsured persons, wherever the specified
number of Insured Persons are not available.
ESIC has been asked to impress upon the State Governments to hand over
the administration of the hospitals having percentage of non-commissioning
of beds.
ESIC must identify the idle equipments in all the ESIC hospitals and
dispensaries in the country and take urgent steps to make them functional.
The ESIC has been urged to open hospitals on the vacant plots and if the
number of Insured Persons in the areas in not adequate, it may be considered
to be opened for  the general public also.
5. The Action Taken by the Ministry/ESIC, as furnished in their Action taken Notes,
on the Committee's Observations/Recommendations may be summed up as under:—
(i) Introduction of ISO standards for hospitals and offices (ii) enhancing
delegated powers to field offices for better functioning (iii) setting up of
super speciality hospitals of Kollam, Kerala and elsewhere (iv) decision to
open ESI hospitals having unutilised capacity to the beneficiaries of Rashtriya
Swasthya Beema Yojna launched by Govt. of India for BPL families in the
unorganized sector (v) proposal to amend the Act for opening of under-
utilised facilities in ESI hospitals to general public on user charges (vi) running
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

3
of ESI hospitals through third party participation (vii) introduction of system
of self certification (viii) Constitution of a Sub-Committee of the Corporation
for suggesting amendment to the ESI Act (ix) taking over of more ESI Schemes
run by State Governments (x) progressive implementation of the ESI Scheme
to new areas as per phased programme (xi) intensive action for prosecution
cases and recovery of arrears (xii) relaxation of conditions in the Rajiv Gandhi
Shramik Kalyan Yojna (xiii) gradation of hospitals by competent external
professional agencies (xiv) introduction of computerization (xv) crash
programme for physical upgradation of hospitals (xvi) conducting customer
satisfaction surveys (xvii) conducting evaluation of the functioning of the
ESI Corporation etc. through organizations like IIM, Ahmedabad, IIMC,
New Delhi, ICRA, New Delhi XIM, Bhubaneshwar etc. (xviii) for
procurement of medicines centralized RC regime has been introduced
(xix) for efficient property management, engineers in all the grades from
junior engineer to chief engineer are being (xx) recruited and for better
coverage, in addition to the existing inspection regime, census of employers
etc. is also being considered.
6. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Labour and Employment
have been reproduced in the subsequent Chapters of this Report. The Committee will
now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of their Recommendations/
Observations that require or merit comments.
B. Widening of Scope with Improvement in Services
(Recommendation  (Sl. No. 5, Para No. 147)
7. Examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed that though the income
of Employees' State insurance Scheme (ESIC) has risen by 42.45 per cent in
2004-2005 over the level of 1999-2000, there has been no corresponding increase in
providing medical and cash benefit to the beneficiaries. Many of the ESI hospitals do
not have proper facilities and are suffering from lack of modern equipment and shortage
of medical/paramedical staff. Also that 9.78 lakh eligible employees were not covered
under the scheme as on 31st March 2004. The Committee, therefore, storongly
recommended in their earlier Report that the ESIC should examine not only the
feasibility of expanding the scope of the scheme in terms of beneficiaries spreading
over various States/UTs lying hitherto uncovered/partially covered but also initiate
measures for improvement in the quality of services to the existing beneficiaries.
8. While furnishing the Action taken Notes, the Ministry have replied as under:—
"As per the provisions of Section 58 of the ESI Act, 1948, the State
Governments are required to set up medical facilities for providing medical
care to the insured persons and their families in areas where the Scheme is to
be implemented. Making necessary arrangements for medical care by the
State Government is pre-requisite before the Scheme is implemented in any
new area/State. In order to expedite the implementation of the Scheme in
North-Eastern States, the Corporation had taken a decision to bear the entire
expenditure on the Scheme in North-Eastern States for an initial period of
five years. The matter is also reviewed and discussed regularly in the meetings
of the ESI Corporation. Regarding the observation that there was no
corresponding increase of medical and cash benefits compared to rise in

4
income, it may be seen that the expenditure on medical and cash benefits for
the year 2004-05 has increased by 17.07% over the year 1999-2000. The
increase for subsequent year of 2005-06 is 22.85% and for the last year of
2006-07 the increase is 29.70% over the year 1999-2000".
9. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note have not been able to convincingly
reply to the Committee's Observation that there was no increase of medical and
cash benefits to the insured persons corresponding to the rising income of the
ESIC. The Committee's concern in this regard for better coverage of the scheme
and significant improvement in the quality of services in the ESIC hospitals/
dispensaries by way of greater investments of available funds has not been
addressed by the Ministry in their reply. In their earlier Report, the Committee
had brought to light an ironical situation wherein ESIC had recorded 'savings'
in their accounts over the revised budget estimate while showing no significant
improvement in coverage or quality of service. The Committee are thus
constrained to reiterate their recommendation that ESIC must set right their
budgeting and financial management systems so that the organization is well-
equipped to fully utilize its funds for providing superior services.
C. Database of Insured Persons
  Recommendation (Sl. No. 10, Para No. 152)
10. The Committee had observed that as a result of deficient internal control
mechanism of ESIC, Rs. 11.97 lakhs has been paid in cases of excess/fraudulent
payment of medical benefits in Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Delhi, Maharashtra and Orissa.
The reasons for this lapse have been stated to be the wrong declarations of the Insured
Persons, wrong computation vis-a-vis the Insured Persons entitlement, reassessment
of loss of earning capacity of Insured Persons, etc. The Committee, therefore, have
recommended that a database of Insured Persons be created which will be helpful not
only in preventing the misuse of medical benefits but also in ensuring the timely
settlement of medical claims.
11. In their Acion Taken Notes, the Ministry have stated as follows—
"Against the payment of Rs. 11.97 lakhs as excess to the IPs in respect of
Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Delhi, Maharashtra and Orissa, an amount of
Rs. 471295.40 has been recovered as on 16.3.07. Further, an amount of
Rs. 2.25 lakhs pertains to medical reimbursement which is to be recovered
by the State Governments. Particulars of recovery of balance excess payment
of Rs. 516118.50 is being obtained from the respective regions."
12. The Committee are surprised that the Ministry have skirted the issue of
creation of database of insured persons as recommended by them in their earlier
Report. As such a database will go a long way in tracking and preventing serious
lapses like wrong declaration of Insured Persons, wrong computation of
entitlements and improper payments etc., the Committee would like the ESIC to
review this matter and initiate steps for creating a computerized database of
Insured Persons, which will help to strengthen their internal control mechanism
and prevent recurrence of lapses and fraudulent practices brought into light by
Audit. This will not only prevent misuse of medical benefits but will also ensure
prompt settlement of medical claims.

CHAPTER  II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Committee note that the Employees’ State Insurance Scheme (ESIS) was
initiated in 1952 as an integrated Social Security Scheme to provide
comprehensive social security to workers employed in the organised sector other
than Government establishments. The Scheme applies to the non-seasonal
factories or manufacturing units located in geographical area notified for
implementation of the scheme and has also been extended to other establishments
such as shops, hotels and restaurants, road and motor transport undertakings,
newspaper establishments and cinema halls. The Scheme provides for medical
protection to workers in contingencies such as sickness, maternity, disablement
due to employment injury or occupational disease.
This is a progressive, well-conceived and a multi-dimensional health insurance
scheme providing full medical facilities to the beneficiaries and adequate cash
compensation to insured persons for loss of wages or earning capacity in times of
physical and employment injury. Wage limit for eligibility of the beneficiaries is
enhanced from time to time.  Presently, employees drawing wages upto Rs. 10,000 per
month from 1st October 2006 are entitled to be covered under the scheme.  The ESI
Scheme is self-financing in which contributions are raised from covered employees
and their employers as a fixed percentage of wages.  The contributions paid by the
employees and the employers are deposited in a common pool known as ESI fund,
which is utilized for meeting the administrative expenses as well as cash and medical
benefits to the insured persons and their dependents.
From  1st  January, 1997, covered employees contribute  1.75 per cent of wages
and the employers contribute 4.75 per cent of the wages of the covered employees.
Employees earning less than Rs. 40 per day, as daily wage, are exempted from payment
of their share of contribution.  The State Governments are required to bear one-eighth
share of the expenditure on medical benefit, within the per capita ceiling of Rs.900 per
annum from 1st April 2005 and the whole of any additional expenditure beyond the
ceiling.
The ESI Scheme is administered by an apex corporate body called the Employees
State  Insurance Corporation (ESIC) under the Chairmanship of the Union Minister of
Labour subordinate to which are Standing Committee and Medical Benefit Council.
The Scheme is being administered by ESIC through 23 Regional Offices, 11 Sub-
Regional Offices and 1084 Local Offices spreading over the various States/UTs of the
Country.
[Sl. No.1, Para 143 of 48th Report of PAC  (14th  Lok Sabha)]
5

6
Action Taken
No comments, being factual.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. No. P.O. 28015/1/06/DRG
dated 20th February, 2008]
Recommendation
Keeping in view the social objectives of the scheme, the Employees’ State Insurance
Corporation (ESIC) have members representing vital interest groups including
employees, employers, representatives of the Central  and State Governments, medical
profession and Members of Parliament. However, the Committee find it surprising
that no elected representative of the people is associated with the Regional Boards
constituted at the State level to oversee the implementation of the Scheme.  The
Committee feel that the inputs/suggestions provided by the people’s representatives
will help the ESIC to perform their responsibilities in a better way. In this regard,
Director General, ESIC also suggested during his deposition before the Committee
that the Members of Parliament should also be associated with the Regional Boards
but at the same time he  expressed his inability to do anything in the matter until the
concerned State Government recommended the same as per the provisions of ESI Act.
The Committee recommend that the Government may consider amending the ESI Act
suitably so as to make it compulsory to associate the elected representatives including
Members of Parliament with the Regional Boards of the Corporation for overseeing
the implementation of the scheme.
[Sl. No. 2, Para 144  of 48th Report of PAC  (14th  Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Committee has recommended that the Govt. may consider amending the ESI
Act suitably so as to make it compulsory  to associate the elected representatives
including Members of Parliament  with the Regional Boards of the Corporation for
overseeing the implementation of the Scheme.
According to Regulation 10 of ESI (General) Regulations, 1950 framed by the ESI
Corporation, the Regional Board shall normally consist of a Chairman and a
Vice-chairman nominated by the Chairman of the ESI Corporation in consultation
with the concerned State Govts., Representative of the State, the officer directly
Incharge of the ESI Scheme, the SSMC/SMC, one representative each of the employers
and employees and the Regional Director as Member Secretary.  In addition, the
Regional Board shall also include all the nominated  members of the Corporation and
Medical Benefit Council residing in the State as ex-officio members.   Further, the
chairman of the Corporation can also nominate upto 3 representatives of the employers
and employees.  Further, the Regional Board may also  co-opt  the officer Incharge of
a Sub Regional Office  in the  State.

7
It may, therefore, be seen that members of the Regional Board are nominated either
by the Chairman of the Corporation or by the State Govt. or are members by virtue of
their other positions.  Unlike the Corporation which has three Members of Parliament
as provided under Section 4(i) of the ESI Act, there is no provision for inclusion of
Members of Parliament or of State legislature in the Regional Board.
However, in order to implement the observation of PAC to include MPs/MLAs/
Representatives of the Local Bodies, this requires amendment in the relevant provisions
of Act/Rules/Regulation.  For this purpose views of State Govts. are considered
necessary.  Accordingly, ESI Corporation is taking action in the matter.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. No. P.O. 28015/1/06/DRG
dated 20th February, 2008]
Recommendation
The Committee have noted that Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC)  is
an apex body for effective administration of Employees’  State Insurance Scheme
(ESIS)  through Standing Committee and Medical Benefit Council. The ESIC is required
to meet at least twice in a year, the Standing Committee four times in a year and
Medical Benefit Council twice in a year to take policy decisions as well as to monitor
the execution of the Scheme.  However, the Committee find that while there was no
shortfalls of 25 per-cent in holding the meetings of Standing Committee during the
years 1999-2000, 2001-2002 and 2005-2006. The Medical Benefit Council (MBC)
had met only once during the year 2003-2004 and no sittings were held in 2004-2005
and 2005-2006. Explaining the reasons for shortfall in holding the meetings, the
Ministry of Labour and Employment have stated that the dates of meetings are decided
as per the convenience of the Labour Minister and Secretary who are the Chairman of
ESIC and Standing Committee respectively.  The Committee strongly feel that holding
of regular  meetings of the ESIC, Standing Committee and the MBC, as specified in
ESI Act, is meant to review the Corporation’s activities at regular intervals for taking
corrective measures. They therefore expect that Labour Secretary would be vigilant
about meetings of the ESIC, Standing Committee and the MBC will be held as provided
in ESI Act, 1948.
The Committee also note that while no Regional Boards were constituted in the
States of Chhattisgarh  and Jharkhand, there were shortfalls in holding meetings of
Regional Boards in other States ranging between 25 and 95 percent during the period
1999-2000 to 2003-2004. Besides, no meetings of the Regional Boards were held in
the States of Assam, Bihar, Pondicherry and Tamilnadu during 2004, 2005 and 2006
(upto September 2006). As regards the meetings of Local Committees, it was informed
by the Ministry that they were held only in the States of Karnataka, Maharashtra,
Orissa, Punjab, Rajasthan and Uttar Pradesh.  The Committee are thus inclined to
conclude that the Standing Committee, Medical Benefit Council, Regional Boards

8
and   Local   Committees have  been  virtually  inactive  over the  years. The Committee
are perturbed to note as to how in the absence of meetings of the Committees/Boards/
Councils of ESIC, the achievements and shortfalls in performance could be monitored
and evaluated for taking corrective measures wherever necessary. It is only after the
matter was taken up by the Committee that the Ministry advised all the Member
Secretaries to ensure that the Regional Boards and Local Committee meetings were
convened as per the prescribed schedule. The Committee are of the opinion that merely
issuing instructions by the Ministry will not yield the desired results.  The Ministry as
well as the ESIC should monitor regularly to ensure that the meetings of the Standing
Committee, Medical Benefit Council, Regional Boards and Local Committees are
held regularly as per the prescribed schedule for taking appropriate policy decisions
and for  exercising  effective control over the operations with a view to achieving the
stated objectives of the Employees State Insurance Scheme.
[Sl. No. 3, Para 145 of 48th Report of PAC (14th  Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Consequent upon approval of Chairman, ESIC, necessary action for issue  of
notification for re-constitution of Regional Boards, Chhattisgarh and Tamil Nadu has
been taken.
 The Uttaranchal Govt. was requested to furnish proposal for constitution of Regional
Board  on 4.2.2002.  However, recommendation of State Govt. were received on
23.7.2002 and with the approval of Chairman, ESIC, Regional Board was constituted
on 26.2.2004.
The following meeting of  ESI Corporation, Standing Committee and Medical
Benefit Council were held from 2005 to date.
Years Date of ESIC meeting Date of Standing Date of Medical
Committee Meeting Benefit Council Meetings
2005 1.2.2005, 27.2.2005 1.2.05, 2.6.05 & 13.12.05 —
19.4.05, 7.7.05 & 21.12.05
2006 21.2.2006, 15.6.2006 & 31.1.2006, 9.6.2006 & 31.10.2006*
23.12.2006 6.12.2006
2007 14.2.2007, 17.7.2007, 31.1.2007, 6.6.2007, —
11.10.2007 & 18.12.2007 12.10.2007 & 18.12.2007
2008 The ESIC meeting to be held 23.1.2008 —
on 18.2.2008
* Shortfall in meetings of MBC is due to the reasons that these meetings are Chaired
by the Director General, Health Services, Govt. of India  and things could not be
coordinated properly.  The Director General, ESIC is not member of this important
decision making body.  Therefore, now it is proposed to amend the relevant Section  10
of the ESI Act, so that Director General, ESIC becomes the Chairman of the MBC and
DGHS becomes Co-Chairman of the Medical Benefit Council.  After this amendment,
it will be possible to hold the meetings of the MBC regularly.  Accordingly, an agenda

9
item is being placed for the approval of the ESIC in its ensuing meeting to be held on
22.2.2008 and it has been approved.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. No. P.O. 28015\1\06\DRG
    dated 20th February, 2008]
Recommendation
It is understood that the Government had appointed a Committee  (Verma
Committee) in 2002 to assess the functioning of the ESIC. This expert Committee had
suggested various measures for implementing new policies and future development of
the scheme. The Committee would  like to be apprised by Ministry about the specific
action taken by them on the recommendations of the Verma Committee.
[Sl. No. 4, Para 146 of 48th Report of PAC (14th  Lok Sabha )]
Action Taken
A Sub-Committee consisting of Director General, Shri R.K. Somani, Insurance
Commissioner, Medical Commissioner and other senior officers of ESIC examined
and discussed in detail the various recommendations of Verma Committee.
The Committee accepted many of the recommendations of the V erma Committee which
include simplification of procedure for payment of cash benefits, need for computerization,
rationalization of staff in offices, hospitals and dispensaries, need to bring structural changes
in the functioning of the ESI Corporation, improvement  of primary and secondary medical
care, face lift of buildings, delegation of more financial and administrative powers to IMO
Incharge, Medical Suptds. and Regional Directors etc.,  modernisation and upgradation of
medical services, enlarging the scope of revolving fund, construction of more Model
Hospitals and provision of latest equipment and technologies to them, training of staff,
improvement in purchase and distribution of drugs  through Rate Contract system,
procurement, storage, distribution and inventory control of drugs, introduction of
professional management for the hospitals, emphasis on Human Resource Development
and CME programmes, promotion of AYUSH, computer linkage among all offices,
simplification of systems, conducting patient satisfaction surveys,   coordination between
ESIC and EPFO etc. Further, the recommendation of V erma Committee  to raise  the wage
ceiling for coverage under the Scheme, provisions for medical benefits separately for family
members, wage period for availing super-speciality treatment, enhancement of ceiling on
per capita payment to the State Govts.,  introduction of quality assurance programme have
already been implemented.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. No. P.O. 28015\1\06\DRG
dated 20th February, 2008]

10
Recommendation
The Committee find that the recovery of dues from the defaulting employers was
initially done through the District Collectors of the concerned States. The progress in
recovery through District Collectors was not encouraging. To accelerate the pace of
recovery of ESI dues, the Revenue Recovery Machinery of the Corporation was
set-up under the new Sections 45-C to 45-I added in the Act by the ESI (Amendment)
Act, 1989, in phases from January 1992 onwards in all the Regions. According to the
Ministry, target for recovery is fixed at the beginning of each financial year with
individual targets for each region and performance of the Recovery Officers/Machinery
is monitored on monthly basis with overall quarterly review. The Committee note that
though the process of recovery of  ESI dues was accelerated to some extent and a sum
of Rs. 956.08 crore was recovered during the period from 1992-93 to 2005-06, the
outstanding arrears also increased simultaneously from Rs. 524.79 crore in March
2000 to Rs. 1015.14 crore in March, 2005 and further to Rs. 1140.87 crore in March,
2006. The arrears for the year 2005-06 alone worked out to Rs 229.08 crore. The
Committee are concerned over the fact that despite the efforts made by the ESIC, the
outstanding arrears continued to increase unabatedly. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry’s efforts should be focused on enforcement and not
amnesty. If necessary, they may empower themselves with enabling amendments in
the Statute/Rules to remove bottlenecks so that the dues are recovered in a time bound
manner without any difficulty. The Committee may be apprised about the steps initiated
in this regard.
[Sl. No. 7, Para 149 of 48th Report of PAC (14th  Lok Sabha )]
Action Taken
The determination of contribution is an ongoing process and the increase in arrears is
the result of the timely action taken by the Corporation against the defaulting employers.
Further, it is submitted that prior to setting up of Corporation’s own Recovery Machinery,
recovery of arrears was entrusted to the Certificate Officers/ District Collectors of State
Govts.   Following insertion of 45 C to 45 I in the ESI Act,  the Revenue Recovery
Machinery of ESI Corporation was set up from 1.1.1992 onwards in all regions to recover
the dues from the defaulting employers. The comparative figures of recovery made by
Collectors and by the Recovery Officers are again given below:—
Year Recovery made
through District
Collectors
(Rs. in Crores)
   1    2
1984-85 4.74
1985-86 5.43
1986-87 4.29
1987-88 5.62

11
1988-89   9.17
1989-90   7.81
1990-91   8.95
1991-92 10.47
As a result of continuous monitoring from the headquarters office of the ESI
Corporation and collective efforts of the Recovery Officers working in the field, the
Corporation could recover a total sum of Rs. 1124.19 crores during the period from
1992-93 to 2006-07. The year-wise break-up of the same is given below:—
                                                                                          (Rs. in Crore)
Year Dues recovered
through Recovery
Machinery of ESI
Corporation
1992-93 12.15
1993-94  16.90
1994-95  21.40
1995-96  23.45
1996-97  28.68
1997-98  37.51
1998-99  54.88
1999-00  65.17
2000-01  67.50
2001-02  72.59
2002-03  88.03
2003-04 131.50
2004-05 176.10
2005-06 160.22
2006-07 168.11
12

12
The details of total dues outstanding, the dues recoverable and dues presently not
recoverable due to court cases, factories gone into liquidation, dues pending with
Claim & Commissioner for last three years are given below:—
                                                                             (Rs. in crores)
BREAK UP As on As on As on
31.3.2005 31.3.2006 31.3.2007
12 3 4
Recovery Officers
A) ARREARS RECOVERABLE
Amount pending with 550.47 443.61 397.70
Total 550.47 443.61 397.70
(B) ARREARS NOT RECOVERABLE
FOR THE PRESENT
(i) Amount of arrears disputed in Courts 366.04 445.38 430.42
(ii) Amount due from factories/ Estt. 74.79 103.16 151.47
Which  have gone into liquidation
(iii) Amount pending with Claim 12.34 9.36 4.75
Commissioner
(iv) Amount due from factories/Estt. 1 1.42 14.39 40.10
Which have  closed and whereabout
of employers are not known
(v) Decree obtained and execution 0.09 0.09 0.11
proceedings in progress
Total  (i to v) 464.48 572.38 626.85
(C) DUES FROM SICK INDUSTRIES/
EXEMPTION GRANTED BY STATE/
CENTRAL GOVT.
(i) Factorier regd. With BIFR but rehabilitation 46.20 48.93
 scheme  yet to be sanctioned
(ii) Factories/establishments which have 1 1.22 34.86
been declared sick and rehabilitaqtion
 scheme sanctioned by BIFR
(iii) Closed unit in respect of which particulars 38.89 41.96
of employer is known/available
(iv) Dues from factories/estt. Where exemption 28.57 0.68
granted by State Govt. and arrears
continued to be shown
Total (i to iv) 124.88 126.43
GRAND TOTAL 1015.15 1140.87 1150.98
(A+B+C)

13
It may be observed that recoverable dues pending with Recovery Officers are
decreasing gradually.
The Recovery Officers of the ESIC are making all out efforts to recover the dues of
the Corporation.  The progress of recovery of the dues is monitored on month to
month basis.  Further, the special drives are also undertaken from time to time to
recover  maximum dues of the Corporation.
The Amnesty Scheme, as such, introduced in August 2006 had no direct bearing
upon the arrears.  Rather Amnesty Scheme was a fall out of the request received from
different quarters representing the interest of employers and employees against whom
prosecution actions were pending in different courts and were dragging on for years
together.  ESI Corporation with a view to reducing the huge pendency of prosecution
cases in different courts decided to introduce the Amnesty Scheme on conditions of
payment  of contribution dues by the employers for the period in respect of which
prosecution action was pending in court, payment of interest thereto and damages
leviable on amount of default.  In the process of collection of past arrears improved to
some extent and in fact such collection in respect of the Amnesty Scheme which was
in vogue during the period from 1.8.06 to 30.6.07, a sum of Rs. 4.36 crores was
collected as contribution while Rs. 1.90 crores was collected as interest and
Rs.1.66 crores was collected as damages.  The Amnesty Scheme, therefore, helped to
increase collection of arrears to the extent indicated without detracting from the main
focus of collection of arrears through the process of recovery and enforcement of
recovery provisions through the Corporations’ Recovery Machinery.  In this process,
1976 cases were settled.
The Amnesty Scheme has been approved by the ESI Corporation in its 141st meeting
held on 18.12.07 with an aim to facilitate smooth enforcement of the Scheme by
settlement of litigation as well as minimizing the arrears.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. No.PO 28015/1/06/DRG
dated 20th February 2008]
Recommendation
The Committee have noted that there are 9.78 lakh eligible employees yet to be
covered under the Scheme as on 31st March 2004. Although the Ministry have reported
improvements in coverage of insured persons and employees in the subsequent year,
i.e. 2005-06, it has been conceded that increase in coverage has not taken place
commensurate with the growth of industrial activity in the Country. For improving the
coverage, the ESIC have enhanced the eligibility wage ceiling from Rs. 7500 to
Rs. 10000 w.e.f. 1st October 2006. However, the Committee believe that the increase
in wage ceiling alone will not remedy the situation, as a large number of industrial
units are operating in areas where the ESI Scheme has not been implemented and the
ESIC was also not able to meet their  existing targets due to the inability of the State
Governments to fulfil the requirement of medical arrangements stipulated under the

14
statute. Moreover, in certain cases, most of the employees/industries are scattered in
very small numbers over a large area and hence do not qualify for coverage, as the
guidelines stipulate a minimum of 3000 employees to start a dispensary for providing
medical treatment. The Committee, therefore, desire that the ESIC should make
concerted efforts to enlarge the scope of the Scheme and widen its coverage so as to
include in the ambit of the scheme all the eligible employees in the organized sector.
The eligibility wage ceiling also requires to be monitored to keep pace with the changing
income profile in the industrial sector. Further, in view of the growth of labour in the
unorganized sector. the Government may also consider extending the coverage of this
laudable scheme to these sections of the labour force who are presently languishing
without any medical security. This will go a long way in further strengthening the
social security system in the Country. In this regard, it would be pertinent to suggest
that the ESIC should also make concerted efforts to promote awareness about the
scheme and its benefits amongst the masses.
As regards the seemingly intractable problem of State Governments not measuring
up to expectations, the Committee would like the ESIC to activate their Regional
Boards and local offices for more effective coordination and follow-up with State
authorities. ESIC must take the initiative and assume a more pro-active role for this
purpose even by making appropriate changes in the Statute and Rules, if required.
[Sl. No. 8 Para 150 of 48th Report of PAC (14th  Lok Sabha )]
Action Taken
The following steps have been taken to enlarge the scope of the coverage of the
Scheme—
(a) The ESI Corporation in its meetings held on 21.2.2003 and 23.2.2005 has
approved extension of Scheme  to the workers  of educational  and medical
institutions.   The State Govts. are required to issue a notification under
Section 1(5) of the ESI Act after seeking the approval of Govt. of India.  The
matter has regularly been pursued  by the ESI Corporation and Ministry of
Labour and Employment, Govt. of India  with State Govts. for early issue of
notifications in this regard.
So far, State Govts. of Rajasthan, Bihar, Puducherry, J&K, Uttaranchal,
Chhattisgarh, West Bengal and Jharkhand have issued final notifications to
extend the Scheme  to educational institutions and State Govts. of
West Bengal, Rajasthan, Bihar, Kerala and Himachal Pradesh have issued
final notifications  to extend the Scheme to private medical institutions.
(b) The Corporation has enhanced the wage ceiling for coverage of employees
under the Scheme  form Rs.7,500/- to Rs.10,000/- w.e.f. 01.10.2006.
(c) A proposal to have a uniform threshold of coverage of 10 or more persons
for both factories and establishments, irrespective of whether power is used
or not,  is under consideration of a Sub-Committee of the Corporation for
considering necessary amendments in the Act for this purpose.

15
(d)      Coverage of insured persons under the ESI Act is being enlarged. During the
year 2005-06,  84.98 IPs have been covered under the Scheme whereas this
has gone up to 101.57 lakhs for the year 2006-07.  Similarly the ceiling on
expenditure for medical care has been raised from Rs.900 to Rs.1,000 per IP
family unit per annum.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. No. P.O. 28015/1/06/DRG
dated 20th February, 2008]
Recommendation
The ESI Scheme provides not only medical care for the Insured Persons (IPs) and
their dependents but also cash benefits relating to medical care, sickness and maternity,
dependents benefit and employment injury benefit to insured workers in consonance
with the policy of ILO and as provided in Section 46 of the ESI Act 1948. The
Committee find that medical reimbursement claims were pending for a long period in
some cases and in a few instances, the medical claims were settled very late. The
Committee further note that the delay was attributed to poor progress in disposal of
claims, flaws in accounting and documentation, non-availability of funds, manpower
etc. Although the Ministry have informed that the scheme of revolving fund, and a
pilot project of information Technology enabled services are going to be implemented
in all the regions, the Committee desire that the proposed measures including
computerization of records should ensure settlement of all the claims relating to cash
benefits for medical care, dependents benefit, and employment injury benefit in a time
bound manner. Such efforts will not only add to the efficiency of the ESIC but will
reinforce the credibility and acceptability of the ESI scheme amongst the beneficiaries.
[Sl. No. 9 Para 151 of 48th Report of PAC (14th  Lok Sabha )]
Action Taken
As desired by the Committee, the process of computerization of functioning of
ESIC is in progress and a consultant has been appointed for advising ESIC in carrying
out the work.  Once the same is put into operation it will ensure speedy settlement of
all types of claims and will also increase the efficiency in the ESIC.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. No. P.O. 28015/1/06/DRG
dated 20th February, 2008]
Recommendation
The Committee have noted that deficient management of ESIC hospitals and
dispensaries resulted in under-utilization of bed capacity. It has been observed that
there were many hospitals that had less than 50 per cent bed occupancy on account of
shortage of medical/paramedical staff including specialists, lack of basic facilities
like drinking water in some hospitals, closure of factories, accessibility of other hospitals

16
and other local factors. The Committee note that the ESIC have taken some steps by
issuing guidelines to State Governments to ensure optimum utilization of hospitals.
The Committee feel that under-utilization of ESIC Hospitals and dispensaries in not a
desirable situation for an organization that is required to cater to a vast number of
people needing medical attention.  Though the primary concern to the ESIC should be
to render medical care services to Insured Persons and their dependants, the Committee
are of the opinion that the non-utilized capacity of ESIC hospitals/dispensaries may
be opened for the non-Insured Persons on payment of specific user charges, which
will, in the long run, ensure the cost effectiveness of treatment for the Insured Persons
and their dependents also. The Committee, therefore, desire that the ESIC should
amend the ESI Act with  a view to ensuring optimum-utilization of its medical
infrastructure by making them accessible for the general public/uninsured persons,
wherever the specified number of Insured Persons are not available.
[Sl. No. 11 Para 153 of 48th Report of PAC (14th  Lok Sabha )]
Action Taken
ESI Corporation has already constituted a Sub-Committee for amendment of the
ESI Act and make provision  for opening of facilities of ESI Hospitals to general
public on user charges and running of ESI Hospitals through third party participation.
Once the enabling provisions are made in ESI Act, the idle capacity  in ESI Hospitals
will be made open to general public on user charges to ensure optimum utilization of
the facilities.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. P.O. 28015/1/06/DRG
dated 20th February, 2008]
Recommendation
The Committee are perturbed to note that though ESIC had constructed 23,912
beds in 143 ESI Hospitals and 42 ESI Annexes and 86 per cent i.e. 20,486 were
commissioned by 31st March, 2004; the percentage of non-commissioned beds in the
ESIC hospitals in several States/UTs namely, Andhra Pradesh, Chandigarh, Delhi,
Gujarat, Haryana, Maharashtra, Karnnataka, Madhya Pradesh, Tamil Nadu,
Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal ranged from 18 per cent to 100 per cent on account of
various reasons like shortage of medical /paramedical staff including specialists, closure
of factories, accessibility of other hospitals and other local factors. Whatever may be
the reasons advanced for non-commissioning of beds, it is the Insured Persons and
their dependants who eventually have to bear the brunt. It is ironical that although
ESIC are flush with funds, the beneficiaries have to suffer on account of non-
commissioning of beds. The Committee find this a rather embarrassing situation for
the Corporation. The Committee, therefore, desire that the ESIC/Ministry should
impress upon the States/UTs where the percentage of non-commissioning of beds is
higher to hand over the administration of such hospitals and dispensaries so that the
intended objectives of providing insurance cover under the ESI Act could be achieved.
[Sl. No. 12 Para 154 of 48th Report of PAC (14th  Lok Sabha )]

17
Action Taken
ESI Corporation has taken up the issue of under utilization of ESI hospitals and
dispensaries with the State Governments.  State Governments  have been asked to
re-organize the hospitals and dispensaries, re-deploy the staff as per the need to ensure
optimum utilization of the facilities created.  ESI Corporation has further taken up the
task of preparing re-organisaton plan of the States and sent it to the State Governments
for implementing the same,  ESI Corporation has already taken, in principle, decision
to take over the administration of ESI Scheme from the State Government wherever
there is specific request from the State Government.    Additional beds in the Hospital
are commissioned based on the work load in the hospitals.  In case, the bed occupancy
of the Hospital is low and there is no scope for increase in the utilization due to less
number of IPs in the region, the bed capacity  of the hospital is re-organized to ensure
cost  effectiveness and adequate utilization.  It is an on going process.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. No. P.O. 28015/1/06/DRG
dated 20th February, 2008]
Recommendation
The Committee have found that out of a target of establishing 25 Model Hospitals
to improve the quality of medical care provided to the beneficiaries and to serve as
benchmark for upgrading other hospitals by the State Governments, only 17 Medical
Hospital had been established in the States so far and even these lacked proper facilities.
Citing the reasons for shortfall in setting up of Model Hospitals, the Ministry have
stated that in some of the States, where ESI Scheme is being implemented, the number
of insured persons does not justify setting up of Model Hospital as per the norms of
ESIC. The Committee feel that before fixing the target for setting up the Model Hospital
across the country, the ESIC ought to have gone for a proper feasibility study. The
Committee would now expect them to re-appraise the requirements and determine the
targets afresh. In the meantime, ESIC should tone up the services in those Model
Hospital which have been already commissioned to enable them to remain true to
their name and meet the requisite standards.
[Sl. No. 13 Para 155 of 48th Report of PAC (14th  Lok Sabha )]
Action Taken
ESI Corporation has  taken a decision to run one hospital in each State to be
developed as Model Hospital for the State.  In the States, where ESI Corporation  is
already running a hospital, the same was designated as Model Hospital for the State.
At present, ESI Corporation  is running 18 Model Hospitals in various States and
Union Territories.  As recommended by the PAC, ESIC has  re-assessed the requirements
for model hospitals.  In addition to the 18 hospitals, Model Hospitals will be started in
the State of Pondicherry and Himachal Pradesh subject to the State Govt. giving its
consent.  In Haryana, the Model Hospital is under construction at Gurgaon.  In the
remaining four States, at present, there is no ESI Hospital and as and when the number

18
of IPs increase and justify setting up of the Hospital, the same will be designated as
Model Hospitals and to be run by ESIC with the consent of the State Govt.
ESI Corporation has taken several steps to upgrade and modernize the services of
ESIC Model Hospitals.  Some of the actions taken are as under:—
(1) Modernization  and upgradation of hospitals by providing modern equipments
for diagnostic and clinical services.  To facilitate early  sanction of equipments
for hospitals, Medical Superintendents have been delegated powers to sanction
equipments up to Rs.15 lakhs per  unit at the State level itself.
(2) Medical Superintendents have been delegated powers for Special Repairs
and R&M   of the Model Hospitals.
(3)  Action has been taken for absorption of staff on deputation to Model Hospitals
and filling up of the remaining  vacancies on regular basis.
(4) Powers have been delegated to Medical Superintendents to recruitment of
group C & D staff on regular basis.
(5) Medicines are being  issued to both out patient and discharged patients from
the hospital.
(6) Tie up arrangements have been made with other reputed Govt./non Govt.
hospitals  for providing super speciality/speciality services which are not
available   in ESI Hospitals.
(7)  ESI Corporation is in the process of getting all the Model Hospitals  graded
by  professional agencies.
(8) The ESI Corporation is in the process of getting hospitals ISO 9001-2000
certification.   One ESI Hospital  in Delhi has already been granted ISO
certification.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. No. P.O. 28015/1/06/DRG
dated 20th February,  2008]
Recommendation
The Committee’s examination of the subject reveals a grim picture about the state
of many ESI Hospitals  in a number of States. It has been found that costly and essential
equipment purchased for ESI hospitals and dispensaries remained unutilized/under-
utilized for a long period due to non-award of Annual Maintenance Contract with
installation agencies, non-availability of technical staff and doctors, mismatch between
equipments and operating staff and lack of coordination between the Union and the
State Governments. While these equipment remained unused, ESIC had to incur
additional expenditure on providing treatment to the Insured Persons from outside
agencies. Though ESIC has an established mechanism comprising of the posts of Senior
State Medical Commissioner ( SSMC ) and State Medical Commissioner ( SMC)  to
monitor the functioning of ESIC Hospitals and review their condition with State

19
Governments on regular basis, it is obvious that obtaining regulatory system did not
work. The Committee recommend that ESIC must identify the idle equipments in all
the ESIC hospitals and dispensaries in the country and take urgent steps to make them
functional . They should also energise their field formations in this regard so that
prompt remedial action  is taken in coordination with the State Governments. If
necessary, punitive measures may also be initiated against the negligent officials.
[Sl. No. 14 Para 156 of 48th Report of PAC (14th  Lok Sabha )]
Action Taken
As per the recommendation of the Committee, ESIC has written to all the State
Govts. to identify  the idle equipments in the hospitals  and dispensaries to take urgent
steps to make them functional.  Further, instructions have also been given to ensure
annual maintenance contract in respect of the equipments.  A strict watch is being kept
on the idle equipments in the hospitals and dispensaries and pursue the matter with the
State Govt. to ensure that equipments are made functional at the earliest.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. No. P.O. 28015/1/06/DRG
dated 20th February, 2008]
Recommendation
The Committee have noted that ESIC is providing both allopathic and ayurvedic
drugs for which the rate contracts are formulated from time to time and forwarded to
the dispensaries and hospitals of ESIC, besides ESIC’s centralized rate contract for
the procurement of drugs, there is a provision for tie-up arrangements with local
chemists for the purchase of urgent requirement of drugs which are not available in the
hospitals and dispensaries of ESIC. Despite all these provisions, the Committee are
perturbed to find that medicines were held beyond their  expiry date and vaccines
could also not be utilized before they expired. Shockingly, Phenformin  capsules,
which were banned by the Union Government in 2003 were distributed in Kansabahal
ESI  Hospital (Orissa) on account of delay in communication of the ban from the State
Government. The Committee while taking a serious view of such glaring lapses
involving ESI hospitals, would like this matter to be enquired  into and the Committee
kept apprised on the following-up action taken. The Committee desire that the ESIC
should ensure that such urgent information should be communicated to concerned
ESIC hospitals/dispensaries within twenty-four hours from the time /date of declaration
of ban of drugs. The State Governments should also follow scientific inventory control
methods for estimating the requirements so that the possibility of shortages/
requirements and expiry of drugs can be reduced to the barest minimum.
[Sl. No. 15 Para 157 of 48th Report of PAC (14th  Lok Sabha )]
Action Taken
As recommended by the Committee, the State Govts. have been asked to enquire
into the matter and submit an action taken report. ESI Corporation on receipt of any

20
communication from the Drug Controller General of India regarding banning of any
drug, circulates the same to all the State ESI Directorates by Fax and Speed Post for
taking necessary action.
In future, if any such instructions received from the office of Drug Controller  General
of India, it will be ensured that the same is communicated to all State ESI Directorates
immediately for taking action.  It is also informed that DCGI issues instructions to all
State Governments and all State Govt. Institutions including ESI Directorates are
supposed to take action on these without waiting for any communication from ESI
Corporation/Ministry of Labour.
ESIC have been issuing guidelines regarding adoption of scientific inventory control
and store management techniques for store management.  The same has again been circulated
to the State Govt. for adoption so as to reduce the possibility of expiry of drugs.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. No. P.O. 28015/1/06/DRG
dated 20th February, 2008]
Recommendation
The Committee have noted that ESIC has been awarded a project by World Bank/
National AIDS Control Organization (NACO) for the prevention and control of HIV/
AIDS amongst ESI beneficiaries. The project envisaged setting up of 85 Sexually
Transmitted Diseases (STD) clinics, 73 STD laboratories and 35 Voluntary Testing
Centre. Against this target, only 42 clinics could be set up and neither the STD
laboratories nor the V oluntary Testing Centre were established. As regards, the
utilization of available funds during the years 1999-2005, it was rather poor and ranged
between as low as 6.27 and 33.06 per cent. The Committee would like the State
Governments to be motivated to take-up this programme on priority basis. STD clinics,
laboratories and V oluntary Testing Centres should be opened up in HIV/AIDS may be
prevented and the entire allocated fund may be used to achieve the envisaged target.
The Committee would await follow up action by the Ministry/ESIC in this regard.
[Sl. No. 16 Para 158 of 48th Report of PAC (14th  Lok Sabha )]
Action Taken
ESI Corporation has proposed for setting up of 85 STD clinics and 73 STD labs all
over the country.  But NACO had sanctioned only 42 STD clinics and 42 STD labs
only.  The sanctioned STD clinics and STD labs have already been set up.  In addition
35 VCTC clinics have been sanctioned and established.  It is further stated that the
expenditure  has increased in the year  2005-06 and 2006-07 to Rs. 87.88 lacs and
Rs. 64.32 lacs.  Further, letters have been written to the Directors of  ESI Schemes in
various States and  to Sr. State/State Medical Commissioners to take personal interest
to strengthen the HIV AIDS control programme in their States  and ensure that the
entire funds allocated are utilized  to achieve the targets assigned.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. No. P.O. 28015/1/06/DRG
dated 20th February,  2008]

21
Recommendation
The Committee have noted that section 58 of ESI Act 1948 provides full medical
care facilities for the Insured Persons and their dependents from the very first day of
entering insurable employment through a network of empanelled clinics, ESI
dispensaries and hospitals. The ESIC constructs hospitals and dispensaries on the
basis of requests made by the State Governments. These requests are examined on the
basis of number of Insured Persons and beneficiaries of ESI Scheme residing in that
particular area. Subsequently, ESIC acquires land from different State Governments
for construction of hospitals/dispensaries and staff quarters. The Committee notice
that in several States, land acquired at the total cost of Rs. 3.68 crore during the years
1967 to 2003 could not be utilized for the intended purpose. It also resulted in blocking
of funds which could have been utilized elsewhere urgently required. The Ministry
have sought to explain the situation by stating that when the ESIC decided to commence
construction works of hospitals/dispensaries, the number of Insured Persons in these
areas declined as a result of closure of some factories and also due to increase in the
wage limit of workers. The plots were retained for unduly long periods, some of them
even after 37 years, in the hope of increase in the number of Insured Persons on
account of re-industrialization of the areas or increase in the wage ceilings required
for the coverage of Insured Persons. According to the Ministry, the plots obtained
through acquisition process could not be disposed off to third parties. As the ESIC is
not left with any other option, rather than wait for re-industrialization of the areas, the
Committee would like them to immediately initiate measures for construction of
hospitals/dispensaries on the vacant plots. If the number of insured persons in the
jurisdiction of the hospitals/ dispensaries is not adequate, ESIC may consider opening
up the facilities for general public by levying user charges. This will also help meet the
shortage of standard medical facilities across the country.
[Sl. No. 17 Para 159 of 48th Report of PAC (14th  Lok Sabha )]
Action Taken
ESIC has taken steps for construction of hospitals, dispensaries on the vacant plots
wherever the number of insured persons justifies the establishment of the same.
ESIC is periodically reviewing whether the plots purchased by ESIC but not utilized
for construction of hospitals/ dispensaries can be utilized taking into account increased
IP population.  For example, ESIC has taken decisions to construct the buildings in plots
at Narela, Marthal, Karnal, Vilakudi, Mylon, Alwar, Bhiwadi, Virudhnagar, Palladam,
Radiapallayam & Ariankuppam.  ESIC is in the process of increasing their coverage to
various new sectors and the other vacant plots will also be utilized in due course.
Regarding opening of facilities to general public by levying user  charges, ESIC
has  already initiated action and a proposal for amendment of ESI Act, 1948 in this
regard has been sent to the Ministry of Labour & Employment.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. No. P.O. 28015/1/06/DRG
dated 20th February, 2008]

22
Recommendation
After the matter was taken up for detailed examination by the Committee, the ESIC
have taken certain corrective measures to improve the scheme as specified below: —
• State Governments as well as Regional Directors were requested to hold
regular  meetings of the Regional Boards as per the prescribed schedule.
• Medical Benefit Council has been constituted.
• New business processes in consonance with the changes occurring in the
labour market has been adopted.
• Wage ceiling for coverage of employee’s has been raised from Rs. 7500 per
month to Rs. 10,000 per month.
• Savings decreased from Rs. 327.72 crore in 2003-04 to Rs. 225.87 crore in
2004-05 on account of increase in expenditure from Rs. 1170.48 crore to
Rs. 1258.20 crore during the same year.
• In the year 2005-06, the coverage of the scheme 
improved. In as much as
84.98 lakhs Insured Persons and 329.73 lakhs beneficiaries got covered under
the ESI Scheme.
• The extension of ESI Scheme to educational and medical institutions has
been approved.
• The Scheme has also been extended gradually to other establishments such
as shops, hotels and restaurants, road and motor transport undertaking, cinema
halls and newspaper establishments employing  20 or more persons.
• Ceiling of expenditure on full medical care has also been raised from Rs. 750
to Rs. 900 per I.Ps. family unit per annum.
The Committee trust that the aforesaid measures are steps in the right direction.
However, for putting the Employee’s State Insurance Scheme (ESIS) infrastructure to
optimum use with the desired results, it is imperative to improve some of  the key
areas of their functioning by acquiring more powers under the law, if required, such as
quality of services, recovery of arrears on account of contribution of employers to the
fund, bed utilization, inventory management  of medicines including proper
procurement procedures of medicines and equipment, property management and under
coverage of the working class as detailed in preceding paragraphs. The Committee
would await specific steps taken by the ESIC in these identified areas. The Committee
would also like to get a review of the scheme done at periodic intervals by competent
medical management professionals with a view to identifying and rectifying its
shortcomings as well as to evaluate whether the intended objectives have been achieved.
[Sl. No. 18 Para 160 of 48th Report of PAC (14th  Lok Sabha )]
Action Taken
The Committee has felt that it is imperative  to improve some of the key areas of
functioning such as quality of services, recovery of arrears, bed utilization, inventory

23
management  of medicines and equipments, property management, under coverage of
employees etc.
In this regard,  it  is stated that    constant efforts are being made from time to time
to improve the functioning of the Corporation by introduction of ISO standards for
hospitals and  offices,  enhancing  delegated powers to field offices for better
functioning, enhancement of PDB and DB rates, setting up of super speciality  hospitals
at Kollam, Kerala and elsewhere, decision to open ESI hospitals having unutilised
capacity to the beneficiaries of Rashtriya Swasthya Beema Yojana launched by Govt.
of India for BPL families in the unorganized sector, proposal to amend the Act for
opening of under-utilised facilities in ESI  hospitals to general public on user charges
and running of ESI hospitals through third party participation, introduction of system
of self certification, Amnesty scheme for defaulting employers, recruitment plans for
filling up of all vacancies  in ESIC institutions, Constitution of a Sub-Committee of
the Corporation for suggesting amendments to the ESI Act, taking over of more ESI
Schemes run by State Govts., progressive implementation of the ESI Scheme to new
areas as per phased programme, intensive action for prosecution cases and recovery
of arrears, relaxation of conditions in the Rajiv Gandhi Shramik Kalyan Yojana,
gradation of hospitals by  competent  external professional agencies, introduction of
ERP and computerization, crash programme for physical upgradation of hospitals,
conducting  customer satisfaction  surveys, conducting  evaluation of the functioning
of the ESI Corporation etc. through organizations like IIM, Ahmedabad, IIMC,
New Delhi, ICRA, New Delhi, XIM, Bhubaneshwar etc.   For procurement of medicines
centralized  RC regime has been introduced  and for efficient  property management,
engineers in all the grades from junior engineer to chief engineer are being recruited
and for better  coverage, in addition to the existing  inspection regime, census of
employers etc. is also being considered.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. No. P.O. 28015/1/06/DRG
dated 20th February, 2008]

CHAPTER  III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
While examining the budget framed by the ESIC, the Committee have noticed that
there was ‘saving’ ranging from Rs. 64.21 crore to Rs. 327.72 crore during 1999-2000 to
2004-2005. The percentage of savings was particularly high during the years 2002-03,
2003-04 and 2004-05. The incidence of ‘savings’ in the face of deteriorating services
can only reinforce the opinion of the Committee that the planning mechanism of the
ESIC as reflected in their budgeting needs corrections so that the beneficiaries under the
scheme get their due benefit. The Committee would like the ESIC to streamline project
planning and their budgetary systems with a view to enhancing the efficacy of the scheme.
[Sl. No. 6 Para 148 of 48th Report of PAC (14th  Lok Sabha )]
Action Taken
The budget framed by the ESI Corporation are revised during the course of the
year taking into account the expenditure  actually incurred.  The percentage of savings
with reference to the Revised Estimate are as follows in respect of various years pointed
out by Audit:—
Year Budget Revised Percentage of savings
Estimate Estimate with reference to Revised
Estimate
1999-2000 1386.38 1338.61 3.45
2000-01 1422.32 1423.51 16.93
2001-02 1287.39 1176.77 8.59
2002-03 1401.02 1164.52 16.88
2003-04 1498.20 1323.78 11.64
2004-05 1484.07 1372.18 7.54
Total 8479.38 7799.37 8.02
From the above, it is seen that the percentage of savings are only 8.02% on an
average which cannot be termed to be very high.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. No. P.O. 28015/1/06/DRG
dated 20th February, 2008]
24

CHAPTER  IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation
The Committee are constrained to note that though the income of Employees’ State
Insurance Scheme (ESIC) has risen by 42.45 per cent in 2004-2005 over the level of
1999-2000, there was no corresponding increase in providing medical and cash benefit
to the beneficiaries. The expenditure on these components increased merely by 17.07
per cent during the same period. While the achievements made by the ESIC in raising
their income is satisfactory, it is very difficult to agree with the plea put forward by the
Ministry that the lack of corresponding increase in expenditure is due to the avoiding
of wasteful/infructuous expenditure and economising the expenditure the expenditure
without sacrificing the quantum of benefit paid to the beneficiaries of the scheme. In
the backdrop of inflation and stagnant expenditure, it is shocking to note that many of
the ESI hospital do not have proper facilities and are suffering from lack of modern
equipment and shortage of medical/ paramedical staff. Adding to the dismal scenario,
as per a survey conducted by ESIC itself, 9.78 lakh eligible employees were not covered
under the scheme as on 31st March 2004. The Committee thus find that the ESIC has
been caught in an ironical situation of rising income but declining expenditure in real
terms, resulting in poor coverage and services. Considering the increasing income and
savings of the Corporation, the Committee strongly recommend that the ESIC should
examine the feasibility of expanding the scope of the scheme in terms of beneficiaries.
ESIC should in any case initiate measures for improvements in quality of services to
the existing beneficiaries. The Committee further recommend that special efforts are
required to be undertaken to bring the States/UTs lying hitherto uncovered/ partially
covered like Nagaland, Manipur, Tripura , Sikkim, Arunachal Pradesh, Mizoram, Delhi,
Chandigarh and Pondicherry within the ambit of the Scheme.
[Sl. No. 5 Para 147 of 48th Report of PAC (14th  Lok Sabha )]
Action Taken
As per the provisions  of Section 58 of the ESI Act, 1948, the State Govts. are
required to set up medical facilities for providing  medical care  to the insured persons
and their families  in areas where the Scheme is to be implemented.  Making  necessary
arrangements  for medical care by the State Govt. is pre-requisite  before the Scheme
is implemented in any new  area/State.  In order to expedite the implementation of the
Scheme in North –Eastern States, the Corporation had taken a decision to bear the
entire expenditure   on the Scheme in North-Eastern  States for an initial period of five
years.  The matter is also reviewed and discussed regularly in the meetings of the ESI
Corporation.
25

26
Further, Hon’ble Minister of State (L&E) (IC) has addressed the Labour Ministers
of Sikkim, Tripura and Mizoram to expedite implementation  of the Scheme in these
States.   Concerted efforts are continued to extend the Scheme in North-Eastern States.
The Scheme is already in force in Delhi, Chandigarh and Puducherry.
Regarding the observation that there was no corresponding increase of medical
and cash benefits compared to rise in income, it may be seen that the expenditure on
medical and cash benefits for the year 2004-05 has increased by 17.07% over the year
1999-2000.  The increase for subsequent year of 2005-06 is 22.85% and for the last
year of 2006-07 the increase is 29.70% over the year 1999-2000.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. No. P.O. 28015/1/06/DRG
dated 20th February, 2008]
Recommendation
As a result of deficient  internal control mechanism of ESIC, the Committee note
that Rs. 11.97 lakhs has been paid in cases of excess/fraudulent payment of medical
benefits in Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Delhi, Maharashtra and Orissa. The reasons for
this lapse have been stated to be the wrong declarations of the Insured Persons, wrong
computation vis-à-vis the Insured Persons entitlement, reassessment of loss of earning
capacity of Insured Persons, etc.  Though some recoveries have been stated to have
been made in the matter, to avoid excess payment in future, the Committee recommend
that a database of Insured Persons be created which will be helpful not only in preventing
the misuse of medical benefits but also in ensuring the timely settlement of medical
claims,  Reportedly, an amnesty scheme has been launched to refund the excess payment
to the beneficiaries. Under the scheme notices/cases will be withdrawn against the
beneficiaries who refund the excess amount. The Committee would like that after the
amnesty scheme is over, strict action is taken against the defaulters.
[Sl. No. 10 Para 152 of 48th Report of PAC (14th  Lok Sabha )]
Action Taken
Against the payment of Rs.11.97 lakhs as excess to the IPs in respect of
Andhra Pradesh, Assam, Delhi,  Maharashtra and Orissa, an amount of Rs. 471295.40
has been recovered  as on 16.3.07.  Further, an amount of Rs. 2.25 lakhs pertains to
medical reimbursement which is to be recovered by the State Govts.   Particulars of
recovery of balance excess payment of Rs. 516118.50 is being obtained  from the
respective regions.
Signature of Secretary/Addl. Secretary/
Jt. Secretary
[Ministry of Labour & Employment O.M. No. P.O. 28015/1/06/DRG
dated 20th February, 2008]

CHAPTER  V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVA TIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAS FURNISHED INTERIM REPLY
— NIL —
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
21 August, 2008                           Chairman,
30 Sravana, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
27

PART  II
MINUTES OF THE FIFTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-2009) HELD ON  14th  AUGUST, 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1315 hrs. on 14th August, 2008  in   Committee Room
“C”, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Furkan Ansari
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Prof. M. Ramadass
7. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
8. Shri Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Raashid Alvi
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
12. Prof. P.J. Kurien
13. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary - II
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary - II
Officers of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri A.K. Thakur — DG ACR
2. Shri Nand Kishore — Pr. Director (RC)
28

29
Representatives of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
(Department of Health and Family Welfare)
1. Shri Naresh Dayal Secretary
2. Dr. R.K. Srivastava Director General of Health Services
3. Shri Naved Masood Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser
4. Shri Vineet Chawdhry Joint Secretary
5. Smt. Shakuntala Gamlin Joint Secretary
2. At the outset, the Chairman PAC welcomed the Members and Audit officers to the sitting.
The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption the following draft Action Taken
Reports:
(i) Draft Report on Action Taken on 51st Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to
“Property Management by Ministry of External Affairs”; and
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken on 48th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to
“Functioning of Employees’ State Insurance Corporation (ESIC)”
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted these draft Reports with some minor changes
and authorized the Chairman to finalise and present the same to Parliament in the light of
factual verification done by Audit.
3. ** ** **
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS  AND OBSERVATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/ Recommendations/Observations
No. No. Department
12 3 4
1. 9 Labour and The Ministry in their Action Taken Note
Employment have not been able to convincingly reply
to the Committee’s Observation that there
was no increase of medical and cash
benefits to the insured persons
corresponding to the rising income of the
ESIC. The Committee’s concern in this
regard for better coverage of the scheme
and significant improvement in the
quality of services in the ESIC hospitals/
dispensaries by way of greater
investments of available funds has not
been addressed by the Ministry in their
reply. In their earlier Report, the
Committee had brought to light an
ironical situation wherein ESIC had
recorded ‘savings’ in their accounts over
the revised budget estimate while
showing no significant improvement in
coverage or quality of service. The
Committee are thus constrained to
reiterate their recommendation that ESIC
must set right their budgeting and
financial management systems so that the
organization is well-equipped to fully
utilize its funds for providing superior
services.
2. 12 -do- The Committee are surprised that the
Ministry have skirted the issue of creation
of database of insured persons as
recommended by them in their earlier
Report. As such a database will go a long
way in tracking and preventing serious
30

31
lapses like wrong declaration of Insured
Persons, wrong computation of
entitlements and improper payments etc.,
the Committee would like the ESIC to
review this matter and initiate steps for
creating a computerized database of
Insured Persons, which will help
strengthen their internal control
mechanism and prevent recurrence of
lapses and fraudulent practices brought
into light by Audit. This will not only
prevent misuse of medical benefits but
will also ensure prompt settlement of
medical claims.
12 3 4
GMGIPMRND—2885LS—23-09-2008.