53
“NON-DISPOSAL  OF  UNCLEARED/
UNCLAIMED IMPORTED CARGO IN
ICDs/CFSs”
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2007-2008
FIFTY-THIRD REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

FIFTY-THIRD REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
“NON-DISPOSAL OF UNCLEARED/
UNCLAIMED IMPORTED CARGO IN
ICDs/CFSs”
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
[Action Taken on 27th Report of Public Accounts
Committee (14th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on  23.8.07
Laid   in   Rajya   Sabha   on   23.8.07
LOK  SABHA   SECRETARIA T
NEW   DELHI
July, 2007/Sravana, 1929 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1838
Price:  Rs. 45/-
© 2007 B Y LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi-110002.

CONTENTS
PAGE NO.
COMPOSITION OF THE  PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  (2007-2008) ..........................  (iii)
INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ..................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER  II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government ................................................................ 6
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations  which  the  Committee  do
not desire  to  pursue  in  the view of  the replies  received  from
Government............................................................................ 29
C
HAPTER  IV Observations/Recommendations    which   have   not   been
accepted by the Committee and which requires reiteration .. 34
CHAPTER  V Observations/Recommendations    in    respect    of    which
Government have furnished interim replies ........................ 35
PART-II
Minutes  of   the  sittings  of   Public   Accounts   Committee
(2007-2008) held on 18.7.2007................................................. 38
APPENDIX
Observations and Recommendations ....................................  40

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra   —   Chairman
Lok  Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
14. Shri Kharabela Swain
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Prof. P.J. Kurien
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary
5. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee,
do present this Fifty-third Report on action taken by Government on the
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 27th Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on “Non-disposal of uncleared/unclaimed imported cargo in ICDs/
CFSs”.
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee
at their sitting held on 18th July, 2007. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the
Report.
3. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendred
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
4. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with
the Committee.
N
EW DELHI;   PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
24 July, 2007 Chairman,
2 Sravana, 1929 ( Saka)  Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Twenty
Seventh Report (Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on "Non-disposal of uncleared/unclaimed
imported cargo in ICDs/CFSs".
2. In their Twenty Seventh Report presented to Lok Sabha on 17th March, 2006 the
Committee had dealt with various issues relating to uncleared/unclaimed goods in
ICDs/CFSs and the recovery of revenue due to Government thereon. The Report
contained fifteen Observations/Recommendations.
3. The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Finance in
respect of all the 15 Observations/Recommendations and these have been categorised
as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
Government;
Sl.Nos. 3 to 7, 9 to 12, 14 and 15
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from Government;
Sl. Nos. 1 and 2
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration;
-Nil-
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies;
Sl. Nos. 8 and 13
Gist of Committee's Observations/Recommendations contained in 27th Report
(14th Lok Sabha)
4. The important Observations/Recommendations made by the Committee in their
27th Report on the subject are as follows:
* A definite time limit should be fixed for early disposal of all categories of
goods including confiscated/seized goods and any delay in this regard should
be taken seriously and responsibility fixed both on the Custodians as well as
the concerned officials.

2
* Board should examine the feasibility of evolving a system of periodical physical
verification by an appropriate machinery of the cargo to be disposed of. For
this, special cargo disposal cells may be set up in each Commissionerate.
* Internal Audit system in Customs Department should be revamped and
strengthened so that they perform their role satisfactorily. Their scope and
ambit should also be broadened so as to bring all the records of cases
pertaining to non-disposal of cargo by the Custodian under their scrutiny/
check.
* Appropriate rules and guidelines should be formulated to control the
activities of Custodians so that in the event of their failure to adhere to the
obligations, the Department/Board can take suitable punitive action against
erring Custodians and ensure that revenue is protected. For this, if necessary,
the Customs Act, 1962 may be amended.
* CBEC should examine the feasibility of constituting a core group at the
Board level, which should meet at regular intervals for monitoring the
progress made in expeditious disposal of uncleared/unclaimed goods in
various ICDs/CFSs.
* Management Information System in regard to examination/scrutiny of cargo
before their clearance for dosposal should be strengthened and periodically
reviewed so that deficiencies in the procedures and monitoring systems in
clearance of the goods for disposal do not recur in future.
* Status of abandoned goods should be properly defined and appropriate
amendments to this effect should be made in the Customs Act, 1962 so as
to recover the costs involved in their maintenance. The Board should also
formulate guidelines/instructions with respect to the modalities for their
disposal.
* Necessary Steps should be taken to introduce/implemente-auction in all the
Commissionerates in a time-bound period so as to safeguard the revenue of
the Government.
5.  The Committee desire that Government should furnish final/conclusive action
taken replies to the recommendations for which interim replies have been furnished
6. The action taken notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance have been
reproduced in the subsequent Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now
deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their Observations/
Recommendations that require reiteration or merit comments.
A. Need for fixation of time-limit for disposal of confiscated/seized goods
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4, Para No. 61)
7. In their 27th Report, the Committee had urged the Ministry to ensure that
Commissionerates make all possible efforts for speedy trial of Court/BIFR cases and a
definite time limit may be fixed for disposal of cases which are pending investigation
before SIIB/DRI/DIU so as to protect the Government Revenue. The Committee had
recommended that Ministry/Department should look into the matter with a view to
find ways and means to simplify the procedures for expeditious disposal of cargo.

3
Further, a time limit should also be fixed for all categories of confiscated/seized goods
with a view to dispose off them expeditiously.
8. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in their Action Taken Note
have stated that in respect of the cases where seizure/confiscation of goods is involved,
the Department takes necessary penal action against offender by way of issue of
notice and adjudication proceedings. At the same time in order to effectively dispose
off the goods in time and to safeguard the interest of Revenue, the relevant provisions
of the Customs Act, 1962 have been amended vide section 26 of the Taxation Laws
(Amendment) Act, 2006 with effect from 13th July, 2006. Accordingly, under section
110A any goods, documents or things seized under section 110, pending investigation
or the order of the adjudicating officer, can be released to the owner on taking a bond
with security. This would ensure that the duty on the goods is collected at the time of
such provisional release and the possible fine and penalty are safeguarded through
the security. Further, the Custom Houses have been directed to constitute Special
Task Forces to conduct a comprehensive review of all the consignments indicated as
being "detained" by various investigating agencies such as DRI/SIIB/DIU for final
disposal in terms of revised procedure for auction/tender. Regarding disposal of
goods including the confiscated/seized goods, the Ministry have stated that a revised
procedure for simplified valuation for time bound disposal of goods have been
prescribed. In this disposal process, it has also been prescribed that if the confiscated
goods which are ripe for disposal, are not sold in auction for the third time, then such
goods would be disposed off at the highest bid in the third auction, thereby making
it mandatory for time bound disposal of goods.
9. The Committee express their satisfaction over the steps taken by the Ministry
for safeguarding the revenue due to Government as well as for the expeditious
collection of Revenue in cases where seizure/confiscation of goods is involved.
However, the Committee are apprehensive about the possibility of owners making
fraudulent claims when goods are released provisionally on the basis of bond furnished
by  them. The Committee would like to reiterate that the protection of Government
revenue should be the underlying objective of the measures that are aimed at
simplification of procedures. Government, should therefore, take all possible steps
to prevent the possibility of misuse of this facility by the owners so as to protect the
Government Revenue. The Committee would also like to be apprised about the progress
made by the Customs Houses in constituting the Special Task Force as well as the
work done by these Task Forces in review of the consignments that were pending for
final decision under the revised procedure.
B. Control over the activities of Custodian
(Recommendation Sl. No. 8, Para No. 65)
10. Noting that no detailed Rules empowering the Customs to take any punitive/
deterrent action against the Custodians in cases of non-fulfillment of the obligations
by the Custodians have been framed and that no safeguards for protection of Revenue
in cases of negligence or violations of the conditions/guidelines by the Custodians
exist in the Customs Act, the Committee had recommended that Government should

4
formulate appropriate rules and guidelines to control the activities of the Custodian
so that in the event of their failure to adhere to the obligations, the Department/Board
can take suitable punitive action against the erring Custodians so that revenue could
be protected. For this, if necessary, the Customs Act, 1962 should be amended.
11. In their Action Taken Notes the Ministry have stated that the ICDs/CFSs, while
being appointed as custodians of the goods, are subjected to certain conditions.
These relate to provision of safe, secure and spacious premises for loading/unloading
in storage of cargo, modern facilities for material handling, supporting equipments,
EDI connectivity, proper insurance of the goods stored, undertaking to bear the duty
on goods lost or pilfered and to abide by all rules and regulations under the Customs
Act. The main obligations of the custodian is to properly account for the goods, keep
them under safe custody, provide efficient clearance process and for compliance with
the Customs Act, 1962 and other acts, rules and regulations in force thereof. Non-
fulfillment of the above would make them liable for penal action and termination of
custodianship, which is enforced in specific cases following due process of principles
of natural justice.
The Ministry have further stated that a separate team of officials at Mumbai and
Chennai under the supervision of Chief Commissioner Mumbai-II and Chief
Commissioner, Chennai (Sea) have been directed to examine the entire gamut of
provisions relating to ICD/CFS and come up with a proposal of amendment to Customs
Act, 1962 by way of introduction of a specific self-contained chapter including penal
provisions relating to functioning of ICD/CFS. They shall be submitting the report by
15th January, 2007. After receipt of the report necessary changes required shall be
incorporated in the Customs Act, 1962.
12. The Committee note that team of Customs officials of Mumbai and Chennai
under the supervision of Chief Commissioners of Customs Mumbai-II and Chennai
(Sea) respectively had been constituted to examine the entire gamut of provisions
relating to ICD/CFS and to suggest proposals for suitable amendments to Customs
Act, 1962 for incorporating a self-contained Chapter on functioning of ICDs/CFSs
therein. The Committee have also been informed that the Team of officials would be
submitting its Report by 15th January, 2007. The Committee would like to be apprised
of the main findings of the Report of the Expert team and the changes/amendments
made or proposed to be made in the Customs Act, 1962 in pursuance of the
recommendation/suggestion given by the Team of officials within three months
from the presentation of the Report.
C. Follow up action on Task Force Report
(Recommendation Sl. No. 15, Para No. 72)
13. In their 27th Report, the Committee had expressed the hope that the revised
Procedure prescribed by the Board for expeditious disposal of unclaimed/uncleared
cargo in the light of recommendation of Task Force Report would cut down the delays
and enable the Custodians to dispose unclaimed/uncleared goods expeditiously and
also protect the revenue due to the Government. They had also recommended that
Ministry of Finance should apprise them of the progress made in the disposal of all
pending cargo in the light of the revised Procedure.

5
14. The Ministry in their Action Taken reply have stated that they had taken into
account the recommendations made by the Task Force, Inter-Ministerial Group and
accordingly, an appropriate mechanism for time bound disposal had been set up.
Further, in order to avoid accumulation of such cargo, the Customs Act has been
suitably amended to provide for a new Section 110A for immediate release of seized
goods to its owner after taking required security. Further, in respect of goods which
remain under the category of unclaimed/uncleared cargo, a separate set of instructions
have been issued to put in place a permanent mechanism for expeditious disposal of
the backlog of accumulated cargo and also to dispose off recurring uncleared /
unclaimed goods in a time-bound manner. A separate working arrangement in each
Port between Customs Administration and head of the Port Authority along with
custodians of CFS have been set up for periodic meeting to work out solutions to
various problems that may arise in the course of clearance of goods in the ports and
ICDs/CFSs.
15. The Committee regret to note that despite the measures taken by the
Government for expeditious disposal of unclaimed/uncleared cargo, the same had
very little impact at the ground level i.e., in ICDs/CFSs in clearance of the pending
cargo. What is surprising to the Committee is the fact that even after the issue of
instructions regarding setting up a permanent mechanism for expeditious disposal
of the backlog of accumulated cargo, the position with regard to clearance of pending
cargo in various Commissionerates has been far from satisfactory. From the details
furnished by the Ministry, the Committee find that in respect of 3 Commissionerates
viz. Chennai (sea port), Chennai (Prev.) (Trichy) and Amritsar Commissionerate a
large number of cases are still pending for disposal. The situation is quite dismal in
case of Chennai (Prev.) Commissionerate-Trichy, where out of 1017 containers that
were stated to be pending as per Audit Report, only 32 could be disposed off and a
large contingent of 985 containers are still to be disposed off. Further in respect of
ICD, Tugulakabad, out of 618 containers that were pending for disposal, only 64
could be cleared and 554 containers are yet to be disposed off. These facts indicate
that there is need to implement the procedure/guidelines in right earnest by the
concerned agencies. The Committee, accordingly, reiterate that the Government
should take all possible measures so that the cargo pending in various
Commissionerates and ICDs/CFSs are disposed off within the stipulated period.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
GOVERNMENT
As per the extant instruction of Central Board of Excise and Customs (CBEC)
contained in their Circular No. 50/97 of  October, 1997 in respect of disposal of
unclaimed/uncleared goods lying with Custodians, all goods that landed till 1.1.1994
and were lying uncleared/unclaimed were to be disposed of by Custodians even
without NOC from Customs. For goods that landed between 1.1.1994 and 31.12.1996,
it was prescribed that a monthly list of Cargo due for disposal was to be prepared and
sent to Customs for NOC and if no intimation was received from Customs within
30 days Custodian was to presume that the former had no objection and could go
ahead with disposal. Further, according to these instructions in respect of goods
pending since 1997 a monthly list was to be sent to Customs for their permission to
dispose of cargo within 30 days failing which the Custodian would be free to dispose
of these goods. The Board vide their Circular No. 7/2004 dated 28.1.2004 further
simplified the procedure for disposal of unclaimed/uncleared cargo landed upto
31.3.2003, wherein the waiting period for customs clearance/NOC has been reduced
from 30 to 15 days.
Notwithstanding the simplified procedure prescribed by the Board from time to time,
Audit scrutiny of records of 37 ICDs/CFSs in 13 Commissionerates had revealed that
goods worth Rs. 540.47 Crore imported between 1985 and March 2003 were awaiting
disposal for periods ranging from one to eighteen years resulting in blockage of duty
amounting to Rs. 192.81 Crore apart from notional loss of interest of Rs. 58.41 crore.
Out of this outstanding, there were a number of high money value cases pertaining to
six Commissionerates viz., Chennai (sea), Tiruchirapalli, JNCH, Mumbai, Pune (Customs),
Mumbai (sea) and Delhi. The total number of containers involved in these cases were
4748, which were valued at Rs. 514.97 crore and involved duty of Rs. 183.50 crore along
with notional loss of interest of Rs. 55.79 crore. Thus, these high value cases involved  95%
of duty blockage i.e. Rs. 183.50 crore from out of total duty of  Rs. 192.81 Crore recoverable.
In this connection, the Committee have been informed by the Ministry that in respect of
Chennai (sea), out of 436 containers, 140 had been disposed of for Rs. 6.38 crore. Of the
remaining 296 containers, 241 containers are pending due to court cases/CESTAT and
under BIFR action/investigation. Only 55 containers involving 39 cases valued at Rs.
2.14 crore are stated to be still pending for disposal. As regards Tiruchirapalli, all the
1017 containers imported by a Public Sector Company were bonded due to non-clearance
by the importer and are awaiting disposal action. In respect of JNCH, Mumbai, 1712
containers have been disposed of and out of balance 505 containers 333 are still under
process of disposal. In so far as Pune Customs, out of 63 Twenty feet Equivalent Units,
21 have been disposed of and in respect of balance goods, the issue had been taken up
by the Department and Custodians with the concerned Municipal Authorities for settling
6

7
the issue relating to payment octroi tax. As regards, Mumbai (Sea), unclaimed cargo
consisted of only 111 Twenty feet Equivalent Units (TEUs) and 43 Less than full
Container Load (LCL) cargo, out of which 44 TEUs and 19 LCL consignments were
disposed of. The balance 67 TEUs and 24 LCLs were put to auction but could not be
disposed of. In Delhi actual number of containers involved were only 854 for ICD-
TKD and 28 for ICD (PPG). Out of these, 251 were disposed of, 384 containers pertain
to hazardous waste which is a matter of litigation in Supreme Court and 103 containers
were ripe for disposal.
The Committee regret to observe that even after a lapse of more than 3 to 11 years
from the date of their importation, a large number of containers/TEUs in respect of
above 6 Commissionerates are still awaiting disposal on the pretext of one or the
other reason. No concrete action seems to have been taken by the Ministry/Board to
expedite disposal of pending cargo. What is surprising is the fact that the Board was
just content with issuing routine circulars asking the Commissionerates to speed up
disposal of pending cargo. The Committee feels that the Ministry should have taken
a pro-active role and closely monitored the dispsoal of cases on a case to case basis
with respect to each Commissionerate where considerable backlog of cargo was
pending disposal/clearance for several years. That this was not done is regrettable.
While deploring the lackadaisical attitude of the Government, the Committee
recommends that the Ministry should immediately direct the concerned
Commissionerate to act swiftly in the matter to ensure early disposal of pending
cargo. A definite time limit should be fixed for this purpose and any delay in this
regard should be taken seriously and responsibility fixed both on the Custodian as
well as the concerned officials of the respective Commissionerates.
(Sl. No. 3 of Appendix. V)
Para 60 of 27th Report of PAC
Action Taken
While taking note of the Committee's observation it is submitted that the Task
Force constituted for the purpose of devising an effective monitoring mechanism
for disposal of unclaimed/uncleared cargo has already examined in detail the present
procedure. Based on the recommendations by it, Government have streamlined the
mechanism for disposal of cargo as enumerated in detail in reply to Para 59.
Further, in respect of fixing definite time limit for the purpose of disposal of
pending cargo, it is stated that following time limits for disposal of confiscated/
seized goods has been prescribed vide Board F. No. 711/16/2006-CUS. (AS) dated
17th August, 2006:
(i) All perishable goods be disposed of within three months of seizure.
(ii) All goods notified under Section 110 (1A) of the Customs Act, 1942 be
disposed of within three months of the application under Section 110 (1B)
having been allowed by the Magistrate, the permission to be obtained within
two months of seizure.
(iii) All other sezied/confiscated goods be disposed of within three months of
adjudication/appellate/court proceedings having concluded and the vesting
of property of such goods in the Central Government having become final.

8
Similarly, in respect of unclaimed/uncleared goods, a maximum time period of one
year has been allowed beyond which a specific step by step process has been laid
down wherein the custodian will dispose of the goods without further reference to
any other agency and with minimum supervisory interference by Customs. Thus the
Committees recommendations regarding fixing a time limit has been taken into account
in the above-prescribed procedure.
The progress regarding the position of uncleared/unclaimed goods lying with
custodian reported in the para is as under:
(1) Under the jurisdiction of Chief Commissioner of Customs (DZ) New Delhi
Port T otal Disposal Pendency Disposal Rev. Current
containers till in till Realized Penden
as per December December November (Rs. in closing
audit para 05 05 06 lakhs) balance
ICD, 854 236 618 64 87.40 554
TKD
ICD, 28 15 13 5 16.00 8
PPG
Out of 562 containers as mentioned above, 350 are under hazardous category, 122
are cases under Court/Appellate authority and "No objection certficates" have been
given to custodians for 58 containers. No details are available with custodians for
29 containers, however, 2 are under confiscated category and 1 belongs to a diplomat.
As regards the hazardous cargo, the CBEC Circular No. 31/2004 dated 26.4.2004
deals with the matter of disposal of hazardous cargo. Monitoring Committee constituted
under the 3 guidelines of hon'ble Supreme Court vide their letter dated 3.9.2004
had decided that with respect to hazardous waste, the representative (s) of Delhi
Pollution Control Committee (DPCC) and Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB)
shall verify the hazardous waste lying at ICD Tughlakabad in the light of findings of
the Wadhwan Committee, and then decide and advise on the disposal option of the
wastes keeping in view the directions of apex court, Samples were drawn from all
the consignments, and the test results have been conveyed to the custodian
(CONCOR), CONCOR has also forwarded the test reports to the Supreme Court
Monitoring Committee. In this matter, CONCOR is in constant touch with DPCC
and CPCB for inspection. However, these containers have not yet been examined as
directed by SCMC. A meeting of the custodian i.e. CONCOR along with Customs is
proposed to be undertaken with the CPCB and DPCC at senior level.
Out of 122 containers reported as held up due to court cases, it is ascertained that
in cases of 86 containers, the dispute is between importer and custodian and no customs
revenue is involved in these cases. In case of 2 containers, High Court of Punjab and
Haryana has granted stay against clearance in a dispute between Bank and the importer.
Thus, there are 34 containers held up due to cases pending in High Court/CESTAT and
necessary application for early disposal of the cases is being made.

9
Regarding 29 containers under the category of undeclared cargo, CONCOR has
been advised to undertake auction of these 29 containers next time. In the mean time,
No objection Certificate from DRI for these containers is also asked for, if they have
cases involving these containers.
Further as regards 5 containers lying at ICD, Patparganj:—
As regards 56 containers lying at ICD TKD for which NOC has been given by
Customs, 11 containers have been put up for auction once, 41, containers are likely to
put up in auction next time and 4 containers contain food stuff which has already
expired shelf life (dry dates and almonds) and are liable for destruction.
Further as regards 5 containers lying at ICD, Patparganj:—
- For 2 containers NOC has been given to CWC, and will be put up for action
next time.
- 1 container pertains to diplomat, for which concerned Embassy is being
contacted and for 2 containers Commissioner of Customs (Preventive)
Delhi) is taking up the necessary action for disposal.
(2) Under the jurisdiction of Chief Commissioner of Customs (JNCH and ACC):
Mumbai Zone—II
After issuance of Circular No. 11/2006 Cus dated 16.02.2006, a total number of 216
containers were disposed off in the month of March and April (auction were conducted
in month February/March and final disposal took place in month of March/April).
Further, 59 E-auctions have been conducted in JNCH (this includes E-auctions
conducted by CFS's) from January 2006 to October 2006 and a total of 9833 containers
have been disposed off by the custodians. Out of these 9833 containers 1078 containers
were sold in the auction and the remaining containers were cleared by the respective
importers after completion of Customs procedures.
In Air Cargo Complex, website for conduct of e-auction was hosted in March 2006
but no bidders have registered till date. One of the custodians (M/s. Air India) is
conducting e-auctions every alternate month.
As regards hazardous cargo of waste oil contained in 133 containers lying at JNCH
has been disposed off through incineration under supervision of Supreme Court
Monitoring Committee (SCMC). Under direction from SCMC the work of incineration
was given to M/s. Mumbai Waste Management Ltd. (MWML), Plot No. P-32, MIDC
Taloja, Dist. Raigad and the same has been completed. The Hon'ble Supreme Court
and Supreme Court Monitoring Committee have been kept informed about this through
affidavits filed before the Hon'ble Court.
The Disposal figures after issuance Circular/Standing Order from March/06 to
October/06 is as follows:
JNCH
Sl.No. Nature No. of cases V alue of the Sale proceeds
disposed off cargo (in lacs) (in lacs)
01. Time Expired 44 401.04 67.68
02. Seized/Confiscated 15 444.30 35.99

10
ACC
Sl.No. Nature No. of cases V alue of the Sale proceeds
disposed off cargo (in lacs) (in lacs)
01. Seized/Confiscated 7 4 128 31.05
(Disposal of time expired bond of Air Cargo Complex is done by New Customs
House, Mumbai as Bond deptt. has started functioning in ACC only recently)
Commissioner of Customs, Pune
39 TEUS + loose cargo were pending as on 30.9.2005 valued at Rs. 69.40 crores.
Out of which one  TEU + loose cargo of total sale value of Rs. 24.41 lakhs and duty
of Rs. 4.74 lakhs have been disposed off. Now as on 01.11.2006, 38 TEUS + loose
cargo of total value of Rs. 62.74 crores are pending for disposal. CC (Pune) is
vigorously pursuing the matter with the central warehousing corporation authorities,
for speedy disposal of uncleared/unclaimed cargo. The major hurdle being faced by
the custodian is the assessment of the octroi charges on the Book V alue instead of
the Bid V alue/Sale value, by the jurisdictional municipal authorities, i.e. Pimpri
Chinchwad Municipal Corporation. CC (Pune) has already taken up this issue with
the concerned State Govt. department as well as the Pimpri Chinchwad Municipal
Corporation authorities.
Confiscated/seized goods worth Rs. 5.30 crores are lying for disposal as on
31.10.2006. Out of which, goods worth Rs. 34 lakhs only are ripe for disposal. The
goods having book value of Rs. 22.47 lakhs have been disposed for sale consideration
of Rs. 18.67 lakhs during the period from June, 2005 to October, 2006.
Commissioner of Customs, Chennai (Preventive)
As regards the time-expired warehoused goods pertaining to M/s NOCL, due to
financial constraints, NOCL had not cleared the goods nor they paid the interest
accrued on the goods for granting the extension of bonding period. This being a
mega project, reportedly only 50% of the machinery has been imported so far. With
this partial imports erection of the proposed oil refinery is not feasible and NOCL is
not de-bonding the available materials as remaining part of the equipment are yet to
be imported. Of the 1017 containers, 32 containers have since been de-bonded by
NOCL after filling ex-bond Bill of Entry and on payment of duty of Rs. 70 lakhs.
The remaining 985 containers are yet to be de-bonded. The culmination of such
action in disposing the goods through auction is not feasible by swinging in action
since  such a course would only fetch scrap value. The persuasion by the Department
had resulted in de-bonding of 32 containers fetching revenue of Rs. 70 lakhs. The
remaining/available goods are valued at Rs. 296.5 crores involving customs duty of
Rs. 81.6 crores and it will be difficult to get a person interested in purchasing such
a huge quantity of second hand refinery equipment at a reasonable price.
As pointed out by the Chairman, CBEC in the oral evidence before the PAC, These
equipments are specifically tailor made for an oil refinery and the importer could not
clear the goods because of his inability to arrange financial/equity closure of the

11
company/project. And it is a matter of subjective judgment whether Customs  should
wait for the clearance to be effected by the importer or it should be sold as metal
scrap, since the goods are tailor made second hand refinery equipments for a specific
project, which would fetch only a meagre value. This becomes more pertinent in
view of the recent development reported by the company vide their letter dated
18th August 2006 that they have now achieved 100% equity closure with TA TA
sons, Sun Group and Under of Germany taking up substantial equity stakes in the
project. Futher it is reported that the contracts for facility to be instated on BOOT
basis are also finalized and company expects to get the financial closure of the
project by tying up with the major public sector banks. The company has also pointed
out vide their letter dated 18th August 2006 that they will be in a position to de-
bond the cargo already brought in before the end of this calendar year with the
above developments.
Under the jurisdiction of Chief Commissioner of Customs Chennai:
No. of Containers
Reasons for In Terms Disposed Balance as on
Pendency of PAC upto 1.11.2006
Report 1.11.2006
Pending due to Court cases, 241 41 185
CESTA T, BIFR,
investigations
Others (under disposal) 55 19 5 1
T O T A L 296 60 236
Under the jurisdiction of Chief Commissioner of Customs Mumbai-I
16 containers of waste oil lying in Mulund CFS was destroyed in pursuance of
Hon'ble Supreme  Court's order by March 2006. Also, during this Financial Year,
this Commissionerate has destroyed Narcotics worth Rs. 16 lakhs in co-ordination
with the Waste Management Authorities.
Further NOC was given in respect of 456 lots comprising of 28,490 packages
during the current year.
F. No. 442/12/2004-Cus.IV Approved by  Member (Cus.), CBEC
Sd/-
(Pawan Kumar Jain)
Addl. Director General.

12
Observation/Recommendation
Apart from cargo that is pending disposal with Custodians, Audit had pointed out
cases of 115 containers valued at Rs. 35 crore and involving customs duty of
Rs. 16.14 crore pending/locked up in court cases. Further, 25 containers valued at
Rs. 1.21 crore and involving duty of Rs. 0.47 crore pending on account of these
cases referred to Board for Industrial and Financial Reconstruction (BIFR), and
111 containers valued at Rs. 10.04 crore detained by Departmental Agencies viz.,
Special Investigation and Intelligence Branch (SIIB)/Directorate of Revenue
Intelligence (DRI)/Dock Intelligence Unit (DIU) for investigation. Due to delay in
the adjudication of these cases, duty amounting to Rs. 4.75 crore was blocked. As
regards the latest position with regard to disposal of these cases and the efforts
made by the Board/Department to get the stay orders vacated, the Ministry have
merely given an updated information on the number of cases of cargo pending along-
with their value. The reply was conspicuously silent with respect of action taken/
efforts made for getting the stay orders vacated from court as well as expediting
the investigation process by the Departmental Agencies in respect of cargo held
under detention. The Committee urge upon the Ministry to ensure that
Commissionerates are directed to take all possible efforts for speedy trial of Court/
BIFR cases. The Committee however, feel that there should not be any inordinate
delay in cases of cargo that are pending investigation before SIIB/DRI/DIU which
are Departmental Agencies. A definite time limit may be fixed for disposal of cases
by these Agencies so as to protect the Government   Revenue.
(Sl. No. 4 of Appendix.V)
Para 61 of 27th Report of PAC
Action Taken
On the issue of fixing a definite time limit for cases under investigation, it is
submitted that under the Customs Act 1962, already a time limit of 6 months
extendable for a further period of another 6 months for completion of investigation
and issuance of Show Cause Notice exists. Similarly, for adjudication of the cases
also a time limit exists.
Nonetheless, the observations of the Committee were taken note of by the
Department and the following action has been taken:
(i) In cases involving seizure/confiscation of goods, department takes necessary
penal action against offender by issue of notice and adjudication proceedings. At the
same time in order to effectively dispose off the goods in time and to secure the
interest of Revenue, the relevant provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 have been
amended vide clause 26 of the Taxation Law Amendment Act, 2006 with effect from
14th July, 2006. Accordingly, under section 110A any goods, documents or things
seized under section 110, pending investigation or the order of the adjudicating officer,
can be released to the owner on taking a bond with security. This would ensure that the
duty on the goods is collected at the time of such provisional release and the possible
fine and penalty are safeguarded through the security.

13
(ii) The Custom Houses have been directed to constitute Special Task Forces to
conduct a comprehensive review of all the consignments indicated as being "detained"
by various investigation organizations such as DRI/SIIB/DIU for final disposal in
terms of revised procedure for auction/tender.
(iii) Proper mechanism for interaction between the custodians and Customs to
review the pendency of uncleared cargo has been set up. There will be a quarterly
meeting between the Customs and Custodians at each Custom station to review the
pendency of uncleared/unclaimed cargo and to update the status of the pending
consignments. Further in such review meetings, the pendency with the custodian
should be matched with the figures of uncleared consignments as per Customs records.
Instructions have been issued to the field formations to take a proactive approach
on pending Court/Tribunal cases for speedy disposal by the field officers. Thus
these provisions adequately take care regarding the recommendation of the Committee.
F. No. 442/12/2004-Cus.IV Approved by Member (Cus.), CBEC
Sd/-
(Pawan Kumar Jain)
Addl. Director General.
Observation/Recommendation
Another disquieting feature has been the instances of delay in clearance of that cargo
where there was no litigation. 1215 such containers of goods valued at
Rs. 255.31 crore in various Commissionerates were not cleared timely leading to
blockage of duty amounting to Rs. 59.27 crore. According to the Ministry, 157 such
containers pertain to Chennai (Sea), 35 to Tuticorin, 1017 to Trichy and one case belongs
to Coimbatore Commissionerate. Out of above cases with respect to Chennai (Sea),
102 containers had been disposed off and 55 are still pending. In respect of Tuticorin
Commissionerate, all the 35 pending containers were stated to have been disposed off
by March, 2005 through Public Auction. As regards Trichy, all the 1017 containers
imported by a Public Limited Company (M/s. Nagarjuna Oil Corporation) were stated
to be pending. In so far as Coimbatore Commissionerate, out of 22 cases of seized,
confiscated, unclaimed and uncleared cargo that was pending disposal, 18 were disposed
off and 4 consignments are still pending. The Committee further note that in Container
Freight Station (Central W arehousing Corporation-Kolkata and Haldia)
74 consignments of goods of perishable nature valued at Rs. 4.44 crore were lying
undisposed for a period ranging from 10 months to 6 years (December, 2003) resulting
in blockage of revenue of Rs. 1.45 crore. In this connection, the Ministry have explained
that out of 74 containers, 39 had been disposed off and 33 containers (11 in Haldia and
22 at Kolkata CWC) are lying uncleared. Despite a monitoring system/arrangement in
place where under the Custodians periodically submit the list of uncleared/unclaimed
goods, pending with them, to the jurisdictional Customs authorities and the same is

14
monitored by them, it is incomprehensible as to how a large number of cases of cargo/
containers were pending disposal with Custodians. Ironically the Task Force
constituted in 2005 to suggest measures for expeditious disposal of imported
unclaimed/uncleared/confiscated cargo, in their Report have observed that the existing
departmental instruction on disposal by sale of unclaimed/uncleared and confiscated
goods were clear and unambiguous and required no major revision/modification. The
Task Force opined that had these instructions been strictly followed by Customs
and Custodians, the position should have been that no confiscated goods older than
six months and unclaimed goods landed earlier than 31.3.2003 would be lying unsold.
The Committee are, thus, inclined to conclude that the instructions of Board are
not being followed in letter and spirit by the Commissionerates. The Board also,
after having issued the necessary instructions, did not seem to have bothered to
ensure their strict compliance by the field officials. This reflects the sorry state of
affairs prevalent in Board as well as in field units as regards to expeditious disposal
of confiscated goods. Not only it is necessary to ensure strict compliance of
instructions, the Board should examine the feasibility of evolving a system of
periodical physical verification by an appropriate machinery of the cargo to be
disposed of. For this, special cargo disposal cells may be set up in each of the
Commissionerate.
(Sl. No. 5 of Appendix. V)
Para 62 of 27th Report of PAC
Action Taken
The Department has taken due note of the observations and the recommendation
made by the Committee.
(i) As explained in earlier paragraph, each of the Custom Houses have constituted
Special Cargo disposal cells, to conduct a comprehensive review of all the
consignments pending disposal and reconcile the figures with the Custodian.
However, if some of the old consignments cannot be connected with any
records, then the details of such detained goods should also be intimated to
the custodians who should put all such consignments for auction/tender in
terms of the new simplified procedure. This time bound exercise would address
the concerns expressed by the Committee and enable disposal of all pending
cargo. The Chief Commissioners have been directed that these cells should
also be specifically assigned the work of disposal of uncleared/unclaimed
cargo as well as seized/confiscated including time expired warehoused goods.
(ii) Proper mechanism for interaction between the custodians and Customs to
review the pendency of uncleared cargo has also been set up. A quarterly
meeting between the Customs and Custodians at each Custom station is to
be held to review the pendency of uncleared/unclaimed cargo and to update
the status of the pending consignments. Futher in such review meetings, the
pendency with the custodian would be matched with the figures of uncleared
consignments as per Customs records.

15
(iii) Apart from the above measures at field level the following measures at the
Board level are being taken to effectively monitor the disposal action at field
level.
(a) The Monthly Report on uncleared/unclaimed cargo shall be compiled at
Directorate of Logistics in addition to seized/confiscated cargo.
(b) For monitoring the disposal of uncleared/unclaimed cargo at Board level,
Joint Secretary (Custom) shall be the nodal officer with secretarial assistance
from Cus-IV section of CBEC. She shall obtain pendency/disposal reports
from Dte. of Logistics on a quarterly basis and put up to Member (RI&I),
CBEC for review.
(c) For monitoring the disposal of confiscated cargo at Board level,
Commissioner (Anti-Smuggling) shall be the nodal officer with Secretarial
assistance from AS section of CBEC. He shall obtain pendency/disposal
reports from Dte. of Logistics on a quarterly basis and put up to Member
(RI&I), CBEC for review.
The above measures will ensure the implementation of the remedial
recommendations made by the Committee.
The further progress in respect of pending containers mentioned in the para is as
under:
1. Chief Commissioner of Customs (Preventive), Chennai
As mentioned earlier, In respect of the case of NOCL, 1017 containers and
224 packages of second hand oil refinery machinery were imported and bonded
during the period between 2001 and 2004. Of the 1017 containers, 32 containers have
since been de-bonded by NOCL after filing ex-bond Bill of Entry and on payment of
duty of Rs. 70 lakhs. The remaining 985 containers are yet to be de-bonded. The
remaining/available goods are valued at Rs. 296.5 crores involving customs duty of
Rs. 81.6 crores. As pointed out by the Chairman, CBEC in the oral evidence before
the PAC, these equipments are specifically tailor made for an oil refinery and the
importer could not clear the goods because of his inability to arrange financial/
equity closure of the company/project. And it is a matter of subjective judgment
whether Customs should wait for the clearance to be effected by the importer or it
should be sold as metal scrap. The company has also pointed out vide their letter
dated 18th August, 2006 referred above, that they will be in a position to de-bond
the cargo already brought in before the end of this calender year with the above
developments.
2. Chief Commissioner Central Excise, Coimbatore
Out of the 22 cases of unclaimed and uncleared cargo 18 cases were already
disposed off.
3. Chief Commissioner of Customs, Mumbai Zone-II
Disposal Cells have been set up in Air Cargo Complex and Jawaharlal Nehru Custom
House to supervise the work relating to disposal of seized/confiscated goods and for

16
monitoring the work of custodian in the area of disposal of uncleared/unclaimed
cargo. The disposal of time expired bonds is done by the Disposal Cell in JNCH
whereas, the time expired bonds in Air Cargo Complex are disposed off by New
Custom House as a separate Bond Department in ACC has been formed only recently.
4. Chief Commissioner of Customs, Kolkata
A Disposal Unit already functioning in the Custom House Kolkata for disposal
of seized/confiscated goods and monitoring of disposal of uncleared/unclaimed
cargo has not been re-designated as Special Disposal Cell. Specific Orders in this
regard have been issued vide Standing Order dated 29/11/2006.
The present position of these 33 containers is as under:
(i) 17 containers have since been disposed of by the custodian CWC, Kolkata.
Sale value of the goods disposed is Rs. 16.48 lakh; Customs duty realized is
Rs. 3.13 lakh.
(ii) 5 containers are being disposed by CWC by way of destruction of the goods
in them because these goods, mainly edible items have been declared unfit for
human consumption. 11 containers are under process of disposal at Haldia.
F.No. 442/12/2004- Cus.IV Approved by Member(Cus.), CBEC
Sd/-
(Pawan Kumar Jain)
Addl. Director General
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee note that out of 1215 containers of goods, which were free from
litigation, a large consignment of goods i.e., 1017 containers were stated to have been
imported by a Public Limited Company (M/s. Nagarjuna Oil Corporation) during
November, 1999 to September , 2000 and in April, 2001. These goods valued at
Rs. 243.64 c rore and involving duty of Rs. 53.79 crore, had remained uncleared in
the bonded warehouse. The national loss of interest on account of blockage of customs
duty was worked out to be Rs. 25.14 crore. Explaining the reasons for non-disposal,
the Chairman CBEC stated during evidence that the equipment imported was specific
for an Oil Refinery and the importer could not clear the goods because of his inability
to arrange finances for payment of duty. According to him, it is a matter of subjective
judgement whether customs should wait for the clearance to be effected by the
importer or whether it should be sold at a scrap value. The Committee are concerned
to note that there are no guidelines with regard to fixing cut-off period or time limit for
disposal of goods in respect of such cases, where the importer/consignee could not
clear the goods due to financial difficulties. During evidence, the Secretary (Revenue)
had deposed that the Task Force constituted to suggest measures for expeditious
disposal of uncleared/unclaimed and confiscated goods etc. would look into this

17
matter. However, the Committee now find that the Report of the Task Force is
conspicuously silent in this regard. The Committee, would, therefore, recommend
that in cases where imported cargo uncleared/unclaimed on account of non-clearance
by the importer/consignee owing to financial difficulties or otherwise, Government
should formulate guidelines for fixing time-limit/cut-off period, within which all the
pending cargo should be disposed off.
(Sl. No. 6 of Appendix V)
Para 63 of 27th Report of PAC
Action Taken
The recommendation of the Committee for a time bound disposal of uncleared/
unclaimed cargo by prescribing a cut-off period was taken due note of and action
initiated to check such delays in clearance of uncleared/unclaimed cargo.
Accordingly, the Department in the revised procedure prescribed for disposal
of uncleared/unclaimed, seized/confiscated and time-expired warehoused cargo,
specifically provided that auction/tender should be held every month. If the
uncleared/unclaimed cargo is lying for more than a year, then these have to be necessarily
sold for the highest bid in the last auction/tender, upto a maximum of four auction/
tenders, regardless of the reserve price fixed. Simultaneously, the Custodians have also
been provided with an independent valuation mechanism to dispose off the uncleared/
unclaimed goods of less than one year old, without intervention from Customs.
Besides above, it may not be advisable to fix any specific time limit for disposal
of time expired warehoused goods on account of financial difficulties of the
importer. The specific case of Nagarjun Oil Corporation, a PSU is a case of
exceptional nature where the disposal was not considered prudent as it would have
fetched only scrap value and there were indications that importer was likely to
clear the goods. This time bound mechanism for disposal of cargo is expected to
rectify the lacunae pointed out by the Committee.
F.N. 442/12/2004-Cus.IV Approved by Member (Cus.), CBEC
Sd/-
(Pawan Kumar Jain)
Addl. Director General.
Observation/Recommendation
One of the important pre-requisites for effective administration is to ensure proper
monitoring of the system that is in place. Monitoring involves ensuring proper
maintenance of prescribed records by the concerned authorities and to keep a close and
continuous watch on the working of the system and also initiating timely and
effective action in cases of default. For this, the Internal Audit Wing of a Department is
expected to play an effective role. The Committee were given to understand that the
role of Internal audit Wing of the Customs Department is limited to auditing of statutory

18
records relating to clearance of goods and payments of duty on imports and exports,
maintained by the Department. It does not undertake audit of ICD/CFS in relation to
checking of the records in respect of goods that were awaiting disposal. Even where
the Department has admitted the role of Internal Audit, they have not performed their
functions effectively resulting in cases of delayed/non-disposal of goods pending
for disposal. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Internal Audit System in
Customs Department should be revamped and strengthened so that they perform
their role satisfactorily. Their scope and ambit should also be broadened so as to
bring all the records of cases pertaining to non-disposal of cargo by the Custodian
under their scrutiny/check.
(Sl. No. 7 of Appendix V)
Para 64 of 27th Report of PAC
Action Taken
The recommendation of the Committee for revamping the internal audit system in
the context of audit clearance and disposal of goods has been taken note of.
Customs internal audit is done on the import transactions mainly in Customs EDI
system taking into consideration the duty liability of the imported products, to ensure
that the duty due has been paid correctly and in proper manner, prior to the clearance
of goods. The Internal Audit as at present does not undertake the audit of the
functioning of ICD/CFS and cannot therefore function as a check on the delayed
disposal of goods, which are unclaimed/uncleared.
However, the Board has taken due note of the recommendation of the Committee
for scrutiny of ICD/CFS. The monitoring of their functioning can be more appropriately
carried out by an agency such as Directorate General of Inspection and their regional
units to ensure that the goods remaining uncleared/unclaimed and their non-disposal
is kept under proper scrutiny to avoid lengthy period when such goods lie undisposed.
Suitable mechanism in this regard is being worked out by CBEC.
F.No. 442/12/2004-Cus.IV Approved by Member (Cus.), CBEC
Sd/-
(Pawan Kumar Jain)
Addl. Director General.
Observation/Recommendation
Apart from non-disposal of uncleared/unclaimed cargo there also exist cases where
there were inordinate delays in disposal of these goods ranging from six months to as
much as fifteen years. The Ministry have attributed these delays by saying that the
goods could not be disposed of early and repeated auctions had to be conducted to
dispose them of. Another factor leading to such delays is stated to be the inability on
the part of the Custodian in taking prompt and immediate action in disposal of goods
that had become ripe for disposal. Though suo-moto action was required to be taken

19
by the Custodian for disposal of goods they unnecessarily chose to seek permission
of the Customs Department to dispose of the goods thereby leading to considerable
avoidable delays. The Committee desire that there should be close coordination
between Custodians and Customs to ensure speedy disposal of goods. The monitoring
mechanism for speedy/expeditious disposal of uncleared/unclaimed goods in the
Customs Department also needs to be strengthened. For this, the Committee
recommend that the CBEC should examine the feasibility of constituting a core group
at the Board level, which should meet at regular intervals for monitoring the progress
made in expeditious disposal of uncleared/unclaimed goods in various ICDs/CFSs.
(Sl. No. 9 of Appendix V)
Para 66 of 27th Report of PAC
Action Taken
The delay in disposal of goods by custodians and the role of customs in expediting
the entire process of clearance of goods right from unloading thereof was studied by
a core group. Accordingly, the following measures have been put in place for regular
disposal of uncleared/unclaimed goods and for monitoring of the progress.
(i) The list of goods which have crossed the period of 30 days from the date of
unloading to be discussed between custodian, customs and port authorities
in regular meetings to sort out any problems arising thereof.
(ii) Monthly conduct of e-auction/tender at the Custom houses covering all type
of goods. Wherever the custodian doesn't have the facility to dispose off
regularly he could use the facility of e-auction of the Customs.
(iii) Directorate of Logistics who is compiling the monthly performance of disposal
of goods would also reflect the performance of uncleared/unclaimed goods.
(iv) Board has further issued  a Circular No. 11/2006 dt. 16.2.2006, stipulating that
there would be a formal mechanism for interaction between the custodians
and Customs to review the pendency of uncleared cargo and to reconcile the
figures. It has been decided that there should be a quarterly meeting between
the Customs and Custodians at each Custom station to review the pendency
of uncleared/unclaimed cargo and to update the status of the pending
consignments.
(v) Apart from the above measures at field level the following measures at the
Board level are being taken to effectively monitor the disposal action at field
level.
For monitoring the disposal of uncleared/unclaimed cargo at field level a nodal
officer i.e Joint Secretary (Custom) has been appointed with secretarial assistance
from Cus-IV section of CBEC to obtain pendency/disposal reports from Directorate of
Logistics on a quarterly basis and put up to Member (RI&I), CBEC for review.
For monitoring the disposal of confiscated cargo at field level a nodal officer i.e
Commissioner (Anti-Smuggling) has been appointed with secretarial assistance from

20
AS section of CBEC to obtain pendency/disposal reports from Directorate of Logistics
on a quarterly basis and put up to Member (RI&I), CBEC for review.
These measures would enable suitable remedial action to be taken against erring
custodians under various customs commissionerates by alerting the field formations.
F.N. 442/12/2004-Cus.IV Approved by Member (Cus.), CBEC
Sd/-
(Pawan Kumar Jain)
Addl. Director General.
 Observation/Recommendation
In terms of Section 126 of the Customs Act, 1962, ownership of confiscated goods
vests in the Central Government which is required to promptly dispose them to avoid
loss of revenue due to deterioration of quality, commercial value of the goods and
excess expenditure incurred in the maintenance of the goods etc. Even in such cases,
the Committee have come across considerable delays on the part of the Customs
authorities. In eight Commissionerates, goods valued at Rs. 27.23 Crore involving
duty of Rs. 10.74 Crore were confiscated between 1991-2003 and the same were awaiting
disposal for periods ranging from 8 months to 12 years resulting in consequential
loss of interest amouting to Rs. 3.64 Crore. During their recent visit to Kolkata Customs,
the Committee were informed that there has been a lack of persistent follow up, in
addition to legal incumbrances in the matter of disposal of confiscated/seized goods.
The Committee were apprised that goods valued at Rs. 2.02 Crore were still awaiting
disposal in their Commissionerates. The Committee regret to find that no specific
timeframe has been prescribed for disposal of confiscated/seized goods. The
Committee recommend that Ministry/Department should look into the matter with a
view to find ways and means to simplify the procedures for expeditious disposal of
cargo. Further, a time limit should also be fixed for all categories of confiscated/seized
goods with a view to dispose them expeditiously.
(Sl. No. 10 of Appendix V)
Para 67 of 27th Report of PAC
Action Taken
The recommendation made by the Hon'ble Committee was taken due note. As
stated earlier the entire process of disposal of goods, including the confiscated/
seized goods, were studied in detail. Accordingly, two-pronged strategy was adopted
to address the issues pointed out by the Hon'ble Committee. One, a revised procedure
for simplified valuation for time bound disposal of goods have been prescribed. In
this disposal process, it has also been prescribed that if the confiscated goods which
are ripe for disposal, are not sold in auction for the third time, then such goods
would be disposed of at the highest bid in the third auction, thereby making it
mandatory for time bound disposal of goods.

21
These measures would ensure that the goods are disposed of timely and the
further action for disposal of goods is methodical resulting in timely disposal. However,
it is reiterated that the Department can dispose of confiscated goods, which are 'ripe
for disposal' i.e. clear ownership of goods lie with the Government after adjudication
and appellate proceedings. The process and procedure of confiscation itself involves
passage through various stages like investigation, issuance of show cause notice,
observance of the principles of natural justice for adjudication and appeal before
different appellate forums. While the department may expedite investigation and
adjudication proceeding, appellate stages may take its time for any final decision.
As regards the recommendation, instructions dated 17th August 2006 have been
issued to the field formations directing that all perishable goods be disposed of
within three months of seizure.
All goods notified under Section 110 (1A) of the Customs Act, 1942 be disposed of
within three months of the application under Section 110 (1B) having been allowed by
the Magistrate, the permission to be obtained within two months of seizure.
All other seized/confiscated goods be disposed of within three months of
adjudication/appellate/court proceedings having concluded and the vesting of
property of such goods in the Central Government having become final.
In order to effectively dispose of the goods in time and to secure the interest of
Revenue, the relevant provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 have been amended by
clause 26 of the Taxation Law Amendment Act, 2006 with effect from 14th July,
2006. Accordingly, under section 110A any goods, documents or things seized under
section 110, pending investigation or the order of the adjudicating officer, can be
released to the owner on taking a bond with security. This would ensure that the
duty on the goods is collected at the time of such provisional release and the possible
fine and penalty are safeguarded through the security.
Thus above provisions take care of the committee's recommendations. The same
shall be monitored at Board level as per the arrangements prescribed in earlier paras.
The further progress in the respect of pending containers mentioned in the
para is as under:
Custom House, Kolkata has conducted the first e-auction on 23rd August 2006.
Three more auctions have thereafter been conducted for Port and upto October, a total
of 13 lots having book value of Rs. 7.16 cr. and fair value of Rs. 1.73 cr. were sold by e-
auction and an amount of Rs. 2.16 crore was realized from the sales. In the 4th e-auction
done on 20.11.06, a total of 5 lots having book value of Rs. 5.73 cr. and fair value of Rs.
2.61 cr. were sold by e-auction (i.e. the bids have been accepted) and an amount of Rs.
4.12 crore is expected to be realized from the same within November. Efforts are on to
dispose of the remaining goods (worth book value of Rs. 30.04 cr., out of which goods
worth Rs. 5.73 cr. already finalized for sale in the aforesaid 4th auction, but will be reported
only after sale proceeds are realized) within this calendar year.
F.No. 442/12/2004-Cus. IV Approved by Member (Cus), CBEC
Sd/-
(Pawan Kumar Jain)
Addl. Director General.

22
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee find that in Delhi Commissionerate (ICD, TKD) imported goods
such as brass dross/eckart ink were put for auction and when they could not be sold
in the first auction they were again put for repeated auction in the next four auctions.
After the fifth auction, the said item was declared as restricted by the Department. In
a written information furnished to the Committee, the Ministry while admitting the
lapse stated that the No Objection Certificate was inadvertently issued overlooking
the aspect that the goods in question were allowed only to units registered with the
Ministry of Environment & Forests, Government of India and by the actual user
condition. Such serious lapse on the part of the Board/Department has revealed
deficiencies in the procedures  and monitoring systems in clearance of the goods for
disposal. Such avoidable lapses render considerable loss of time and money to the
exchequer in terms of expenditure incurred on auction. The Committee recommend
that the procedures/guidelines involved in examination/scrutiny of cargo before
their clearance for disposal, should be reviewed in their entirety. The management
information system in this regard should be strengthened and periodically reviewed
so that such lapses do not recur in future.
(Sl. No. 11 of Appendix V)
Para 68 of 27th Report of PAC.
Action Taken
The Recommendation made by the Hon'ble Committee was taken into due account
while revising the procedure for examination and disposal of goods. Further, based on the
study conducted by the Task Force, it is specifically provided in the instructions that
Customs shall scrutinize the list of unclaimed/uncleared goods which are being intimated
by the custodian, segregate the list of disputed or stayed consignments or consignments
required to be retained for any investigation/adjudication/court proceedings, motor vehicles
or negative list items as restrictions imposed under allied acts. However, in order to
give certainty and to avoid the situations like the one cited in the above case, it is also
provided that if no such intimation is received from the Customs within 15 days, the
custodian shall go ahead with the disposal of the goods. A separate working arrangement
in each Port between Customs Administration and head of the Port Authority along with
custodians of CFS has been set for meeting at least once a month to work out solutions
to various problems that may arise in the course of  clearance of goods. The information
provided by the custodian regarding unclaimed/uncleared goods is to be reviewed by
the jurisdicational Commissioner of Customs from the disposal through E-auction by
the Customs Zones are reported to the Board. Accordingly, it is stated that the said
information flow at the local and central level would enable periodical review of the
disposal of uncleared/unclaimed goods, seized/confiscated goods.
F. No. 442/12/2004-Cus.IV Approved by Member (Cus), CBEC
Sd/-
(Pawan Kumar Jain)
Addl. Director General.

23
Observation/Recommendation
In yet another case export goods i.e. ready-made  garments, compact disc, hand
tools and electronic goods worth Rs. 63.15 crore which entered for export between 1985
and 2003 were lying in the export shed in Delhi Commissionerate as unclaimed/detained/
confiscated/seized. Non-disposal of such items, having short span of life, resulted in
their commercial value being lost leading to loss of revenue amount of Rs. 49.88 crore
apart from blocking of revenue amounting to Rs. 13.27 crore on other goods. The
Ministry have contested this Audit finding by saying that the goods under question
were not seized or confiscated. Some of them were connected with investigation by
Customs and the remaining were abandoned export goods  over which customs had no
claim. It has been contended that abandoned export goods did not come either under
the category of seized or confiscated goods  and therefore their non-disposal did not
involve any revenue loss. The Committee are of the opinion that since the abandoned
goods occupy considerable space of the godowns of ICDs/CFSs thereby involving
opportunity cost, it is imperative that the status of abandoned goods should be properly
defined and appropriate amendments to this effect should be made in the Customs Act,
1962 so as to recover the costs involved in their maintenance. The Board should also
formulate guidelines/instructions with respect to the modalities for their disposal.
(Sl. No. 12 of Appendix V)
Para 69 of 27th Report of PAC
Action Taken
The point mentioned in the recommendation of the Hon'ble Committee was taken
note of. In order to clarify the scope of unclaimed/abandoned goods and to dispose
of such goods in a time bound manner necessary changes in the Customs Act and
instructions have been issued.
In respect of goods entered for exportation, it has been specifically provided
that except for prohibited/contraband goods, all such goods should be allowed for
exportation including seized goods released provisionally. In respect of imported
goods, it has also been provided that the importer shall not be allowed to abandon
his title to such goods where an offence appears to have been committed under the
Customs Act by making  suitable amendments in Sections 23 and 68 of the Customs
Act, 1962 through the Finance Act, 2006. In respect of all other goods, both imported
and exported goods, where there is no violation of Customs Act is involved, the
custodian has been fixed with the responsibility for disposal of goods exclusively
by them without intervention by Customs. This would enable disposal of abandoned
goods immediately by the custodian after giving due notice to the importer/exporter.
However, if there is any offence involved, such goods will not be allowed to be
abandoned and would be seized/confiscated for necessary action and moved to the
Customs warehouse. This would ensure that abandoned goods shall not occupy
unnecessary space at CFS/ICD and that the goods are disposed of in a timely manner.
F. No. 442/12/2004-Cus. IV Approved by Member (Cus), CBEC
Sd/-
(Pawan Kumar Jain)
Addl. Director General.

24
Observation/Recommendation
In January, 2004 the Ministry of Finance are stated to have introduced e-auction
system at field level with the objective of providing time efficient and transparent
procedure for disposal of cargo. The e-auction software is presently being implemented
in Chennai, Mumbai II and Bangalore Commissionerates. As regards its status of
implementation, the Ministry have informed that e-auction had helped in facilitating
a time-bound and efficient mechanism for disposal of cargo and also eliminated
cartelization in auction procedure and the same would be implemented in other
Commissionerates in a phased manner. The Committee expect the Ministry of
Finance to take necessary steps to Introduce/Implement e-auction in all the
Commissionerates in a time-bound period. They also hope that e-auction would
cut red tape and simplify the procedures in clearance/disposal of the uncleared/
unclaimed goods in an expeditious manner so as to safeguard the revenue of the
Government. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the further
progress made in this regard.
(Sl. No. 14 Appendix V)
Para 71 of 27th Report of PAC.
Action Taken
CBEC have issued instructions regarding disposal of goods through e-auction to
all Customs field formations on 6th October 2005. Such e-auctions cover
confiscated goods, time-expired warehoused goods as well as uncleared/unclaimed
cargo lying with the custodians, which are required to be disposed of under section
48 of the Customs Act, 1962. After issue of these instructions, e-auctions with
simultaneous tenders are being regularly held at the respective Custom Houses.
As regard the recommendation, Ministry has further issued instructions vide letter
F.No. 711/1/2006-Cus (AS) dated 20th February 2006 to the field formations directing to
introduce-e-auction for seized/confiscated goods within 100 days of the issue of the
letter. Of the 12 Customs Zones, e-auction has been implemented in 10 Zones and it is
in the process of being implemented in the other two Zones. So far, goods valued at Rs.
60 crore approximately have been disposed of through e-auction.
However, it is felt that the localized e-auctions are not sufficient to overcome the
problems of the cartelization of bidders and bidding low amounts of high valued
auction even in the third auction and there is a need for E-auction on a central portal
as it would provide a wider base of bidders that would reduce the chances of any
cartelization and fetch a better price for the goods auctions. To obviate this lacuna,
steps are being taken to create an All India E-auction portal, which is proposed to
cater to the disposal of un-cleared/unclaimed cargo as well.
Details of disposal through E-auction
In this regard, as a part of key area of performance the value of goods disposed and
amount of duty realized were monitored in t he Central Board of Excise & Customs

25
(CBEC) through monthly reports sent by Commissionerates. The past performance of
the field formations in the previous period is given below:
Period No. of auction conducted V alue of goods disposed in
e-auction (Rs. in crore)
November, 2005 29 10.43
December, 2005 22 10.06
January, 2006 16 10.74
February, 2006 27 12.03
March, 2006 40 22.43
2006-07
April, 2006 9 5.19
May, 2006 15 1.66
June, 2006 18 7.00
July, 2006 17 7.48
August, 2006 23 15.47
September, 2006 08 8.76
F. No. 442/12/2004-Cus. IV Approved by Member (Cus), CBEC
Sd/-
(Pawan Kumar Jain)
Addl. Director General.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are informed that a Task Force headed by Chief Commissioner of
Customs, New Delhi and comprising of Chief Commissioner of Customs of different
zones was set up by the Ministry of Finance of 27th June, 2005 to suggest
administrative measures including monitoring mechanism for clearance of cargo lying
undisposed/uncleared/unclaimed or confiscated beyond specific period of time, in an
expeditious manner, by effective use of IT sources, appropriate development of
manpower etc. The Committee regret to observe that the subject-disposal of uncleared/
unclaimed/confiscated cargo seems to have been neglected by the Department/Board
until audit conducted a review on the working of ICDs/CFSs and Public Accounts
Committee took up the subject for detailed examination. It is only after that the
Ministry woke up to the problem and constituted a Task Force. The Committee are of
the opinion that had the Ministry seized of the problem and taken corrective measures
well in advance, things would not have come to such a pass.

26
The Task Force had submitted its Report in September 2005. Important
recommendations made by the Task Force are stated to be as under:—
The procedure laid down in the last Circular dated 28.1.2004 should be put in place as
a permanent measure. However, the procedure should be made applicable only to
unclaimed/uncleared cargo landed at least one year prior to the date on which the list of
goods for customs "no objection" is prepared. The total number of auctions/tenders to
which a lot is subjected should be four, with the goods to be necessarily sold for the
highest bid in the last auction/tender regardless of the reserve price fixed.
All other Custom Houses should mandatorily introduce e-auctions utilizing the
software developed by Chennai custom House within 100 days of the Task Force
report being approved by the Board. The physical auctions should be altogether
discontinued once the e-auction has become operational. Such e-auctions would not
only cover goods confiscated by Customs or time-expired warehoused goods but
also to uncleared/unclaimed cargo lying with the custodians required to be disposed
of under Section 48.
The Customs Act, 1962 should be amended to provide that if the importer does not
avail of the option given to him for taking delivery of the goods on a provisional basis,
the Department may offer the goods for sale in public auction after giving a notice of
say 30 days to the importer. The sale proceeds should be kept in a fixed deposit with
the nationalized bank until the case is decided and the proceeds be disposed of
depending on the final outcome.
As a follow up of Task Force Report, the CBEC have issued two circulars on 1st
and 9th December, 2005 prescribing a revised Procedure for expeditious disposal of
unclaimed/uncleared cargo under Section 48 of the Customs Act lying with the
Custodians–both Public and Private. The Committee hope that the revised Procedure
prescibed by the Board in the light of Task Force Report would cut down the delays
and enable the Custodians to dispose unclaimed/uncleared goods expeditiously and
also protect the revenue due to the Government. They also recommend that
Ministry of Finance should apprise them of the progress made in the disposal
of all pending cargo in the light of the revised Procedure.
(Sl. No. 15 of Appendix. V)
Para 72 of 27th Report of PAC
Action Taken
As noted by the Hon'ble Committee in respect of disposal of unclaimed/uncleared,
confiscated/seized goods, the Ministry had taken into account the recommendations
made by the Task Force, Inter Ministerial Group and accordingly, appropriate
mechanism for time bound disposal has been set up. Further, in order to avoid
accumulation of such cargo, the Customs Act has been suitably amended to provide
for a new Section 110A for immediate release of seized goods to its owner after
taking required security. Further, in respect of goods which remain under the category
of unclaimed/uncleared cargo, a separate set of instructions has been issued to put in
place a permanent mechanism for expeditious disposal of the backlog of accumulated
cargo and also to dispose of recurring uncleared/unclaimed goods in a time-bound
manner. A separate working arrangement in each Port between Customs Administration

27
and head of the Port Authority along with custodians of CFS have been set up for
periodic meeting to work out solutions to various problems that may arise in the
course of clearance of goods in the ports and ICD/CFS.
The progress made in the disposal of the pending cargo after the instructions were
issued enclose as Annexure.
F.No. 442/12/2004-Cus. IV  Approved by Member (Cus), CBEC
Sd/-
(Pawan Kumar Jain)
Addl. Director General.

28
ANNEXURE
Sl. Name of the No. of No. of No. of cases
No. Commissionerate Containers containers pending
pending disposed of
disposal as per
Audit Report
1. Commissioner of (i) 67 TEUs (ii) 67 TEUs NIL
Customs, Mumbai (ii) 24 LCL (ii) 21 LCL 3
(General)
2. Mumbai (II) 333 152 181
3. Chennai (Sea Port) 296 60 236
(Import & Export)
4. Delhi (DZ)
ICD, TKD 618 64 554
ICD, PPG 15 5 8
5. Chennai (Prev.)
Trichy 1017 32 985
Tuticorin 1 1 NIL
6. Kolkata
CWC, CFS 33 17 16
Balmer & Lawrie 33 33 NIL
7. Ahmedabad 12 9 3
8. Amritsar 275 175 100
9. Bangalore
10. Mangalore 11 (cases) 8 (cases) 3 (cases)
(Customs)
11. Coimbatore 22 (cases) 19 (cases) 3 (cases) Not in
working
condition/
deteriorated

CHAPTER III
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
GOVERNMENT
Observations/Recommendations
An Inland Container Depot (ICD) or Container Freight Station (CFS) is a common
user facility, which offers services for handling and temporary storage of import/
export goods. They were established in order to facilitate the clearance of import and
export goods of dry port. Under Section 45 of the Customs Act, 1962, the Commissioner
of Customs approves a Custodian under whose custody all the imported goods
unloaded in customs area remains till they are cleared from ICDs/CFSs for home
consumption, warehoused or transshipped. The clearance/disposal of uncleared and
unclaimed goods is to be initiated and carried out by the Custodian as per the
instructions in vogue.
(Sl. No. 1 of Appendix. V)
Para 58 of 27th Report of PAC
Action Taken
No comments.
F.No. 442/12/2004-Cus. IV Approved by Member (Cus.), CBEC
Sd/-
(Pawan Kumar Jain)
Addl. Director General.
Observations/Recommendations
The Committee's examination of the subject is based on the Audit Review on the
working of Inland Container Depots (ICDs)/Container Freight Stations (CFSs) in
relation to clearance/disposal of uncleared/unclaimed cargo on payment of appropriate
customs duty to the Government. For this, Audit had conducted test-check of records
of customs as well as custodians i.e., ICDs/CFSs located in 13 Commissionerates
for three years i.e., 2000-01 to 2002-03 with the objective of assessing whether
Revenue due to the Government viz., duty on uncleared/unclaimed goods at ICDs
was recovered in time. The Committee's examination of the subject has revealed
a number of deficiencies in the system. There have been instances where the
prescribed rules/regulations and procedure have not been followed in respect
of disposal of uncleared/unclaimed goods leading to inordinate delay in their
disposal and consequent non-recovery/delay in recovery of customs duty on auctioned
29

30
goods etc. The existing monitoring mechanism in the Ministry/Department in respect
of functioning of ICDs/CFSs, also seem to be very weak and ineffective. These issues
have been discussed in detail in the succeeding paragraphs.
(Sl. No. 2 of Appendix. V)
Para 59 of 27th Report of PAC
Action Taken
While the action taken is explained in individual paragraphs, in the overall
perspective, it is submitted that for monitoring of goods lying uncleared/unclaimed in
ICDs/CSFs and disposal of the same, the department has taken a number of measures
to strengthen and expedite the process of disposal as detailed below.
1. Task Force:
As a sequel to the review of the C&AG, the Central Board of Excise and Customs
appointed a Task Force vide order F.No. 442/12/2004-Cus.IV(Pt) dt. 27.6.2005 to
examine the various issues arising out of the audit review, and to suggest effective
measures for implementation to dispose expeditiously. The Task Force comprised
the Chief Commissioners of Customs, Mumbai-I, II, Chennai and Kolkata as its
members with the CC, Delhi Zone as its Chairman.
The Task Force in its report suggested various measures, inter alia,
A circular to be issued dealing with time-expired warehoused goods, definition of
Reserve Price, simultaneous auction-cum-tender to be compulsorily held every month,
appointment of a joint pricing committee and panel of valuers, compulsory disposal at
below reserve price at the third auction-cum-tender, etc.
Another circular to be issued adopting the procedure laid down in Ministry's
Circular No. 7/2004 as a permanent measure with the modifications such as (i) Custodian
is responsible for disposal of only unclaimed/uncleared cargo of more than one year;
(ii) no role of customs on the valuation even if on the request of custodian and (iii)
compulsory disposal at the fourth auction-cum tender even at below reserve price;
(iv) procedure to deal with hazardous waste.
2. CBEC Circulars:
After a careful consideration of the report of the Task Force, CBEC has issued
Circular No. 50/2005 dt. 1.12.2005 as amended by Circular No. 52/2005 dt. 9.12.2005
and another Circular No 11/2006 dt. 16.2.2006 for disposal of unclaimed/uncleared
cargo under section 48 of the Customs Act, 1962, lying with the custodians.
(a) Circular No. 50/2005 dt. 1.12.2005 as amended by Circular No. 52/2005
dt. 9.12.2005:
The salient features laid down in the above circular are as follows:
Regarding unclaimed/uncleared cargo landed at least one year prior.

31
(i) The custodian will furnish the list of items to be considered for disposal of
customs. A notice shall be issued by the custodian to the consignee and also
displayed on the notice board.
(ii) Customs shall scrutinize the list of disputed or stayed consignments or
consignments required to be retained for any investigation/adjudication/court
proceedings.
(iii) The responsibility for the disposal shall exclusively be with the Custodian
who shall fix a reserve price arrived at by a panel of Government approved
valuers appointed by the Custodian.
(iv) The customs shall choose 10% consignments for which detailed inventory
shall be made in their presence for sample check.
(v) The disposal of the goods shall be made by public auction/E-auction/tender.
The maximum number of auctions/tenders to which a lot is subjected should
be four, with the goods to be necessarily sold for the highest bid in the last
auction/tender regardless of the reserve price fixed. Reserve price fixed
would not be applicable in case of fourth auction/tender.
(vi) Guidelines issued by the Central Vigilance Commission are to be followed.
Regarding uncleared/unclaimed goods lying for a period less than one year
(i) Custodian would get the reserve price fixed by a panel of Government
approved valuers appointed by the Custodian. Customs shall not associate
itself with the valuation of the goods lying uncleared with the custodian.
However, both reserve price and bids would be approved by the Customs.
(ii) If these goods remain unsold and pass into the category of landed-more
than-one-year-prior, then the custodians can sell the same following the
independent procedure as detailed in (a) above, without any reference to
customs, and adjusting the number of auctions/tenders to which the lot was
already subjected to against the prescribed number of four such auctions/
tender.
(b) Circular No. 11/2006 dated 16.2.2006:
The measures laid down in the above circular are:
(i) One time interim administrative measure, for disposal of all lots of
unclaimed/uncleared goods pending for disposal for more than one year
which have undergone auctions/tenders at least 3 times by the custodians
and which are still lying unsold, are to be offered for final tender once more
and the highest bid received to be accepted by the department. This process
was to be completed by 31st March, 2006.
(ii) Disposal of goods through e-auction/tender conducted regularly every
month.
(iii) All consignments of hazardous waste are to be disposed off in terms of
Ministry's Circular No. 31/04 dated 26.4.2004 laying down the guidelines
given by the Supreme Court.

32
(iv) Each Custom House will constitute a Special Task Force to conduct a
comprehensive review of all the consignments indicated as being "detained"
by the respective custodians.
(v) The Board has further decided that there would be a formal mechanism for
interaction between the custodians and Customs to review the pendency of
uncleared cargo and to reconcile the figures. It has been decided that there
should be a quarterly meeting between the Customs and Custodians at each
Custom station to review the pendency of uncleared/unclaimed cargo and to
update the status of the pending consignments.
(c) Circular No. 12/2006 dt. 20.2.2006:
Based on the recommendations of the Task Force, CBEC has further issued another
Circular No. 12/2006 dt. 20.2.2006 for the valuation and disposal by auction-cum-
tender of seized, confiscated and time-expired goods. The review by Audit has covered
the confiscated goods also, lying with the custodians.
The measures prescribed in the above circular are:
(i) The disposal by sale of seized, confiscated and time-expired warehoused
goods shall take place simultaneously through public auction and sealed
tender, every month.
(ii) A Joint Pricing Committee (JPC) shall be constituted in each Customs
Commissionerate charged with the responsibility of disposal of seized and
confiscated goods.
(iii) The JPC shall determine the Fair Price of the goods to be disposed of through
auction-cum-tender. The Fair Price is the best price at which the goods can be
sold under normal conditions. It can be expected to be somewhat lower than
the price at which goods of the same kind and in the same condition could be
sold by the buyer in the wholesale market, the difference representing the
profit which the buyer at the auction expects to make.
(iv) There shall be no Reserve Price as distinct from Fair Price.
(v) The wholesale market price of the goods offered for sale and the margin of
profit shall be ascertained by Government Approved V aluers alone and not
by Customs staff.
(vi) The highest bid in the auction-cum-tender shall be accepted by the JPC. In
the event of the goods not being sold in the first two auction-cum-tenders,
the goods shall be sold at the highest bid obtained in the third auction-cum-
tender.
(vii) The goods should not be withdrawn from auction-cum-tender on filmsy
grounds, such as the possibility that the goods may fetch a slightly higher
price in a subsequent auction.
(viii) All post-auction/tender offers, even if these are for amounts higher than the
successful bid, shall be strictly disregarded and not taken congnizance of in
any manner.

33
(ix) In respect of complaints regarding determination of Fair Price and acceptance of
bids in auction-cum-tender, the Commissioner shall immediately ascertain whether
the prescribed procedure has been adhered to. The matter should not be referred
for Vigilance scrutiny in a routine manner if the prescribed procedure has been
followed.
(x) All Custom Houses shall immediately introduce e-auction.
3. Amendment in Customs Act, 1962:
In order to effectively dispose off the goods in time and to secure the interest of
Revenue, the relevant provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 have been amended
vide clause 26 of the Taxation Law Amendment Act, 2006 with effect from 14th
July, 2006. Accordingly, under section 110A any goods, documents or things seized
under section 110, pending investigation or the order of the adjudicating
officer, can be released to the owner on taking a bond with security. This would
ensure that the duty on the goods is collected at the time of such provisional release
and the possible fine and penalty are safeguarded through the security.
4. Special Disposal Cells:
As a follow-up of the recommendation of the Task Force, Special Disposal Cells
have already been created in the Custom Houses for effectively monitoring the
disposal which are specifically assigned the work of disposal of uncleared/unclaimed
cargo and seized/confiscated goods including time-expired warehoused goods.
5. Monitoring mechanism in the Ministry:
After reviewing the existing monitoring mechanism in the Ministry, the following
monitoring mechanism is being devised.
(i) The Monthly Report on uncleared/unclaimed cargo shall be compiled at
Dte. of Logistics in addition to seized/confiscated cargo.
(ii) For monitoring the disposal of uncleared/unclaimed cargo at Board level, Joint
Secretary (Custom) shall be the nodal officer with secretarial assistance from
Cus-IV section of CBEC. JS shall obtain pendency/disposal reports from Dte.
of Logistics on a quarterly basis and put up to Member (RI&I), CBEC for review.
(iii) For monitoring the disposal of confiscated cargo at Board level, Commissioner
(Anti-Smuggling) shall be the nodal officer with secretarial assistance from
AS section of CBEC. He shall obtain pendency/disposal reports from Dte. of
Logistics on a quarterly basis and put up to Member (RI&I), CBEC for review.
The aforesaid measures have already resulted into reduction in pendency of
disposal as discussed in subsequent paras. These measures are likely to strengthen
and expedite the disposal of cargo by streamlining the procedures and sensitizing
the officers for expeditious disposal.
F.No. 442/12/2004-Cus.IV Approved by Member (Cus.), CBEC
Sd/-
(Pawan Kumar Jain)
Addl, Director General.

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
—NIL—
34

35
CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
Observation/Recommendation
Under the extant rules/arrangements, responsibility for clearance/disposal of
goods lies with the custodian and the role of Customs in disposal of cargo is to
examine the status of cargo and give permission to Custodians when sought for
under the Customs Act. The Committee are informed that in case of non-fulfillment
of the obligations by the Custodians the concerned Commissioner of Customs can
cancel the approval given to him to operate/ICDs/CFSs. However, no detail Rules
empowering the Customs to take any punitive/deterrent action against the
Custodians in such cases have been framed. Further, no safeguards for protection
of Revenue in cases of negligence or violations of the conditions/guidelines by the
Custodians exist in the Customs Act. The Committee feel that Government should
formulate appropriate rules and guidelines to control the activities of the Custodian
so that in the event of their failure to adhere to the obligations, the Department/
Board can take suitable punitive action against the erring Custodians so that
revenue could be protected. For this, if necessary, the Customs Act, 1962 may be
amended.
(Sl. No. 8 of Appendix V)
Para 65 of 27th Report of PAC
Action Taken
The recommendation of the Committee for controlling the activities of the ICD/
CFS has been noted. It is submitted that the ICDs/CFSs, while being appointed as
custodians of the goods, are subjected to certain conditions. These relate to provision
of safe, secure and spacious premises for loading/unloading in storage of cargo,
modern facilities for material handling, supporting equipments, EDI connectivity,
proper insurance of the goods stored, undertaking to bear the duty on goods lost or
pilfered and to abide by all rules and regulations under the Customs Act. The main
obligations of the custodian is to properly account for the goods, keep them under
safe custody, provide efficient clearance process and for compliance with the
Customs Act, 1962 and other acts, rules and regulations in force thereof. Non-
fulfillment of the above would make them liable for penal action and termination of
custodianship, which is enforced in specific cases following due process of
principles of natural justice.
However noting the Committee's suggestion, it is submitted that a separate team
of officials at Mumbai and Chennai under the supervision of Chief Commissioner
Mumbai-II and Chief Commissioner Chennai (Sea) have been directed to examine
the entire gamut of provisions relating to ICD/CFS and come up with a proposal of

36
amendment to Customs Act, 1962 by way of introduction of a specific self-contained
chapter including penal provisions relating to functioning of ICD/CFS. They shall be
submitting the report by 15th January, 2007. After receipt of the report necessary
changes required shall be incorporated in the Custom Act, 1962.
F. No. 442/12/2004-Cus. IV Approved by Member (Cus), CBEC
Sd/-
(Pawan Kumar Jain)
Addl. Director General.
Observation/Recommendation
The Committee are deeply perturbed to note that an atmosphere of non-
accountability is prevailing in the entire system of disposal of pending cargo. While
Customs Department have no powers to take action against the Custodians for
inordinate delay in disposal of cargo, the Ministry/Board have also shirked their
responsibility to fix responsibility on the concerned officials for delay in disposal of
goods on the plea that it is the Custodian who is responsible for disposal of pending
cargo. With a view to address this problem, the Committee recommend that Ministry
of Finance should constitute a high level Committee comprising of members of the
CBEC and other experts on the subject, to go into the entire gamut of functioning of
ICDs/CFSs and Customs Commissionerates, in relation  to disposal of pending
uncleared/unclaimed goods and also to investigate into the causes for inordinate
delay in disposal of cargo, on a case to case basis and fix responsibility on the
concerned Customs officials and the Custodians.
(Sl. No. 13 of Appendix V)
Para 70 of 27th Report of PAC
Action Taken
As suggested by the Hon'ble Committee, an Inter Ministerial Group (IMG)
consisting of the representatives of Ministry of Shipping, Commerce & Industry,
Planning Commission and Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance had studied
the issues concerning ports and ICD/CFS, in order to streamline Customs procedure
and simplify the same. The recommendations made by the Inter Ministerial Group
will bring about an efficient and facilitative environment for expeditious customs clearance
of cargo. The procedural simplification recommended for disposal of confiscated and
uncleared/unclaimed goods would enable expeditious disposal of such cargo and reduce
congestion and bottlenecks at the ports and ICD/CFS. An Institutional mechanism consisting
of Senior officers of Customs Administration and port authority has been made responsible
at each port for implementing the recommendations of the IMG including the expeditious
disposal of goods and take remedial action.
However noting the Committee's suggestion, it is submitted that a separate team
of officials at Mumbai and Chennai under the supervision of Chief Commissioner
Mumbai-II and Chief Commissioner Chennai (Sea) have been directed to examine the
entire gamut of provisions relating to ICD/CFS and come up with a proposal of

37
amendment to Customs Act 1962 by way of introduction of a specific self-contained
chapter including penal provisions relating to functioning of ICD/CFS. They shall be
submitting the report by 15th January, 2007.
F.No. 442/12/2004- Cus.IV Approved by Member (Cus.), CBEC
Sd/-
(Pawan Kumar Jain)
Addl. Director General.
New Delhi; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
24 July, 2007 Chairman,
2 Sravana, 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

PART II
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008) HELD ON 18th JULY , 2007
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs. on 18th July,2007 in Room No. 51
(Chairman's Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R.L.Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
9. Shri K.S. Rao
10. Shri Mohan Singh
11. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Janardhana Poojary
13. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
14. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
15. Dr. K. Malaisamy
16. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
 S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary- II
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
5. Shri N.K. Jha — Under Secretary
Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Nand Kishore — P r. Director (AB)
2. Shri Jayanti Prasad — Pr. Director (INDT)
38

39
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members of the Committee to the
sitting. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the
following draft Reports:
(i) Draft Report relating to ''Functioning of Employees' State Insurance
Corporation (ESIC)'';
(ii) Draft Report relating to "Avoidable expenditure due to delay in taking
decision — Chennai Port Trust'';
(iii) Draft Report relating to ''Delay in finalisation of demands'';
(iv) Draft Report relating to ''Property Management by Ministry of External
Affairs'';
(v) Draft Report on Action Taken on 9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) on
''National Scheme for Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers";  and
(vi) Draft Report on Action Taken on 27th Report of PAC(14th Lok Sabha) on
''Non-disposal of uncleared/unclaimed Imported cargo in ICDs/CFSs''.
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted these draft Reports without any
amendments/modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalise and present the
same to Parliament in the light of factual verification done by Audit.
3. The Committee then desired that Audit may be asked to revive the practice
(upto 12th Lok Sabha) of furnishing to the Committee a compilation titled ''Epitome
of the Reports of the Central Public Accounts Committee'' containing action taken
by the Ministries on the recommendations made by PAC in their Reports alongwith
the status of their implementation.
4. Further, it was decided that the Committee would convene their next sittings
on 30th and 31st July, 2007.
The Committee then adjourned .

APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF OBSERV A TIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/Department Observations/Recommendations
No. No.
12 3 4
1. 9 Ministry of Finance The Committee express their satisfaction
over the steps taken by the Ministry for
safeguarding the revenue due to
Government as well as for the
expeditious collection of Revenue in
cases where seizure/confiscation of
goods is involved. However, the
Committee are apprehensive about the
possibility of owners making fraudulent
claims when goods are released
provisionally on the basis of bond
furnished by them. The Committee
would like to reiterate that the protection
of Government Revenue should be the
underlying objective of the measures
that are aimed at simplification of
procedures. Government, should
therefore, take all possible steps to
prevent the possibility of misuse of this
facility by the owners so as to protect
the Government Revenue. The
Committee would also like to be
apprised about the progress made by
the Customs Houses in constituting the
Special Task Force as well as the work
done by these Task Forces in review of
the consignments that were pending for
final decision under the revised
procedure.
2. 12 -do- The    Committee    note    that  team  of
Customs officials of Mumbai and
Chennai under the supervision of Chief
Commissioners of Customs Mumbai-II
(Department of Revenue)
40

41
and Chennai (Sea) respectively had been
constituted to examine the entire gamut
of provisions relating to ICD/CFS and
to suggest proposals for suitable
amendments to Customs Act, 1962 for
incorporating a self-contained Chapter
on functioning of ICDs/CFSs therein.
The Committee have also been informed
that the Team of officials would be
submitting its Report by 15th January,
2007. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the main findings of the
Report of the Expert team and the
changes/amendments made or
proposed to be made in the Customs
Act, 1962 in pursuance of the
recommendation/suggestion given by
the Team of officials within three month
from the presentation of the Report.
3. 15 Ministry of Finance The Committee regret to note that
despite the measures taken by the
Government for expeditious disposal of
unclaimed/uncleared cargo, the same
had very little impact at the ground level
i.e., in ICDs/CFSs in clearance of the
pending cargo. What is surprising to
the Committee is the fact that even after
the issue of instructions regarding
setting up a permanent mechanism for
expeditious disposal of the backlog of
accumulated cargo, the position with
regard to clearance of pending cargo in
various Commissionerates has been far
from satisfactory. From the details
furnished by the Ministry, the
Committee find that in respect of
3 Commissionerates viz. Chennai (sea
port), Chennai (Prev.) (Trichy) and
Amritsar Commissionerate a large
number of cases are still pending for
disposal. The situation is quite dismal
in case of Chennai (Prev.)
Commissionerate—Trichy, where out of
12 3 4
(Department of Revenue)

42
1017 containers that were stated to be
pending as per Audit Report, only 32
could be disposed off and a large
contingent of 985 containers are still to
be disposed off. Further in respect of
ICD, Tugulakabad, out of 618 containers
that were pending for disposal, only 64
could be cleared and 554 containers are
yet to be disposed off. These facts
indicate that there is need to implement
the procedure/guidelines in right
earnest by the concerned agencies. The
Committee, accordingly, reiterate that
the Government should take all possible
measures so that the cargo pending in
various Commissionerates and ICDs/
CFSs are disposed off within the
stipulated period.
12 3 4

PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING  AUTHORISED  AGENTS:—
Sl.No. Name of Agent Sl .No. Name of Agent
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Bo ok Centre, Benz Circle,
Vasavya Nagar, Vijaywada-520006.
(A.P)
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila
School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842002. (Bihar)
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem
House, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 1113. New Delhi-110001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi-110009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency,
IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double
Storey, New Delhi-110024.
(T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India
Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3,
Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110002.
(T.No. 23262515)
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80,
Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110054. (T. No. 23911966)
11. M/s. Seth & Co. Room No. 31 D,
Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law
House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110006. (T. No. 23866768)
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol
Bagh, New  Delhi-110005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125,
Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 708, New Delhi-110001.
(T. No. 23411919)
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd. A/15-17,
Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service C-D/123/C,
Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110034.
MADHYA  PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28 Malviya
Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A, Chitra
Bazar, Khan House, P.B. No. 2621,
Mumbai-400002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India),
649-A Girgaum Road, opp. 2nd Dhobi
Talao Lane, Mumbai-400002.
PUDUCHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative
Assembly Department,
Puducherry-605001.
TAMIL NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies,
123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37,
Royappettah High Road,
Chennai-600014.
UTTAR PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel
Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad (U.P)
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair
Building Hazrat Ganj,  GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226001.
PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI.