NATIONAL SCHEME OF LIBERATION
AND REHABILITATION OF SCAVENGERS
AND THEIR DEPENDENTS
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND
EMPOWERMENT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2007-2008
FIFTY-SECOND REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
52

PAC NO. 1834
FIFTY-SECOND REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
NATIONAL SCHEME OF LIBERATION AND
REHABILITATION OF SCAVENGERS AND
THEIR DEPENDENTS
MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE AND EMPOWERMENT
[Action Taken on 9th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(14th  Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.08.2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.08.2007
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2007/Sravana, 1929 (Saka)

PAC  NO. 1837
Price  Rs. 54.00
© 2007 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIA T
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok
Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi - 110 002

(i)
CONTENTS
PAGE NO.
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2007-2008) ....................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER  I Report ...................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by Government ....................................................................... 7
CHAPTER III Observations /Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in  view of the replies received from
Government............................................................................. 18
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted  by the Committee
and which require reiteration .................................................. 25
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations  in  respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies ............................ 32
PART  II
Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2007-2008) held on  18.07.2007............................................... 33
APPENDIX
Observations and Recommendations ..................................... 35

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra—Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
14. Shri Kharabela Swain
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V. Narayanasamy
17. Prof. P.J. Kurien
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary Gr.-II
5. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Fifty-second Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 9th Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on “National Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers
and their Dependents”.
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee
at their sitting held on 18th July, 2007. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the Report.
3. The Committee  place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
4. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the
Committee.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
24 July, 2007 Chairman,
2 Sravana, 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with action taken by the Government on the
Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their
Ninth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Chapter I of the Report of the Comptroller and
Auditor General of India for the year ended March, 2002 – Union Government
(Performance Appraisals) No. 3 of 2003 relating to “National Scheme of Liberation and
Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their Dependents”.
2. The Ninth Report of the Public Accounts Committee which was presented to
Lok Sabha on 23rd March, 2005, contained 18 Observations/ Recommendations. The
revised/ updated Action Taken Notes on all the Observations/ Recommendations
have been received from the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment and are
categorized as under:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by Government:
Sl. Nos. 5, 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 14, 15 and 16
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from Government:
Sl.  Nos. 2, 3, 13 and 18
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which requires reiteration:
Sl.  Nos. 1, 4, 9 and 17
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
Sl. Nos. - Nil -
3. The Committee in their Ninth Report on the subject had made the following
important Observations/ Recommendations:—
(i) The National Scheme of liberation and rehabilitation of scavengers and
their dependents though well-intentioned, was ill conceived as it  had failed
to harness its operational parameters to the complex structure of a highly
stratified society resisting occupational reform. Absence of base-line survey,
non-involvement of district development authorities, commercialisation of
the assistance patterns have led to loss of focus on the monitoring aspect
of the Scheme.
1

2
(ii) Noting that the Scheme suffered, because it was not calibrated to relate its
parameters to the legal framework provided by the Employment of Manual
Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act 1993 and
continued to operate in a persuasive mode without the legal means to
penalize for its violation,  the Committee had recommended that the Ministry
should look into the grey areas experienced by the States in enforcing the
Act and lying  out clear cut steps to remove bottle necks and correlate legal
framework with the attainment of objectives of the scheme,.
(iii) The Committee have recommended to conduct a  fresh survey so as to
ensure the availability of a reliable data of the number of scavengers to be
liberated and rehabilitated. For this, it is also essential to define the
boundaries so as to make the out reach of the scheme only to the potential
beneficiaries i.e. Scavengers as envisaged in the scheme and not to all the
Safai Karamcharis engaged in cleaning and sweeping occupation as extension
of benefit to them is construed as leakage of benefits to ineligible persons.
(iv) Noting that there was no coordination amongst the three Ministries, nor the
scheme inter-faces  been mapped in any of the scheme documents to avoid
over-lapping and asymmetries,  the Committee, recommended that a single
National programme be formulated and implemented by the Ministry of
Social Justice and Empowerment as a mission with the objective of eliminating
this scourge within the next four-five years.
(v) Pointing out that there was improper utilisation of funds by the State
Governments, which was evident from the accumulation of  huge unspent
balances at the end of each Financial Year,  the Committee had asked the
Ministry to step up monitoring efforts for the optimum utilization of funds
by the States on a regular basis.
(vi) The Committee had desired that the Ministry  should put in place, a suitable
mechanism to ensure that the Central Level Committee and the Committees
at the State Level must meet regularly and strive to ensure threadbare analysis
of the reports submitted by the different Monitoring Committees at different
levels.
4. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report.  The
Committee will now  deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of their
Observations/Recommendations  that require reiteration or merit comments.
A. Sporadic, Non/ Poor Achievement of the objectives of the Scheme
(Recommendation Sl. No. 1, Para No. 103)
5. In their Ninth Report, the Committee had observed that The National Scheme
of Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers and their Dependents Scheme had
failed to deliver its social vision after ten years of continuous but regrettably half
hearted efforts and also in working out a coherent strategy  for policy initiatives as it
could not take advantage of an existing law that prohibited employment of Scavengers.
It also failed in enhancing or reorienting the skill levels of the beneficiaries necessary

3
for change of occupation and in its mission of replacing the hereditary practice by skill
based choice of profession.  Absence of base-line survey, non-involvement of district
development authorities, commercialization of the assistance patterns have led to a
loss of focus of the monitoring aspect of the scheme.
6. In their Action Taken Note the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
have stated that in order to supplement the efforts of the State Governments to put an
end to this abominable practice as quickly as possible,  the Ministry of Urban
Employment & Poverty Alleviation had enacted a Central legislation, namely the
“Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition)
Act, 1993.”  The State Governments have been entrusted the responsibility of enforcing
the various provisions of the Act.    The fundamental issue remains the planning and
implementation of the provisions of the Act by State Governments and the coordination
among their nodal agencies . This is because the Model by-laws cannot be implemented
without adoption, support and involvement of the State Governments.  A “National
Action Plan’ for total eradication of manual scavenging by 2007”,  had also been
prepared by the Planning Commission and the Ministry of Urban Employment and
Poverty Alleviation had been made the Nodal Ministry for its implementation.  A
Central Monitoring Committee for reviewing its implementation had also been
constituted under the Chairpersonship of Secretary (Social Justice and Empowerment).
The Secretary, Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation had  requested
all the Chief Secretaries of States and UTs to conduct a detailed survey on  the number
of dry latrines existing in their respective States/Union Territories and  the number of
scavengers and their dependents which are still practising  manual scavenging.
7. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment have further stated that as
per the decision taken in the meeting of the Committee of Secretaries of the States, they
are also formulating an integrated Scheme for rehabilitation of manual scavengers and
that the Government of India have accorded highest priority for rehabilitation of manual
scavengers by including it as one of the items in the ‘Thrust Areas’ of the Ministry of
Social Justice & Empowerment.
8. Even  though the Government had formulated grandiose plans for eradication
of manual scavenging by 2007 and rehabilitation of all manual scavengers by 2008,
the Government has not made  available any  information relating to targets set and
achievements made during each of the years since 2002, in respect of the number of
manual scavengers that were  liberated and rehabilitated. In the absence of any
meaningful feedback, the Committee  cannot but conclude that much progress has
not  been made in  respect of the implementation of  the Scheme. Obviously, there was
no monitoring mechanism to review the targets fixed and achievements made there
against during each year under the scheme, which is anything but regrettable.
Further, under the new scheme namely ‘Nation Action Plan for Total Eradication
of Manual Scavenging by 2007’, prepared by the Planning Commission and  entrusted
to the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation  for its implementation,
no mention has been made with regard to the physical targets laid and achievements
made their against.  Besides, there has been no mention about the achievements made
in respect of the number of scavengers rehabilitated under the Integrated Scheme for

4
Rehabilitation, being implemented by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment,
though the scheme intends to rehabilitate all the manual scavengers by 2008.  The
Committee deplore the callous attitude displayed by the Ministry in not furnishing
the requisite information to the Committee.  The Committee are of the view that there
is no point in setting goals unless and until a concrete and time bound action plan is
prepared and yearly targets are fixed for achievement of the same.  The Committee
expect  that the Ministry would apprise them of the total number of manual scavengers
liberated and rehabilitated under the NSLRS till March, 2007 and those which are
yet to be liberated and rehabilitated.  They would also like to be apprised of the targets
set and achievements made upto 31st March, 2007 under the Integrated Scheme for
rehabilitation of manual scavengers.
The Committee would also like the Ministry of  Social Justice & Empowerment
and Ministry of Urban Development to work in close coordination alongwith the State
Governments so that the  schemes envisaged for the benefit of scavengers are
implemented in letter and  spirit.
B. Need to Conduct a Fresh Survey so as to Ensure Availability of Reliable Data of
Number of Scavengers
(Recommendation Sl. No. 4, Para No.  106)
9.  Noting that the baseline surveys conducted in the States suffered from a
number of infirmities which resulted in non-availability of any reliable data with the
Ministry  even after a  decade on the number of scavengers and their dependents , the
Committee recommended to conduct a  fresh survey so as to ensure the availability of
a reliable data of the number of scavengers to be liberated and rehabilitated. For this,
it is also essential to define the boundaries so as to make the out reach of the scheme
only to the potential beneficiaries i.e. Scavengers as envisaged in the scheme and not
to all the Safai Karamcharis engaged in cleaning and sweeping occupation as extension
of benefit to them is construed as leakage of benefits to ineligible persons.
10. In their Action Taken Note,  the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment
have stated  that as per the National Action Plan, proper identification of manual
scavengers is required to be done as per the definition given in the Employment of
Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993 and
photo-IDs should be issued to the identified scavengers.  The Secretary, Ministry of
Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation had requested the Chief Secretaries of the
States on 10th September, 2004 to carry out the survey on an urgent basis.
11. The Ministry have further stated that as per the information supplied by
State Governments and as per the 38th Round NSSO Survey in 1989, the total number
of dry latrines yet to be converted into wet toilets stands at 1.16 million units.
12. The Committee were dismayed to find that the Ministry have not taken any
concrete steps for implementation of its recommendation for conducting a fresh
survey to identify the potential scavengers which are to liberated and rehabilitated.
The Ministry have merely mentioned about the request that was made by the then
Secretary to the Chief Secretaries of States way back in September, 2004 for carrying
out the survey, and that too much before presentation of the Report by the Committee.

5
There is no evidence to suggest whether Ministry have taken any follow up action to
persuade  the State Governments to complete the survey expeditiously, even after
lapse of about 3  years since the date of their request.  This shows that the Ministry
have not taken up the survey work with all the seriousness which it deserves.  While
deploring the lackadaisical  approach adopted by the Ministry, the Committee
recommend that Ministry should atleast woke up now and ensure completion of the
survey by the States expeditiously within a time-bound period so that it would facilitate
in arriving at a proper estimate about the number  of scavengers  that are required to
be liberated/rehabilitated and specific  future plans for covering these people in a
time bound programme .
C. Need for Refixing the Revised Stipulated Targets for Conversion of  Dry Latrines
into wet  ones within a time bound Programme
(Recommendation Sl. No. 9, Para No. 111)
13. In Ninth Report, the Committee had observed that to liberate all the scavengers,
revised stipulated targets should be refixed for the conversion of dry latrines into the
wet latrines within a time bound programme to achieve the revised targets.
14. The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment in their Action Taken Note
have stated that   the Planning Commission has formulated National Action Plan for
Total Eradication of Manual Scavenging by 2007.  For effective implementation and
monitoring of the National Action Plan, a Central Monitoring Committee under the
Chairmanship of Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has been
constituted. Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation organized a
Conference of State Welfare Ministers on 22.06.2005 on ‘Eradication of Manual
Scavenging’.  Representatives of various States/Central Ministries/Organisations and
NGOs took part in this Conference. The Conference was convened to expand the
awareness and also to evaluate the impact of Govt.’s Programme in the field of liberation
and rehabilitation of scavengers.  Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Urban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation has also written to the Chief Ministers of States
to impress upon the implementing agencies of various States to accord top priority to
the schemes, which relates to the welfare of the weaker sections of the society.
15.   The Committee express their satisfaction that a National Action Plan has
been formulated for total eradication of manual scavenging by 2007 and a Central
Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Social Justice and
Empowerment has been constituted for effective implementation and monitoring of
the Action Plan. The Committee trust that the scheme would be implemented in the
right earnest by the Ministry in close coordination with the State Governments and
the implementing agencies so that the objective of  total eradication of manual
scavenging is achieved within the period stipulated under the National Plan. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the progress made in the eradication of
manual scavenging within three months of the presentation of Report.  The Committee
desire that the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation should formulate
a time bound programme under which all the dry  latrines may be converted into wet

6
latrines. The Ministry should frequently interact with the State Governments and the
implementing agencies at regular intervals so as to monitor the progress made in the
implementation of the schemes relating to eradication of manual scavenging.
D. Need to fix Periodicity for the Meetings of District and town Committees for
Implementation of   NSLRS
(Recommendation Sl. No. 17, Para No. 119)
16. The Committee in their 9th  Report had  observed that while the Central and
State level Monitoring Committees constituted for monitoring the scheme were required
to meet quarterly, no such  periodicity was  fixed for the meetings to be held by the
District and Town Committees.
17. In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry have stated that although no
periodicity  has been prescribed for District and Town Committees, these Committees
are to meet at such intervals as required for effective and fruitful implementation of the
scheme.
18. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry.  Non-fixing
of any periodicity for the meetings to be held by  District and Town Monitoring
Committees would lead to slackness and complacency as it would not  be binding on
the part of the District Authorities to hold the  meetings at regular intervals.  The
Committee are of the opinion that periodicity at which the District and Town
Committees should meet in a year should be prescribed in clear cut terms so that
there is no ambiguity in this regard and there can be proper monitoring of the
scheme by these Committees.  Needless to emphasise, periodic review of work would
facilitate the Central as well as State level Monitoring Committees to review the
progress made in the  implementation of the programme throughout the country.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
Observation and Recommendation
The Scheme had envisaged that the obnoxious occupation would come to an
end if all those who were engaged in this occupation and their dependents were
rehabilitated in alternative and dignified occupation. The liberation of the scavengers
was possible only when the practice of using dry latriness was eliminated. The
Committee are constrained to point out that the scheme failed to provide the necessary
linkages amongst  the implementing agencies and the Ministries administering the
scheme encompassing the whole range of operations. Instead, the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment confined itself only to the aspects of identification, training
and rehabilitation leaving the liberation issues to the Ministries of Urban Development
and Rural Development who, separately, and independently implemented their own
schemes for liberation under the 'Low Cost Sanitation Scheme' and the 'Rural Sanitation
Programme' respectively. The Committee regret to observe that there was no
coordination amongst the three Ministries nor had the scheme interfaces be mapped
in any of the scheme documents to avoid overlapping and asymmetries. Another
disquieting fact observed by the Committee is that the Low Cost Sanitation Scheme
carried out by the then Ministry of Urban Development for liberation of urban
scavengers was a failure as they did not fix any physical or financial targets. The
Committee recommend that a single national programme be formulated and implemented
by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment as a mission with the objective of
eliminating this scourge within the next four-five years.
[Sl. No. 5 Appendix II Para No. 103 of  9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment is formulating an integrated
scheme for rehabilitation of manual scavengers in a time bound manner.
Comments of Audit
Ministry may intimate the time frame within which a single national programme
for elimination of manual scavenging within the next four-five years, be formulated
and implemented by the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment.
Revised action taken note
Planning Commission  have since formulated a National Action Plan for Total
Eradication of Manual Scavenging by  2007. The Ministry of Social Justice and
Empowerment is also framing an integrated scheme for rehabilitation of Manual
7

8
Scavengers. The proposed Scheme envisages that all the manual scavengers will be
rehabilitated by 2008.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment  O.M. No. 11023/4/2005-SCD-V
dated 21st June, 2006.]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee find that the Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme was
implemented through Housing Urban Development Corporation. The first objective
was to convert dry latrines into twin pit pour flush units, and the second objective
was to construct new toilets where no facility was available in order to liberate the
persons involved in manual scavenging. The funding pattern,  according to the Ministry
under Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme is part subsidy and the part loan given
by HUDCO. The loan is availed by the Municipal Board or by the concerned agency
and the subsidy element is taken away but the State Governments are wary of taking
loans since  HUDCO being a commercial organization, insists on State guarantees.
The Committee also note that out of the subsidy aggregating to Rs. 480.22 crore
sanctioned by the then Ministry of Urban Development, only Rs. 246.68 crore had
been released upto 31 December, 2001 and loans aggregating to Rs. 583.51 crore
sanctioned, only Rs. 278.60 crore were released and out of the 6 lakh identified
scavengers in urban areas only 37340 i.e. 6.2 per cent were liberated. The low progress
made by this scheme has been attributed by HUDCO to the time lag between the
sanction and release of subsidy and loans to delays in documentation, non-availability
of Government guarantees, belated submission of utilisation certificates and slow
physical progress. The Committee  are constrained to point out that there was no
evidence of the Ministry having initiated any remedial measures aimed at removal of
these hurdles to enable the successful implementation of the scheme.
[Sl. No. 6 Appendix II Para No. 108 of  9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme was transferred to the Ministry of
Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation from the Ministry of Urban Development
in 2003 only. Secretary (UE & PA) took meetings with the concerned State Secretaries
on 7th July, 2003 and again on 22nd November, 2004 to review the scheme.
Comments of Audit
Ministry's reply that the Integrated Low Cost Sanitation Scheme  was
transferred to the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation from the
Ministry of Urban Development in 2003 only, is not clear since Ministry of Urban
Employment has been renamed as Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty
Alleviation. Ministry may also mention specific remedial measures taken to remove
hurdle in the successful implementation of the Intergrate Low  Cost Sanitation Scheme.

9
Revised Action Taken Note
The Ministry of Urban Development and the Ministry of Urban Employment
and Poverty Alleviation are two different Ministries headed by spearate Ministers.
Earlier, the Department of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation was a part of
the ministry of Urban Development and Poverty Alleviation. The Integrate Low Cost
Sanitation Scheme (ILCS) prior to 2003 was being implemented by the Ministry of
Urban Development. It is now implmentated by the Ministry of Urban Employment
and Poverty Alleviation. To remove the bottlenecks in the ILCS, a revised EFC memo
has been prepared and is under circulation.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 11023/4/2005-SCD-V
dated 21st June, 2006.]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee note that according to the Ministry of Rural Development,
20 States and Union Territories have no dry latrines and no manual sanitation was
prevalent in rural areas. The Ministry have contended that only Karnataka,
Madhya Pradesh, Manipur, Rajasthan and Sikkim had reported the practice of
manual scavenging in rural areas. The committee note that the Ministry had not
fixed any targets for conversion of dry latrines into water-borne flush latrines, nor
were separate allocations made for the purpose. The State Governments are stated
to have been directed by the Ministry of Rural Development to utilise the funds
allocated under the Central Rural Sanitation Scheme for conversion of dry latrines
into pour flush latrines. Further, the 'Rural Sanitation Programme' had got
dovetailed into the 'Total Sanitation Campaign' launched in 1999. The main
objectives of the Total Sanitation campaign was to accelerate the sanitation coverage
by creating the felt need among the rural population about sanitation and also
impart hygiene education to the people. It aimed at attaining this objective by
focussing on intensive Information, Education and Communication and by providing
on intensive Information, Education and Communication and by providing cost
effective and appropriate technologies through alternate delivery mechanism such
as the Rural Sanitary Marts or Production Centres.
[Sl. No. 7, Appendix II, Para No. 109 of  9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Government of India accord highest priority to promote rural sanitation for
which it has launched Total Sanitation Compaign (TSC). These projects are already
sanctioned in 478 districts of the country and a policy decision has been taken to
extend these projects to remaining districts of the country within the 10th Plan
period. In these projects, 3.94 crore individual household toilets, 4.59 lakh number of
school toilets, 1.22 lakh Anganwadi toilets, 30,213 community complexes and 3,752
Rural Sanitary Marts (RSM)/Production Centres (PC) have been sanctioned. The

10
achievement so far has been construction of  1.23 crore individul household toilets,
1.39 lakh school toilets, 24,627 lakh Anganwadi toilets, 4,829 community complexes
and 4,109 Rural Sanitary Marts (RSM)/Production Centres (PC).
Government of India has also launched Nirmal Gram Puraskar to give incentive
to PRIs to involve them in rural sanitation. First set of Nirmal Gram Puraskar was
distributed by His Excellency President of India on  24th February, 2005.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 11023/4/2005-SCD-V
dated 21st June, 2006.]
Observation and Recommendation
At present Total Sanitation Campaign is being implemented in 426 districts
of the country, which is likely to be further scaled up to cover all the remaining
districts in the country. According to the Ministry, 100.13 lakh individual toilets,
1.14 lakh school toilets, 17,606 Balwadi toilets and 3,862 community sanitary
complexes have been constructed. Prior to launching of Total Sanitation Campaign,
under Central Rural Sanitation Programme, 94.80 lakh individual household toilets
had been constructed in rural areas. Concurrent evaluation of the campaign is
essential. The Committee wishes that the Ministry of Rural Development to place
the highest emphasis on this aspect.
[Sl. No. 8, Appendix II, Para No. 110 of  9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Total Sanitation Campaign (TSC) projects are already sanctioned in 478 districts
of the country and a policy decision has been taken to extend these projects to
remaining districts of the country within the 10th Plan period. In these projects,
3.94 crore individual household toilets, 4.59 lakh number of school toilets, 1.22 lakh
Anganwadi toilets, 30,213 community complexes and 3,752 Rural Sanitary Marts
(RSM)/Production Centres (PC) have been sanctioned. The achievement so has
been construction of 1.23 crore individual household toilets, 24,627 lakh Anganwadi
toilets, 4,829 community complexes and 4,109 Rural Sanitary Marts (RSM)/
Production Centres (PC).
Government of India has also increased resource allocation for rural sanitation
in the last few years and the budget estimates for rural sanitation has increased from
Rs. 165.00 crore in 2003-04 to Rs. 700.00 crore in 2005-06. Government of India hopes
to accelerate the sanitation coverage in the remaining period of the 10th Plan and
during the 11th Plan.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 11023/4/2005-SCD-V
dated 21st June, 2006.]

Observation and Recommendation
The Committee note that training to indentified scavengers and their
dependents, in the age group of 15 to 50 years, was expected to equip them with the
requisite skills and expertise to successfully implement self-employment projects.
The Committee have been informed that the scavengers are trained in the institutes
run by the Centre and the State Governments and also by reputed voluntary
organisations as per TRYSEM norms. The type of training imparted depended upon
the aptitude, capability and inclination towards a particular trade. However, to their
utter dismay, the Committee have found that only 2.02 lakh beneficiaries out of
5.38 lakh eligible beneficiaries were trained during the Eighth and Ninth Plan
periods (1992-2002). The Committee regret to observe that targets for training
were not communicated by the Ministry to the States which resulted either in
targets not being prescribed by the States or in targets being determined only on
ad hoc basis. Consequently, shortfall in training coverage was as high as 68 per
cent and targets set for the Eighth Plan were not achieved even at the end of the
Ninth Plan. No special curriculum was developed for training of scavengers though
it was recognised that occupational shift in low skill areas would require special
measures.
[Sl. No. 10, Appendix II, Para No. 112 of 9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
States were well aware that they had to rehabilitate all the liberated scavengers
in alternative and dignified occupations by providing them suitable training as per
their aptitude. There are some trades, which do not require training before
rehabilitation. However, 100% Central assistance was provided for training of liberated
scavengers under the NSLRS.
The Government of India, while calling proposals under the scheme, had
reiterated the State Governments/SCDCs to provide suitable training to
scavengers as per TRYSEM norms in Central/State Government Training Institutes
and also training institutions run by reputed NGOs, keeping in view of their
aptitude. Since the training was in specific training institutions, which already
had a curriculum on the trades, it was not considered necessary to develop a
centralized curriculum.
The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment is formulating an integrated
scheme for rehabilitation of manual scavengers by providing them need based training
taking into their attitudinal behaviour, aptitude and education standards.
The Training would be provided under the two types of training programme
viz., Institutional Linkages Programmes (ILP) and Entrepreneurship Development
Programme (EDP).
11

12
Comments of Audit
Ministry may inform the PAC the time frame for formulation and implementation
of an integrated scheme for rehabilitation of manual scavengers by providing them
need based training taking into their attitudinal behaviour, aptitude and educational
standards.
Revised Action Taken Note
The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment is formulating an integrated
scheme for rehabilitation of manual scavengers. The proposed scheme envisages
that all the manual scavengers will be rehabilitated by 2008.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 11023/4/2005-SCD-V
dated 21st June, 2006.]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee desire that the Ministry should immediately lay down the
requisite targets for training purposes of the scavengers liberated so that they do
not relapse into their hereditary occupation. For this purpose, special training
scheme should also be designed keeping in view their low skill level the focus
being on the creation and upgradation of the skills for self-employment. The
Committee further feel that the need for revitalizing the training infrastructure
should also be looked into a greater depth. For this the Ministry should consider
the feasibility of involving Non-Governmental Organisations, especially in certain
selected training activities to bring about a fruitful training programme ensuring
that their attitudinal behaviour, aptitude and education standards are taken into
consideration for the rehabilitation programme.
[Sl. No. 11, Appendix II, Para No. 113 of 9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Training is imparted to the liberated scavengers in the age group of 15—50
years keeping in view their aptitude vis-a-vis the trade in which they are rehabilitated.
As per the National Action Plan for Total Eradication of Manual Scavenging
by 2007, NGOs would provide entrepreneurial assistance to the liberated scavengers
to engage themselves in various avenues of alternative employment.
The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment is formulating an integrated
scheme for rehabilitation of manual scavengers. The scheme, on its inception, will
address the issue.
Comments of Audit
Ministry may inform the PAC the time frame for formulation and implementation
of an integrated scheme for rehabilitation of manual scavengers by providing them

13
need based training taking into their attitudinal behaviour, aptitude and educational
standards.
Revised Action Taken Note
The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment is formulating an integrated
scheme for rehabilitation of manual scavengers. The proposed scheme envisages
that all the manual scavengers will be rehabilitated by 2008.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 11023/4/2005-SCD-V
dated 21st June, 2006.]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee note the Rehabilitation Programme under the Scheme
contemplated (i) a time bound survey to identify scavengers and their dependents
and their aptitudes for alternative trades; (ii) identification of trades and preparation
of a shelf of projects; and (iii) the imparting of training with stipend to identified
beneficiaries in the identified trades. The Committee, however, note that against the
target of 5.20 lakh scavengers to be rehabilitated from 1997-98 to 2001-2002, only
2.03 lakh scavengers were rehabilitated during this period. During 9th Plan only
39 percent of the target could be met whereas in the 8th Plan 62 percent of the
targeted beneficiaries were rehabilitated. Thus, the number awaiting rehabilitated at
the end of the 9th Plan period was more than twice the number at the close of the
8th Plan period. The Committee, however, regret to observe that more than
40 percent of the beneficiaries remained un-rehabilitated even after a decade of the
implementation of the scheme. This, according to the Committee, was due to the fact
that the resources were neither released nor applied judiciously, there by leading to
accumulated unspent funds and hasty release at the end of the financial year. But
absence of reliable baseline data which could form the basis of target setting, led to
incorrect projections and even more incorrect conclusions in regard to the outcome
of the rehabilitation measures. The Committee would, however, also like to point out
that rehabilitation efforts were characterized by misapplication of resources, emphasis
on low-cost projects for availing of cash benefits without income generation and
mismatches between skills and occuptions.
[Sl. No. 12, Appendix II, Para No. 114 of 9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The NSLRS was launched on 22nd March, 1992 with the objective to liberate
the scavengers and their dependents from their existing hereditary obnoxious and
inhuman occupation of manually removing night soil and filth and to provide for
and engage them in alternative and dignified occupations.
Training is imparted to the liberated scavengers in the age group of 15—50
years keeping in view their aptitude vis-a-vis the trade in which they are rehabilitated.

14
Since the inception of the scheme, 4,08,972 scavengers and their dependents were
rehabilitated as on 31.3.2002.
As the Committee has rightly observed in para 107 that the liberation of the
scavengers was possible only when the practice of using dry latrines was eliminated.
Thus, scavenging continues because of the existence of dry latrines. However, all
out efforts are being made for conversion of dry latrines, construction of wet latrines
and rehabilitation of all the remaining manual scavengers in a time bound manner.
The Ministry of Social and Empowerment is formulating an integrated scheme for
rehabilitation of manual scavengers.

15
Comments of Audit
Ministry may inform the PAC the time frame for formulation and implementation
of an integrated scheme for rehabilitation of manual scavengers by providing them
need based training taking into their attitudinal behaviour, aptitude and educational
standards.
Revised Action Taken Note
The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment is formulating an integrated
scheme for rehabilitation of manual scavengers. The proposed scheme envisages
that all the manual scavengers will be rehabilitated by 2008.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 11023/4/2005-SCD-V
dated 21st June, 2006.]
Observation and Recommendation
The Scheduled Castes Development Financial Corporation and banks which
were responsible for the implemenation of income-generating rehabilitation schemes
failed to deliver as there was no clear indication of the path of occupational change.
Training in low skill alternative occupation was inadequate, impractical and
disoriented. Factors of habitation, cluster, aptitude, gender and motivation were
ignored for the statistically visible loan-projects. There too the rejection percentage
was as high as 74 percent in Tamil Nadu and 47 percent in Maharashtra. To Expect
an illiterate and poor scavenger to comply with the rigours of project-financing by
commerical banks, was to say the least, unimaginative. Instances of banks rejecting
a large number of applications or adopting a cautious approach was also indicative
of the fact that the implementing agencies and Scheduled Castes Development
Financial Corporations did not exercise sufficient care in the formulation of viable
projects that could be financed by the banks. The Committee recommend that
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation should take up the matter
with the State Governments to impress upon SCDCs that they should formulate
technically and commercially viable projects to avoid rejection of loan applications
by the banks. The bank should also be instructed through Ministry of Finance to be
more compassionate while dealing with the loan applications of the scavengers. The
committee would like to be informed of the precise steps taken in this regard.
[Sl. No. 14, Appendix II, Para No. 116 of 9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Department of Banking, M/o Finance have already been requested by the
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation to issue necessary
instructions to the Nationalised banks regarding release of loans to the target group
for facilitating their rehabilitation.

16
Moreover, the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment, vide communication
dated 8.4.2005, has also apprised the Ministry of Finance about the role of commercial
banks in the rehabilitation of liberated scavengers and requested to direct all the
scheduled commerical banks to extend hassle free loans to the manual scavengers at
concessional rate of interest in order to achieve the desired objective.
In the new integrated scheme being formulated for rehabilitation of manual
scavengers, it is under consideration that the loan component of the project would
be provided by the NSKFDC.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 11023/4/2005-SCD-V
dated 21st June, 2006.]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee have been given to understand that against the budget
estimate of Rs. 807.70 crore, the actual expenditure was Rs. 620.69 crore during the
years 1997-2002. The funds released for the scheme during 2002-2003 and 2003-2004
have been Rs. 40.95 crore and Rs. 24.27 crore respectively, Reduction in funds
released during the last two years has been explained by the Minsitry by saying
that this has been done due to accumulation of the unspent balances of the previous
years with the State Governments. They have contended that the reduction in the
flow of funds have not affected the achievement of targets. The Committee are
constrained to point out that there has not been proper utilisation of funds by the
State Governments for this vital scheme which is evident from the accumulation of
the huge unspent balances at the end of each Financial Year. This in turn has
contributed to the tardy progress of the implementation of the scheme. It is obvious
that the Ministry have not been able to identify the precise reasons from the State
Governments for this financial mismanagement. The Committee have taken a serious
view of this state of affairs and would like to emphasise the need to ensure full
utilisation of the funds released for the scheme by the States. The Committee would
like the Ministry to step up monitoring efforts for the optimum utilisation of funds
by the States on a regular basis and should promptly take up the matter with that
States where there are instances of poor utilisation of allocated funds.
[Sl. No. 15, Appendix II, Para No. 117 of 9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Government of India has taken up the matter with the State Governments.
State Governments have been emphasized from time to time that the amount of
central assistance should be utilized for the purpose for which it has been
sanctioned.

17
In the conference of State Welfare Ministers on Manual Scavenging held on
22.6.2005 at New Delhi, State Governments have been requested to submit the
pending utilization certificates in respect of funds released under NSLRS and
ILCS.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 11023/4/2005-SCD-V dated
21st June, 2006.]
Observation and Recommendation
 Another areas of concern in the financial management that came to the notice of
the Committee is the failure on the part of the State Governments and SCDCs to submit
the outstanding utilisation certificate in 91 per cent of the total grants-in-aid of
Rs. 642.43 crore released during 1991-2002 for the implementation of the Scheme. The
Committee are constrained to point out that even after a lapse of 12 years, the Ministry
have still not realized outstanding utilisation certificate from the defaulting State
Governments and the SCDCs. This clearly is indicative of casual approach and lack of
urgency on the part of those State Governments and SCDCs in effective utilisation of
the funds. The inordinate delay on the part of the Ministry to evolve a viable and
effective mechanism for the realisation of such a huge financial corpus is
unconscionable. The Ministry could not explain the reasons for non-submission of
utilisation certificates by the State Implementing Agencies and have not explained
efforts being made by them in this regard. The Committee expect the Ministry to
henceforth strictly monitor the norms regarding submission of the utilisation certificates
by the implementing agencies and take prompt measures at highest level to impress
upon the States to act swiftly in this regard.
[Sl. No. 16, Appendix II, Para No. 118 of  9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
No funds are released to those States who have not submitted the Utilisation
Certificates in respect of funds released earlier.
Minister of State for Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation has addressed
to the Chief Ministers on 03-01-04 and Secretary, Ministry of Urban Employment and
Poverty Alleviation wrote to the Chief Secretaries on 11-08-2004 regarding submission
of UCs in respect of funds released earlier.
In the conference of State Welfare Ministers on Manual Scavenging held on
22.6.2005 at New Delhi, State Governments have been asked to submit the pending
utilization certificates in respect of funds released under NSLRS and ILCS.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 11023/4/2005-SCD-V
dated 21st June, 2006.]

CHAPTER  III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM GOVERNMENT
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee observe that even at this stage of its implementation, the Scheme
still continues to remain a prisoner of it own statistics. Absence of creditable database
of targeted beneficiaries has robbed the scheme of its objectivity. The loss of links
between liberation, training and rehabilitation has derailed the Scheme. The Scheme
visualised the rehabilitation of all the 4 lakh scavengers and their dependents estimated
by the Task force in March 1991 by the end of the Eighth Plan period (1992-97). Against
this, the Scheme claimed to have rehabilitated only 2.68. This did not, however, result
in a reduction in the total number, as subsequent surveys conducted between 1994-95
and 2001-02 estimated the number as 7.87 lakh necessitating upward revision of the
targets. Further, the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, which was the then
nodal Ministry for the Scheme, claimed to have rehabilitated 4.71 lakh scavengers
during 1992-2002, while the Ministries of Urban and Rural Development projected that
only 0.37 lakh scavengers had been liberated during the same period. In addition to
this, there is no evidence to suggest the actual number of those liberated and the
number which were in fact rehabilitated. The Scheduled Castes Financial Development
Corporations responsible for implementation of the Scheme at the State level have
failed to deliver the positive results, which can be substantiated by the fact that there
is no clear-cut indication in the occupational changes of scavengers. Besides, training
imparted is inadequate, impractical and disoriented. The Committee is of the view that
it is the lack of purpose in aligning the parameters of the Scheme and lack of will in
implementing it that led to the Scheme floundering on its own principles. The committee's
examination of some of the important dimensions on the issues reviewed by Audit
highlights the fact that the implementation of the Scheme continues to be afflicted by
serious shortcomings which are summed up in the succeeding paragraphs.
[Sl. No. 2, Appendix II, Para No. 104 of  9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The scheme visualized the rehabilitation of all the 4 lakh scavengers and their
dependents estimated by the Task Force in March 1991. Against this, 4,08,972
scavengers and their dependents are reported to have been rehabilitated up to
31.3.2002.
Secretary (UE&PA) has already addressed to all Chief Secretaries of the States
and UTs to conduct a detailed survey on the number of dry latrines in existence in the
18

19
States/UTs, the number of scavengers and their dependents involved in manual
cleaning of these dry latrines.
In terms of the National Action Plan for Total Eradiction of Manual Scavening by
2007, as prepared by the Planning commission, Ministry of Urban Employment &
Poverty Alleviation has been made as the nodal Ministry for implementation of all the
three components of the programme viz. the employment of Manual Scavengers and
Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act. 1993, the Integrated Low Cost Sanitation
(ILCS) scheme and the National Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of Manual
Scavengers and their dependents (NSLRS) for ensuring better coordination in the
implementation of the programmes.
A Central Monitoring committee under the Chairpersonship of Secretary (SJ&E)
has been constituted to monitor the implementation of the National Action Plan.
Comments  of  Audit
Ministry had reported in its reply to the post-evidence questionnaire (July 2005)
that the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation had requested
to Chief Secretaries of the States/UTs, vide d.o. letter dated 10.9.2004, to conduct a
detailed survey on the number of dry latrines in existence in the S tates/UTs,  the
number of scavengers and their dependents involved in manual clearing of these dry
latrines at the earliest. Ministry has reiterated the position in the action taken note to
the PAC report. It is evident from the reply that no progress has been made in the
survey since September, 2004, despite the fact that PAC has noted its report that the
absence of creditable database of targeted beneficiary has robbed in scheme of its
objectivity. Therefore, Ministry may mention the time frame within which the said
survey will be completed.
Revised Action Taken Note
As per the information supplied by State Governments and as per the 38th
Round NSSO Survey in 1989, the total number of dry latrines yet to be converted into
wet toilets stands at 1.16 million units.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 11023/4/2005-SCD-V
dated 21st June, 2006.]

Observation and Recommendation
The major provision of the Employment of Manual Scavengers and
Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993, states that State Government
may by notification, specify that no person shall engage in or employ for and permit
to be engaged in or employed for any other person for manually carrying human
excreta, or construct or maintain a dry latrine. However, the Committee note that the
scheme suffered, because it was not calibrated to relate its parameters to the legal
framework provided by the Act and continued to operate in a persuasive mode
without the legal means to penalize for its violation. Although only 17 States have
adopted this Act, yet its implementation aspects left much to be desired since these
States have failed to analyse and substantiate with facts for its effective
implementation. Some of the States have not even adopted the Act till date, and the
Ministry has neither assessed the drawbacks in its enforcement nor has taken
concrete steps to ensure its adoptions and implementation. The law that prohibited
the engagement of manual scavengers, thus, could have provided a powerful
instrument to the implementers of the Scheme. By adopting this Central Law and
enforcing it in right earnest, the States could have paved the way for the successful
implementation of the Scheme and liberation of scavengers would have progressed
in tandem with rehabilitation measures. The fact that this was not adopted and
implemented by all the States is regretted. The committee recommend that the
Ministry should look into the grey areas experienced by the States in enforcing the
Act and bring out clear cut steps to remove the bottlenecks and corelate the legal
framework with the attainment of objectives of the Scheme. The Committee also
hope that the Ministry will wake up to their responsibility and ensure that the Act
is adopted by all the States which are yet to adopt it and at the same time, initiate
urgent measures for its implementation in all the States.
[Sl. No. 3, Appendix II, Para No. 105 of  9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines
(Prohibition) Act, 1993 has been adopted by 17 States and all the UTs. Out of
remaining 11 States, 6 States have reported that there are no dry latrines or they
are scavenger free Rajasthan has its own Act. Himachal Pradesh has made provision
in their Municipal Act, J&K, Meghalaya and Uttaranchal are three States who have
not yet adopted the Act.
Recently, in the conference of State Welfare Ministers on Manual Scavenging
held on 22.6.2005 in New Delhi, the representatives of the Meghalaya and Uttaranchal
have informed that they have adopted the Act. Thus, J&K is the only State which
has not adopted the Act. In the said conference, Government of J&K has been
impressed upon to adopt the Act.
20

21
Penal provisions have already been made in Clause 14 in the chapter IV of the
Act, which reads as under:—
"whoever fails to comply with or contravenes any of the provisions of this
Act, or the rules or scheme made or orders or directions issued thereunder,
shall, in respect of each such failure or contravention be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to one year or with fine, which may
extend to two thousand rupees, or with both and in case the failure or
contravention continues, with additional fine which may extend to one
hundred rupees for every day during which such failure or contravention
continued after the conviction for the first such failure or contravention"
Comments  of  Audit
(i) Ministry may clearly mention which six States have reported that there are
no dry latrines or they are scavenger free.
(ii) PAC has regretted that the Act had not been adopted and implemented by
all States and have recommended that Ministry should look into the grey
areas experienced by the States in enforcing the Act and bring out clear cut
steps to remove the bottlenecks and correlate the legal framework with the
attainment of objectives of the Scheme. However, Ministry has not mentioned
any Action Taken to address the recommendation of the PAC. Ministry has
also not mentioned the specific measures taken to correlate the legal
framework with the attainment of objectives of the Scheme.
Revised Action Taken Note
(i) The State Governments of Kerala, Manipur, Mizoram, Sikkim, Arunachal
Pradesh and Nagaland have specifically informed the Ministry that there
are no dry latrines nor any manual scavengers in their respective States.
(ii) As per the latest information available, all the State Governments except
Jammu & Kashmir have adopted the Act in their respective States. The
State Government of J&K has been requested to indicate the position with
respect to adoption of the Act.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 11023/4/2005-SCD-V
dated 21st June, 2006.]

22
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee found that District Collectors were to act as key functionaries
for coordinating with training institutes, financial institutions and various
departments of State Governments executing welfare schemes. However, their role
was confined largely to survey and indentification of beneficiaries. The responsibility
of the Scheme was transferred to Scheduled Castes Development Financial
Corporations, which were not accountable to the District Collectors in the normal
course of their functioning. These organisational mismatches adversely affected the
implementation of the Scheme.
[Sl. No. 13, Appendix II, Para No. 115 of  9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The NSLRS envisages that the District Collector/District Magistrate/Deputy
Commissioner of the district would be responsible for overall implementation of the
scheme. District Collector is the Chairman of the District Monitoring Committee, which
is responsible for overall implementation and monitoring of the scheme. V arious District
level Monitoring Committee meetings were held under the Chairpersonship of the
district Collector for monitoring the implementation of the scheme at District level.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 11023/4/2005-SCD-V
dated 21st June, 2006.]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee are surprised to note that the Central Monitoring Committee
met only once in February 1993 during 1992—2002, while it should have at least met
40 times. In some States, the State Level Monitoring Committee have not even met
once. The Committee are also unhappy to note that in some States, the State Level
Committee, District Level and Town Level Committees have not even been set up. Even
the reporting system is faulty leading to incorrect/incomplete identification of
beneficiaries, non-identification of skill requirements, lack of monitoring mechanism,
lack of awareness among beneficiaries, lack of motivation for self-help and
misutilisation of financial assistance by the beneficiaries. The Committee note that it
was through the District Collector and interaction with banks, Urban local bodies,
SCDCs, Training institutes and Monitoring Committees was sought to be achieved. It
is however, noticed that the role of the Collector was confined largely to survey and
identification and that too not in all cases. The day-to-day implementation of the
scheme was done by SCDCs. The State Governments passed the funds directly to the
SCDCs and District Collector had no role to play. Hence, there was a lack of
coordination in the operation of the scheme. In many cases, the district level
Monitoring Committees under the Chairmanship of Collectors were not formed.
There was lack of coordination among the State level Departments as well as among

23
the Central Ministries involved in the Scheme. Therefore, the Committee strongly
recommend that the application of scavengers for loans from the banks should be
routed through the District Collectors office so that they can identify their needs and
suggest viable project, so that their loan applications are not rejected by the banks
out rightly. Even if the Central authority of loan disbursement remain with the SCDCs,
still the loans to the individual should be disbursed through the District Collectors
office so that the role of District Collector become more effective and the monitoring
of training and rehabilitation measures is done at district level effectively. The
Committee, therefore, are inclined to conclude that there is a major deficiency in the
monitoring system at the levels. They, therefore, desire the Ministry to put in place a
suitable mechanism to ensure that the Central Level Committee and the Committees
at the State Level must meet regularly to ensure a high vigil over the progress of the
Scheme. As the scheme is implemented through District level officials, the District
collector should also be involved in finalisation of the projects and disbursement of
funds. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should strive to ensure threadbare
analysis of the reports submitted by the different Monitoring Committees at different
levels. This would facilitate identification of bottlenecks in the implementation process
for rectification. The Committee also recommend that the States, which are yet to set
up various monitoring Committees should be asked to act immediately now.
[Sl. No. 18, Appendix II, Para No. 120 of  9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Government of India has been emphasizing the need for strict monitoring of
the scheme for effective implementation.
As per the NSLRS, the District Collector/District Magistrate/Deputy
Commissioner of the district would be responsible for overall implementation of the
scheme. District Collector is the Chairman of the District Monitoring Committee, which
is responsible for overall implementation and monitoring of the scheme. V arious District
level Monitoring Committee meetings were held under the Chairpersonship of the
District Collector for monitoring the implementation of the scheme at District level.
A Central Monitoring Committee under the Chairpersonship of Secretary (SJ&E)
has been constituted as per the directions of the Cabinet Secretariat to review the
National Action Plan prepared by the Planning Commission. The Committee has
members from the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation, the Ministry
of Rural Development and other concerned agencies. Four meetings of the Central
Monitoring Committee have so far been held on 28.11.2003, 26.7.2004, 26.10.2004 and
10.5.2005.
Comments of Audit
(i) Ministry has not mentioned the Action Taken on the recommendation of
the PAC regarding the larger role of district collector in the loan disbursement
to the scavenger to make the monitoring of training and rehabilitation measure
more effective at district level.

24
(ii) Ministry may mention the specific efforts made to ensure that Central Level
Committee and the Committees at the State Level meets regularly. The system
developed to ensure threadbare analysis of reports submitted by the different
Monitoring Committee at different levels may also be elaborated. Ministry
may mention the direction given to those States, which are yet to set up
various Monitoring Committees.
Revised Action Taken Note
(i) It is reiterated that as per the NSLRS, the District Collector/District
Magistrate/Deputy Commissioner of the district would be responsible for
overall implementation of the scheme. District Collector is the Chairman of
the District Monitoring Committee, which is responsible for overall
implementation and monitoring of the scheme. Various District level
Monitoring Committee meetings were held under the Chairpersonship of
the district Collector for monitoring the implementation of the scheme at
District level.
(ii) It is reiterated that the Government of India has been emphasizing the need
for strict monitoring at various levels for effective implementation of the
scheme.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 11023/4/2005-SCD-V
dated 21st June, 2006.]

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee note that the 'National Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation
of Scavengers and their Dependents' mark the convergence of several public initiatives
over a period of four decades preceding its introduction in 1992. It was introduced by
the Ministry of Welfare (now Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment) on
22nd March, 1992 with the objective to provide alternative, dignified and viable
occupation to them. The Centrally Sponsored Scheme was conceived to deal with
three principal issues. Firstly, the identification of scavengers and their dependents
through a time bound survey; secondly, imparting of training in their identified trades;
and thirdly, providing subsidy, margin money and bank loan for their rehabilitation.
While bifurcating the integrated scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers
in 1991, the liberation camponent was entrusted to the Ministries of Urban and Rural
Development and the rehabilitation component was entrusted to the then Ministry of
Welfare (now Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment) along with the nodal
responsibility for the Scheme. Undoubtedly, the Scheme was well intentioned with the
objective to provide an alternative, dignified and viable occupation to scavengers and
their dependents in a stipulated time span. However, the Committee are constrained to
point out that it has failed to implement its operational parameters in a highly stratified
society resisting change from a hereditary occupational structure even after 10 years
of its implementation involving investment of more than Rs. 620 crore. It is a matter of
national shame that anywhere between 5-8 lakh manual scavenger remain
unrehabilitated. The scheme failed to deliver its social vision after ten years of
continuous but regrettably half-hearted efforts. It failed in working out a coherent
strategy for policy initiatives as it could not take advantage of an existing law that
prohibited employment of Scavengers. Divorcing liberation from rehabilitation was an
error of judgement that weakened the foundation of the Scheme and led to
uncoordinated efforts without focus. It failed in enhancing or re-orienting the skill-
levels of the beneficiaries necessary for change of occupation. For the same reason, it
failed in its mission of replacing the hereditary practice by skill-based choice of
profession. Absence of base-line survey, non-involvement of district development
authorities, commercialisation of the assistance patterns have led to a loss of focus of
the monitoring aspect of the scheme.
[Sl. No. 1,  Appendix II, Para No. 103 of  9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As per the Entry No. 6 of list-II of the Seventh Schedule of the Constitution of
India, "Sanitation" is a State subject. However, in order to supplement the efforts of
25

26
the State Governments to put an end to this abominable practice as quickly as possible,
Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation enacted a Central legislation,
namely the Employment of manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines
(Prohibition) Act, 1993. The State Governments are responsible for enforcing the various
provisions of the Act. The Central legislation was enacted for to enable uniformity in
provisions. The fundamental issue remains the planning and implementation of the
provision of the Act by State Governments and coordination among their nodal
agencies because the problem lies in the domain of the State Governments and their
nodal agencies. The  Model by-laws cannot be implemented without adoption, support
and involvement of the State Governments. Section 23 of the said Act also empowers
the State Governments to make rules for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
All the UTs and 17 States have adopted the said Act. Out of remaining  11 States,
6 States have reported that there are no dry latrines or they are scavenger free. Rajasthan
has its own Act. Himachal Pradesh has made provision in their Municipal Act. J&K,
Meghalaya and Uttaranchal are the three States who have not yet adopted the Act.
However, the National Scheme of Liberation and Rehabilitation of Manual
Scavengers and their dependents (NSLRS) was introduced during the year 1991-92
with the objective to liberate the scavengers and their dependents from their existing
hereditary obnoxious and inhuman occupation of manually removing night soil and
filth and to provide for and engage them in alternative and dignified occupations.
Under the scheme, 1,56,812 and 4,08,972 scavengers and their dependents were trained
and rehabilitated respectively up to 31.3.2002. Thereafter, the scheme was transferred
to the Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation in August, 2003 as per
the dicision of the Committee of Secretaries (COS).
A 'National Action Plan for Total Eradication of Manuual Scavenging by 2007'
has been prepared by the Planning Commission. The Ministry of Urban Employment
and Poverty Alleviation has been made as the Nodal Ministry at the Centre. A Central
Monitoring Committee has been constituted under the Chairpersonship of Secretary
(SJ&E) to review the implementation of the National Action Plan.
Secretary (UE&PA) has already addressed to all Chief Secretaries of the States
and UTs to conduct a detailed survey on the number of dry latrines in existence in the
States/UTs, the number of scavengers and their dependents involved in manual
cleaning of these dry latrines.
As per the decision taken in the meeting of the COS held on 11.3.2005, the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment is formulating an integrated scheme for
rehabilitation of manual scavengers.
Government of India is also according highest priority to rehabilitation of manual
scavengers by including it as one of the items in the Thrust Areas of the Ministry of
Social Justice & Empowerment.
The Committee of Ministers on Dalit Affairs in its meeting held on 21.6.2005 has
decided to divide itself into six Sub Groups to go into different aspects of welfare and
development of Scheduled Castes in a comprehensive manner. One of the groups in
Sub-Group-V: Liberation and Rehabilitation of Manual Scavengers. A Sub-Group V on

Liberation and Rehabilitation of Manual Scavengers has been constituted under the
Chairpersonship of Hon'ble Minister (SJ&E). First meeting of the said Sub-Group was
hald on 16.8.2005.
Comments of Audit
PAC have, in their report, mentioned that it is a matter of national shame that
anywhere between 5-8 lakh manual scavenger remain unrehabilitated. Despite the
remaks of PAC, the Action Taken by Ministry to  implement the scheme to eliminate the
manual scavenging are not satisfactory, as is evident from the audit observations on
Action Taken note of Ministry on succedings paragraphs of the PAC report.
Revised Action Taken Note
The Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment is formulating an integrated
scheme for rehabilitation of manual scavengers. The proposed scheme envisages that
all the manual scavengers will be rehabilitated by 2008.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 11023/4/2005-SCD-V dated
21st June, 2006.]
27
27

28
Observation and Recommendation
For the success of the scheme proper identification of scavengers and their
dependents was vital. However, various sureveys for identification of scavengers and
their depedents necessary to locate, specify and to give particularized training to the
beneficiaries according to their needs were often not methodologically sound. The
result varied widely. Even the definition of 'Scavengers' was not settled which resulted
in the inclusion of ineligible persons in the list of beneficiaries. Even the Ministry of
Welfare in 1996 received reference from various State Governments about the exact
definition of a Scavenger. Thus the absence of proper definition of 'Scavenger' led to
different surveys by different agencies. As many as five different set of figures were in
the Ministry's possession. The Committee note that the baseline surveys conducted
in the States suffered from a number of infirmities which resulted in non-availability of
any reliable data with the Ministry even after a decade on the number of scavengers
and their dependents which was essential to estimate the fund requirements, to facilitate
the preparation of a well considered action plan. At this state, the Committee cannot
but over emphasise the need for fresh survey to be undertaken immediately so as to
ensure the availability of a reliable data of the number of scavengers to be liberated
and rehabilitated. For this, it is also essential to define the boundaries so as to make the
out reach of the scheme only to the potential beneficiaries i.e. Scavengers as envisaged
in the scheme and not to all the Safai Karamcharies engaged in clearning and sweeping
occupation as extention of benefit to them is construed as leakage of benefits to
ineligible persons.
[Sl. No. 4, Appendix II, Para No. 106 of  9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Acation Taken
The "Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of Dry Latrines
(Prohibition) Act, 1993" defines 'manual scavenger' as a person engaged or employed
for manually carrying human excreta.
As per the National Action Plan, proper identification of manual scavengers is
required to be done as per the definition given in the Employment of Manual Scavengers
and Construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act, 1993 and photo-IDs should be
issued to the identified scavengers.
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation has requested
the Chief Secretaries of the States on 10th September, 2004 to carry out the survey on
an urgent basis.
Comments of Audit
Ministry had reported in its reply to the post-evidence questionnaire (July 2005)
that the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation had requested
to Chief Secretaries of the States/UTs. vide d.o. letter dated 10.9.2004, to conduct a
detailed survey on the number of dry latrines in existence in the States/UTs, the
number of Scavengers and their dependents involved in manual clearing of these dry
latrines at the earliest. Ministry has reiterated the position in the Action Taken note to

29
the PAC report. it is evident from the reply that no progress has been made in the
survey since September, 2004, despite the fact that PAC has noted its report that the
absence of creditable database of targeted beneficiary has robbed in scheme of its
objectivity. therefore, Ministry may mention the time frame within which the said
survey will be completed.
Revised Action Taken Note
As per the information supplied by State Governments and as per the
38th Round NSSO Survey in 1989, the total number of dry latrines yet to be converted
into wet toilets stands at 1.16 million units.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 11023/2005-SCD-V dated
21st June, 2006.]
Observation and Recommendation
The Committee feel that Liberation, meaning removal of the very cause and
basis of manual scavenging, thereby allowing the beneficiary liberate from the
stigmatised occupation, should have been the cornerstone of the Scheme as there
could be no rehabilitation without liberation. Some half-hearted measures seem to
have been taken in rural as well as in urban areas to convert dry latrines into wet
latrines. A lot, however, needs to be done to liberate all the scavengers. For this, it is
necessary that revised stipulated targets are refixed for conversion of dry latrines
into wet latrines for which a time bound programme may be drawn up to achieve the
revised targets. Lack of requisite funds should not come in the way of successful
achievement of the objectives and therefore, the Ministry accordingly should take
timely and effective steps to provide the necessary funds. The Committee would also
like the Ministry to have close coordination with HUDCO and other implementing
agencies in Urban as well as in Rural areas to accomplish the task. For this, proper
monitoring of the physical and financial targets should be carried out at the highest
level.
[Sl. No. 9, Appendix II, Para No. 111 of  9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As and when the proposals are received from the State Governments, these were
processed and funds released as per the guidelines of the scheme.
The Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation is working in close
coordination with HUDCO and other implementing agencies in respect of conversion
of dry latrines. A Coordination Committee headed by the Chief Economic Adviser is
also working at the Ministry level.

30
Comments of Audit
PAC have recommended that revised stipulated targets should be refixed for
conversion of dry latrines into wet latrines for which a time bound programme may be
drawn up to achieve the revised targets. However, Ministry has sanctioned in the
action taken note that as and when the proposals are received from the State
Governments, these were processed and funds released as per guidelines of the scheme.
Ministry's action is not in consonance with PAC recommendation, which stresses on
target based approach instead of demand-driven approach adopted by Ministry for
conversion of dry latrines into wet latrines.
Revised Action Taken Note
The Planning Commission has formulated National Action Plan for Total
Eradication of Manual Scavenging by 2007. For effective implementation and monitoring
of the National Action Plan, a Central Monitoring Committee under the Chairmanship
of Secretary, Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment has been constituted.
Ministry of Urban Employment and Poverty Alleviation organized a Conference
of State Welfare Ministers on 22.6.2005 on 'Eradication of Manual Scavenging'.
Representatives of various States/Central Ministries/Organisations and NGOs took
part in this Conference. The Conference was convened to expand the awareness and
also to evaluate the impact of Govt.'s programme in the field of liberation and
rehabilitation of scavengers.
Minister of State (Independent Charge) for Urban Employment and Poverty
Alleviation has also written to the Chief Ministers of States to impress upon the
implementing agencies of various States to accord top priority to the schemes, which
relates to the welfare of the weaker sections of the society.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 11023/4/2005-SCD-V dated
21st June, 2006.]
Observation and Recommendation
The Scheme provides for the setting up of a network of Monitoring Committees
i.e. Central Monitoring Committee at the apex level, State-level Monitoring Committees,
supported by District-level Monitoring Committees and the Town Committees or
Mohalla Committees at the ground level. While the Central and State-level Committees
were required to meet quarterly, no periodicity was prescribed for District and Town
Committees.
[Sl. No 17, Appendix II, Para No. 119 of  9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

31
Action Taken
Although no periodicity has been prescribed for District and Town Committees,
these committees are to meet in such intervals as required for effective and fruitful
implementation of the Scheme.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment O.M. No. 11023/4/2005-SCD-V dated
21st June, 2006.]

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES.
-NIL-
NEW D ELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
24th July, 2007 Chairman,
2 Sravana, 1929 ( Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
32

PART-II
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2007-2008) HELD ON 18th JULY , 2007
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs. on 18th July, 2007 in Room No. 51
(Chairman's Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
9. Shri K.S. Rao
10. Shri Mohan Singh
11. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
12. Shri Janardhana Poojary
13. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
14. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
15. Dr. K. Malaisamy
16. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
SECRETARIA T
1.  Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2.  Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
3.  Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
4.  Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
5.  Shri N.K. Jha — Under Secretary
Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Nand Kishore — P r. Director (AB)
2. Shri Jayanti Prasad — Pr. Director (INDT)
33

34
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members of the Committee to the
sitting. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the following
draft Reports:—
(i) Draft Report relating to "Functioning of Employees' State Insurance
Corporation (ESIC)";
(ii) Draft Report relating to "Avoidable expenditure due to delay in taking
decision — Chennai Port Trust";
(iii) Draft Report relating to "Delay in finalisation of demands";
(iv) Draft Report relating to "Property Management by Ministry of External
Affairs";
(v) Draft Report on Action Taken on 9th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) on
"National Scheme for Liberation and Rehabilitation of Scavengers"; and
(vi) Draft Report on Action Taken on 27th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) on
"Non-disposal of uncleared/unclaimed Imported cargo in ICDs/CFSs".
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted these draft Reports without
any amendments/modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalise and present
the same to Parliament in the light of factual verification done by audit.
3. The Committee then desired that Audit may be asked to revive the practice
(upto 12th Lok Sabha) of furnishing to the Committee a compilation titled "Epitome of
the Reports of the Central Public Accounts Committee" containing Action Taken by
the Ministries on the recommendations made by PAC in their Reports alongwith the
status of their implementation.
4. Further, it was decided that the Committee would convene their next sittings
on 30th and 31st July, 2007.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
OBSERVATIONS   AND  RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/Deptt. Observations/Recommendations
No. No. Concerned
12 3 4
1. 8 Social Justice and Even though the Government had formulated
Empowerment grandiose plans for eradication of manual
scavenging by 2007and rehabilitation of all
manual scavengers by 2008. The Government
has not made available any information
relating to targets set and achievements made
during each of the years since 2002, in respect
of the number of manual scavengers that
were liberated and rehabilitated. In the
absence of any meaningful feedback, the
Committee cannot but conclude that much
progress has not been made in respect of the
implementation of the Scheme. Obviously,
there was not monitoring mechanism to
review the targets fixed and achievements
made there against during each year under
the scheme, which is anything but
regrettable.
Further, under the new scheme namely
'Nation Action Plan for Total Eradication of
Manual Scavenging by 2007', prepared by
the Planning Commission and entrusted to
the Ministry of Urban Employment and
Poverty Alleviation for its implementation,
no mention has been made with regard to the
physical targets laid and achievements made
their against. Besides, there has been no
mention about the achievements made in
respect of the number of scavengers
rehabilitated under the Integrated Scheme for
Rehabilitation, being implemented by the
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment,
though the scheme intends to rehabilitate all
the manual scavengers by 2008. The
35

36
Committee deplore the callous attitude
displayed by the Ministry in not furnishing
the requisite information to the Committee.
The Committee are of the view that there is
no point in setting goals unless and until a
concrete and time bound action plan is
prepared and yearly targets are fixed for
achievement of the same. The Committee
expect that the Ministry would apprise them
of the total number of manual scavengers
liberated and rehabilitated under the NSLRS
till March, 2007 and those which are yet to be
liberated and rehabilitated. They would also
like to be apprised of the targets set and
achievements made upto 31st March, 2007
under the Integrated Scheme for
rehabilitation of manual scavengers.
The Committee would also like the Ministry
of Social Justice and Empowerment and
Ministry of Urban Development to work in
close coordination alongwith the State
Governments so that the schemes envisaged
for the benefit of scavengers are implemented
in letter and spirit.
2. 12 Social Justice and The Committee were dismayed to find that
Empowerment the Ministry have not taken any concrete
steps for implementation of its
recommendation for conducting a fresh
survey to identify the potential scavengers
which are to liberated and rehabilitated. The
Ministry have merely mentioned about  the
request that was made by the then Secretary
to the Chief Secretaries of States way back in
September, 2004 for carrying out the survey,
and that too much before presentation of the
Report by the Committee. There is no
evidence to suggest whether Ministry have
taken any follow up action to persuade the
State Governments to complete the survey
expeditiously, even after lapse of about
3 years since the date of their request. This
shows that the Ministry have not taken up
the survey work with all the seriousness
which it deserves. While deploring the
12 3 4

37
lackadaisical approach adopted by the
Ministry, the Committee recommend that
Ministry should atleast woke up now and
ensure completion of the survey by the States
expeditiously within a time-bound period so
that it would facilitate in arriving at a proper
estimate about the number of scavengers that
are required to be liberated/rehabilitated and
specific future plans for covering these
people in a time bound programme.
3. 15 Social Justice and The Commit tee express their satisfaction that
Empowerment a National Action Plan has been formulated
for total eradication of manual scavenging
by 2007 and a Central Monitoring Committee
under the Chairmanship of Secretary, Social
Justice and Empowerment has been
constituted for effective implementation and
monitoring of the Action Plan. The Committee
trust that the scheme would be implemented
in the right earnest by the Ministry in close
coordination with the State Governments and
the implementing agencies so that the
objective of total eradication of manual
scavenging is achieved within the period
stipulated under the National Plan. The
Committee would also like to be apprised of
the progress made in the eradication of
manual scavenging within three months of
the presentation of Report. The Committee
desire that the Ministry of Uraban
Employment and Poverty Alleviation should
formulate a time bound programme under
which all the dry latrines may be converted
into wet latrines. The Ministry should
frequently interact with the State
Governments and the implementing agencies
at regular intervals so as to monitor the
progress made in the implementation of the
schemes relating to eradication of manual
scavenging.
4. 18 Social Justice and The Committee are not satisfied with the reply
Empowerment of the Ministry. Non-fixing of any periodicity
for the meetings to be held by District and
12 3 4

38
Town Monitoring Committees would lead to
slackness and complacency as it would not
be binding on the part of the District
Authorities to hold the meetings at regular
intervals. The Committee are of the opinion
that periodicity at which the District and
Town Committees should meet in a year
should be prescribed in clear cut terms so
that there is no ambiguity in this regard and
there can be proper monitoring of the scheme
by these Committees. Needless to emphasise,
periodic review of work would facilitate the
Central as well as State level Monitoring
Committees to review the progress made in
the implementation of the programme
throughout the country.
MGIPMRND—3409LS(5)—13-10-2007.
12 3 4