DELAYED PURCHASE AND
INSIGNIFICANT UTILISATION OF
EQUIPMENT PROCURED UNDER
FAST TRACK PROCEDURE
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2007-2008
FIFTY-NINTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

P.A.C. No. 1855
Price: Rs. 23.00
© 2007 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and  Conduct of Business
Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Govt. of  India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi-110002.
e

FIFTY-NINTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK SABHA)
DELAYED PURCHASE AND INSIGNIFICANT UTILISATION OF
EQUIPMENT PROCURED UNDER FAST TRACK PROCEDURE
[Action Taken on 34th Report of Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 23 November 2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on: 23 November 2007
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2007-2008) ....................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted
by Government .................................................................. 5
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government ....................................................................... 10
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations replies to which have
not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration ........................................................................... 13
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies/no replies ..... 15
PART II
Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2007-08) held on 02.11.2007.............................................. 16

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra —      Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
14. Shri Kharabela Swain
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Prof. P.J. Kurien
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Fifty-ninth Report on action taken by Government on the recommendations
of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 34th
  Report (14th Lok Sabha) on
"Delayed purchase and insignificant utilisation of equipment procured under Fast
Track Procedure".
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 2nd November, 2007. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the
Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with
the Committee.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
7 November, 2007 Chairman,
16 Kartika, 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee in their Thirty-
fourth Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Paragraph 2.2 of the Report of the C & AG of India
for the year ended 31 March, 2004, No. 6 of 2005, Union Government (Defence
Services—Army and Ordnance Factories) relating to "Delayed purchase and
insignificant utilization of equipment procured under Fast Track Procedure".
2. The Thirty-fourth Report (14th Lok Sabha) which was presented to Lok Sabha
on 12th December, 2006 contained 10 Observations/Recommendations. The Action
Taken Notes in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received
from the Ministry of Defence and are broadly categorized as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the
Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 4, 6, 7, 9 and 10
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in the light of replies received from the Government:
Sl. Nos. 3 and 5
(iii) Observations/Recommendations replies to which have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Sl. No.  8
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
—NIL—
3. In their 34th Report on the subject, the Committee had examined the issues
involved in the evaluation, selection, procurement, delivery and utilisation of the
de-mining equipment procured by the Defence Authorities through Fast Track
Procedure for de-mining over 10 lakh mines laid along the borders during the Operation
Parakram launched in December, 2001. The scrutiny of the subject by the Committee
had revealed lapses in the procurement of de-mining equipment through Fast Track
Procedure such as:
(i) Delay in Procurement, (ii) Benefit of competitive bidding lost by adopting the Fast
Track Procedure,  (iii) Delivery period of nine months in the contract though firm had

2
offered a schedule of four months to Technical Evaluation Committee, and  (iv) Most
mine fields already de-mined manually due to delay in procurement.
A. Gist of Committee's Observations/Recommendations
4. The Committee had made the following important Recommendations in their
34th Report on the subject:—
(i) The Ministry should evolve a system so that the requirement for defence
equipment is assessed timely and expeditious action taken to procure the
same under the normal procedure thereby dispensing with the need for a
Fast Track Mechanism. Fast Track Procedure should be adopted only in
emergent unavoidable conditions.
(ii) The Committee have urged that if at all a decision had to be taken to
procure things urgently and that too under a Fast Track Mechanism, utmost
urgency should be shown by the concerned authorities in planning and
procurement.
(iii) The Ministry of Defence should take necessary precautions while framing
the terms and conditions of procurement contract, and ensure that the faults/
shortcomings brought to light during field trials are immediately rectified by
the vendor.
(iv) Observing the delay in actual delivery of de-mining equipment, the Committee
have stated that given such an urgency, the cumulative delay in delivery of
the equipment is inexplicable.
(v) While deploring the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry in enforcing the
contract, the Committee have recommended that Ministry should invariably
incorporate a Liquidated Damages (LD) clause in all future contracts in case
of delayed delivery by the supplier and impose penalty on the vendor by
reducing the cost of the contract.
(vi) The Committee have emphasized that the Ministry would now learn the right
lessons from this experience and take adequate care to prevent recurrence of
lapses witnessed in the instant case, while avoiding the pitfalls of
procurement through fast track mechanism.
B. Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
5. The Government have accepted most of the recommendations made by the
Committee. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry on the various
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report have been
reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report.
6. In regard to recommendations (Sl. No. 3) regarding evolving a system to timely
assess and expeditiously procure Defence equipment under the normal procedure
itself the Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Note have stated that the
observation of the Committee is conceded and noted for future compliance for taking
expeditious procurement action. However, on the question of accepting longer

3
delivery schedule for procurement of de-mining equipment, the Ministry of Defence
in their Action Taken Note submitted:—
"At the time of the PNC initially, the vendor handed over a chart giving
delivery schedule for 24 Nos. in place of the schedule given in the offer for
40 Nos. After scrutiny, the PNC observed that the last consignment was
proposed to be delivered within 41 weeks from the effective date of the contract.
The vendor was then asked to clarify as this was at variance with what was
proposed to the Technical Evaluation Committee at the time of evaluation and
also from the delivery schedule given in the commercial offer. The vendor
intimated that the schedule given in the offer was based on winter production
capacity of the firm which will be more than summer production capacity. The
Committee impressed upon the vendor to compress overall delivery time and
the vendor was asked to present the revised delivery schedule as the earlier
proposed schedule was not acceptable to the Committee. The vendor explained
that assembly was in progress for five vehicles and these could be delivered
in two lots within four and ten weeks respectively, of opening of LC. Production
of the balance lot could only be commenced on receipt of signed contract and
advance payment and delivery of the third consignment could be affected
only after 27 weeks from the effective date of the contract. The vendor intimated
that delivery of the last four consignments would be compressed by three
weeks. This was not accepted by the Committee and the vendor was asked to
review the delivery schedule and compress it further. The vendor informed
the Committee  that the schedule could not be further compressed without
compromising quality as large number of  checks on various components and
their integration were required to be carried out in the factory premises.
Thereafter, after deliberations and duly considering the requirement of ensuring
quality, the delivery schedule for supply of 24 Nos. of 910 MCV Series 2
alongwith spare parts package within 39 weeks, from the effective date of the
contract was agreed to.
As regards the observation of the Committee that the equipment could perhaps
have been procured under normal procurement procedure, it is submitted that
that would have taken much more time for trials, evaluations etc. with consequent
cost implication like payment of higher compensation to farmers for crop-loss
etc."
7. Regarding non-incorporation of LD clause in the contract in case of delay in
completing the supply by the vendor (Recommendation Sl. No. 8), the Ministry in
their Action Taken Note have conceded that there was some delay in the opening of
LC by the Bank and also in the matter of  Pre-Despatch Inspection (PDI). There were
also some problems in shipping arrangements. Because of these factors, any imposition
of Liquidated Damages (LD) on the vendor would not stand legal scrutiny and
therefore, no LD was recovered from the vendor. The Ministry have stated that
corrective action is being taken so that there would be no delay in making logistic
arrangements in future contracts.

4
8. Apprising the Committee about the extent of utilization of equipment for de-
mining required in connection with Operation Parakram and subsequently the Ministry
in their Action Taken Note stated as follows:—
"The equipment was utilized for probing 182 mine fields covering an area of
approximately 18,433.94 acres. The equipment has been utilized extensively and
has performed its task post OP Parakram satisfactory. The equipment will continue
to be utilized in future for its entire service life, including possible deployment
in UN missions and hence will not result in 'under-utilisation'. Reports from field
units on the performance of the equipment were positive and they confirmed
that the equipment had performed its task effectively in the conditions obaining
in the sectors of employment."
C. Observations/Recommendations
9. The Committee note that in respect of their earlier recommendation regarding
evolving a system for timely assessment and expeditious procurement of Defence
equipment, the Ministry while conceding the point have stated that they have noted
the same for future compliance for ensuring timely perspective planning and taking
expeditious procurement action. However, the Committee are not satisfied with the
fact that they have not been apprised about any concrete system put in place by the
Ministry of Defence to effectively deal with cases under the Fast Track Procedure
(FTP). As an efficient FTP can play a vital role in emergent situations, the Committee
hope that the Ministry would at least now initiate specific measures for a more
transparent, simple and faster procedure of procurement of Defence equipment. The
Commitee further desire that the procurement procedures should be constantly
reviewed and re-formulated by carefully analysing its shortcomings and an effective
procedure established for emergent purchases which is truly 'fast track and quick'.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the specific measures taken/proposed to
be taken in this regard.
10. In so far as the non-invoking of Liquidated Damage (LD) clause and imposing of
penalty on the vendor for the delay in delivery of the equipment is concerned, the
Ministry in their Action Taken Note have accepted that there was some delay in the
opening of Letter of Credit (LC) by the Bank and also in the matter of Pre-Despatch
Inspection (PDI). There were also some problems in the shipping arrangements.
Because of these factors the Ministry have contended that any imposition of LD on the
vender would not have stood legal scrutiny and therefore, no Liquidated Damages was
recovered from the vendor. From the reply of he Ministry of Defence it is evident that
there is no proper system in place for monitoring prompt delivery of Defence equipment.
The Committee are constrained to point out that although the purchase of de-mining
equipment was proposed and effected through FTP keeping in view the urgency of
operational requiements, there was substantial delay in the delivery of the equipment
due to lack of effective coordination between the Ministry of Defence and other
concerned agencies defeating the very concept and intent of Fast Track Procedure.
While reiterating their concern on this count, the Committee desire that an effective
coordination and monitoring mechanism be evolved by the Ministry of Defence involving
all the agencies so that procurement process progresses smoothly without hindrance
and defence equipment are made available within the time-frame required by the Armed
Forces.

CHAPTER II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
GOVERNMENT
ACTION TAKEN REPORT (ATR) ON THE 34TH REPORT OF THE PAC ON
''DELAYED PURCHASE AND INSIGNIFICANT UTILISATION OF
EQUIPMENT PROCURED UNDER FAST TRACK PROCEDURE"
Recommendation
During the Operation Parakram launched in December 16, 2001, the Indian Army
was mobilized along the borders. During this operation several mines were laid
extensively in the frontage area. Most of the minefields were laid on  agricultural land,
which was required to be returned to the owners, after the termination of the operation,
in a useable condition after clearing the mines".
[S. No. 1 of Appendix II Para 52 of 34th Report of the PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
The observations are factual and no further comments are required.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary &
Acquisition Manager (LS)
[M/o Defence, D/o Defence O.M. No. 21/49/2006-D(GS IV) dated 30th July, 2007]
Recommendation
Mine clearance process, after the operation, involved two stages-initially by manual
recovery and thereafter by mechanical means. Explaning the procedure of demining
the Ministry have indicated that during the process of manual recovery of minefields,
it is not possible to trace all the mines which could have drifted or got further buried
due to vagaries of nature, i.e. flooding of area, shifting of soil/sand wind etc. or
dislocation due to animal/human interference. Hence there is need for mechanical
method which ensured that certain mines, which were not found in the process of
manual recovery, are taken out.
[S. No. 2 of Appendix II Para 53 of 34th Report of the PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
5

6
Action Taken
The observations are factual and no comments are offered.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary &
Acquisition Manager (LS)
[M/o Defence, D/o Defence O.M. No. 21/49/2006-D(GS IV) dated 30th July, 2007]
Recommendation
The Committee note that based on technical literature and delivery schedule offered
by various firms, three firms supplying the required demining equipment were short
listed for evaluation by the Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC), out of which, one
firm was found to be technically superior and most suitable for employment in the
Indian operational scenario. According to the Ministry, demining equipment of the
selected firm was recommended after due evaluation of the technical parameters
against operational requiement and based on the performance of the equipment during
the demonstration organised for the Technical Evaluation Committee.
[S. No. 4 of Appendix II Para 55 of 34th Report of the PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
The observations are factual and no comments are offered.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary &
Acquisition Manager (LS)
[M/o Defence, D/o Defence O.M. No. 21/49/2006-D(GS IV) dated 30th July, 2007]
Recommendation
The Committee find that the Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) evaluated the
equipment based on only live dynamic demonstrations against the Operational
Requirement at the vendor's premises. No trial evaluation is stated to have been as
such carried out on the equipment in India. However, Blast Tests were carried out as
part of the Joint Receipt Inspection (JRI) of the first consignment on the first de-
mining vehicles during 27-28 June 2003. During these Blast Tests, it was noticed that
5 out of 10 mines did not detonate, the vehicle got bogged down in slushy area and
was recovered using the dozer, the vehicle did not have any sensor to indicate the
blast of anti-personnel mines and the speed of the vehicle was also very slow. The
Ministry have tried to explain in their written submission that the observations made
by the trial team were not directly related to the operational performance of the
equipment and at no stage the equipment was found unsuitable or rejected. However,

7
the Ministry have not specifically indicated whether the shortcomings pointed out
during the Blast Tests were even taken up with the firm and whether and when the firm
had set right these shortcomings. The Committee would, therefore, like to be apprised
in this regard and would also like to know as to how the equipment worked satisfactorily
subsequently. They desire that, in future, the Ministry  of Defence should take
necessary precautions while framing the terms and conditions of procurement contract,
and ensure that the faults/shortcomings brought to light during field trials are
immediately rectified by the vendor.
[S.No. 6 of Appendix II Para 57 of 34th Report of the PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
The shortcomings brought out by trial team during JRI were minor in nature and
insignificant vis-a-vis the performance of the equipment. Moreover, as per laid down
procedure and provision of the contract, quality and quantity claims raised against
the vendor have already been settled. The equipment has performed its designated
function satisfactorily in demining operations post OP Parakram.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary &
Acquisition Manager (LS)
[M/o Defence, D/o Defence O.M. No. 21/49/2006-D(GS IV) dated 30th July, 2007]
Recommendation
Surprisingly, the contract executed with the supplier for procurement of demining
equipment did not contain any provision for life span of the equipment, although all
demining equipment are stated to have a specified shelf life. It has been noticed that
the equipment supplied by the selected firm was assessed by Controller of Quality
Assurance (EE) [CQA(EE)] in the Ministry of Defence to have a service life of 7 years
and storage life of 10 years. The Ministry have accepted that they work on a principle
of initial life and extend the life by mid-overhauls and generally work on a principle of
25 to 30 years of serviceable life of equipment. The Committee are constrained to
point out that since the stipulated shelf life of the equipment was not  explicitly
mentioned in the contract, the Ministry's contention of the serviceable life of this
particular equipment being 25 to 30 years does not carry much weight. The Committee
desire that while executing such contracts in future, important provision of life-span
of equipment should invariably by considered carefully before entering into contract
with the supplier.
[S.No. 7 of Appendix II Para 58  of 34th Report of the PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

8
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
The shelf life of the equipment was not stipulated explicitly in the contract, however,
Controller of Quality Assurance (EE) assessed the equipment to have a service life of
7 years and storage life of 10 years which can be extended by means of mid-overhauls
and generally works on the principle of 25-30 years of serviceable life of the equipment.
However, this requirement has been noted for future and this aspect of stipulating
shelf life/in-service life of the equipment has been addressed in the DPP 2005 and
DPP 2006, where it is mandatory vide Para 10 of the standardised RFP to stipulate the
in-service life and shelf life of the equipment by the vendor in the offer.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary &
Acquisition Manager (LS)
[M/o Defence, D/o Defence O.M. No. 21/49/2006-D(GS IV) dated 30th July, 2007]
Recommendation
Out of 2,78,300 mines proposed to be recovered, only 1182 miens (0.42 per cent)
were recovered using the demining equipment and the remaining were recovered
manually. It is, thus, evident that the equipment purchased due to operational urgency
was hardly utilised as most of the minefields had already been demined manually. The
Ministry of Defence have tried to explain the poor utilisation of the equipment
purchased by stating that if all the minefields had been demined by using this
equipment, it would not only have caused serious deficiencies in the holding of
mines, but also the entire demining equipment would have been damaged beyond
economic repair/usage, as any equipment cannot be subjected to indefinite number
of blasts or employed in a role for which it is not designed for. Further, according to
them, demining operations are done in terms of area covered and number of mine-
fields and not number of mines blasted. The Committee find this explanation of the
Ministry untenable. If their argument were to be accepted, then it is difficult to
comprehend as to why there was a need for import of such a costly equipment in large
number and that too urgently under Fast Track Procedure. Either these facts now
being explained were not visualised earlier, or, there is something inherently wrong in
the system of conception, planning and procurement of urgently required defence
equipment. Although, the Ministry have contended that the demining equipment has
been utilised extensively, the Committee would like to be apprised about the extent of
utilisation thereof for the demining  required in connection with Operation Parakram
and subsequently.
[S.No. 9 of Appendix II Para 60 of 34th Report of the PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
The equipment was utilised for probing 182 minefields covering an area of
approximately 18,433.94 acres. The equipment has been utilised extensively and has

9
performed its task post OP Parakram satisfactorily. The equipment will continue to be
utilised in future for its entire service life, including possible deployment in UN missions
and hence will not result in 'under-utilisation'. Reports from field units on the
performance of the equipment were positive and they confirmed that the equipment
had performed its task effectively in the conditions obtaining in the sectors of
employment.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary &
Acquisition Manager (LS)
[M/o Defence, D/o Defence O.M. No. 21/49/2006-D(GS IV) dated 30th July, 2007]
Recommendation
The facts narrated above abundantly confirm that the process of acquisition of
demining equipment by the Government leaves much to be desired. The equipment
procured under Fast Track Procedure obviously involved a higher cost than that
procured under the normal procedure. Further, whatever justification existed for
adopting the Fast Track Procedure appeared to be defeated when the Ministry took
such a long time in the negotiations for bringing the equipment to the country. The
placement of order on the foreign supplier was unduly delayed, the supplier's delivery
schedule of four months intimated to the Technical Evaluation Committee was
enhanced to nine months and even after the enhancement of the delivery schedule,
50 per cent of the ordered quantity i.e. 12 equipment were supplied after the expiry of
the delivery period of nine months. The delay in procurement thus rendered the very
purpose of procurement infructuous, as the defective and old vintage mines had to be
cleared manually. By adopting the Fast Track Procedure, the benefit of competitive
rates through open tenders was lost, while the very purpose of the Fast Track
Mechanism was defeated due to delayed procurement. The Committee trust that the
Ministry would now learn the right lessons from this experience and take adequate
care to prevent recurrence of lapses witnessed in the instant case, while avoiding the
pitfalls of procurement through fast-track mechanism.
[S.No. 10 of Appendix II Para 61 of 34th Report of the PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
Paragraph contains summary of observations of the PAC. Hence, no comments are
offered separately.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary &
 Acquisition Manager (LS)
[M/o Defence, D/o Defence O.M. No. 21/49/2006-D(GS IV) dated 30th July, 2007]

CHAPTER III
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Committee note that for de-mining of over 10 lakh mines laid during Operation
Parakram, the Army Headquarters proposed in August 2002 for procurement of 40 de-
mining equipment under 'Fast Track Procedure' through an Empowered Committee. In
order to minimize the risk of casualties involved in manual de-mining and render the
mined land 100% safe for cultivation, the Defence Procurement Board approved the
proposal for procurement of de-mining equipment on a 'Fast Track' in October 2002. It
is pertinent to note in this regard that while Operation Parakram was thought of in
2001, the Army sent the proposal for procurement of de-mining equipment only in
2002. Needless to say that the Army authorities woke up late in the matter for
procurement of 'Fast Track Equipment' for de-mining purposes. The representative of
the Ministry of Defence also conceded during evidence that earlier procurement of
de-mining equipment could have been thought of.
It is incomprehensible as to why the Ministry adopted the Fast Track Procedure
instead of the normal procedure when they did not take timely action earlier to procure
the same. The instructions issued in 2001 regarding Fast Track Procedure provide
that such a procedure is to be adopted only in an operational situation foreseen as
imminent or for a situation where a crisis has emerged without prior warning. In the
present case,  the situation was not only unforeseen but there was ample time available
with the Army authorities to conceive, plan and procure the requisite under the
normal procedure itself. The Committee, therefore, feel that the necessity of a Fast
Track Procedure in this particular case had arisen only because of the inaction on the
part of concerned authorities earlier. The Committee feel that adoption of Fast Track
Procedure instead of normal procedure for procurement of de-mining equipment is
clearly indicative of lack of perspective planning on the part of the concerned
authorities. The Committee emphasize that the Ministry should evolve a system so
that the requirement for any defence equipment is assessed timely and expeditious
action taken to procure the same under the normal procedure thereby dispensing with
the need for a Fast Track Mechanism. Fast Track Procedure should be adopted only
in emergent unavoidable conditions.
[S. No. 3 of Appendix II Para 54 of 34th Report of the PAC (14 th Lok Sabha)]
10

11
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
The de-mining-operation is a post-war activity which has numerous variables
affecting its location, time and methodology. It is a complex combination of recovery,
breaching, proving and reproving using various standard as well as innovative
methods as per conditions obtaining in each minefield, with safety of troops, local
populace and live stock as a paramount requirement. The delay of seven months in
sending proposal for procurement of de-mining equipment in August 2002 after
commencement of Operation Parakram, was mainly due to prevailing fluid defensive
cum offensive operational situations and focus on dynamic ongoing activities.
Once the de-escalation of hostilities was planned, the methodology for de-mining
of mined areas was formalised. However, the observation is conceded and noted for
future compliance for timely perspective planning and taking expeditious
procurement actions.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary &
 Acquisition Manager (LS)
[M/o Defence, D/o Defence O.M. No. 21/49/2006-D(GS IV) dated 30th July, 2007]
Recommendation
The Committee find it strange that although the selected firm had offered a delivery
schedule of four months to the Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) for the supply
of 32 equipment during technical evaluation, it was allowed a delivery period of nine
months for a lesser number of equipment in the contract. According to the Ministry
being, unaware of the procurement procedures of Ministry of Defence, the vendor
initially verbally intimated a delivery schedule of four months assuming that the
orders would be placed on them immediately by the Technical Evaluation Committee
itself and also due to higher production capacity of the firm during winter as compared
to summer.The vendors subsequently proposed a revised delivery schedule of
39 weeks for supply of 24 pieces of the equipment, when the supply order was finally
placed on him. Even though the equipment were sought to be procured under Fast
Track Procedure, the Government did not specify a shorter delivery schedule but
only asked the vendor that the goods must be delivered at the earliest. The Committee
are inclined to conclude that the decision of the Government to accept delivery
period of nine months against the original period of four months was not proper,
which resulted in avoidable delay in receipt and actual utilisation of the equipment.
This reinforces the Committee's belief that perhaps the equipment could very well
have been procured under normal procedure itself and there was hardly any need for
a Fast Track Procedure. If at all a decision had to be taken to procure things urgently
and that too under a Fast Track Mechanism, utmost urgency should have been
shown by the concerned authorities in planning and procurment.
[S.No. 5of Appendix II Para 56 of 34th Report of the PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

12
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
At the time of the PNC initially, the vendor handed over a chart giving delivery
schedule for 24 Nos. in place of the schedule given in the offer for 40 Nos. After
scrutiny, the PNC observed that the last consignment was proposed to be delivered
within 41 weeks from the effective date of the contract. The vendor was then asked
to clarify as this was at variance with what was proposed to the Technical Evaluation
Committee at the time of evaluation and also from the delivery schedule given in the
commercial offer. The vendor intimated that the schedule given in the offer was
based on winter production capacity of the firm which will be more than summer
production capacity. The Committee impressed upon the vendor to compress overall
delivery time and the vendor was asked to present the revised delivery schedule as
the earlier proposed schedule as not acceptable to the Committee. The vendor
explained that assembly was in progress for five vehicles and these could be
delivered in two lots within four and ten weeks respectively, of opening of LC.
Production of the balance lot could only be commenced on receipt of signed contract
and advance payment and delivery of the third consignment could be affected only
after 27 weeks from the effective date of the contract. The vendor intimated that
delivery of the last four consignments would be compressed by three weeks. This
was not accepted by the Committee and the vendor was asked to review the delivery
schedule and compress it further. The vendor informed the Committee that the
schedule could not be further compressed without compromising quality as large
number of checks on various components and their integration were required to be
carried out in the factory premises. Thereafter, after deliberations and duly
considering the requirement of ensuring quality, the delivery schedule for supply
of 24 Nos. of 910 MCV Series 2 alongwith spare parts package within 39 weeks, from
the effective date of the contract was agreed to.
As regards the observation of the Committee that the equipment could perhaps
have been procured under normal procurement procedure, it is submitted that that
would have taken much more time for trials, evaluations etc. with consequent cost
implication like payment of higher compensation to farmers for crop-loss etc.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary &
Acquisition Manager (LS)
[M/o Defence, D/o Defence O.M. No. 21/49/2006-D (GS IV) dated 30th July, 2007]

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS REPLIES TO WHICH HAVE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation
The Committee note that the contract was concluded with the firm in March 2003,
five months after the stipulated supply date, for the supply of 24 de-mining equipment.
The equipment was received between June 2003 and March 2004, 8 to 16 months
beyond the date indicated by Army Hqrs. Even after extension of the delivery schedule,
50 per cent of the ordered equipment, i.e. 12 equipment were supplied only after the
expiry of the delivery period of 9 months. It may not be out of place to mention here
that the equipment was required rather urgently for de-mining mine-fields as a
consequence of Army operation in 2001. Given such an urgency, the cumulative delay
in delivery of the equipment is inexplicable.
The Committee further observe that though there was substantial delay in
completing the supply, Liquidated Damages (LD) clause was not invoked and Penalty
was not imposed on the vendor for the delay. The Ministry have contended that there
was no requirement to invoke LD clause as the delivery was completed with the
agreed delivery schedule. The Committee, however, believe that the Ministry's
contention was based on the premise that the effective date for delivery schedule was
from the date of opening of letter of credit. The delivery schedule should have
commenced from the date on which the advance payment was made. Thus, there was
a delay in completing the supply for which the LD clause should necessarily have
been invoked on the vendor. While deploring the lackadaisical approach of the Ministry
in enforcing the contract, the Committee recommend that the Ministry should invariably
incorporate a LD clause in all future contracts in case of delayed delivery by the
supplier and impose penalty on the vendor by reducing the cost of the contract.
[S.No. 8 of  Appendix II Para 59 of 34th Report of the PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by the Ministry of Defence
The matter has been considered carefully. As per Article 3 of the contract, the
Effective Date was the (i) Date of Receipt of Performance Bank Guarantee (PBG),
(ii) Receipt of advance payment in the sellers account and (iii) Provision of End User
Certificate (EUC) by the buyer to  the seller, whichever is later. Accordingly, the
Effective Date of the contract was 31st
  March, 2003, the date of release of the advance
payment. Again, as per Article 4.6, any delay in the issuance of the LC or in payments
by the buyer would correspondingly extend the delivery period. There was some
delay in the opening of LC by the Bank and also in the matter of Pre Despatch
Inspection (PDI). There were also some problems in shipping arrangements. Because
13

14
of these factors, any imposition of Liquidated Damages (LD) on the vendor will not
stand legal scrutiny and therefore, no LD is being recovered from the vendor. However,
corrective action is being taken so that there would be no delay in making logistic
arrangements in future contracts.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary &
Acquisition Manager (LS)
[M/o Defence, D/o Defence O.M. No. 21/49/2006-D (GS IV) dated 30th July, 2007]

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
7 November, 2007 Chairman,
16 Kartika, 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
15

PART II
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2007-2008) HELD ON 2ND NOVEMBER, 2007
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1250 hrs. in Committee Room 'C', Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra  —  Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri Raghunath Jha
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Brajesh Pathak
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
9. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARAIT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
5. Shri N.K. Jha — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri B.K. Chattopadhyay — ADAI (RC)
2. Shri A.N. Chatterji — DG (PA)
3. Shri K.R. Sriram — PD (ESM)
4. Shri Jayanti Prasad — PD (INDT)
5. Shri R.B. Sinha — PD (A F&N)
16

17
Representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution (Deptt. of Food & Public Distribution)
*** *** *** *** ***
Representative of the Food Corporation of India (FCI)
*** *** *** *** ***
Representative of the Planning Commission
*** *** *** *** ***
Representative of the Ministry of Rural Development (Department of Rural
Development)
*** *** *** *** ***
Representative of Ministry of Housing and Poverty Alleviation
*** *** *** *** ***
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration, the following Draft
Reports:
(a) Draft Report on Para 11.3 of C&AG Report No. 7 of 2006 [Indirect Taxes—
Customs, Central Excise & Service Tax] relating to "Under-valuation due to
adoption of lower mutually agreed price."
(b) Draft Action Taken Report on 28th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) on "Control
Systems in India Security Press, Nashik."
(c) Draft Action Taken Report on 34th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) on "Delayed
purchase and insignificant utilization of equipment procured under Fast Track
Procedure."
After brief discussion, the Committee adopted the draft Reports without any
modifications/amendments and authorized the Chairman to finalise and present the
same to the Parliament in the light of factual verification done by the Audit.
3. *** *** *** *** ***
4. *** *** *** *** ***
5. *** *** *** *** ***
6. *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.