20
PROCUREMENT OF DEFECTIVE
SLEEPING BAGS
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2005-2006)
TWENTIETH REPORT
FOURTEENTH   LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
SERVER5\REPORT\3590LS\3590LSCONT

TWENTIETH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
PROCUREMENT OF  DEFECTIVE
SLEEPING BAGS
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[Action Taken on the 46th Report of Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on   8.12.05
Laid in Rajya Sabha in  5.12.05
LOK  SABHA   SECRETARIA T
NEW   DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1794
Price:  Rs. 13.00
© 2005 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2005-2006) ............................  (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................. ……………………………………………………………..      (v)
PART I
CHAPTER I Report ..................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER  II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by Government………………………...................................... 5
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government ............................................................................ 19
C
HAPTER  IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration ................................................. 20
C
HAPTER  V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies ........................... 21
PART II
Extract of Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2005-06) held on  14.11.2005................................................. 22
APPENDIX
Observations and Recommendations ....................................  24

COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2005 - 2006)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Dr. R. Senthil
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
12. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
13. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
14. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Dr. K. Malaisamy
19. Shri V . Narayanasamy
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
21. Shri Jairam Ramesh
22. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
4. Shri N.K. Jha — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee having been authorised by the
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this Twentieth Report on
action taken by Government on the recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their 46th  Report (13th Lok Sabha) on “Procurement of
Defective Sleeping Bags”.
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee
at their sitting held on 14th November 2005. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the
Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observation/Recommendation
of the Committee has been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and has also
been reproduced in a consolidated form in the Appendix to the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI;     PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
17 November, 2005 Chairman,
26 Kartika, 1927 (Saka)  Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in their 46th Report (13th Lok Sabha)  on
Paragraph 17 of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the
period ended 31 March 1998 (No. 7 of 1999), Union Government (Defence Services-
Army & Ordnance Factories) relating to “Procurement of Defective Sleeping Bags”.
2. The 46th Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 13 March, 2003 contained
17 Observations/Recommendations. The action taken notes have been received in
respect of all Observations/Recommendations and these have been  broadly categorized
as follows:—
 (i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by
Government:
Paragraph Nos.  1 to 17
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire  to
pursue in view of the replies received from Government:
Paragraph No.  - NIL -
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph No.  - NIL -
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
Paragraph No.  - NIL -
3. The action taken notes furnished by the Ministry of Defence on various
observations/recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report have been
reproduced in the relevant chapter of this Report.  In the succeeding paragraphs, the
Committee will deal with the action taken by the Government on their Observations/
Recommendations, made in the Original Report.
Irregularities found in the procurement of sleeping bags
4. Sleeping bag with cover is one of the items of special snow and mountaineering
equipment for troops deployed at Siachen Glacier and Eastern Sector.  Till the year
1991, the Ministry of Defence had been procuring sleeping bags from M/s Richner of
Geneva, Switzerland by placing repeat orders on the firm, the only approved vendor
for this item at that time.  When the firm sought an increase in prices of sleeping bags
for the year 1991, the matter was then got reviewed by the Ministry of Defence and it

2
was decided to increase the vendor base so as to secure the item at the most competitive
price.  Accordingly, global tenders for procurement of sleeping bags were floated on
26th December 1991.  Six firms including the past supplier M/s Richner of Switzerland
responded. Samples of sleeping bags were, however, submitted  by three out of these
six firms.  All the samples received from the tenderers except M/s Richner were subjected
to a short user trial in Siachen Glacier for one month.  Trial report of the samples was
submitted by Master General of Ordnance’s (MGO’s) Branch/Army Headquarters
(HQrs) on 27 March 1992. As per the trial report, sample of the sleeping bags submitted
by M/s Moncler SA,   France was only found suitable for introduction into service.
According to the Ministry of Defence, M/s Moncler of France had quoted a lower rate
of FF 1381 (Rs.6557.45) per piece whereas the past supplier, M/s Richner of Switzerland
had quoted a rate of SFR 579.60 (Rs.10571.82) per piece for large size and SFR 479.55
(Rs.8746.92) per piece for medium size.  The Price Negotiation Committee (PNC),
constituted with the approval of Raksha Mantri, decided that the orders be placed on
the lowest technically valid offer and recommended placement of order on M/s Moncler
of France.  Accordingly, with the approval of competent financial authority, the contract
for procurement  of 8,588 sleeping bags was entered into with M/s Moncler on 11 May
1992 at a cost of FF 11.86 million equivalent to Rs. 7.65 crore.  As per the delivery
schedule fixed in the contract, the entire quantity i.e. 8588 sleeping bags were to be
delivered within 90 days  from the date of placement of orders.  However, the entire lot
of sleeping bags was received from  the M/s Moncler of France in six lots between
19 September, 1992 and 21 June , 1993.
5. In their 46th Report, the Committee had found that  the execution of contract
for procurement of Sleeping bags was beset with irregularities of varied nature.  These
broadly included: —
(i) Failure to undertake an  in-depth verification of track record of the supplier,
M/s Moncler, and disregarding the crucial information supplied
subsequently by Indian embassy  at Paris that the firm had been suffering
losses during the preceeding three years;
(ii) Non -incorporation of vital element like size  specification of sleeping bags
in the tender document which amounted to  showing undue favour to
M/s Moncler ;
(iii) Failure to get sealed samples authenticated by the signature of the
designated authority as per the procedural  requirement and  inspection
and clearance of first three lots of defective sleeping bags (3594 Nos.)
without cross checking them with the approved sealed samples.
 (iv) Non-forwarding of specific complaint made by the past supplier
M/s Richner of Switzerland regarding alleged bankruptcy  of M/s Moncler
of France and the possibility of supply of inferior quality bags by the firm,
by the Ministry to Director General of Quality Assurance (DGQA) which
reinforces the inference of certain collusion.
(v) Failure on the part of Ministry to seek cancellation of  contract with
M/s Moncler despite communication from the Indian Embassy, Paris

3
confirming insolvency of the firm and recommending cancellation of the
remaining orders; and
(vi) Lack of Coordination between Ministry of Defence, Army Head Quarters
and Director General of Quality Assurance (DGQA) which resulted not
only in pecuniary loss to Government but also denial of essential life
saving kits to jawans posted in forward glacial areas.
The manner in which the contract was executed by the Ministry gave an
unmistakable impression that the intention was always to accommodate the foreign
supplier under any circumstances regardless of the quality of sleeping bags procured
and the financial loss to the Government.  While it was clearly established that the firm
had gone bankrupt and supplied inferior quality of sleeping bags, the Committee were
shocked to find from records that despite seeking cancellation/short closure of the
contract, the Ministry were negotiating another deal with the firm.  Evidently, the role
of the Ministry in the entire deal was questionable. The Committee, therefore,
recommended that the questionable role of the Ministry of Defence particularly the
Officers responsible for the execution of contract with M/s Moncler of France, should
be entrusted to an Independent Agency for thorough investigation and they be apprised
of the action taken thereon within a period of six months.
6. In their Action Taken Notes, the Ministry have given replies to all the
recommendations of the Committee wherein it has been stated that pursuant to the
Committee’s recommendation to entrust the case to an independent agency for
investigation, it was decided, with the approval of Raksha Mantri, that the case be
referred to Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for investigation by any agency they
consider appropriate.  The CVC advised that the case be referred to the Central Bureau
of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.  The Ministry have further stated that since,
the matter had been handed over to CBI as per the recommendation of the PAC, action
on their part has, therefore, been complete.
7. The Committee enquired about the exact date on which the matter was referred
to CBI; the latest status of the investigation of CBI in the matter; and the probable date
of submission of enquiry report by CBI.  In response, the Ministry of Defence in a
written reply stated that the matter was referred to CBI on 27th December 2004. It has
further been stated that according to the CBI, documents pertaining to the case handed
over by the Ministry are under their scrutiny and a decision regarding further course
of action would be taken on completion of the same.  CBI is stated to have further
indicated that since the matter is at an initial stage, it is not possible for them to indicate
any date for completion of inquiry in the matter.
8. The Committee are peeved at the casual manner in which the Action Taken
replies were furnished by the Ministry which were not only incomplete but also
betray lack of seriousness on the part of the Ministry to the gravity of the problem of
the case which not only involved pecuniary loss to the Government but had exposed to
danger the lives of jawans posted in forward glacier areas.   The Committee were
disturbed to note that the Ministry did not bother to supply basic facts pertaining to
the case such as date of reference of the matter to the CBI for investigation and the

4
latest  status of investigation in the matter.  It is only after the Committee’s specific
enquiry in this regard the Ministry had furnished the same.  Further by stating that
with handing over of the case to CBI, their action in the matter had been complete, the
Ministry have given an impression that they were no longer interested in taking the
case to its logical conclusion. The Committee cannot but deplore the irresponsible
attitude displayed by the Ministry.  The Committee urge the Ministry of Defence to
pursue the matter vigorously with CBI so that investigation in the matter is completed
within a time bound period, lest the importance  and the relevance of the subject would
be lost.  They also desire that as soon as the Report is finalized and submitted to the
Government by CBI, a copy of the same together with gist of findings should be made
available to them for their perusal. The Committee further recommend that the
Ministry should take deterrent action against the officers responsible for procurement
of defective sleeping bags on the basis of findings of the CBI enquiry within three
months of the receipt of the Report.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
A Sleeping Bag is one of the items of special snow and mountaineering equipment
for troops deployed at Siachen Glacier and Eastern Sector. The Committee note that till
the year 1991, the Ministry of Defence had been procuring sleeping bags from M/s
Richner of Geneva, Switzerland by placing  repeat orders on the firm, the only approved
vendor for this item at that time. When the firm sought an increase in prices of sleeping
bags in 1991 the Ministry decided to float global tender to increase the vendor base
with a view to securing the most competitive price. Global tenders for procurement of
sleeping bags were floated on 26 December 1991. Six firms including M/s Richner of
Switzerland responded. All the samples received from the tenderers except from
M/s  Richner, whose samples had been successfully trial evaluated in the past, were
subjected to a short user  trial in Siachen Glacier. As per the trial report, the sample of
the sleeping bag submitted by M/s Moncler of France only was found suitable for
introduction into service. According to the Ministry, M/s Moncler of France had
quoted a lower price compared to the prices quoted by the past supplier M/s Richner
of Switzerland and therefore, Price Negotiation Committee (PNC) recommended
placement of order on M/s Moncler of France whose offer was lowest and technically
valid. Accordingly, on 11 May 1992, a contract for procurement  of 8588 sleeping bags
costing FF 11.86  million  (Rs. 7.65 crore) for use by Army in Siachen Glacier was
entered into with M/s Moncler of France. The Committee's examination has revealed
several disturbing aspects in the execution of the contract.
[Sl. No. 1,   Appendix II, Para 83 of  Forty sixth report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In pursuance to the recommendation of the PAC to entrust the case to an
independent agency for investigation. it was decided, with the approval of Raksha
Mantri, that the case be referred to Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for investigation
by any agency they consider appropriate. The CVC advised that the case be referred
to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.
2. Since, the matter, as per the recommendation of the PAC, has been handed
over to CBI, the action, by the Ministry, on the recommendations/observations of the
PAC as mentioned in the report of the PAC is complete.
Signature of
Joint Secretary
[Min. of,  Defence O.M. No. 3 (7)/US(O-I-V)/2000/V ol. III dt. 25. 05.05]
5

6
Recommendation
The Committee observe that while sleeping bags  offered by both M/s Richner
of Switzerland and M/s Moncler of France were found suitable for introduction into
service, price differential factor clinched the selection in favour of the latter firm.  As a
matter of fact, M/s Richner had quoted prices for both large (Rs. 10571.82 per piece)
and medium (Rs. 8746.92 per piece) sizes for the sleeping bags, which were required/
used by the Army, whereas M/s Moncler quoted price for only one type of sleeping
bag (Rs. 6557.45 per piece), whose size was not even specified in the trial report.
Undoubtedly, the comparative cost analysis made  without reference to the relative
size specifications of the sleeping  bags offered by both the firms, was a hollow
exercise without any tangible basis. On the contrary, significant price differential factor
should have cautioned the Ministry to undertake indepth verification of the track
record of the supplier so as to ensure quality of the stores to be procured. The
Committee find that the verification was at best perfunctory and despite the crucial
information supplied subsequently by our embassy at Paris that the Firm M/s Moncler
had been suffering heavy  losses during the preceding three years was simply
disregarded by the Ministry.
[Sl. No. 2,  Appendix II, Para 84 of Forty sixth report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In pursuance to the recommendation of the PAC to entrust the  case to an
independent agency for investigation, it was  decided, with the approval of Raksha
Mantri, that the case be referred to Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for investigation
by any agency they consider appropriate. The  CVC  advised that the case be referred
to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.
2. Since, the matter, as per the recommendation of the PAC, has been handed
over to CBI, the action, by the Ministry, on the recommendations/observations of the
PAC as mentioned in the Report of the PAC is complete.
Signature of  Joint Secretary
[Min. of   Defence O.M. No. 3(7)/US(O-I-V)2000/V ol. III dt. 25. 05.05]
Recommendation
The Committee are amazed that a vital element  like size specification of the
sleeping bags  was not drafted into the tender document. This was despite the fact that
Army had been using both medium and large sizes of sleeping  bags prior to the
contract with the French supplier, M/s Moncler. The  Ministry failed to adduce any
reason for non-incorporation of the size specification in the tender documents.
Surprisingly, the DGQA, deposed before the Committee that since they were not
associated with the procurement deal, items which were required to be specified in the
tender documents were not so specified. So a conscious omission, the opinion of the
Committee, amounted to showing undue favour to M/s Moncler and the  resultant
supply of substandard sleeping bags to the Army.
[Sl. No. 3,   Appendix II, Para 85 of Forty sixth report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]

7
Action Taken
 In pursuance to the recommendation of the PAC to entrust the case to an
independent  agency for investigation. it was decided, with the approval of Raksha
Mantri, that the case be referred to Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for investigation
by any agency  they consider appropriate. The CVC advised that the case be referred
to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.
2. Since, the matter, as per the recommendation of the PAC, has been handed
over to CBI, the action, by the Ministry, on the recommendations/observations of the
PAC as mentioned in the Report of the PAC is complete.
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Min. of   Defence O.M. No. 3(7)/US(O-I-V)2000/V ol. III dt. 25. 05.05]
Recommendation
The Committee note that 8588 sleeping bags were received from M/s Moncler of
France in six lots between September 1992 and June 1993. The sleeping bags were
required to be inspected on arrival as per DGQA standing instructions and the contract
entered into with the firm. It is beyond comprehension as to why the inspecting
officials of DGQA inspected and cleared the first three lots of defective sleeping bags
(3594 nos.) without cross-checking them with the approved sealed samples. It is
perplexing that the approved sealed samples were neither sought by DGQA nor
provided by the users at the time of inspection of stores till receipt  of a complaints
from a firm namely M/s Deftech. Netherlands in December 1992, which brought  out
several deficiencies in the sleeping bags   supplied  by M/s Moncler. What is worse is
that even though the fourth lot of sleeping  bags was compared  with an approved
sample, the inspectors  even failed to notice a superfluous central stitching on outer
bags, visible to naked eye and cleared the bags. The Ministry admitted that there was
gross  dereliction of duty on the part of the officials of DGQA  and Army HQrs in
carrying out the inspection of stores and the matter was inquired into  with a view to
fixing responsibility. The action taken on this count has been reviewed by the Committee
elsewhere  in the Report. the Committee are,  however, constrained to observe  that it
is really a sad commentary on the functioning of an organization like DGQA, which is
independent  of Users and is vested with the onerous responsibility  of inspecting and
certifying the quality of stores procured. Viewing the kind of negligence  in quality
inspection in this  case as a major failure of internal control, the Committee strongly
feel that the functioning of DGQA calls for a thorough review and revamping in order
to guarantee that the quality assurance parameters are not compromised and the
services are supplied with defect free quality stores/equipment.
[Sl. No. 4,   Appendix II, Para 86 of Forty-sixth report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action  Taken
In pursuance to the recommendation of the PAC to entrust the case to an
independent agency for investigation, it was decided, with the approval of
Raksha Mantri, that the case be referred to Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for

8
investigation by any agency they consider appropriate. The CVC advised that the
case be referred to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.
2. Since, the matter,  as per the recommendation of the PAC, has been handed
over to CBI, the action, by the Ministry, on the recommendations/observations of the
PAC as mentioned  in the Report of the PAC is complete.
Signature of  Joint Secretary
[Min. of   Defence O.M. No 3(7)/US(O-I-V)/2000/Vol. III, dt 25.05.05]
Recommendation
The Committee note that the samples of the trial evaluated and approved sleeping
bags were sealed and maintained at a specified place for future comparisons by the
Users. However, the sealed samples were not authenticated by the signature of the
designated authority as per the procedural requirement. The Army Headquarters
contended that since the sample had been properly stored and documented for, these
were as good as authenticated and the concept of sealing with signtures on the
samples is another measure of security only. The contention of the Army Headequarters
is not maintainable in view of the fact that during  inspection of the fourth  and the fifth
lots of sleeping bags, the inspecting  staff of DGQA did not take congnizance  of the
sealed samples provided to them because those were not  duly authenticated. The
Committee  find no reasons as to why the lapse on the part of the designated  officer
not to authenticate the sealed samples of sleeping  bags was not inquired into by the
Army  Headquarters while probing the acceptance  of defective supplies. It  is remarkable
that the requirement of authentication of the samples under the signature of a
designated officer  was not felt till the receipt of a complaint from M/s Deftech,
Netherlands, in December 1992 pointing out various defects in the quality of sleeping
bags supplied by M/s Moncler. The Committee expect the Ministry to draw suitable
lesson from such a procedural fiasco so as to safeguard the interest of the Users and
the public exchequer atleast in future procurements.
[Sl. No. 5,  Appendix II, Para 87 of Forty-sixth report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In pursuance to the recommendation of the PAC to entrust the case to an
independent  agency for investigation, it was decided, with the approval of
Raksha Mantri, that the case be referred to Central Vigilance  Commision (CVC) for
investigation by any agency they consider appropriate. The CVC advised that the
case be referred to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.
2. Since,  the matter, as per the recommendation of the PAC, has been handed
over to CBI, the action, by the Ministry, on the recommendations/ observations of the
PAC as mentioned in the Report of the PAC is complete.
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Min. of Defence. O.M. No. 3(7)/US(O-I-V)/2000/V ol. III, dt 25.05.05]

9
Recommendation
The Committee find that even before the first lot of the bags was received a
specific complaint was received by the Ministry of Defence on 10th September 1992
from the past supplier, M/s Richner of Switzerland regarding the alleged bankruptcy of
M/s Moncler of France and the possibility of inferior quality  of bags to be supplied by
the firm. A scrutiny of relevant records unraveled that the manner in  which this
complaint was dealt with  by the Ministry renders the very transparency of the deal
questionable. The allegation of  financial bankruptcy of the firm and the quality of
stores likely to be supplied should  have rung the alarm bells in the Ministry. The very
fact that the complaint was not forwarded to the DGQA reinforces the inference of
certain collusion. The Defence Secretary  admitted in evidence that DGQA should
have been consulted before deciding the fate of the complaints which  later proved to
be well founded. The Committee note that the Ministry absolved their responsibility
by merely endorsing  the complaint to the User Directorate  with the contention that
they were expected to keep  a watch on the quality of supplies made by M/s Moncler.
Had the Ministry forewarned the inspecting  officials of DGQA about  the alleged
quality of supplies, acceptance of defective sleeping bags and resultant loss of public
money could have been avoided.
[Sl. No. 5,   Appendix II, Para 88 of Forty-sixth report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In pursuance to the recommendation of the PAC to entrust the case to an
independent  agency for investigation, it was decided, with the approval of
Raksha Mantri, that the case be referred to Central Vigilance  Commission (CVC) for
investigation by any agency they consider appropriate. The CVC advised that the
case be referred to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.
2. Since,  the matter, as per the recommendation of the PAC, has been handed
over to CBI, the action, by the Ministry, on the recommendations/ observations of the
PAC as mentioned in the Report of the PAC is complete.
Signature of  Joint Secretary
[Min. of  Defence. O.M. No. 3(7)/US(O-I-V)/2000/Vol. III, dt 25.05.05]
Recommendation
On 3 December, 1992 the Ministry further received a communication from
M/s Richner with documentray evidence indicating M/s Moncler going into voluntary
liquidation and having been placed under judicial administration on 6 November 1992.
In the meantime, the Ministry also received a complaint from another firm namely
M/s Deftech, Netherlands highlighting several shortcomings in the sleeping bags
supplied by M/s Moncler. The Committee note that on 10 December, 1992, the Ministry
wrote to Embassy of India at Paris seeking confirmation of the financial status of M/s
Moncler as well as their advice on continuing further business with the firm. The
Embassy of India, Paris, in their communication dated 29 December, 1992 while confirming
the insolvency of the firm, recommended cancellation of the remaining orders. It is
intriguing that even at this stage, the Ministry did not seek cancellation of the contract,

10
which could have at least prevented supply of remainder 4,994 sleeping bags (out of
8588) received subsequently. The Defence Secretary also conceded in evidence that
this was an unusual case where the Ministry continued dealing with a bankrupt firm.
The Committee therefore recommend that stringent and decisive action should be
taken against the colluding officials responsible for causing avoidable loss to the
Government and showing undue and rank favour to the firm.
Sl. No. 7,  Appendix II, Para 89 of Forty sixth report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In pursuance to the recommendation of the PAC to entrust the case to an
independent agency for investigation, it was decided, with the approval of Raksha
Mantri, that the case be referred to Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for investigation
by any agency they consider appropriate. The CVC advised that the case be referred
to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.
2. Since, the matter, as per the recommendation of the PAC, has been handed
over to CBI, the action, by the Ministry, on the recommendations/observations of the
PAC as mentioned in the Report of the PAC is complete.
Signature of  Joint Secretary
[Min. of   Defence O.M. No. 3(7)/US(O-I-V)2000/V ol. III. dt 25. 05.05]
Recommendation
The Committee were informed that the repots of inferior quality of sleeping bags
supplied by M/s Moncler were conveyed to Army Headquarters and they were alerted
on 23 December 1992 to ensure that the quality of the sleeping bags was as per the
sealed sample at the time of initial inspection and any deterioration in the quality of
sleeping bags delivered during warranty period be immediately brought to their notice.
It was only on 18 January 1993 that the Army Headquartes sought feedback from
Headquarters, Northern Command as by that time 900 sleeping bags had been dispatched
to them. Though the Headquarters, Northern Command were asked to forward their
feedback by 10 February 1993, it was only on 26 November 1993 that the field formation
informed the Army Headquarters about the unsuitablility of the sleeping bags. As a
matter of fact, the DGQA rejected the sleeping bags received in the sixth lot (1133 nos.)
in July 1993 as these were not as per the sealed sample. The Committee regret to note
the deplorable lack of coordination between the Department of Defence, Army
Headquarters and DGQA which ultimately resulted not only in pecuniary loss to
Government but also denial of essential life saving kit to the jawans posted in forward
glacial areas.
[Sl. No. 8,  Appendix II, Para 90 of Forty-sixth report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In pursuance to the recommendation of the PAC to entrust the case to an
independent agency for investigation, it was decided, with the approval of Raksha

11
Mantri, that the case be referred to Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for investigation
by any agency they consider appropriate. The CVC advised that the case be referred
to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.
2. Since, the matter, as per the recommendation of the PAC, has been handed
over to CBI, the action, by the Ministry, on the recommendations/observations of the
PAC as mentioned in the Report of the PAC is complete.
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Min. of Defence O.M. No. 3(7)/US(O-I-V)2000/Vol. III. dt 25.05.05]
Recommendation
The Scrutiny of relevant file also revealed that the firm not only failed to deliver
the sleeping bags in time but also failed to furnish the requisite performance/warranty
bonds as per the terms of the contract. The Committee note that the Ministry extended
the Letter of credit several times at the request of the firm and diluted the conditions of
warrantly Bond without consulting its finance wing. The performance/warranty Bonds
were not received from the supplier as of 29 April, 1993. However, by that time payment
to the tune of FF 5332,041.00 had already been made by the State Bank of India,
New Delhi to the Supplier. While, as per the LC conditions, the firm was required to
submit proof of dispatch of performance Bond and warranty Bond, it is not clear as to
how the payment was released to the supplier without these documents. What the
Committee could glean from the documents made available to them is that while the
issue of payment to the firm was under active consideration of the Ministry, reports
obtained from SBI, New Delhi (24.5.1993) revealed that payments to the tune of FF 5.78
million had already been released to the supplier and this information apparently came
as a surprise to the Ministry. Apparently, the Ministry were not sure whether
Performance/Warranty Bonds had since been received by the State Bank of India. The
sequence of events establish conclusively the active connivance of those entrusted
with executing the deal. The Committee hope that the Ministry would fix individual
responsibility and take exemplary action against the guilty officials. The Committee
also want the role of SBI and the circumstances under which payment was released by
the SBI to the firm, to be inquired into.
[Sl. No. 9,  Appendix II, Para 91 of Forty-sixth report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In pursuance to the recommendation of the PAC to entrust the case to an
independent agency for investigation, it was decided, with the approval of Raksha
Mantri, that the case be referred to Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for investigation
by any agency they consider appropriate. The CVC advised that the case be referred
to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.
2. Since, the matter, as per the recommendation of the PAC, has been handed
over to CBI, the action, by the Ministry, on the recommendations/observations of the
PAC as mentioned in the Report of the PAC is complete.
Signature of  Joint Secretary
[Min. of   Defence O.M. No. 3(7)/US(O-I-V)2000/V ol. III. dt 25.05.05]

12
Recommendation
The Committee find that the Letter of Credit (LC) for balance amount of
FF 6.08 million was renewed on the basis of a decision taken in a meeting held by
Joint Secretary (O) on 21 May 1993. The minutes  of meeting show that the User
Directorate was agreeable to the release of payment against LC for the Stores
already supplied except for a superfluous central stitching which was to be avoided
in future supplies. The MGO's Branch, however, on 24th May 1993  intimated the
Ministry that the sleeping bags supplied by the firm were not in conformity with
the trial evaluated sample due to presence of a central stitching in the outer bag
and therefore proposed taking of appropriate action by the Ministry. It was again
on 1 June, 1993 the MGO's Branch pointed out the defect in the sleeping bags
intimated to the Ministry  that those were not acceptable to them. Eventually, after
getting a copy of the minutes of the meeting held by JS(O) on 21 May 1993, which
were circulated by the Ministry  on 3 June 1993, without authentication by officers
present in the Ministry, the Director (MGO) on 18 June 1993 had clarified that no
commitment regarding acceptability of the bags was made by him during the meeting.
Despite this, the Ministry extended the Letter of Credit in May 1993 without
obtaining an unconditional quality assurance from the supplier, facilitating
encashment of the amount towards supply of defective sleeping bags by the firm.
The Army HQrs were at a loss to understand as to how the statement attributed to
Director MGO/EM(GS&C) was incorporated in the minutes of 21 May 1993, since
according to them, the same officer  wrote to the Ministry about the defect found
in the sleeping bags and their unacceptability immediately after the meeting, i.e. on
24  May 1993 and also on 1 June 1993. Surprisingly, no reference was made to the
bankruptcy of the firm in the meeting where a crucial decision was to be taken with
regard to releasing payments to the firm. Apparently, the decision to release payment
to the supplier was taken under dubious circumstances and such a decision is
amply suggestive of a nexus between certain authorities in the Ministry of Defence
and the supplier. The Committee would therefore like answer to some of these
questions as to why the Ministry released payment to the firm when the User
Directorate had found the sleeping bags defective and unacceptable, why the
minutes were not countersigned by all the Members present and why the material
fact of bankruptcy of the firm was not mentioned in the meeting held by JS(O). The
Committee would also like to be apprised of the action taken against officials
responsible for the contract management.
[Sl. No. 10,  Appendix II, Para 92 of Forty sixth report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok  Sabha)]
Action Taken
In pursuance to the recommendation of the PAC to entrust the case to an
independent agency for investigation, it was decided, with the approval of
Raksha Mantri, that the case be referred to Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for
investigation by any agency they consider appropriate. The CVC advised that the
case be referred to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.

13
2. Since, the matter, as per the recommendation of the PAC, has been handed
over to CBI, the action, by the Ministry, on the recommendations/observations of the
PAC as mentioned in the Report of the PAC is complete.
 Signature of  Joint Secretary
[Min. of Defence O.M. No. 3(7)/US(O-I-V)/2000/Vol. III, dt. 25.05.05]
Recommendation
The Committee have been informed that following the rejection of sleeping bags
which was communicated to M/s Moncler on 6 August 1993, a series of meetings were
held by the Ministry with the representative of the firm to arrive at an agreement
regarding claim of compensation for defective supplies. The proposal given for
rectification of bags and the quantum of compensation offered by the firm were not
acceptable to the Ministry. Ultimately, the Ministry decided to encash the Bank
guarantee and on 24 September, 1993, advised the Banque Rivaud to encash bank
guarantee of  FF 2.37 million representing only 20 percent of the cost of the defective
sleeping bags. The firm, however, moved the court in Paris and obtained a stay order
in October 1993 against payment of the amount. The French Commercial Court give its
judgement on 18 November 1997 in favour of the supplier. It is surprising that the
Union of India could not be represented in the debates in the Commercial Court of
Paris despite being summoned by the Court. It was only after the judgement was
announced in favour  of the supplier,  the Ministry of Defence appealed against the
judgement. The Court of Appeal annulled the decision of Commercial Court and decided
in favour of the Ministry of Defence. The Committee were informed that an amount of
FF 2.27 million repersenting the principal amount of the bank guarantees minus the
administrative charges was received by the Ministry on 3 August 1999. As regards the
recovery of balance amount towards cost and charges, an amount of FF 14,000/-
awarded by the Supreme Court, where the firm had also appealed against the claim of
Government of India, is yet to be released. Considering that an amount of FF 1.09
million has already been paid to the solicitor on account of fees out of FF 2.27 and the
net accrual to the exchequer is very minimal, the Committee hardly need to comment on
the financial prudence of the Ministry.
[Sl. No. 11, Appendix II, Para 93 of Forty sixth report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok  Sabha)]
Action Taken
In pursance to the recommendation of the PAC to entrust the case to an
independent agency for investigation, it was decided, with the approval of Raksha
Mantri, that the case be referred to Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for investigation
by any agency they consider appropriate. The CVC advised that the case  be referred
to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.

14
2. Since, the matter, as per the recommendation of the PAC, has been handed
over to CBI, the action, by the Ministry, on the recommendations/observations of the
PAC as mentioned in the Report of the PAC is complete.
 Signature of Joint Secretary
[Min. of  Defence O.M. No. 3(7)/US(O-I-V)/2000/V ol. III, dt. 25.05.05]
Recommendation
The Committee note that although Clause 17(b) of the contract stipulated that all
the rights and liabilities embodied in the contract shall be determined by referring to
the Arbitrator—a nominee of the Secretary of the Ministry under the Laws of India—
yet the Ministry of Defence appointed the Arbitrator only in April 1998 i.e. after five
years of defective supplies. According to the Ministry, the Legal Adviser (Defence)
had opined on a reference made to him in May 1994, that the case of the Department
was weak and not tenable on the grounds that no notice had been given to the seller
at proper time and goods were appropriated by the buyer without intimating the seller
of the recovery of compensation/damages for defect in the goods. When the matter
was again referred to LA (Defence) in April 1998, he reiterated the advice given by his
predecessor in May 1994. Subsequently, based on the advice of Government Counsel
who was appearing on behalf of the Government in the French Court and Ambassador
of India in Paris, it was decided by the Ministry to appoint an Arbitrator to strengthen
their claim. The Committee find that though a statement of claim for Rs. 5.23 crore was
filed before the sole Arbitrator on 25 August 1998, the pace of arbitration proceedings
has been tardy. Viewed in the light of opinion rendered by the LA (Defence), the
outcome of the arbitration appears a foregone conclusion. Further, there is little hope
whether the claim, if awarded by the Aribitrator in India can be executed in France
against a bankrupt firm.
[Sl. No. 12,  Appendix II, Para 94 of Forty sixth report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In pursuance to the recommendation of the PAC to entrust the case to an
independent agency for investigation, it was decided, with the approval of Raksha
Mantri, that the case be referred to Central Vigilance  Commission (CVC) for investigation
by any agency they consider appropriate. The CVC advised that the case be referred
to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.
2. Since, the matter, as per the recommendation of the PAC, has been handed
over to CBI, the action, by the Ministry, on the recommendations/observations of the
PAC as mentioned in the Report of the PAC is complete.
Signature of  Joint Secretarty
[Min. of   Defence O.M. No. 3(7)/US(O-I-V)/2000/V ol. III, dt. 25.05.05]

15
Recommendation
The Committee find that the Ministry of Defence appointed Deputy Secretary(Q)
in September 1994 to enquire into the lapse associated with acceptance of sub-standard
sleeping bags. The terms of reference of the enquiry was to (i) make recommendation
as to which individuals/organizations were responsible for the above lapse and also to
(ii) suggest steps which may be taken to prevent repetition of such lapses. The enquiry
report submitted by the DS(Q) in October 1994 pin pointed lapses on the part of
officials in DGQA and Army Headquarters for acceptance of defective sleeping bags.
The Department of Defence asked the Department of Defence Production & Supplies,
under whose control the DGQA functions, to take action as per the findings of the
enquiry report. The Committee are constrained to observe that the then Secretary,
Department of Defence Production & Supplies did not agree with the findings that the
inspecting staff was primarily responsible for accepting the defective stores. It was
agrued that the only fault which could be attributed to inspecting staff in DGQA was
that they inspected the stores in the absence of an authenticated sealed sample because
of the urgency and pressure exerted by the Users as the DGQA did not wish to appear
to be uncooperative by refusing to carry out the necessary inspection. The Committee
observe that the reasons adduced by the Department of Defence Production & Supplies
do not hold good considering that it was mandatory on the part of DGQA to follow the
laid down procedure to test and certify the quality of stores on receipt. What is further
disquieting to note is the fact that MGO's Branch/Army Headquarters also did not take
any action against officials found responsible for the lapses in the enquiry report. To top
it, the Department of Defence also failed to pursue the matter to its logical end. The
Committee are quite alarmed by the atmosphere of non-accountability which seems to be
prevailing in the Ministry of Defence, considering the magnitude of defence purchases.
[Sl. No. 13, Appendix II, Para 95 of Forty sixth report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In pursuance to the recommendation of the PAC to entrust the case to an
independent agency for investigation, it was decided, with the approval of Raksha
Mantri, that the case be referred to Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for investigation
by any agency they consider appropriate. The CVC advised that the case be referred
to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.
2. Since, the matter, as per the recommendation of the PAC, has been handed
over to CBI, the action, by the Ministry, on the recommendations/observations of the
PAC as mentioned in the Report of the PAC is complete.
Signature of  Joint Secretarty
[Min. of Defence O.M. No. 3(7)/US(O-I-V)/2000/V ol. III, dt. 25. 05.05]
Recommendation
The Committee's examination revealed that subsequently, on perusal of a news
item in November, 1999 highlighting the findings in the Report of C&AG about
procurement of defective sleeping bags, Ruksha Mantri (RM) directed the Ministry

16
that the factual position of the case be put up to him. When full facts of the case were
placed before him, the RM passed an order on 1st December, 1999 that action should
be initiated within one month against those responsible for procuring the sub-standard
sleeping bags. Pursuant to orders of Raksha Mantri, a Court of Inquiry (CoI) was
instituted on 24 December 1999 to investigate as to why during receipt inspection, the
sleeping bags were passed which did not conform to the trial evaluated and approved
samples. The Committee note that six officers in DGQA, Senior Quality Assurance
Officer (SQAO) including some civilian officials of SQAE(GS) and three officers of Det
2 FOD (Army Headquarters) were found responsible in the report of CoI. Pursuant to
the findings of COI, two officers in Army Headquarters who failed to produce the
sample of sleeping bags to the inspecting staff of SQAE(GS) were awarded severe
displeasure which debarred them from promotion throughout their service career. The
Committee find that charge sheets for major penalty had been issued against 3 out of
six officers in DGQA and it was recommended for filing criminal cases against the then
SQAE(Retd.) and other civilian officials of SQAE(GE). The Committee have been
informed that the matter was referred to two Government counsels, who opined against
the filing of criminal case on the ground that the case lacks evidence to show the
element of 'dishonesty and/or criminal misappropriation', as well as connivance of the
various officials either among themselves or with the suppliers for the alleged acts of
omission and commission. It is further distressing to note that the Government took a
decision not to further pursue the issue of filing criminal case against the then
SQAO(Retd.) and other civilian officials of SQAE(GS). Action against three other
officials of DGQA was not found possible since they had retired from service between
October 1996 and June 2000. Had the Department of Defence Production & Supplies
initiated action against erring officials, which they did after a lapse of five years on the
intervention of RM, the outcome of the case could have been different. The Committee
find that the Department of Defence is no less blameworthy for their failure to pinpoint
the then JS(O), who failed to take due cognizance of the complaint received in September
1992, circulated the minutes of the meeting held on 21 May, 1993 without counter
signatures of all officers present, which were later contested by the Director MGO(EM/
GS&C), did not bring on record the material fact of bankruptcy of the firm and also
defied the orders of his superiors to take all precautions to prevent loss to the Government
and various other acts of omission and commission relating to the contract management.
The Committee is not satisfied with the mere seeking of his explanation as assured by
the Defence Secretary. The Committee therefore reiterate that the orders of RM to
initiate action against all those responsible for procurement of sub standard sleeping
bags must be implemented without any discrimination.
[Sl. No. 14,  Appendix II, Para 96 of  Forty sixth report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In pursuance to the recommendation of the PAC to entrust the case to an
independent agency for investigation, it was decided, with the approval of Raksha
Mantri, that the case be referred to Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for investigation
by any agency they consider appropriate. The CVC advised that the case be referred
to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.

17
2. Since, the matter, as per the recommendation of the PAC, has been handed
over to CBI, the action, by the Ministry, on the recommendations/observations of the
PAC as mentioned in the Report of the PAC is complete.
Signature of Secretary/Joint Secretary
[Min. of Defence O.M. No. 3(7)/US(O-I-V)/2000/Vol. III, dt. 25.05.05]
Recommendation
The Committee observe that as per the decision taken by Army Headquarters in
August 1995, sleeping bags were cleared and used in the regions of lower heights of
Northern and Eastern Commands. According to the Ministry, though these bags could
not be utilized in Siachen, yet they were found fit for use in other high altitude areas.
Significantly, Army Headquarters themselves had confirmed presence of most of the defects
pointed out by the firm M/s. Deftech, Netherlands in the sleeping bags supplied by
M/s. Moncler. Having regard to the nature of the defects found, the Committee observe
that the decision to issue these sleeping bags to our Jawans operating in extremely difficult
weather conditions would have exposed them to great risk to their lives.
[Sl. No. 15,  Appendix II, Para 97 of Forty sixth report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In pursuance to the recommendation of the PAC to entrust the case to an
independent agency for investigation, it was decided, with the approval of
Raksha Mantri, that the case be referred to Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for
investigation by any agency they consider appropriate. The CVC advised that the
case be referred to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.
2. Since, the matter, as per the recommendation of the PAC, has been handed
over to CBI, the action, by the Ministry, on the recommendations/observations of the
PAC as mentioned in the Report of the PAC is complete.
Signature of  Secretary/Joint Secretarty
[Min. of Defence O.M. No. 3(7)/US(O-I-V)/2000/V ol. III, dt.  25.05.05]
Recommendation
The Ministry also failed to claim liquidated damages amounting to Rs. 1.80 crore
despite contractual provision of levying 5 percent liquidated damages on delayed
deliveries. The Committee are unable to accept the explanation of the Ministry that
liquidated damages for delays have been claimed through the statement of claim filed
before the Sole Arbitrator as in terms of the contract, liquidated damages were
recoverable from the payments due and by not doing so the Ministry failed to secure
the pecuniary interest of the Government.
[Sl. No. 16, Appendix II, Para 98 of Forty sixth report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]

18
Action Taken
In pursuance to the recommendation of the PAC to entrust the case to an
independent agency for investigation, it was decided, with the approval of
Raksha Mantri, that the case be referred to Cental Vigilance Commission (CVC) for
investigation by any agency they consider appropriate. The CVC advised that the
case be referred to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.
2. Since, the matter, as per the recommendations of the PAC, has been handed
over to CBI, the action, by the Ministry, on the recommendations/observations of the
PAC as mentioned in the Report of the PAC is complete.
Signature of  Joint Secretary
[Min. of   Defence O.M. No. 3(7)/US(O-I-V)/2000/V ol. III, dt.  25.05.05]
Recommendation
To sum up, various acts of omission and commission by the Ministry, DGQA
and Army Headquarters led to procurement of 8,588 sub-standard sleeping bags valuing
Rs. 7.6 crore, which could not be used by the troops at Siachen due to their inferior
quality. The manner in which the contract was executed by the Ministry gives an
unmistakable impression that the intention was always to accommodate the foreign
supplier under any circumstances regardless of the quality of sleeping bags procured
and financial loss to the Government while it was clearly established that the firm had
gone bankrupt and supplied inferior quality of sleeping bags, the Committee are shocked
to find from records that despite seeking cancellation/short-closure of the contract,
the Ministry were negotiating another deal with the firm. Evidently, the role of the
Ministry in the entire deal is questionable. The Committee therefore, recommend that
the questionable role of the Ministry of Defence particularly  the officers responsible
for execution of the contract with M/s. Moncler of France be entrusted to an
Independent Agency for thorough investigation. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the action taken thereon within a period of six months.
[Sl. No 17,  Appendix II, Para 99 of  Forty sixth report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In pursuance to the recommendation of the PAC to entrust the case to an
independent agency for investigation, it was decided, with the approval of
Raksha Mantri, that the case be referred to Central Vigilance Commission (CVC) for
investigation by any agency they consider appropriate. The CVC advised that the
case be referred to the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for investigation.
2. Since, the matter, as per the recommendation of the PAC, has been handed
over to CBI, the action, by the Ministry, on the recommendations/observations of the
PAC as mentioned in the Report of the PAC is complete.
Signature of Joint Secretary
[Min. of  Defence O.M. No 3(7)/US(O-I-V)/2000/Vol.III, dt.  25.05.05]

CHAPTER   III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
GOVERNMENT
-Nil-
19

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
-Nil-
20

21
CHAPTER  V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
-Nil-
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
17 November, 2005 Chairman,
26 Kartika, 1927 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

PART   II
EXTRACTS OF MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2005-2006) HELD ON 14TH NOVEMBER, 2005
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. on 14th November, 2005 in Committee
Room ‘C’ Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
LOK SABHA
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Dr. M. Jagannath
4. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
RAJYA SABHA
5.  Shri R.K. Dhawan
6. Dr. K. Malaisamy
7. Shri V. Narayanasamy
8. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
9. Shri Jairam Ramesh
10. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLAR  AND
AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri U. Bhattacharya — ADAI (RC)
2. Dr. A.K. Banerjee — DG of Audit
3. Shri Roy Mathrani — Pr. Director (AB)
4. Shri R.K. Ghose — AG (Audit), Delhi
REPRESENATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
1. Shri Anil Baijal — Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Pradhan — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Neena Garg — Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser
22

23
REPRESENTATIVES OF DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
1. Shri A.K. Patnaik — Finance Member
2. Shri V .K. Sadhoo — Pr. Commissioner
REPRESENTATIVES OF DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION,
GOVERNMENT OF NCT OF DELHI
1. Ms. Reena Ray — Secretary (Edu)
2. Shri Vijay Kumar — Director (Edu)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to
the sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee observed silence for a minute in memory of Shri K.R. Narayanan,
former President of India as a mark of respect to the departed soul.
4. Therafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following Draft Reports:
( i ) xxx xxx xxx xxx
(ii) xxx xxx xxx xxx
(iii) xxx xxx xxx xxx
(iv) Action Taken on 46th Report (13th Lok Sabha) relating to “Procurement of
Defective Sleeping Bags”.
(v) xxx xxx xxx xxx
5. Barring Report on “National AIDS Control Programme”, the Committee adopted
all the Draft Reports without any changes.  As regards, draft Report on “National AIDS
Control Programme”, the Committee after some deliberation adopted the same subject
to some minor additions. The Committee, then authorised the Chairman  to finalise
these Draft Reports in the light of changes suggested by Audit through factual
verification, if any, or otherwise and to present the same to Parliament.
6 . x x x xxx xxx
x x x xxx xxx
x x x xxx  xxx
7. x x x xxx  xxx
x x x xxx  xxx
x x x xxx  xxx
8. The Committee then decided to postpone the evidence to a subseqent date.
9.  A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
OBSERV ATION AND RECOMMENDATION
Para No. Ministry/Deptt. Observation/Recommendation
Concerned
8 Defence    The Committee are peeved at the casual manner in
which the Action Taken replies were furnished by
the Ministry which were not only incomplete but
also betray lack of seriousness on the part of the
Ministry to the gravity of the problem of the case
which not only involved pecuniary loss to the
Government but had exposed to danger the lives of
jawans posted in forward glacier areas. The
Committee were disturbed to note that the Ministry
did not bother to supply basic facts pertaining to the
case such as date of reference of the matter to the
CBI for investigation and the latest status of
investigation in the matter. It is only after the
Committee's specific enquiry in this regard the
Ministry had furnished the same. Further by stating
that with handing over of the case to CBI their action
in the matter had been complete, the Ministry have
given an impression that they were no longer
interested in taking the case to its logical conclusion.
The Committee cannot but deplore the irresponsible
attitude displayed by the Ministry. The Committee
urge the Ministry of Defence to pursue the matter
vigorously with CBI so that investigation in the matter
is completed within a time-bound period, lest the
importance and the relevance of the subject would
be lost. They also desire that as soon as the Report
is finalized and submitted to the Government by CBI
a copy of the same together with gist of findings
should be made available to them for their perusal.
The Committee further recommend that Ministry
should take deterrent action against the Officers
responsible for procurement of defective sleeping
bags on the basis of findings of the CBI enquiry
within three months of the receipt of the Report.
24
MGIPMRND—3590LS—16-12-2005.

25
ANDHRA PRADESH
1. M/s Vijay Book Agency, 11-1-477,
Mylargadda, Secundrabad-500361.
2. M/s Booklinks Cooperation, 3-4-423/5
& 6, Narayanguda, Hyderabad-500029.
3. M/s Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle,
Vasavya Nagar, Vijayawada-520006. (A.P.)
4. M/s Labour Law Publications, 873, Kothi
Bus Stand, Hyderabad-500001.
5. M/s Law Publico Pvt. Ltd., opp. Tele-
graph Office, 5-1-873, Kothi, Hyderabad-
500195.
6. Shri V .A.N. Raju, Newspaper Agent, H.No.
1-2-58, Rahamath Nagar, Kazipet-
506003. (A.P.)
7. M/s Vivekananda Law Publishers, Shop
No.8, opp. Secundrabad Courts,
Secundrabad-500010, Hyderabad.
BIHAR
8. Departmental Publications Sales Centre,
Vikas Bhavan, New-Secretariat, Patna
(Bihar).
9. M/s Progressive Book Centre, Zila School,
Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramma, Muzaffarpur-
842002 (Bihar).
GUJARAT
10. M/s Vijay Magazines Agency, Station
Road, Anand-388001 (Gujarat).
11. The New Order Book Company, Ellis
Bridge, Ahmedabad-380006. (T.No.
79065).
HARYANA
12. M/s Indian Documentation Service, Patel
Nagar, Post Box No. 13, Gurgaon-122001
(Haryana)
13. M/s Prabhu Book Service, Sadar Bazar,
Gurgaon-122001.
14. M/s Maharishi Dayanand University Book
Shop, Rohtak-124001. (Haryana)
JAMMU
15. M/s Haldia Publishers (India), 128-A,
Gandhi Nagar, Jammu-180004.
KARNATAKA
16. M/s People’s Book Houses, J.M. Palace
Road, Mysore-570024.
17. M/s Geetha Book House, K.R. Circle,
Mysore-570001.
18. The Editor, Youth Gazette No. 154, Jyoti
Niwas, 4th Cross, 4th Main, 2nd Phase,
Marjinath Nagar-560010. (Karnataka).
MAHARASHTRA
19. M/s Sunderdas Gian Chand, 601, Girgaum
Road, Near Princes Street, Bombay-400002.
20. The International Book Service, Deccan
Gymkhana, Pune-4.
21. The Current Book House, Maruti Lane,
Raghunath Dadaji Street, Bombay-
400001.
22. M/s Usha Book Depot, “Law Book Sell-
ers and Publishers” Agents Govt. Publica-
tions, 585, Chira Bazar, Khar House,
Bombay-400002.
23. M & J Services, Publishers Representa-
tive Accounts & Law Book Seller, Mohan
Kunj, Ground Floor 68, Jyotiba Fule Road,
Nalgaum-Dadar, Bombay-400014.
24. The Marathwada Book Distributors,
Parmimal Khadkeshwar, Aurangabad-
431001.
25. M/s Pragati Jer Mahal, 432, Kalbadevi,
Road, Bombay-400002.
26. M/s Jaina Book Agency (India), 64-A,
Girgaum Road, Dhobi Talao, Bombay-
400002.
27. M/s Thosar Granihagar Shabu Lasmi, 201,
Samrath Nagar, Aurangabad-431009.
MANIPUR
28. M/s P .C. Jain & Co. Thangal Bazar,
Imphal-795001.
MEGHALAYA
29. M/s Paul’s Agency & Distributors, R.K.
Mission Road, Laitumkharh, Shillong-
793003.
PONDICHERRY
30. Editor of Debates, Legislative Assembly,
Department, Pondicherry-605001.
PUNJAB
31. M/s Lyall Book Depot, Chaura Bazar,
Ludhiana-141008.
RAJASTHAN
32. M/s Pitaliya Pustak Bhandar, Jaipur-
302001.
TAMIL NADU
33. M/s C. Sitaraman & Co., 37, Royappettah
High Road Madras-600014.
34. Shri I. Gopalkrishnan, Principal, Salem
Sowdeswari College, Salem-636010
35. M/s M.M. Subscription Agencies, 123,
Third Street, Tatabad, Coimbatore-641012.
UTTAR PRADESH
36. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel Marg, P.B.
No. 70, Allahabad. (U.P.)
37. M/s International Publicity Service, GPO
Box No. 1114, V aranasi-211001.  (U.P .)
38. The Law Book Company (P) Ltd., Sardar
Patel Marg, P.B. No. 1004, Allahabad-
211001. (U.P .)
Sl. Name of Agent
No.
LIST OF AUTHORISED AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
PUBLICATIONS
Sl. Name of Agent
No.

26
39. M/s S. Kumar & Associates, Marketing &
Sales Division, Information Group, 32,
Sarojini Devi Lane, Guru Govind Singh
Marg, GPO Box No. 251, Lucknow-
226001.
40. M/s Ram Advani Bookseller, Hazrat Ganj,
GPO Box No. 154, Lucknow-226001.
WEST BENGAL
41. M/s Manimala Buys & Sells, 123, Bow
Bazar Street, Kolkata-700001.
42. M/s Bankura News Paper Agency,
Machantola, P.O. & Distt. Bankura-
722101.
43. M/s Book Corporation, 4, R.N. Mukherjee
Road, Kolkata-700001.
44. M/s Bolpur Pustakalaya, Rabindra Sarani
(Shantiniketan) P.O. Bolpur (W.B.).
DELHI
45. M/s Jain Book Agency, C-9, Connaught
Place, New Delhi-110001 (T.Nos.
23321663 & 23320806).
46. M/s J.M. Jaina & Brothers, P . Box 1020,
Mori Gate, Delhi-110006. (T. Nos.
291564 & 230936).
47. M/s Oxford Book & Stationery Co.,
Scindia House, Connaught Place,
New Delhi-110001 (T. Nos. 23315308
& 23315896).
48. M/s Bookwell, 2/72 Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp, Delhi-110009
(T.Nos. 27112309 & 23268786).
49. M/s Rajendra Book Agency, IV-DR-59,
Lajpat Nagar Old, Double Storey,
New Delhi- 110024. (T.Nos. 26412362
& 26412131).
50. M/s Ashok Book Agency, BH-82, Poorvi
Shalimar Bagh, Delhi-110033.
51. M/s Venus Enterprises, B-2/85, Phase-II,
Ashok Vihar, Delhi.
52. M/s Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
23/90, Connaught Circus, New Delhi-
110001. (T.Nos. 23364448, 23364478).
53. M/s Amrit Book Co., N-21, Connaught
Circus, New Delhi-110001 (T.No.
23310398).
54. M/s Books India Corporation, Publishers,
Importers & Exporters, L-27, Shastri
Nagar, Delhi-110002. (T.Nos. 269631 &
714465).
55. M/s Sangam Book Depot, 4378/4B,
Murari Lal Street, Ansari Road, Darya
Ganj, New Delhi-110002.
56. M/s Grover Book & Stationery Co., 58/
109, Sahyog Building, Nehru Place,
New Delhi-110019. (T.Nos. 26419877,
26419651, 26440902).
57. M/s Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18, Ansari
Road, New Delhi-110001.
58. M/s Universal Book Traders, 80 Gokhale
Market, Opp. New Courts, Delhi-110054.
59. M/s Eastern Book Co. (Sales),  Kashmere
Gate, Delhi-110006.
60. M/s International Publicity Service, GPO
Box No. 1114.
61. M/s Jain Book Agency (South End) 1,
Aurobindo Place, Hauz Khas, New Delhi-
110016.
62. M/s Seth & Co., Room No. 31-D, Block B,
Delhi High Court, Sher Shah Road,
New Delhi-110003.
63. M/s Dhaowantra Medical & Law House,
592, Lajpat Rai Market, Delhi-110006.
64. M/s Oxford Subscription Agency, A-13,
Green Park  Extension, New Delhi-110016.
65. M/s K.L. Seth, B-55, Shakarpur,
Delhi-110092.
66. M/s Jaina Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala,, Bank Street, Karol Bagh,
New Delhi-110005.
67. M/s Kamal & Co., 27, DDA Shopping
Centre, Arjun Nagar, Safdarjung Enclave,
New Delhi-110029.
68. M/s Standard Book Co., 125, Municipal
Market, Connaught Place, P.B. No. 708,
New Delhi-110001. (T. Nos. 23712828,
23313899).
69. M/s Jayale(W) Agency, I-196, Naraina
Vihar, New Delhi-110028.
70. M/s Sat Narain & Sons. 40-A, Municipal
Market, Babar Road, Behind Modern
School, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi-
110001.
71. M/s R.K. Books, 40/21-A, Gautam Nagar,
New Delhi-110049.
72. M/s D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd., A/15-17,
Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110059.
73. M/s Ishwar ` Chandra Co., Baldev Bhawan,
9986, Ram Behari Road, Sarai Rohella,
New Delhi-110005.
74. M/s Vijay Book Service C/D/123/C
Pitampura, New Delhi-110034.
Sl. Name of Agent
No.
Sl. Name of Agent
No.
PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI.