41
CONCESSION MEANT FOR SMALL SCALE
INDUSTRIES A V AILED OF BY LARGE SCALE
MANUFACTURERS
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
FORTY-FIRST  REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

FORTY-FIRST  REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
CONCESSION MEANT FOR SMALL SCALE
INDUSTRIES A V AILED OF BY LARGE
SCALE MANUFACTURERS
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
Presented to Lok Sabha on  27.4.07
                                           Laid in Rajya Sabha on 27.4.07
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2007/Chaitra, 1929 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1826
Price: Rs. 32.00
©2007 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2006-2007)...................... ( iii)
INTRODUCTION....................................................................................................... (v)
REPORT 1
PART  I Background analysis...................................................................... 1
PART  II Observations and Recommendations.......................................... 13
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
held on 19th January, 2006. ................................................ 18
II. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
held on 19th  April, 2007. ................................................... 20
APPENDIX
Para  4.3  of  the  Report of  the Comptroller and  Auditor
General  of  India  for  the  year  ended  31  March,   2004
(No. 11 of  2005),  Union   Government   (Indirect  Taxes—
Central  Excise  &  Service Tax)  relating to  “Concession
meant for Small Scale Industries availed of by large scale
manufacturers”............. ....................................................... 23

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
 4. Shri R.L. Jalappa
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Prof. M. Ramadass
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Mohan Singh
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V. Narayanasamy
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional  Secretary
2.  Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint  Secretary
3.  Shri  Brahm Dutt — Director
4.  Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
5.  Smt.  Anju Kukreja — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Forty-first Report relating to “Concession meant for Small Scale Indus-
tries availed of by large scale manufacturers” on  Paragraph 4.3 of the Report of
Comptroller & Auditor General of India for the year ended 31 March, 2004 (No. 11 of
2005), Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise & Service Tax).
2. The Report of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India for the year ended
31 March, 2004 (No. 11 of  2005), Union Government (Indirect Taxes – Central Excise &
Service Tax) was laid on the Table of the House on 6th May, 2005.
3. The Committee took  evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) and Ministry of Small Scale Industries, Agro &
Rural Industries on the subject at their sitting held on 19th January, 2006. The
Committee considered and finalised this Report at their sitting held on 19th April, 2007.
Minutes of the sittings form Annexures to the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommen-
dations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the officers of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) and Ministry of Small Scale Industries,
Agro & Rural Industries for the cooperation extended by them in furnishing informa-
tion and tendering evidence before the Committee.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the
Committee.
PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
N
EW DELHI; Chairman,
19 April,  2007                       Public Accounts Committee.
29 Chaitra, 1929 (Saka)
(v)

REPORT
CONCESSION MEANT FOR SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES A VAILED OF BY
LARGE SCALE MANUFACTURERS
PART   I
Background Analysis
Introductory
Small Scale enterprises play a major role in the economic and industrial progress
of the country.  They contribute a significant percentage of the country’s industrial
production and have been consistently registering a higher growth rate than the rest
of the industrial sector. For the growth and development of the small scale sector, the
Government has been providing fiscal incentives by way of concession in payment
of central excise duties on goods manufactured by the Small Scale Industries. A
general excise duty exemption scheme for small scale units has been made operational
providing concessions from excise duty in respect of clearances of specified excisable
goods.
Central Excise Notifications dated 1 March, 2000/2001/2002 on the subject
inter-alia, stipulate that manufacturers whose aggregate value of clearances of goods
for consumption within the country in the preceding financial year did not exceed
Rs. 3 crore were eligible for concessional rate of central excise duty/full exemption from
central excise duty. However, in the aggregate value of clearances, value of clearances
relating to (i) branded goods manufactured and cleared on behalf of another person on
payment of normal rate of duty, (ii) excisable goods which were either exempt or
chargeable to nil rate of duty, and (iii) excisable goods exported to countries except
Nepal and Bhutan, were to be excluded.
2. The Union Budget 2003-04 recognized that while Small Scale Exemption Scheme
aimed at providing a distinctive advantage to labour – intensive units, there was
possibility of misuse of this facility in certain sectors.  Consequently, the clause relating
to exclusion of exempted goods for purpose of computation of total clearances was
deleted.  Value of clearances pertaining to exempted goods or goods cleared with nil
rate of duty was therefore includible for purpose of determining eligibility criterion of
Rs. 3 crore with effect from 1 April,  2003.  However, the relevant clauses which provided
for exclusion of clearances pertaining to branded and export goods were not deleted
and consequently value of those clearances continued to be excluded for purpose of
reckoning the eligibility limit of Rs. 3 crore.
3. The Audit Paragraph 4.3 of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General
of India for the year ended 31 March, 2004, No. 11 of 2005, Union Government
(Indirect Taxes – Central Excise and Service Tax) relating to “Concession meant for
Small Scale Industries availed of by large scale manufacturers” has referred to

2
instances of  mis-use of the excise duty exemption scheme for small scale industries.
It has revealed that the concession meant for small-scale units were availed of by
large scale manufacturers by taking advantage of the clause in the scheme which
excluded branded goods manufactured and cleared by the units on behalf of another
person from the value of clearances taken into account for determining eligibility
of the unit for the exemption/concession. Audit test check revealed that the
continued retention of exclusion clause relating to branded and export goods thus
enabled these large manufacturers to derive unintended benefit of duty exemption/
concession which amounted to Rs. 40.41 crore during the financial years from
1999-2000 to 2003-04.
4.  The Committee desired to know about the background of the formulation of the
Government  policy on the eligibility criteria of small-scale exemption scheme. During
his deposition, Secretary (Revenue) explained that the scheme of the exemption for
small scale industry has been evolved over a period of time taking into account the
reported misuse of the scheme.  Prior to 1987, a small- scale unit was allowed to avail of
the exemption even in respect of goods bearing the brand name of a large unit.  The
view at that time was that this arrangement gives to the big unit the advantage of low
labour costs, which is generally applicable to SSI units.  Such an arrangement benefits
both the SSI units and the big units, leads to increased production and capacity
utilization, solves the marketing problems of SSI units and hence is good for the
economy as a whole.
5.  He further elaborated that :—
“The general small-scale exemption scheme was modified in 1987, so as to deny
the exemption where a SSI unit affixed the brand name or trade name of a non
Small-Scale unit.  Representations were received to the effect that while the
Government’s intention to ensure that a larger unit does not take advantage of
an exemption meant for Small- Scale units was understandable, the provision
was hampering the capacity untilisation of Small-Scale sector.  It was then sug-
gested that clearance of such branded goods on which full duty is paid should
be excluded while calculating the eligibility limit.  It was felt that accepting this
suggestion would not dilute measures adopted by the Government to prevent
large-scale units from getting the benefit of concessions meant for Small-Scale
units. Consequently, the scheme was amended in 1989 so as to exclude the
clearances of branded goods, on which full duty was paid while calculating the
eligibility limit.”
6.  In this connection, Secretary (Revenue) also sought to emphasise that :—
“After 1987 the scheme was limited to exclusion of branded goods with the
stipulation that the brand shall be owned by a small scale unit.  In other
words, brands owned by large scale units were not covered within the purview
of the exclusion.  When a small scale unit produced a product with a brand
name belonging to another small scale unit, they were also entitled to special
concessions on excise duty  in respect of the turnover of the branded
products.”

3
7. Further expounding on the evolution of the eligibility criteria for exemption and
the exclusion clause built in the provision, the witness added:—
“It was however, noted  that the some major brands like Nirma were misutilizing
the facility.  The concerned small-scale unit remained within the stipulated ceiling
(at that time Rs. 2 crore) but got that product manufactured through other small
scale units availing of the exclusion and concessions.  In 1989, the issue was
considered at length by the Government.  The pros and cons of the continuance
of the scheme were examined at length in the relevant file.  It was noted that big
units get the advantage of low labour cost and fiscal and other incentives given
to SSI units.  On the other hand, it was also felt that such a concession would
encourage ancillarization by large scale units and utilization of capacity by small
scale units.  It was also felt that the economy would benefit by giving room to
small scale industries to grow and develop.  It was noted that the Public Accounts
Committee then had criticized the practice of large scale units deriving benefits
meant for the SSI sector.  It was noted that the scheme had been modified on
1.10.1987 to deny exemption in all cases where an SSI unit affixes the brand name
of another entity that is not a small scale unit.  However, it was decided not to
make any change as it was felt that denying the concession to a small scale unit
who was affixing brand name of another SSI unit would be restrictive and amount
to withdrawal of concession which they have been enjoying.
The scheme of exemption for branded goods was again reviewed in  1994
budget in the light of recommendation of Tax Reforms Committee under Dr. Raja
Chelliah that there should not be any concession if an SSI unit uses the brand
name of another SSI unit.  TRC did not recommend or suggest any changes in
respect of computation of eligibility limit.  This recommendation was accepted
and the benefit of exemption was denied for use of any other manufacturer’s
brand name.  However, the existing scheme of exclusion of value of branded
goods was continued.
After changes over a period of time, the exemption scheme prior to 2003
budget had the following salient features:—
(a) In order to be eligible to avail of this concession, the aggregate value of
clearances of a manufacturer should not have exceeded Rs. 300 lakhs in
the preceding financial year.
(b) In computing the aggregate value of clearances in a financial year, clear-
ances by a manufacturer from one or more factory or from a factory by one
or more manufacturers are clubbed together.
(c) Clearances for export goods and clearances of branded goods in urban
areas are excluded while computing the aggregate value of clearances.
In 2002, the Task Force on Indirect Taxes, headed by Dr. V . Kelkar had, inter alia,
reviewed the SSI exemption scheme and made following recommendations with
reference to the clearance limits:—
(a) The exemption should be extended only to small units with a turnover of
Rs. 50 lakhs;

4
(b) The exemption limits should be gradually brought down to Rs. 50 lakhs; and
(c) Duty exemption should be based on total turnover.  However, in view of
the special contribution of the sector towards overall exports and to en-
courage exports, the clearances for exports might continue to be excluded.
It may thus be seen that the policy of exclusion of clearances of goods bearing
brand name of another manufacturer, on which full duty is paid formulated in
1989, has been reviewed by successive Governments in 1994 and again in 2003,
and it was a conscious policy decision to continue the existing dispensation.”
8.  In reply to a pointed query by the Committee on the exclusion of value of
branded goods from the clearance value limit for availing exemption, the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue- CBEC) informed that exclusion of  value of branded
goods  from the aggregate value of clearances was continued keeping in mind  the
following grounds on the basis of which this benefit was initially given to the Small
Scale units in 1987:—
(a) in any case, excise duty at normal rate is paid on such goods, as they are
ineligible for SSI exemption;
(b) inclusion of value of such goods in aggregate value of clearances would
affect capacity utilization of SSI sector; and
(c) there was also no proposal from the Ministry of Small-Scale Industries
that this particular   provision should be withdrawn.
9. The Committee further desired to know the circumstances and compulsions
which led the Government to take such a deliberate policy decision. The Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue- CBEC) explained  as under:—
“ This has to be seen in the context of the exclusion, which was given in 1989 to
units because of withdrawal of the exemption from the excise duty on goods
manufactured by such units being the brand manufacture of another non-SSI
person. As full excise duty is charged on clearances of branded goods (ineligible
for SSI exemption), and their inclusion would have affected the capacity utilization
of SSI sector, it was decided to continue their exclusion from aggregate value of
clearances as well. Similarly, inclusion of value of goods cleared for exports
would have affected the capacity of SSI sector to contribute to exports, and it
was decided to continue their exclusion from aggregate value of clearances”.
10.  The Ministry further clarified that:
“In 2003 budget, inclusion of value of exempted clearances in the aggregate
value for determining eligibility for SSI exemption was provided. However, to
promote export competitiveness of small scale sector and to help them in optimum
capacity utilization, exclusion of
(a) value of goods cleared for exports; and
(b) value of branded goods (ineligible for SSI exemption) on which full excise
duty is paid was continued”.

5
11. The Committee enquired about the yardsticks applied by the Government to
satisfy itself that the Small Scale Industry units, to whom excise duty concession was
given, actually achieved their full capacity. The Ministry responded as under:—
“Capacity utilization by Small Scale Industry units in general would depend on
a number of factors including fiscal concessions. Fiscal concessions alone
cannot ensure full capacity utilization by Small Scale Industry units. There is no
mechanism in the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue—CBEC) to
ensure that a Small Scale Industry unit achieves its full capacity. However, the
exemption for small-scale units has been given to help the Small Scale Industries,
and from time to time the exemption amount has been increased, though not on
the basis of any study.”
12. The Committee also enquired  whether the Ministry conducted a detailed study
as to how many Small-Scale  units had developed their own brands while availing of
this concession and whether this concession was ultimately intended to benefit the
brand owning large scale companies. The Ministry replied:—
“The present scheme does not benefit brand owning large-scale companies, as
the benefit at the most is restricted to clearances of Rs. 1 crore. Units having
large brands cannot get the benefit of this exemption. If a unit clear goods
bearing its own brand in excess of the eligibility limit, there is no exclusion and
full duty has to be paid on all clearances. It is only when a unit clears goods
bearing the brand of another manufacturer, and pays full duty, only then it is
eligible for concession on its own clearances not exceeding Rs. 1 crore.”
The Ministry have further informed in a written note that they have not conducted
any study for this purpose.
13. On being asked about the total amount of revenue foregone on  account of the
exclusion clause in the exemption provision, the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue) stated that they have not done any evaluation or study for this purpose.
14. When specifically asked about  the exclusion clause relating to branded and
export goods facilitating  278 large manufacturers to derive unintended benefit of duty
exemption of Rs. 40.41 crore between 1999-2000 to 2003-04, the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue— CBEC) stated that  the benefit was available to these units
as per policy decision of the Government and thus cannot be termed as unintended
benefits.
15. When further enquired as to whether the Ministry received any feedback from
revenue field formations on the revenue leakages occurring due to the exclusion clause,
the Ministry replied in the negative.
16. Asked whether the Ministry ever considered the impact of exemption on the
development of small scale industries all over the country, the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue— CBEC) in their written information submitted to the
Committee stated as follows:—
“This Ministry has not done any study to evaluate the impact of this exemption
for Small Scale Industry sector. Ministry of Small Scale Industry is the

6
administrative Ministry for all matters pertaining to small-scale sector and they
have not commented adversely on the efficacy or otherwise of fiscal concessions
meant for Small Scale Industry. In fact, there have been requests from them for
increasing the exemption limit as well as the eligibility limit.”
17. The Committee desired to know as to how the Ministry ensured that without a
proper study, exemptions would not be availed arbitrarily and the intended result of
extending the benefit to Small Scale manufacturers would be achieved.  The Ministry
in their written Information informed as under:—
“In the matters relating to fiscal concessions for SSI sector, this Ministry takes
into consideration inputs from various sources, such as concerned Parliamentary
Committees, references from public representatives, Ministry of Small Scale
Industries, field formations and recommendations from Committees or Expert
Groups constituted by this Ministry.
It would thus not be correct to say that the present excise duty exemption
scheme for SSI is arbitrary.  The SSI exemption scheme has been reviewed by
various study groups/task forces and present scheme has been finalized taking
into consideration their recommendations, as well as inputs from trade and industry
and Ministry of SSI.”
18. On a pointed query by the Committee on the exclusion of branded goods in the
particular context of the Kelkar Committee recommendations on exemptions to small-
scale sector, the Ministry informed in a note that:—
 “The Task Force on Indirect Taxes, headed by Dr. V . Kelkar had reviewed the
Small Scale Industry exemption scheme and inter-alia,  made following
recommendations:
(a) the exemption should be extended only to small units with a turnover of
Rs. 50 lakhs;
(b) the exemption limit should be gradually brought down to Rs. 50 lakhs. On
such reduction the unit would have an option of payment of duty @ 4%
(without cenvat credit);
(c) duty exemption should be based on total turnover. The duty exemption
should provide for determining the turnover based on value of total clear-
ances including exempted goods. However, in view of the special contri-
bution of the sector towards overall exports and to encourage exports, the
Task Force proposed that the clearances for exports might continue to be
excluded for this purpose for the present;
(d) a negative list of items should be drawn up and Small Scale Industry
exemption should be denied to units manufacturing such items, so as to
ensure that Small Scale Industry exemption does not subsidize consump-
tion of luxury items;
(e) a unit should be required to file a declaration when value of clearances
touches Rs. 50 lakhs; and

7
(f) list of goods eligible for Small Scale Industry exemption should be com-
prehensively reviewed so as to extend the exemption to all those goods to
which the exemption is presently not applicable to the extent possible.”
19. On being asked as to whether all the recommendations made by the Kelkar
Committee have been accepted by the Ministry, they replied in a note:—
“The recommendations of the Task Force were examined and it was felt that
accepting all of them would adversely affect the Small Scale Industry sector.
However, it was decided to accept the recommendation of the task force regarding
inclusion of value of exempted clearances while calculating the aggregate value
for deciding the eligibility for small Scale Industry exemption. It was also decided
to accept the recommendation of the Task Force, regarding continued exclusion
of the export clearances from such aggregate value of clearances. As regards
value of branded goods, the Task Force had not made any specific
recommendation regarding their inclusion or exclusion from the aggregate value
of clearances.”
20. Dwelling upon the norms/criteria for granting duty exemption to small-scale
sector, the Ministry in their written information furnished to the Committee, have
apprised that the present criteria laid down by the Government for Small Scale Industry
excise duty exemption, inter-alia include:
“(a) exemption applicable only for specified goods;
(b) in order to be eligible for the exemption, the aggregate value of specified
clearances of unit during the preceding financial year should be less than
Rs. 4 crore;
(c) the exemption is applicable only for the first clearances in a financial year
upto Rs. 1 crore; and
(d) the exemption is not applicable to goods manufactured by units located in
urban areas bearing brand name of another person.”
21. The  Ministry further added:
“Criteria for inclusion or exclusion of a particular commodity for the purpose of
Small Scale Industry exemption may vary from commodity to commodity and
generally take into consideration factors like nature of industry, difficulty in
administering the levy for inclusion of an item and need to check evasion for
exclusion of an item.  Generally, the policy has been to include as many items as
possible under the small-scale exemption scheme.”
22. On being specifically asked as to whether the Ministry satisfied itself that the
criteria/norms adopted presently for determining eligibility to Small Scale Industry
exemption was a fool proof device which would be available for and utilized by only
genuine small scale units, the Ministry replied:—
“Present eligibility criterion for Small Scale Industry exemption is in line with
Government policy on this issue. The policy can be changed if it is found that it
has not helped the Small Scale units.”

8
23. Seeking to know about the definition of a “Small-Scale Unit”, the Committee
enquired as to what actually constituted a small-scale unit for availing the duty
exemption,  the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) apprised in a written
note that:—
“Notification No.8/2002-CE dated 1.3.2002 was issued by the Government of
India in exercise of powers conferred by sub-section (1) of section 5A of the
Central Excise Act, 1944, granting excise duty concessions to goods manufactured
by the Small Scale Industry units.  This notification, inter-alia,  provided
exemption from payment of duty by Small Scale Industry units satisfying the
criteria laid down therein. The benefit of the notification was to be available
subject to a number of conditions, one of which was that the manufacturers
whose aggregate value of clearances for home consumption in the preceding
financial year did not exceed Rs. 3 crore were eligible for concessional rate of
duty/full exemption of duty.”
24. It was further stated therein that:—
“For the purpose of determining the aggregate value of clearances for home
consumption, the notification laid down that the following clearances, inter
alia, shall not be taken into account, namely:—
(i) branded goods manufactured and cleared on behalf of another person on
payment of normal rate of duty;
(ii) excisable goods which were either exempt or chargeable to nil rate of duty;
and
(iii) excisable goods exported to countries except Nepal and Bhutan.”
25. On the issue of definition of  “Small-Scale Industry”, the representative of the
Ministry of Small Scale Industry clarified  during evidence that:—
“There is a definition so far as Ministry of Small-Scale Industry is concerned.
The definition is the value of  plant & machinery should not be more than Rs. 1
crore, that is the general definition of Small Scale Industry. It is across only one
definition that is being used by the Ministry of Small Scale Industry for defining
the small-scale industries.  That should be taken into account while giving
exemption benefit.  That is very much necessary.”
26. On this issue, while observing that no uniform definition of Small Scale
Industries has been defined either in the Central Excise Act, 1944 or in the Central
Excise Rules, 1944, Public Accounts Committee (1992-93) in para 118 of their
32nd Report (10th Lok Sabha) had recommended:—
“The Committee note with surprise that although the excise duty concessions
are extended to the Small Scale Industrial Units by the Department of Central
Excise, the term ‘Small Scale Industrial Undertaking’ is nowhere defined in the
Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 or Rules made thereunder. The Committee
desire that the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 or Rules should be amended to
incorporate therein the definition of the term ‘Small Scale Industrial Undertaking’
on the same lines as in the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951.”

9
27. In their Action Taken Notes on the above recommendation of PAC furnished in
June 1993, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue – CBEC) stated as follows:—
“The Department of Small Scale Industries and Agro and Rural Industries is
the department concerned with all aspects of development of Small Scale
Industries and legislation in this regard. The Industries (Development and
Regulation) Act, 1951 already contains the definition of ‘small scale industrial
undertaking’ and the Central Excise exemption notification No. 1/93 – Central
Excise dated 28.2.1993 (which came into force on 1.4.1993) lays down that full
exemption from duty for clearances upto Rs. 30 lakhs and concessional rates
of duty upto Rs. 75 lakhs shall be applicable to a factory which is an
undertaking registered with the Director of Industries in any State or the
Development Commissioner (Small Scale Industries) as a small scale industry
under the provisions of the Industries (Development and Regulation)Act,
1951.
Besides, if a definition of small scale industrial undertakings is incorporated in
the Central Excise and Salt Act, 1944 or Rules made thereunder, it would
necessitate the determination of value of plant and machinery in such
undertakings. This is likely to give rise to disputes and litigation. Moreover, the
Department has no such expertise.
The objective of having minimum contact with the small sector units in
particular, would also get diluted.
In view of the foregoing, it is felt that it may not be necessary to incorporate
the definition of small scale industrial undertakings in the Central Excise and Salt
Act, 1944 or Rules made thereunder.”
28. The Committee then desired to know whether registration of small scale units
under the Industries (Development and Regulating) Act should be made mandatory
for availing exemption under the excise duty regime. The representative of the Ministry
of Small Scale Industry sought to explain this point  as follows:—
“As far as registration is concerned, it is a voluntary thing. So, small scale
industry sector, who are interested in registering themselves with the District
Industrial Centres (DICs) in the State Government, they can go for registration.
Many of the small scale industries which are functioning in our country are
not registered with the State Governments. As per the census conducted by
our Ministry, almost 85 percent of the small scale units functioning in our
Country are unregistered. But, at the same time, we would certainly like that
this benefit which is given under this general Small Scale Industry Exemption
Scheme should also be available to the 85 per cent of the small scale industry
sector which is functioning in the country at this point of time. That is the
reason we would not certainly like to make registration as a compulsory thing
for availing the benefit under the general Small Scale Industry Exemption
Scheme.”

10
29.  Explaining the reasons for non-registration of 85 percent of the Small Scale Industry
units, the representative of Ministry of Small Scale Industry stated during evidence:—
“During the survey that was conducted in 2001-02, one of the questions that
was asked from the Small Scale Industry units which were covered under the
census and the survey was why they were not registering themselves. As I have
told you, only 15 percent of the Small Scale Industry units have registered
themselves. There were very valid reasons that were given by the Small Scale
Industry people. One of the most significant replies was that they are not
interested in it. But what we feel is that they are basically apprehensive of the
harassment because of various labour related laws and various other inspectors
visiting their premises. That is one of the major factors.”
30. The Secretary Revenue, endorsing this view, stated that:—
“One could be that the very process of registration is leading to Inspector Raj in
the sense that you have to go to a particular person and get yourself registered.
That creates a certain hassle and certain amount of difficulties for the small scale
industries. That must have been the major reason why many of them are not
registering themselves.”
31. On the question of registration, the representative of the Ministry of Small Scale
Industry observed that the Central Excise Department can verify whether the unit is
small scale or not by getting some information over the investment criterion.
32. The Secretary Revenue, also informed in this regard that :—
“This issue was considered in the 1994 Budget. The Hon’ble Finance Minister at
that time said:
I am also proposing certain changes in the general Small Scale Industry
Exemption Scheme. At present, only the registered units are eligible for
concessions up to Rs. 75 lakh. Non-registered units can get exemption only up to
Rs. 30 lakh. I propose to do away with this distinction so that the small scale units
can get the exemption meant for them irrespective of whether they are registered
or not. This will satisfy one of the major demands of the small scale industries.”
33. Audit has observed that on the issue of the exclusion clause with regard to
branded goods, despite judicial pronouncements providing enough justification and
ground for inclusion of value of clearance pertaining to branded goods under the over
all ceiling of Rs. 3 crore, the Government has not so far made suitable amendment in the
Small Scale Industry notifications.
34. Submitting their explanation on Audit’s observation, the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue—CBEC) have clarified as below:—
“The decision of Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of M/s Food Specialities
Limited Vs. Government of India (referred by Audit), relates to valuation of
branded goods manufactured on job work by Food Specialities Limited for
Nestle’s Products (India) Limited, and as such it is not related to determination
of eligibility for Small Scale Industry exemption.

11
In fact, the question before the Hon’ble Supreme Court in this case was
whether the value for the purpose of levy of excise duty of the goods sold by the
respondent (Food Specialities Limited) to Nestle should include the value of the
trade marks under which the goods are sold in the market and whether the value
of such trade marks should be added to the wholesale price for which the goods
are sold by the respondent to Nestle’s products. In this regard, the Hon’ble
Court had observed that what were sold and supplied by the respondent were
goods manufactured by it with the trade markets affixed to them and it was the
wholesale price of such goods that must determine the value for the purpose of
assessment of excise duty.”
35. On being asked whether the policy of exclusion will continue, the Revenue
Secretary informed the Committee during the evidence:—
“I can only say that this is the current policy. The Board has appointed a group
which is looking at this entire thing. Of course, we will have to interact with Small
Scale Industries. We will have to interact with other Departments. We will have
to see if any changes need to be made.”
36. With regard to terms of reference of the Study Group, the Ministry of Finance
informed in a written note as under : —
“The terms of reference of the Study Group were as under: —
(a) Whether clearances of exported goods and branded goods ineligible for
SSI exemption should be included for determining eligibility limit; and
(b) Whether clearances of branded goods of other manufacturer can be
allowed exemption within the Rs. 1 crore exemption limit, and whether in
such eventuality, no exclusion should be made of the clearance of branded
goods for determining the eligibility.”
37. The Committee desired to know about the co-ordination mechanism between
the Ministry of Small Scale Industry and the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue—CBEC) in ensuring that undue benefits do not accrue to non Small Scale
Industry manufacturers under the garb of Small Scale Industry concession while
protecting the benefits due to a genuine Small Scale Industry manufacturers. The
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue—CBEC) informed that :
“Small Scale Industry exemption scheme is reviewed every year as part of
budget exercise. Ministry of Small Scale Industry every year sends proposal
to this Ministry, which are examined along with input from other sections.
Ministry of Small Scale Industry in their pre-budget suggestions on no occasion
had suggested that the present scheme of exclusion of certain clearances
should be withdrawn. Ministry of Small Scale Industry is mandated to frame
policy for development of the small-scale sector, and it is reasonable to expect
that while recommending fiscal concession for this sector, they would have
raised the issue of these benefits going to bigger units, if they felt that such a
policy is not desirable.”

12
38. In the light of the revenue leakages occurring due to this concession, the
Committee desired to know as to whether there is a need to amend the Central Excise
statute for providing a more objective and fair definition of a Small Scale Industry unit,
particularly from revenue perspective. The Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue— CBEC) replied as under:—
“The present scheme is easy to administer. It is based on computation of the
clearances, which are easily verifiable. Any other criterion will be difficult to
administer. For instance, if it is limited to the unit being registered by the
Directorate of Small Scale Industry, many units will be denied the benefit despite
being small. It is for this reason that the requirement of registration of a unit for
the purpose of availing of the exemption was dispensed with in the year 1994
budget. However, as the Committee has rightly observed in the present scheme
concessions can be availed of by units having a larger turnover. But this is in
accordance with policy of the Government followed until now. One way out may
be to include all clearances, whether it is for export or clearance of other
manufacturers brands. In this context, it will also be desirable to have the view of
the administrative Ministry. If the Committee feels that such inclusion will be in
the overall interest of the development of the small scale sector, the Department
will process it further for decisions at appropriate policy making levels”.

PART   II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
39. The Small  Scale sector has played a very important role in the socio-economic
development of the Country during the past five decades. It has significantly contributed
to the overall growth in terms of Gross Domestic Product (GDP), employment
generation and exports. The performance of the small scale sector has had a direct
impact on the growth of the overall economy. The Committee have been apprised about
the various measures initiated from time to time with the purported objective of
enhancing the productivity, efficiency and competitiveness of the small scale sector.
As a part of this policy, the Government has been providing calibrated fiscal incentives
by way of concession in payment of central excise duties on goods manufactured by
the Small Scale Industries. Excise duty concession to the small scale sector is stated
to have been formulated to help them harness their full capacity and enable their
growth in a steady manner.
[Sl. No. 1]
40. A general excise duty exemption scheme for small scale units has been made
operational for about last two decades providing concession from excise duty in respect
of clearances of specified excisable goods. Presently manufacturers, whose aggregate
value of clearances of goods for consumption within the country in the preceding
financial year do not exceed Rs. 3 crore, are eligible for full exemption from central
excise duty or concessional  rate of duty.  However, while computing the aggregate
value of clearances of excisable goods for determining the eligibility criteria, value of
clearances relating to the certain categories of goods are to be excluded viz.
(i) branded goods manufactured and cleared on behalf of another person on payment
of normal rate of duty; (ii) excisable goods which were either exempt or chargeable to
‘nil’ rate of duty; and (iii) excisable goods exported to countries except Nepal and
Bhutan.
[Sl. No. 2]
41. The Union Budget 2003-2004, while recognizing that there was a possibility of
misuse of the duty exemption facility extended to the small scale sector, deleted the
aforementioned clause relating to the exclusion of exempted goods or those cleared
with ‘nil’ rate of duty, making it includible in the computation of aggregate value of
clearances of goods for determining the eligibility criteria.  However, the clauses
relating to exclusion of clearances of branded and exported goods were not deleted
and consequently, the value of clearances of these goods continued to be excluded for
the purpose of reckoning the eligibility limit of  Rs. 3 crore.
The aforesaid decision of the Government to exclude the value of clearances of
branded goods manufactured and cleared on behalf of another person from the
aggregate value of clearances of excisable goods in determining the eligibility criteria
13

14
for availing duty exemption became the focal-point of the Audit paragraph, which has,
inter-alia, highlighted how this decision helped large scale manufacturers to avail
themselves of the duty exemption scheme intended for small scale units. Audit has
pointed out that 278 large manufacturers derived unintended benefit of duty exemption
to the tune of Rs. 40.41 crore during the period covered by audit review, that is,
1999-2000 to 2003-2004.  The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), while
responding to the audit findings, categorically stated that this was a deliberate policy
decision of the Government. Therefore, according to the Ministry, it could not be
construed that unintended benefits were caused to any entity.
[Sl. No. 3]
42. While explaining the evolution and background of the duty exemption scheme
for the small scale sector, the Revenue Secretary acknowledged the earlier
Observations of the Public Accounts Committee on this issue, wherein the practice of
large scale units deriving benefits meant for the small scale sector was criticized. He
informed that in compliance to the recommendation of the PAC, the general small
scale exemption scheme was modified in 1987, so as to deny the exemption where a
small unit affixed the brand name or trade name of a non-small scale unit. However, in
response to representations from the industry, this decision was reversed in 1989 so
as to exclude the clearances of branded goods, on which full duty was paid, while
calculating the eligibility limit. The purported rationale behind this was to encourage
ancilliarisation by large scale units and utilization of capacity by small scale units.
[Sl. No. 4]
43. According to the Ministry, the exclusion of value of dutiable branded goods
from the aggregate value of clearances of excisable goods was made on the ground
that: (i) in any case, excise duty at normal rate is paid on such goods, as they are
ineligible for SSI exemption;  (ii) inclusion of value of such goods is aggregate value
of clearances would affect capacity utilization of SSI sector; and (iii) there was also
no representation from the administrative Ministry that this particular provision
gives benefit to larger units also. The Committee consider this reply of the Ministry
rather tactical and evasive as it tries to circumvent the core issue, that is, by excluding
branded goods from the clearance value eligibility limit for SSI units, the benefit of
duty concession was indirectly allowed to large scale units and to units which were
not genuinely small scale. The Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) have neither done any evaluation of the revenue
implication of their decision nor have they received any feedback in this regard from
revenue field formations on the revenue leakages occurring due to this decision. In
the opinion of the Committee, such concessions may lead to wrongful/undeserving
availment without a proper mechanism of regular feedback from revenue field
formations. The Committee are of the considered view that since most of the units
under the small scale sector are actually tiny units, any fiscal concession including
excise duty exemption should be clearly focused  and there should not be any hidden
provision which gives benefit to non-small scale units. In this connection, the
Committee desire to be apprised of the quantum of revenue outgo arising out of the
exclusion clause in the scheme and the extent of its misuse by non-small scale units.

15
The Committee note that the exclusion of the value of branded goods manufactured
and cleared on behalf of another person from the aggregate value of clearances of
excisable goods reckoned for determining the eligibility of a unit for small scale
exemption was made as a deliberate policy decision of the Government with the
intention to facilitate ancilliarisation and capacity utilization and growth in the
small scale sector. However, examination of the subject by the Committee has
revealed that the Ministry of Finance have not conducted any study or analysis so
far to evaluate the impact of the small scale exemption scheme in achievement of
full capacity by the small scale sector or in development of independent brands by
this sector. Surprisingly, the Ministry of Finance have sought to shift the onus by
stating that the Ministry of Small Scale Industry, being the administrative Ministry
for all matters pertaining to small scale sector, have not commented adversely on
the efficacy or otherwise of fiscal concessions meant for small scale industry. The
Committee are not satisfied with such a stance of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) as, in so far as the duty exemption scheme for the small
scale industry is concerned, it is the Department of Revenue which is responsible
for administering the scheme and evaluate its impact and efficacy. The Department
of Revenue cannot thus shy away from their primary responsibility of reviewing the
working of sector- specific duty exemption schemes such as the one for small scale
units.  The Committee need hardly emphasise that extension of any incentive or
concession  should be followed up with a detailed evaluation to enable the Department
to assess the efficacy of such incentives in terms of growth of the targetted sector.
This becomes all the more relevant as  fiscal concessions are the balancing act
between the growth of the sector and the likely revenue loss that is to accrue to the
exchequer.  The Committee, therefore, desire that the Department of Revenue should
at least now undertake a comprehensive study/review to ascertain the benefits,
pitfalls, shortcomings and instances of misuse noticed in the working of the
exemption scheme, in its present form, at the ground level with a view to ensuring
that the policy of the Government subserves its purpose. This feedback will form a
vital input for the Ministry in the formulation of any effective strategy for programme/
policy support to promote the growth of the small scale sector.  The Committee
would like to be apprised about the steps taken in this regard and the corrective
measures including statutory changes initiated as a result thereof.
[Sl. No. 5]
44. The Ministry of Small Scale Industry is the administrative Ministry for
all matters pertaining to small scale sector and it has been stated that there have
been requests from them  to the Ministry of Finance for increasing the exemption
limit as well as the eligibility limit for duty concession. The Committee are not
surprised that the Ministry of Small Scale Industry, being the nodal agency for the
development of small scale sector in the country, has been seeking more duty
concessions from the Ministry of Finance. However, the Committee would once
again emphasize that formulation of foolproof duty exemption schemes for the
small scale sector is the exclusive responsibility of the Department of Revenue and
they have to ensure that no provision/clause remains in the scheme which causes
benefit to non-small scale units, albeit indirectly.  In this context,  it may be

16
appropriate to appoint an Inter-ministerial Group comprising of representatives
from both Ministries of Small Scale Industries and Finance to monitor the
administration of fiscal concessions to small scale sector, identify the loopholes in
their implementation and to adopt a more balanced approach in the formulation of
policies for the small scale sector.
[Sl. No. 6]
45. The Committee note that there is no definition prescribed in the Central
Excise Act, 1944 or Rules for defining a small scale industry. The Ministry of
Small Scale Industry has a prescribed definition for  small scale industries that the
investment in plant and machinery should not be more than Rs.1 crore. The
Committee had in their 32nd Report (10th Lok Sabha) recommended that the Central
Excises and Salt Act, 1944 or Rules made thereunder should be amended to
incorporate the definition of the term “small scale industrial undertaking” on the
same lines as in the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. The Ministry
of Finance (Department of Revenue) have not however accepted the recommendation
on the plea that if a definition of small-scale industrial undertaking is incorporated
in the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 or rules made there under, it was likely
to give rise to disputes and litigation and the objective of having minimum contact
with the small sector units would also get diluted. It was thus felt that it may not be
necessary to incorporate the definition of small scale industry in the Central Excises
and Salt Act, 1944 or Rules made thereunder. This argument of the Ministry does
not appear to be convincing.  The Committee feel that giving a clear-cut definition
for small scale undertaking would actually help to prevent the misuse of the
exemptions.  The Committee, therefore, recommend that there should be one uniform
definition of small scale industries both from revenue and development perspective,
based on the criteria of investment limit in plant and machinery as well as turnover.
The Committee would like to be informed of the conclusive action taken in the
matter.
[Sl. No. 7]
46. The Committee have been informed that almost 85 percent of the small-scale
units functioning in our country are unregistered and  their registration is not
compulsory either for availing duty exemption.  Explaining the reasons for non-
registration of small scale industries, the Ministry of Small Scale Industry have
stated that small scale units are basically apprehensive of the hassles that may
arise out of the operation of labour laws etc. and inspectors from different
Departments visiting their premises. The Revenue Secretary also endorsed the
view that the very process of registration was leading to  procedural hassles for the
units. Thus, while reviewing the small scale exemption scheme in 1994-1995 Budget,
it was decided to do away with the requirement of registration with the Directorate
of Industry for the purpose of excise duty exemption. The Committee, however, do
not share this apprehension that registration ipso facto will lead to harassment of
the small units or create hassles for them.  In fact, registration will seek to ensure
the genuineness of the unit availing excise duty exemptions. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) should

17
reconsider the feasibility of making registration compulsory for availing exemptions
under the excise duty regime, as it will obviate the need for any verification of the
status of the unit by Central Excise Authorities. Needless to emphasise, the process
of registration should be made as simple and transparent as possible with usage of
information technology.
[Sl. No. 8]
                                           PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
N
EW DELHI; Chairman,
19 April, 2007    Public Accounts Committee.
29 Chaitra, 1929 (Saka)

ANNEXURE  I
MINUTES  OF  THE  EIGHTEENTH  SITTING  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2005-2006)  HELD  ON  19TH  JANUARY ,  2006
The Committee sat from 1630 hrs. to 1730 hrs. on 19th January, 2006 in
Committee Room "A",  Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Dr. R. Senthil
3. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
4. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
5. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
7. Dr. K. Malaisamy
8. Shri V . Narayanasamy
9. Shri Jairam Ramesh
10. Prof.  R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Officers of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Smt. Mohua Chatterjee — ADAI
2. Dr. A.K. Banerjee — Director General
3. Shri Jayanti Prasad — Principal Director
18

19
Representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue)
1. Shri K.M. Chandrashekhar — Revenue Secretary
2. Shri M. Jayaraman — Chairman (CBEC)
3. Shri V .P. Singh — Member
4. Smt. Chitra Saha — Member
5. Shri Gautam Ray — Joint Secretary
6. Shri Ramtirath — Commissioner
Representatives of the Ministry of Small Scale Industries
1. Shri A.S. Nikhade — Addl. Development Commissioner & Economic Advisor
2. Shri Praveen Mahto — Addl. Economic Advisor
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the
sitting. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of following
two draft Reports:
(i) *** *** *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** *** *** ***
3 . *** *** *** *** ***
4. The Chairman then informed the Members that the sitting has been convened
also to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Depart-
ment of Revenue) on Paragraph 4.3 of Audit Report No. 11 of 2005 (Central Excise)
pertaining to "Concession meant for small-scale industries availed of by large scale
manufacturers". Thereafter, the Officers of the C&AG briefed the Committee on the
specific points arising out of the Audit Para. The representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) and Ministry of Small Scale Industries were then
called and the Committee commenced their oral evidence.
5. To begin with, the Revenue Secretary gave an overview of the Government's
policy on the subject and explained the various points arising out of the Audit Para.
Members then raised some queries on the issues brought out in the Audit Para. To
certain queries, for which the witnesses could not give satisfactory reply, the Hon'ble
Chairman directed the Revenue Secretary to furnish the requisite information in writ-
ing at the earliest.
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE  II
MINUTES OF THE TWENTY FIRST SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2006-2007) HELD ON 19TH APRIL, 2007
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. on 19th April, 2007 in Room No.
"53", Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra  —  Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri Raghunath Jha
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
6. Shri Kharabela Swain
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri R.K. Dhawan
9. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Dr. K. Malaisamy
 S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Shrarma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary
5. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
Officers of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri  P.K. Kataria — Pr. Director of Audit (RC)
2. Shri  Nand Kishore — Pr. Director of Audit (AB)
3. Ms. Sudha Krishnan — Pr. Director of Audit (DT)
4. Shri  Jayanti Prasad — Pr. Director of Audit (INDT)
  5. Ms. Subhashini Srinivasan — Pr. Director of Audit (Railways)
20

21
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the  Members to the sitting of the
Committee. Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the following draft
Reports:—
(A) Draft original Reports on the following subjects:
(i)  Concession Meant for Small Scale Industries availed of  by Large Scale
Manufacturers;
(ii) Allotment of land to Educational Institutions by Delhi Development
Authority;
(iii) Performance Audit of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA);
(B) Draft Action Taken Reports on Action Taken by the Government  on the
following  Reports:
(i) 7th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to "All India Institute of
Medical Sciences (AIIMS)";
(ii) 21st Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to "Excessess over V oted
Grants and Charged Appropriations (2003-2004)";
(iii) 24th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to"Kendriya Vidyalaya
Sangathan";
(iv) 29th Report of  PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to"Status of improvement of
efficiency through the  'Restructuring’ of the Income Tax Department."
The Chairman invited suggestions of the  Members on the Draft Reports. After
discussing the contents of the draft Reports in brief, the Committee adopted the same.
3. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise these Reports in the light
of verbal discussion and consequential changes arising out of factual verification by
the Audit or otherwise and present the same to Parliament.
4.  As the term of the Committee ends on 30th  April, 2007, the Chairman apprised
the Members of the work done by the Committee in their current term. He stated that
during the present term, the Committee have finalized twenty Report (11 Original and
9 Action Taken), out of which thirteen Reports have already been presented and the
remaining seven will be presented in the current Session of Parliament. He expressed
his thanks to all the Members for the co-operation extended by them in making this
possible and hoped that this momentum would be carried through to the next
Committee.
5. The Chairman specially expressed his thanks to the Members namely,
Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy, Shri Madan Lal Sharma, Shri  K.V . Thangkabalu
and Shri R.K. Dhawan, for their co-operation and contribution in the successful working
of the Committee. These Members will not be part of the Public Accounts Committee in
the next term beginning from 1st May, 2007.

22
6. On behalf of the Committee, the Chairman placed on record their appreciation
of the Officers/Staff of the Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the Committee for their
hard work and dedication in rendering Secretarial assistance to the Committee.
7. The Committee also expressed their thanks to the C&AG of India and his team
for providing assistance to the Committee.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
PARA 4.3 OF THE REPORT OF THE COMPTROLLER AND  AUDITOR GENERAL
OF INDIA FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH, 2004 (NO. 11 OF  2005), UNION
GOVERNMENT (INDIRECT TAXES—CENTRAL EXCISE & SERVICE
TAX) RELATING TO “CONCESSION MEANT FOR SMALL SCALE
INDUSTRIES A V AILED OF BY LARGE SCALE
MANUFACTURERS”
Notifications dated 1 March 2000/2001/2002, inter-alia, stipulated that manufacturers
whose aggregate value of clearances for home consumption in the preceding financial
year did not exceed Rs.3 crore were eligible for concessional rate of duty/full exemption
from duty. Value of clearances relating to (i) branded goods manufactured and cleared
on behalf of another person on payment of normal rate of duty, (ii) excisable goods
which were either exempt or chargeable to nil rate of duty and (iii) excisable goods
exported to countries except Nepal and Bhutan, were to be excluded.
The Union Budget 2003-04, had recognized that while Small Scale Exemption Scheme
aimed at providing a distinctive advantage to labour—intensive units, there was
possibility of misuse of this facility in certain sectors. Consequently the eligibility limit
of Rs.3 crore under general small scale industries scheme was rationalised and the
clause relating to exclusion of exempted goods for purpose of computation of total
clearances was deleted. Value of clearances pertaining to exempted goods or goods
cleared with nil rate of duty was therefore includible for purpose of determining eligibility
criterion of Rs.3 crore with effect from 1 April 2003. However, the relevant clauses
which provided for exclusion of clearances pertaining to branded and export goods
were not deleted and consequently value of those clearances continued to be excluded
for purpose of reckoning the eligibility limit of Rs.3 crore even after 1 April 2003.
It was however, seen that in the case of M/s. Food Specialities Limited Vs. Government
of India, the Supreme Court ruled that where goods are produced with customer’s
brand name under his quality control, it does not mean that the customer is the
manufacturer {1985 (22) ELT 324}. Despite judicial pronouncements providing enough
justification and ground for inclusion of value of clearance pertaining to branded
goods under the over all ceiling of Rs.3 crore, Government has not so far made suitable
amendment in the SSI notifications.
Audit check of  278 manufacturers in 58 Commissionerates of Central Excise availing
the benefits of the notification ibid revealed (between January 2003 and March 2004)
that the total value of excisable goods cleared ranged between Rs.3 crore and Rs.86
crore. The continued retention of exclusion clause relating to branded and export
goods thus enabled these large manufacturers to derive unintended benefit of duty
exemption/concession which amounted to Rs.40.41 crore during the financial years
from 1999-00 to 2003-04.
23

24
The Ministry stated (December 2004) that the exclusion of the export and branded
goods from the purview of aggregate clearances of Rs.3 crore was a deliberate policy
decision of the Government.
The fact remains that this ran contrary to the declared intentions of the Government
through Budget, which enabled the large scale manufacturers to derive undue benefit
of duty concession.
GIPMRND—1839LS—31-05-2007.

39
PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING AUTHORISED AGENTS:—
Sl. No. Name of Agent
ANDHRA PRADESH
1. M/s/ Ashok Book Centre, Benz  Circle, Vasavya Nagar, Vijayawada- 520006.
(A.P.)
BIHAR
2. M/s/  Progressive Book Centre, Zila School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramna,
Muzaffarpur-842002 (Bihar)
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem House, Connaught Place, P.B. No. 1113,
New Delhi-110001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari Colony, Kingsway Camp, Delhi-110009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency, IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double Storey,
New Delhi-110024 (T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd. P-23, Connaught Circus, New Delhi-
110001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India Corporation, Publishers, Importers  &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar, Delhi-110052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3, Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd. 2/18, Ansari Road, New Delhi-110002
(T. No. 23262515).
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80, Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts, Delhi-
110054 (T.No. 23911966).
11. M/s. Seth & Co., Room No. 31 D, Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110006. (T. No. 23866768).
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol Bagh,
New Delhi-110005.
14. M/s. Standard Book co., 125, Municipal Market, Connaught Place, P.B.
No. 708, New Delhi-110001 (T. No. 23411919).
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd., A/15-17, Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service, C-D/123/C, Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110034.

40
MADHYA PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28, Malviya Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A, Chitra Bazar, Khan House, P.B. No. 2621.
Mumbai-400002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India), 649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp. 2nd Dhobi
Talao Lane, Mumbai-400002.
PONDICHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative Assembly Department, Pondicherry-605001.
TAMIL NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies, 123, Third Street. Tatabad, Coimbatore-
641012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37, Royappettah High Road, Chennai-600014.
UTTAR  PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad (U.P.)
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair Building, Hazrat Ganj, GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226001.