EIGHTY-THIRD REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
CLEANLINESS  AND  SANITATION ON
INDIAN  RAILWAYS
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 20-02-2009
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 20-02-2009
LOK SABHA SECRETARIA T
NEW DELHI
February, 2009/Magha, 1930 (Saka)

PAC No. 1885
Price: Rs. 67.00
© 2009 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business
in Lok Sabha (Thirteenth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager,
Government of India Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2008-2009) ................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................... (v)
REPORT
PART I
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS
I. Introductory ............................................................................ 1
II. Audit Review .......................................................................... 2
III. Gist of Audit Findings ........................................................... 2
IV . Plans and Policies .................................................................. 3
V. Inadequacy  of  Standards,  Action  Plan  and  Norms  on
Cleanliness .............................................................................. 7
VI. Sanitation and Amenity Upgradation in Railway Stations ... 8
VII. Multiplicity of Departments involved in Maintaining
Cleanliness .............................................................................. 10
VIII. Insufficient Expenditure on Cleanliness ................................ 14
IX. Insufficient Amount Spent on 'Passenger Amenities' .......... 15
X. Policy on Waste Management .............................................. 17
XI. Cleanliness of Railway Stations ............................................ 20
XII. Inadequate Dustbins .............................................................. 20
XIII. Upgradation of Infrastructure and Amenities on the Railway
Stations/Model Stations ......................................................... 22
XIV . Green Toilet Scheme ............................................................... 23
X V . Inadequate V ats and Waste Disposal System ...................... 24
XVI. Garbage Scattered Outside V at .............................................. 25
XVII. Inadequacy of Washable Aprons .......................................... 26
XVIII. Inadequacy of Drains and Sewerage System ....................... 27
XIX. Ineffective Utilisation of Machines ....................................... 27
XX. Inadequate Toilets and Urinals .............................................. 28
XXI. Inadequacy of Drinking Water .............................................. 29
XXII. Deficiencies in Manpower Management on Stations .......... 30
(i)

XXIII. Contracts—Poor Contract Management ............................... 31
XXIV . Unauthorised use of Station Premises .................................. 32
XXV . Deficient Monitoring Mechanism .......................................... 33
XXVI. Cleanliness of Trains ............................................................. 34
XXVII. Deficient Infrastructure in Trains .......................................... 35
XXVIII. Deficient Implementation of Clean Train Station Scheme .... 36
XXIX. User Perception and Awareness ............................................ 37
XXX. User Perception ...................................................................... 39
XXXI. Grievance Redressal of Passengers ....................................... 40
XXXII. Catering And Hygienic Food ................................................. 40
CHAPTER-II ................................................................................................ 42
PART II
Recommendations and Observations .................................... 44
ANNEXURES
I. Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2008-2009) held on 17.01.2008.............................................. 56
II. Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2008-2009) held on 28.08.2008.............................................. 59
III. Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2008-2009) held on 30.01.2009.............................................. 61
PAGE
(ii)

PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE  (2008-09)
**Shri Santosh Gangwar — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Furkan Ansari
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri P. S. Gadhavi
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
***9. V acant
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
*11. Shri K. S. Rao
12. Shri Sita Ram Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
15. Shri Arun Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Raashid Alvi
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri B. K. Hariprasad
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Prof. P. J. Kurien
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3.  Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary-II
(iii)
* Elected w.e.f. 17th December, 2008 vice Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh resigned his seat
in Lok Sabha on 11th November, 2008.
** Elected w.e.f. 17th December, 2008 vice Shri Brajesh Pathak ceased to be a Member of
Committee consequent upon his election to Rajya Sabha.
*** Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra resigned his seat in Lok Sabha w.e.f. 18th December, 2008.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chariman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee,
do present this Eighty-third Report relating to "Cleanliness and Sanitation on
Indian Railways'' on report of the C&AG of India for the year ended 31st March,
2006 (No. 6 of 2007 — Performance Audit), Union Government (Railways).
2. The Report of the C&AG of India for the year ended 31st March, 2006
(No. 6 of 2007), Union Government (Railways) Performance Audit was laid on the
Table of the House on 14th May, 2007.
3. The Committee took the evicence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Railways (Railway Board) on the subject at their sittings held on 17th January, 2008
and 28th August 2008. The Committee considered and finalised this Report at
their sitting held on 30th January, 2009. Minutes of the sittings from Annexures to
the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body
of the Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the officers of the
Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) for the cooperation extended by them in
furnishing information and tendering evidence before the Committee.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter  by the Office of the comptroller and Auditor General of
India.
7. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached
with the Committee.
     N
EW DELHI; SANTOSH GANGWAR,
17 February, 2009 Chairman,
28 Magha, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

1
REPORT
"CLEANLINESS AND SANITATION ON INDIAN RAILW AYS"
PART  I
I. INTRODUCTORY
Railways are the most preferred mode of transport for the masses in India, running
more than 9,000 trains, reaching 8,000 stations and handling approximately 1.4 crore
passengers per day. One of the commitments of the Railways in its 'Citizen's Charter
on Passenger Services' is to provide safe and dependable train services to the
passengers and ensure adequate passenger amenities in transit and at railway stations,
which includes provision of clean and hygienic surroundings both at railway stations
and in trains. The Charter also lays down Railways' commitment towards setting up
a responsive and effective grievance redressal machinery for time bound resolution
of complaints and grievances of the passengers. Railway Board had also constituted
a working Group to work out constructive suggestions for cleanliness at stations
and on trains. The Group suggested (September, 2002) an action plan for development
of infrastructure, tools, delegation of powers and budget allocation, public-private
participation, education of users, modification in coaches, amendments in rules and
improving staff motivation. 'Operation cleanliness' was launched on 15th August 2002
and a Task Force was constituted to address the issue of assessment of cleanliness
gadgets and manpower. Audit has conducted a view of the steps taken by the
Railways and have brought out their findings on the implementations of the policy
measures in the various Zones.
2.  As regards the organizational structure, a number of directorates in Railway
Board are responsible for dealing with the issue of cleanliness in the Railways. While
Mechanical and Engineering directorates are responsible for maintenance and
cleanliness of coaches in service, the Health directorate is responsible for cleanliness
of a few railway stations through Chief Health Inspectors (CHI).  However, the overall
cleanliness at railway stations is the responsibility of Chief Commercial Managers in
zonal railway Headquarters and Divisional Railway Managers in Divisions, under
the overall direction of the Commercial directorate.
3. Keeping in view the topicality of the subject the Committee deemed it fit to
probe this subject with urgency and profundity. Also keeping in view the magnitude
and scale operations of Railways, the Committee in the light of Audit findings and
evidence tendered before them examined this subject. The Commitee in this
connection also took the initiative to call for suggestions from interested public and
Organizations by way of Memoranda on the subject of ‘Cleanliness and Sanitation
in Indian Railways'. A gist of the issues chalked out by the Committee for giving
suitable recommendations have been brought out in Chapter II of this Report.

2
4. Railways as an organization have rendered valuable service by catering to
transportation needs of millions of passengers in India. Keeping the track record of
the Indian Railways in mind, it is all the more important that Railways polish their
image and manifest a cleaner and more sleek picture to the world at large without
compromising with their basic function and assigned role.
II. AUDIT REVIEW
5. The review on Cleanliness and Sanitation on Indian Railways was carried out
with a view to assess whether:—
●the plans and policies framed to maintain cleanliness and management of
waste generated in railway stations and in trains were adequate;
●the cleanliness and sanitation measures undertaken by Indian Railways at
railway stations were adequate and effective;
●cleanliness and sanitation measures undertaken by Indian Railways in trains
were adequate and effective; and
●the feedback mechanism was adequate and useful in improving the system.
III. GIST OF AUDIT FINDINGS
6. The Audit has noticed the following deficiencies in the cleanliness and sanitation
activities of the Indian Railways:—
●Multiple departments were involved in cleanliness activities leading to lack
of coordination among them and rendering the cleanliness efforts ineffective.
As such, accountability did not go with responsibility;
●passenger amenities such as toilets and urinals, drinking water, seating
arrangements and waiting halls were not commensurate with the quantum of
passengers using them and were poorly maintained. This was further
complicated by the failure to prevent unauthorised persons from entering
station premises;
●inadequate training compounded with a high incidence of absenteeism among
safaiwalas in stations maintained departmentally, resulted in deficient
performance;
●inadequate mechanism to monitor the work of contractors for outsourced
cleanliness activities including pest control and bed linen washing contracts
led to compromise in quality of work done;
●the cleaning of coaches in coaching yards and EMU car sheds was found
ineffective as the infrastructure and resources were inadequate and the
quality of supervision was deficient. Infrastructure in trains namely, dustbins
and toilets, were also inadequate;
●railways neither had any mechanism to assess or control the level of
expenditure on maintenance of cleanliness in stations and in trains nor a

3
policy on waste management. Large quantities of garbage were found lying
in station premises due to inadequate infrastructure, deficient waste collection
and disposal mechanism;
●inadequate provision of water supply, washable aprons, drains and sewerage
system and ineffective utilisation of machines were major handicaps in
providing a clean and hygienic environment in the railway premises;
●the clean Train Station scheme introduced for en route cleaning of trains
was largely ineffective due to a number of deficiencies in its implementation;
●measures adopted to create user awareness of utilising existing amenities at
stations and in trains were inadequate. User abuse of facilities was not
monitored effectively. Further, user perception was not being harnessed to
bring about improvements in the system; and
●railways had neither developed any standards as benchmarks nor formulated
any norms at Zonal level for ensuring cleanliness and sanitation in railway
stations, trains and tracks.
7. This Report is based on Chapter II of C&AG's Report No. 6 of 2007 (Performance
Audit), Union Government (Railways) relating to "Cleanliness and Sanitation on
Indian Railways" for the year ended March 2006. The Committee have dealt within
the succeeding paragraphs, the Audit findings and observations as well as other
relevant issues and the position explained thereon by the Ministry of Railways by
way of oral and written evidence.
IV . PLANS AND POLICIES
8. Audit scrutiny revealed inadequacy of standards, action plan and norms on
cleanliness, obsence of an unified department responsible for cleanliness and
involvement of multiple departments, insufficient expenditure on cleanliness and
inadequacy of policy on waste management.
9. On being asked as to whether Railways have prepared any roadmap for
comprehensively addressing the issue of maintenance of cleanliness and sanitation
in railway premises,  the Ministry in a note stated as under:—
"The year 2007-08 is being observed as Cleanliness Year. An action plan
has been devised and the zonal railways have been instructed to implement
the same so as to make visible improvement in the standard of cleanliness
at Railway stations to mark the cleanliness year. Some of the basic features
of the action plan are as under:
(A) Cleanliness and Sanitation at Stations:
I. Development of infrastructure
(a) Washable aprons to be provided with high pressure jets
(b) Waste disposal system
(c) Effluent treatment plant at major stations
(d) Provision of adequate number of dustbins

4
(e) Sewer lines/septic tanks be rehabilitated  by modern technology
(f) Building of more toilets under the 'Pay & Use' toilet scheme.
II. Development of tools & Plants and Equipments
(a) More and more modern tools, plants and equipments to be used
(b) Scrubber and flipper for platform surfaces and circulating areas
(c) Vacuum operated sweeping machines to be used at large stations.
III. Mechanised cleaning process through specialized agencies at all A-I, A & B
category stations
IV . Awarding  of contracts
(a) Rag picking contract
(b) Garbage disposal contract
(c) One time cleaning contract
(d) Pest control contract
V. Cleaning and maintaining of toilets by private parties
VI. Delegation of powers to DRMs for purchase of all tools and plants, awarding
pest control contracts, one time cleaning contract and specialized contracts
involving large component of mechanized cleaning.
VII. Fixation of responsibilities—Station Suprintendent/Station manager will be
responsible for cleanliness and the supervisors of all A1 and A category
stations shall be under the administrative control of station Manager/Station
Superintendent.
VIII. Launching of campaigns to educate the users about social hygiene.
IX. Launching  of inter division cleanliness competition scheme
X. Launching of special cleanliness drives
10. Based on the above guidelines zonal  railways depending on the category of
stations, habits and number of the passengers and other factors have made out
comprehensive plans for ensuring satisfactory level of cleanliness at the stations on
their system.
(B) Cleanliness and Sanitation at Hospitals/Health Units:
Besides the maintenance of cleanliness and sanitation in the hospital premises,
the medical department  also takes  care of  the biomedical waste management. The
cleanliness and sanitation is done by the regular Safai Karamcharis of the Railways
under the supervision of the Health Inspectors and  designated Medical Officers.
Measures to fill up the vacancies of Safaiwalas and  Health Inspectors are being
done by  creation of posts for Health Inspectors (His), through Railway Recruitment
Board and on contract system. Plans for mechanization  of hospital cleaning is also
being proposed.

5
(C) Cleanliness and Sanitation in Railway Colonies:
Sanitation and Cleanliness of railway colonies is done by safai Karamcharis
supervised by Health Inspectors and designated Medical Officer of the Division.
Sanitation of certain colonies are also being done on contract system  as there is
shortage of sanitary staff.
(D) Cleanliness and Sanitation  in Trains and depots:
Rake cleaning in the depots is done during maintenance and cleaning  of depot
premises by going in  for  machanized cleaning arrangements.
11. Contesting the Audit observation regarding inadequacy of standards, action
plan and norms on cleanliness, member, traffic Railway Board during the course of
evidence informed  the Committee as under:—
"One of the issues that has been raised from time to time is regarding there
being a lack of policy on the part of the Railways to tackle this problem of
cleanliness. I do not think that it is true because a considerable amount of
time and effort is devoted both at the Railway Board level in framing policy
and at the level of the General Managers and Divisional Railway Managers
in actually insuring that the stations are kept clean. I think we have to view
the problem in terms of the sheer numbers  that we are dealing with,  and
our passenger traffic on Indian Railways is  growing today at  the rate of 6-
7 per cent. Of this, 3.5 per cent is in the case of suburban traffic and the
growth is  nine per cent in the case of long distance Main Express and
other traffic. In  certain parts of India, particularly in the Southern States
and in Eastern India, the growth rate of passenger volumes during the current
year has reached 14 per cent as compared to the comparable  period last
year. So, it is a challenge really for the Railways."
12. According to Audit a Task Force was constituted to address the issues of
assessment of cleanliness gadgets  and manpower. In this connection, the Committee
desired to know about the recommendations made by  the aforesaid Task Force. The
Ministry while elaborating on the matter responded as under:—
"On 15th August, 2002, Hon'ble Prime Minister announced launching of 'Operation
Cleanliness' on Railways. A Task force was constituted following  which a working
Group was set up to identify the problem areas and suggest remedial measures. The
important recommendations of the Task Force both for stations and for trains are as
under:—
1. Development of infrastructure
(a) Repair/cleaning of internal drains by modern technology;
(b) Pathways for movement of grabage trolleys/fork-lifts;
(c) Re-design of toilets in coaches;
(d) Mechanisation of washing in depots; and
(e) Washable aprons with build in high pressure jets.

6
2. Development of Tools and Plants and Equipments
(a) Scrubber and flipper for platform surfaces and circulating area;
(b) High pressure jets for cleaning of toilets on the trains and washable
aprons;
(c) Soft chokage and hard chokage cleaning  machines for cleaning of
drainage;
(d) Closed container/trolleys and dustbins  of appropriate design and size
for keeping garbage;
(e) Vaccum operated sweeping machines to be used at large stations for
sweeping and scrubbing;
(f) For cleaning of the toilets at intermediate stations, better and sleek
design machines; and
(g) Rail cleaning machines (mounted on rails).
3. Floating of contracts of mechanized cleaning.
4. Pay & Use toilets.
5. Delegation of powers to DRMs for all items relating to sanitation.
6. Aggressive campaign for  educating  the users.
7. Improving the motivation of safaiwalas and strengthening the supervision
of safaiwalas.
8. Launching drives against persons making premises dirty.
13. In pursuance, Board made an Action Plan both for stations and for trains and
circulated to all Zonal Railways for preparing Railway wise Action Plans. The following
guidelines were also issued to all Zonal Railways:—
(a) Delegation of powers to all DRMs for mechanized cleaning, pest control
etc.;
(b) Deployment  of contract labour  for cleaning activities at stations;
(c) Invoking of penal provision of the Railway Act to prevent dirtying of
the station premises;
(d) Mechanised cleaning contracts for undertaking cleaning of trains;
(e) Redesign of the toilets of coaches for providing modular toilets and
controlled discharge toilets;
(f) Publicity and education of users; and
(g) Mechanised cleaning  of  drains.
The Zonal Railways have progressed broadly along the above mentioned
guidelines issued by Board. Additional General Managers on each Zonal
Railway have been designated as the  nodal officers for co-ordinating and
monitoring all the aspects of operation cleanliness."

7
14. Further, explaining the steps taken on their part in the pursuance of  this matter,
the Ministry inter-alia  informed as under:—
“Moreover, the year 2007-08 is being observed as Cleanliness Year. An action
plan has been issued to Zonal Railways so as to make visible improvement
in the standard of cleanliness at railway stations to mark the cleanliness
year. Recently a meeting of AGMs/SDGMs of Zonal Railways  was held
wherein  the issues regarding provision of mechanized cleaning at all A & B
category stations, provision of Health Inspectors (round the clock at A-1
category stations, one or more Health Inspectors at A category stations
and one Health Inspector at B category stations), administrative control of
the station Superintendent/Station Manager  over the Inspectors/
Supervisors  of all departments, provision of cash imprest to Station
Superintendent/Station Managers for cleaning approach to stations and
activation of SIG Group at A and B category stations. Earlier guidelines have
also been issued in this regard.”
V . INADEQUACY OF STANDARDS, ACTION PLAN AND NORMS ON
CLEANLINESS
15. Audit highlighted that the Railways were yet to adopt any standards or
performance indicators (i.e. the expected quality of the outcome) for  any cleanliness
related activity carried out in stations and in trains against which the actual
performance could be judged. Standards for supervision were also not prescribed
for any cleanliness related activity on stations and in trains. In this connection the
Audit inter-alia  observed that Cleanliness was largely viewed as a secondary activity,
subservient to other activities such as maintenance, as was done in the coaching
yards, where while certifying  a train as  fit  for next journey, the certificate provided
was limited to maintenance of coaches and  the cleanliness activities carried out  were
not certified.
16. When asked about any norms/guidelines that have been laid down  for the
hawkers, tea vendors and waiters at railway stations premises/in trains for maintaining
cleanliness/hygiene in respect of selling eatables, the Ministry replied hereunder:
"Detailed guidelines for disposal of garbage were circulated to all Zonal
Railways vide Board's letter No. 97/TG.III/613/1 Pt. date 22.6.1999 which
stipulates the  following:—
(i) in all pantry cars, big size plastic dustbin should be placed at a
convenient location;
(ii) railway should arrange provision of big size plastic bag and place  the
same in dustbin. In case of licencee operated services, this will be
supplied by the licencees;
(iii) all waste material arising out of  preparation of food, if any, in pantry
car should be collected  in the dustbin;
(iv) all bearers/waiters will collect the waste material like emply casserole
containers, mineral water bottles/pouches, glasses, cutlery, napkins etc.

8
from the respective  coaches after making service to the customers and
will collect the wastes in the same container. They should under no
circumstances throw any material either in the vestibules or in the
coaches. They should also not throw waste material from the running
trains;
(v) the waste material so collected in the plastic bag should  be secured
properly. The bag should be unloaded at every crew changing point
where station Safaiwala will be available for collecting  of the same;
(vi) in case Safaiwala is not available near the pantry car during the half of
the  train at a particular station, pantry car staff will unload the  bag
and dump it in the dustbins provided on the platform;
(vii) the  station Safaiwala will collect these bags along with other garbage
of the station and will dispose them off in the dustbins provided
outside the station from where it  would be cleared  either by railway
conservancy staff or the municipal corporation staff as the case may
be; and
(viii) it would be the responsibility of the catering Inspector in-charge in case
of departmental units and the licencees in case of private operated units
that adequate quantity of plastic bags are available all the  time with
the  pantry car staff.
The above instruction has also been reiterated to Indian Railway Catering and
Tourism Corporation Limited (IRCTC) vide Board's  letter. No. 2007/TG.III/613/3
Garbage dated 14.09.2007 to issue  necessary instructions to IRCTC staff as well as
the licensees to follow the above guideline scrupulously. IRCTC have been advised
that  panal  action for non-compliance of the  guidelines may be contemplated."
VI. SANITATION AND AMENITY UPGRADATION IN RAILWAY STATIONS
17. The Committee very strongly feel that tangible and visible changes in the
maintenance of cleanliness and sanitation of platform, trains, tracks, pantry cars, in
and around the Railway stations must be brought about in order to enhance the
functionality and professionalism that is expected of a big organization like Railways.
Responding to a specific query in this regard, the Ministry elucidated their position
as under:
"Tangible change in aspects of cleanliness in short term can be effected
only by managerial processes of collection and disposal of garbage/
sweeping and through regular cleaning of the area. However, for the long
term, following action for fixed infrastructure is also planned (i) For making
platform surface more amenable to mechanical cleaning, use of materials
providing smoother surface finish, is planned. In this regard, instructions
for use of Kota stone flooring in concourses and main platform at important
stations handling large volume of traffic already exist. For other platforms,
platform surface are planned to be improved by use of materials like vacuum
dewatered concrete surface, etc.; (ii) For keeping the tracks in station area

9
Server-1/E/Report LS\187ls\187ls
clean, washable aprons are planned to be provided in phases at all A-1,
A & B category stations where trains originate/terminate or have halt/
stoppage in the morning hours; and (iii) Works of improvement/development
in and around Railway stations, i.e. in circulating areas of important stations
are undertaken every year under various schemes like Model stations and
Modern stations. This helps in maintenance of the station area neat and
clean.
More intensive supervision of cleanliness and sanitation by creation of
additional posts of Health and Malaria Inspectors, increasing mechanization
in cleaning and sanitation activities, increase cycles of cleanliness, intensive
public campaign by involvement of SJAB, Scouts and Guides, other
voluntary organizations to increase awareness, joint inspections etc. are few
of the activities through which time bound tangible changes in maintenance
of cleanliness and sanitation are planned to be brought about.
With specific reference to cleanliness and sanitation in train, Indian Railways
have initiated the following measures and Zonal Railways have been directed
to adopt the following schemes in the current year itself."
(i) Intensive Mechanized cleaning of rakes in the coaching depots
Comprehensive guidelines have been issued to the Railways to go in for
mechanized Cleaning of coaching rakes during maintenance in the depots
through outsourcing by professional agencies in the field.
(ii) Automatic Coach Wash Plants
Automatic coach wash plants are being installed at nominated coaching
depots for efficient and faster coach exterior cleaning.
(iii) Clean Train Station Scheme
In order to bring about a quantum jump in enroute cleaning of trains a 'Clean
Train Station' scheme has been in vogue under which mechanized cleaning
attention is provided to nominated trains during their schedule stoppage at
such stations. 25 such clean trains stations exist & 6 more shall be
commissioned shortly.
(iv) On Board Housekeeping Service (OBHS)
A comprehensive 'On Board House Keeping Service' scheme has recently
been launched by the Railways. Adequately trained staff provided by a
professional agency shall escort prestigious Mail/Express Trains and carry
out frequent. On Board Cleaning Coach Toilets in compartment using
efficient tools/implements and also collect wastage/garbage in waste bags.
The waste so collected shall be disposed off at nominated enroute stations.
(v) Pest and Rodent Control
Instructions have been reiterated to all Zonal Railways to ensure effective
Pest & Rodent Control mechanism in Trains through professional agencies.

10
Directives have also been issued to Railways to launch special drives &
depute officials for incognito checks in trains. Four major Railways have
also been advised to go in for contracts through limited tenders restricted
to four leading firms in the field of pest and rodent control..........”
18. On being inquired as to whether the available passenger amenities were
commensurate with the ever-increasing passenger traffic, the Ministry informed as
under:—
“Passenger amenities at stations are provided as per stipulated norms based
on the category of railway stations and volume of passenger traffic handled.
Recently, all Zonal Railways have confirmed that passenger amenities as
per norms have been provided at all railway stations except at one station
on Western Railway. Deficiency in passenger amenities at this station is
being made good by Mumbai Rail Vikas Corporation (MRVC).
Augmentation of the passenger amenities to handle increasing passenger
traffic is a continuous process and works are taken up for the provision of
additional passenger amenities at station for handling increased traffic as
and when required.”
VII. MUL TIPLICITY OF DEPARTMENTS INVOLVED IN MAINTAINING
CLEANLINESS
19. The Audit pointed out that the responsibility of maintenance of cleanliness
on railway premises rested with a number of departments viz. Commercial, Medical,
Engineering, Mechanical, Electrical etc. While the Engineering department looked
after the construction, repair and maintenance of civil engineering works, the cleaning
of station premises and coaching yards rested with Medical, Commercial and
Mechanical departments. Of the 298 stations (A, B and C categories) selected for
review in audit, Medical department was responsible for maintenance of cleanliness
on 128 railway stations and Commercial/Operating department was responsible for
maintenance of cleanliness on 160 railway stations. Six stations were jointly maintained
by the Commercial and Medical departments while four stations were maintained by
the Engineering department. Thus, there was no rationale behind some of the stations
being looked after by Medical and some by Commercial departments and the
responsibilities were vested with these departments historically.
20. The Audit observed that owing to a wide spectrum of responsibilities assigned
to functionaries like Chief Health Inspector/Health Inspector (CHI/HI), Station
Masters/Managers etc. Cleanliness was a very low priority area.
21. The Committee desired to know from the Ministry their view on this audit
observation and the Ministry while contesting this Audit observation stated as
under:—
"Cleanliness and Sanitation on Indian Railways is being given due
importance and is not secondary to any other activity. All efforts are being
made to achieve the objective laid down in the Citizen's Charter with respect
to cleanliness."

11
22. Audit have very emphatically brought out the lack in clarity of approach and
focus with regard to cleanliness in Indian Railways and they have observed that
due to absence of standards, cleanliness initiatives were carried out without
accountability and the Railways had no mechanism to assess the effectiveness of
the various measures. Absence of a comprehensive action plan at the apex level led
to efforts towards cleanliness remaining as isolated efforts, with sporadic instructions
being issued from time to time without being cohesive. Thus, the planning itself was
deficient and resulted in poor cleanliness and sanitation on the Railways.
23. As regards the organizational map of different departments of Indian
Railways concerned with maintaining and monitoring cleanliness and sanitation
activities as well as its centralized monitoring, the Ministry furnished the following
information:—
Zonal Level
Additional General Manager (Nodal officer)
Chief Commercial Manager Chief Mechanical Chief Medical Director
(CCM) Engineer (CME) (CMD)
Chief Rolling Stock
Engineer (Coaching)
Divisional Level
Additional Divisional Railway Manager (Nodal officer)
Senior Divisional Senior Divisional Chief Medical Supdt.
Commercial Manager Mechanical Engineer (CMS)
(Sr. DCM) Carriage &
Workshop
(Sr. CME C & W)
Divisional Commercial Assistant Mechanical Senior Divisional
Manager (DCM) Engineer Carriage & Medical Officer
Workshop (AME C&W) (Sr. DMO)
Assistant Commercial Chief Depot Officer Assistant Health
Manager (ACM) Officer (AHO)
Senior Section Engineer Chief Health
Carriage & Workshop Inspector (CHI)
(SSE C&W)
Junior Engineer Carriage &
Workshop (JE C&W)

12
Station Level
Station Manager/Station Supdt.
Commercial Inspectors Health Inspectors
Safai Muccaddam Safai Muccaddam Jamadaar
Safaiwala Safaiwala Conservancy
Safaiwala
24. Audit highlighted that at the lowest level, cleanliness activities were carried
out by safaiwalas. However, there was no unified cadre of safaiwalas and the various
departments controlled their respective cadres of safaiwalas. Even at the Railway
Board level, different directorates were responsible for different areas of cleanliness
related activities and schemes. This would affect policy making and development of
a comprehensive action plan at the apex level including budgetary considerations.
25. The Committee taking a serious view of Audit's observation regarding heavy
absenteeism, poor work ethics and lack of motivation among the Safaiwalas, desired
to know about steps taken to upgrade the morale of these Safaiwals as these form a
very work force at the lowest level. The Ministry in a note explained their view as
under:—
“Heavy absenteeism poor, work ethics and lack of motivation among the
safaiwalas is due to multiple factors viz. lack of promotional avenues, low
self esteem, lack of variety in work environment, repetitiveness of job, shift
duties, etc. Following steps have been taken to upgrade the morale of these
safaiwalas:
Counseling by supervisors on the job, development of training module and
periodic training provision, awards and incentives for outstanding
performers, improvement in work environment by increasing mechanized
cleaning, better implements and equipments viz. floor scrubber and dryers,
floor washing and scrubbing machines, high pressure jet cleaner, wet and
dry mops, vacuum cleaners, manual sweeping machines etc.”
26. While submitting their case before the Committee on this subject member traffic
Railways admitted as follows:
“We have found our existing infrastructure of the Safaiwallas at the stations
and on trains a little weak, we have strengthened that, in addition to
whatever we had.”
27. The Railways while contesting the Audit observation stated that instructions
had been issued in 2001 regarding the administrative arrangements. They also stated
that exclusive Health Inspectors were to be provided at important stations under the
administrative control of the Station Manager and that service improvement groups
had been formed for ensuring upkeep of passenger amenities. However, these efforts
were not adequate as even five years after the issue of these orders, coordination
problems continue.
28. While responding to a specific question regarding the available mechanism or
system for centralized monitoring of cleanliness and sanitation at prescribed standards

13
at railway stations, on trains and in coaching yards, the Ministry in a written note
stated as under:
“The subject of cleanliness is reviewed by the ADRM at the divisional level
and AGM at Headquarters level periodically. The system is functioning at
both the levels. The issue of cleanliness is dealt by the Railways at Zonal/
Divisional level. Security Personnel of Division/Zone are also associated at
proper levels.”
29. The Committee desired to know about the initiatives taken recently by ADRMs/
AGMs for maintaining cleanliness and sanitation at the stations and in trains and
also the mechanism put in place for the issues such as:
(i) periodical inspection of all major railway stations and prestigious trains;
(ii) periodical review of improvement in passenger amenities regarding cleanliness
and sanitation; and
(iii) coordinate multiple departments involved in cleanliness and sanitation
activities.
30. The Ministry in this regard informed as under:—
“Additional General Manager at Zonal level, Additional Divisional Railway
Manager at Divisional level and Station Manager/Station Supdt. at station
level are the nodal officers/supervisors who coordinate with various
departments responsible for sanitation and cleanliness.
Frequent cleanliness review meetings at Zonal level are conducted by
Additional General Manager where all Divisional Railway Managers and
concerned Head of Departments are required to participate. The deficiencies
and failures are discussed and the remedial measures are formulated.
Cleanliness audit inspection conducted in the previous months is reviewed
and the shortfalls highlighted in the report are taken into account for remedial
action.
Additional Divisional Railway Managers nominate stations for periodic
inspection by different branch officers along with supervisors of all
departments and take corretive action. Targets are fixed for inspection of
Divisional officers and check list has been supplied for items related to
cleanliness and also on trains.
Service Improvement Groups (SIG) exist at various levels  viz.  Zonal,
Divisional and station, which conduct periodical review of improvement in
passenger amenities including cleanliness and sanitation at different
categories of stations.”
31. Keeping in view the importance and urgent need for maintaining cleanliness
and sanitation, and in order to establish a unified command amongst various
functionaries, the Committee specifically desired to know from the ministry whether
it is not necessary to create a post of full time Members in the Railway Board for

14
exclusively looking after the work relating to cleanliness and sanitation. The Ministry,
in this connection offered their view as under:—
"Cleanliness and sanitation in railway premises and trains is a subject which
pertains to four major departments, viz. Commercial, Mechanical Engineering,
Medical and Civil Engineering. All the four departments are equally
responsible for maintaining cleanliness in the railway premises/trains in their
respective field in close coordination. It may also be stated that the
responsibility of cleanliness has been appropriately distributed among Board
Members and they are looking after their respective areas of cleanliness
with utmost focus and control over the department under them. Moreover,
with the creation of a new post of Member exclusively for cleanliness and
sanitation, there shall be overlapping/duplication of functions with the other
Board Members which itself will defeat the very purpose for which the post
is created. It is therefore, not considered desirable to have a post of full
time Member in Railway Board for cleanliness and sanitation."
32. The Committee wanted the Ministry to further apprise them regarding their
view on the creation of a Nodal agency that acts as a coordination and facilitation
authority with plenary powers to intervene and instruct all the four concerned
departments of Railways for achieving sanitation targets. The Ministry while
presenting their view on the matter responded as under:—
"Taking into consideration the vastness of the area of cleanliness activities,
the work has been properly distributed among the different directorates at
the Board's level and departments at the Zonal level to ensure proper focus
on their respective areas. This will also help the different Directorates/
Departments to carry out the activity of cleanliness of their respective fields
more effectively. This will also be helpful in rendering each Directorate
accountable for the cleanliness of their assigned area. While being
responsible and accountable to their assigned areas, these Directorates work
in close coordination with each other. As such, the need of a nodal agency
is not considered desirable.
Routine checks and occasional cleanliness drives are also conducted for
strengthening the cleanliness machinery and also for identifying
shortcomings, if any, which are appropriately addressed to."
VIII. INSUFFICIENT EXPENDITURE ON CLEANLINESS
33. Audit review has revealed that The Working Group on cleanliness suggested
creation of a separate minor head under Operating Expenses—Traffic to book all the
expenses of operating nature for cleanliness and housekeeping of stations, platforms,
concourses and other areas. However, the expenditure on various cleanliness
activities was booked to different accounting heads depending upon the department
undertaking the activity. The review further highlighted that the Railways did not
have a mechanism to either assess the extent of expenditure incurred on cleanliness
or to monitor this activity. As a result, budgetary provisions were also not coordinated
and there was no overall financial plan to tackle cleanliness related issues.

15
34. In their background note, the Ministry have stated that inorder to mark the
year 2007-08 as cleanliness year, guidelines have been issued to all Zonal Railways
so as to make visible improvement in the standard of cleanliness. In this connection
the Committee enquired as to what is the total fund earmarked/allotted, zone-wise
for observing 2007-08 as "Cleanliness year" vis-a-vis amount of expenditure incurred
there against. The Ministry responded as under:—
"No separate fund has been earmarked/allotted for observing 2007-08 as
‘cleanliness year’. The expenditure has to be incurred from out of the
allotment given in the existing budgetary heads to the Railways. The
expenditure on maintaining and monitoring cleanliness and sanitation on
Indian Railways is normally booked under the following revenue demands,
viz.,
Demand — Subhead — Sanitation (on arrangement for
No. 4 520 — sanitations i.e. drains, sewers,
sewage installations, etc.)
Demand — Subhead — Other Operating expenses
No. 8 530
Demand — Subhead — Other expenses including station
No. 9 290 sanitation (sanitary staff, sanitary
stores, etc.)
Demand — Subhead — Sanitation in Railway Colonies
No. 11 310
Subhead — W ater Supply  Sanitation
560 (Residential & Welfare
buildings) (civil & electrical
engg.).
Apart from above, expenditure of capital nature is also incurred for affecting
improvement in the state of cleanliness.
zone-wise allotements made under the revenue and capital heads in 2007-08
are enclosed.
The actual expenditure incurred on above account will be available only
after the close of the financial year."
IX. INSUFFICIENT AMOUNT SPENT ON 'PASSENGER  AMENITIES'
35. Audit has highlighted that the infrastructure such as station buildings,
platforms, foot over bridges, booking offices, washable aprons, drains water supply,
waiting hall/shed, seating arragement etc., which impact the cleanliness levels is
booked to plan head 'Passenger Amenities'. Even under this Plan head, the Railways
spent Rs. 256.24 crore during 2005-06, equivalent to only 1.5 per cent of the total
capital expenditure incurred and 1.69 per cent of the earnings from passenger services.
Thus, the Railways had spent a very small amount for providing infrastructure and
amenities to the passengers on railway stations. This resulted in inadequate

16
infrastructure, amenities and resources which had an adverse impact on the
cleanliness and sanitation levels of railway premises.  In addition, no separate imprest
was provided with Station managers for purchase of cleaning items. Wherever
required, these had to be purchased from the regular imprest meant  inter alia for a
variety of miscellaneous expenditure not necessarily related to cleanliness.
36. As regards any resource crunch for maintaining and monitoring cleanliness
and sanitation on Indian Railways the ministry categorically responded as under:—
"No, There is no resource crunch as far as the requirement for maintaining
and monitoring cleanliness and sanitation on Indian Railways is concerned."
37. While informing the Committee about the financial measures taken by the
Ministry towards the cause of cleanliness and sanitation, Chairman Railway Board
informed as under:—
"We have decentralized even the financial powers to the DRMs. Earlier, the
DRMs had no power to sanction the work, but, now a DRM can sanction a
work up to Rs. 30 Lakh; and the GM can sanction a work up to Rs. 50 lakh
for a particular station on passenger amenities."
38. The Committee further enquired about the investible profit available with Indian
Railway for the current fiscal year and what percentage of this profit has been
allocated for Sanitation and Cleanliness on Indian Railways. The Ministry explaining
their position on the matter informed as under:—
"Railway is likely to generate Rs. 19,992 crore of investible surplus in BE
2008-09. This, however, may vary due to the impact of implementation of
recommendations of the VI CPC. This surplus is utilized for replacement of
assets on age come condition basis to ensure safe travel and for meeting
investment expenditure on the Rail network. The investible surplus available
after meeting working expenses and appropriation to various funds etc. is
utilised for financing plan actitives. The investment is made on various plan
heads under Demand No. 16 — Assets-acquisition, Construction &
Replacement. The plan heads cater to major activities like Construction of
New Lines, Gauge Conversion, Doubling, Traffic Facitlites, Bridge Works,
Workshops, Staff Quarters, Amenities for Staff , Passenger Amenities etc.
Works relating to sanitation and cleanliness are provided for as part of
various projects under many of these planheads, e.g. for construction of
staff quarters there are provisions for construction of drains, toilets,
improved flooring, water supply, roads etc. Similarly under passenger
amenities, individual projects include provision for better flooring for
platforms, drains and water supply at stations etc. The accounting procedures
in vogue provide for budgetary allocations and booking of accounts on
the planheads. The accounts of expenditure on specific items of sanitation
and cleanliness, which form part of the projects under various planheads,
are not amendable for separation. Therefore, it may not be possible to work
out the percentage of surplus being allocated specifically for sanitation and
cleanliness. In addition Railways will also be spending about Rs. 947 crore

17
in 2008-09 (BE) on maintaining 'Sanitation and Cleanliness' related activities
from the Ordinary Working Expenses (OWE) of the Railways. Apart from
above, the Railways have also undertaken works worth Rs. 2,606 crore for
creating further facilities enabling higher level of cleanliness, on which about
Rs. 20 crore will be spent during the current year. Though the amount likely
to be spent on creating additional cleanliness related facilities is very nominal
in the current year i.e. 0.1% of the investible surplus, the same will increase
substantially in the coming years considering the cost of the projects
undertaken."
X. POLICY ON W ASTE MANAGEMENT
39. Audit Review of selected stations over all zonal railways revealed that Railways
did not have any mechanism to realistically assess the quantum of garbage generated
at any of these stations.
40. It was observed that garbage disposal was far below the garbage generated in
most of the important stations as shown in the following table:—
Name of the Zonal No. of Estimated quantity of Quatum Difference
station R ailway passengers garbage generated of garbage (col. 4-5)
per day per day @ 64 gms disposed (metric
per passenger per day tonnes)
(Metric tonnes) (Metric
tonnes)
12 3 4 5 6
New Delhi NR 390000 24.96 15.00 9.96
Delhi NR 320525 20.51 10.00 10.51
Mumbai CST CR 310415 19.87 0.50 19.37
Ahmedabad WR 69755 4.46 0.35 4.11
41. Consequently, large quantities of garbage were either not reaching the vats or
were strewn all over the place in the surrounding areas and around the vats at any
given point in time creating an unhygienic atmosphere within the station premises.
Large quantities of garbage were removed sporadically once in a while. Moreover, in
the absence of any assessment of quantum of garbage generated, the infrastructure
provided for garbage collection and arrangements made for garbage disposal in railway
stations were ad hoc and inadequate.
42. As per the Municipal solid Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules 2000,
solid waste generated should be segregated into biodegradable and non-
biodegradable by providing separate bins for garbage collection. With increasing
use of various kinds of packaging material for food items including plastic,
segregation becomes all the more imporant. Thus, it is necessary that the terms and
conditions of the catering contracts bind the contractors to adhere to these laws
failing which penalty would need to be levied. Audit review of the standard conditions
of contracts of Indian Railways Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) revealed

18
that there were no provisions regarding either proper disposal or segragation of waste
before its disposal. Further, no penalty was prescribed for improper disposal of waste.
Inspection of railway stations over various zonal railways also revealed that except
in Gwalior and Jhansi, there was no mechanism to segragate biodegradable and non-
biodegradable waste in any railway station, including at the four metropolitan cities
i.e. New Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai. All kinds of garbage recyclable and
non-recyclable were collected in the same bins, in violation of extant rules.
43. On being enquired as to whether the Railways have any policy on waste
management the Ministry categorically replied as under:—
“At present there is no policy on waste management.”
44. The Committee specifically asked as to why it did not occur to the Ministry to
have a comprehensive policy on Waste Management till Audit had pointed out given
the fact that Railway generates tonnes of garbage every day. The Ministry explained
their case as under:—
“There is no comprehensive policy on Waste Management on Indian
Railways. However, there is a well defined system for collection of garbage
at centralized locations at stations and its final disposal to nominated
municipal bins/landfill areas in coordination with the local municipal bodies.
In order to achieve better results integrated system of  management of wastes
is being adopted through the following methods:—
(a) Development of proper infrastructure
(b) provision of additional dustbins and large sized polythene bags in
garbage bins
(c) Provision of incinerators at important stations
(d) Regular removal of garbage
(e) Effluent treatment plants for recycling
(f) Garbage disposal contracts
(g) Strengthening of monitoring and supervision of waste disposal
(h) Minimization of waste generation through public awareness
campaign.”
45. In response to a question regarding the deficiencies in the maintenance of
cleanliness and management of waste generated in railway stations and in trains in
the context of Audit observations and the measures taken thereafter to rectify the
shortcomings in this regard, the Ministry informed as under:—
“The Indian Railways cover over 8000 stations and carry around 16 million
passengers daily with clientele of varied socio economic backgrounds.
Cleanliness at a railway station is primarily governed by the social
environment around it and the civic sense of the users. Some of the basic

19
problems in the areas of cleanliness at stations are as under:
(i) The infrastructrue for cleanliness i.e. drainage waste disposal and
logistics has not kept pace with the increased volume of passenger
traffic;
(ii) The tools and implements used in upkeep of amenities and cleanliness
are still very rudimentary;
(iii) Safaiwalas are highly demoralised and there is heavy absenteeism, poor
work ethics and lack of motivation;
(iv) Inadequate supervision;
(v) Rail users are not aware of social hygience; and
(vi) Shortcomings in the management of wastes.''
46. In this connection, the Ministry further intimated:—
"The measures adopted for improving the standard of cleanliness at stations
are as under:
(i) Introduction of one time cleaning of muck and repair of the drains
sewerage line etc.;
(ii) Introduction of washable concrete aprons;
(iii) Mechanised cleaning;
(iv) Provision of more and more 'Pay & use' toilets;
(v) Special cleaning drives are launched from time to time;
(vi) Clean hour concept i.e. during a notified lean period entire station
premises are thoroughly cleaned on daily basis;
(vii) Deployment of Health Inspectors round the clock exclusively for station
sanitation at all important stations;
(viii) To motivate safaiwalas, special uniforms and protective gears are
provided;
(ix) For proper handling and easy disposal, large sized polythene bags are
kept in the garbage bins;
(x) Rag picking contracts have also been awarded;
(xi) Educating travelling public through publicity campaigns and frequent
announcements;
(xii) Cash imprest to Station Managers/Station Supdts. for executing petty
works of repairs and maintenance and procurement of consumables
related to sanitation;
(xiv) Legal action is taken under section 145 of the railways Act 1989 against
any person found engaging in acts like littering, throwing garbage,
defecating at important places etc;

20
(xv) Regular supervision to monitor cleanliness through Service Improvement
Groups (SIGs) operating at supervisory and officers level;
(xvi) Financial powers to DRM to execute various sanitation related
activities; and
(xvii)integrated system of management of wastes is being adopted through
the following methods;
(a) Development of proper infrastructure
(b) Provision of additional dustbins and large sized polythene bags
in garbage bins.
(c) Regular removal of garbage
(d) Effluent treatment plants
(e) Garbage disposal contracts
(f) Strengthening of monitoring and supervision of waste disposal
As regards cleanliness in trains Railways have been directed to make special efforts
to improve the standards of cleanliness and hygiene in trains with focus in the under
noted areas:
(a) Enroute cleaning and garbage removal at 'Clean Train Stations' (CTSs)
through mechanized cleaning during stoppage of nominated long distance
passing through trains.
(b) Comprehensive guidelines have also been issued to the Railways for
arranging on board housekeeping and cleanliness in trains through long term
contracts with professional agencies."
XI. CLEANLINESS OF RAILWAY STATIONS
47. The Audit review pointed out that the railway stations are maintained either
departmentally through safaiwalas or through outsourced agencies. Effective
manpower management and contract management are, therefore, essential. This apart,
the railways should have a mechanism to prevent unauthorised use of stations as
well as an effective monitoring mechanism in place to ensure quality in all cleanliness
related activities.
48. Audit review revealed deficiencies in waste collection and disposal mechanism,
inadequacies in the provision of infrastructure such as water supply, washable
aprons, drains and sewerage system etc. inadequacies in the provision of passenger
amenities such as toilets and urinals, drinking water, seating arrangements and waiting
halls, inadequate training compounded by a high incidence of absenteeism among
safaiwalas, deficiencies in contract management, widespread unauthorised use of
station premises and a deficient monitoring mechanism as brought out in the following
paragraphs.
XII. INADEQUATE DUST BINS
49. Dustbins are primary garbage collection points within the station premises. It
is necessary that dustbins are provided in adequate numbers and at convenient

21
locations so that passengers/users could use them conveniently. Railway Board,
however, had not prescribed any scale for providing dustbins in stations. The Audit
highlighted  that:—
●Requirement of dust bins was not assessed by railways in 76 per cent
(250 out of 329 stations) of the stations reviewed. Even where assessments
were made, the dust bins were far short of the assessments.
●Thus, only 25 stations out of a total of 329 stations reviewed were provided
with dustbins as per the assessed requirement. Further, there were lacunae
even in the assessments. The criteria adopted for assessment of number of
dustbins was not clear in most of the stations. For instance, the requirement
of dust bins in Rai Bareily having an area of 42,713 sqm and Guntur having
an area of 43,238 sqm. catering to 4,525 and 18,530 passengers per day was
assessed as one and two respectively.
●Forty-two stations including Saharanpur, Unnao, Siwan, Raipur etc. did not
have a single dustbin on the date of joint inspection.
●A comparison of total area in the station premises, number of platforms and
the dust bins provided on 19A category stations handling more than 35,000
passengers per day revealed that the number of dustbins provided was
grossly inadequate. There were no laid down norms for providing dustbins
on railway stations and the number of dustbins per 10,000 passengers ranged
from as low as less than 0.17 in Bardhaman to 28.50 in Chennai Central.
Similarly, one dustbin was catering to an area ranging from 246.39 sqm in
Hazrat Nizamuddin station as compared to 21,769 sqm in Bardhaman.
●Dust bins were found in broken/defective condition, overflowing with
garbage or were not located at convenient places in a large number of
stations. The frequency of emptying the dustbins was also not laid down.
●During the joint inspections, garbage was found lying scattered all over the
premises, on platforms, in circulating areas and in other open areas in
62 stations. Further, it was seen that garbage was being thrown on the
platforms by the users and subsequently swept out and thrown on the side
of the track by the safaiwalas in 73 stations and there was no proper
mechanism of collecting the same for disposal. This included important
stations such as New Delhi, Hazrat Nizamuddin, Delhi, Bhubaneshwar,
Rourkela, Durgapur, Ranchi, Bhopal, Mysore, Hubli, Ahmedabad, Ratlam,
Jammu Tawi, Guwahati, Tirupati, Dadar etc.
●Signages indicating the location of dustbins were not available on any of
the stations selected in the sample.
50. It may be seen from the above that inadequate provision of dustbins and their
poor condition rendered the process of garbage collection from its point of origin
ineffective.

22
XIII. UPGRADATION OF INFRASTRUCTURE AND AMENITIES ON THE
RAILWAY STATIONS/MODEL STATIONS
51. During the course of the evidence held on the subject, Chairman, Railway
Board explaining about the concept of Model station, stated as under:—
"Each DRM has been instructed to pick up, year-wise, five stations so that
those stations are developed under the touch and feel items; to have best
of the passenger amenities, cleanliness, ciruiting areas. The stations would
be so developed that when a man enters the stations, he would see the
difference.''
52. Elaborating on the subject, he further informed as under:—
"Since 2005-06, the emphasis has been on improving the stations. There
has been a positive approach as to how to involve the DRMs and the
General Managers to look at the stations improvement. In this, while
passenger amenity is one part of it, of course, the part of cleanliness is a
very important issue which needs to be further addressed. Now on this issue,
as you rightly mentioned also, we went in for outsourcing of these activities
because we found that using the old process of cleaning the platforms or
the track in the platform areas is difficult. They are very dirty because of
the night soil falling there. It was causing difficulty even for the staff to
work.
We have picked up 22 stations as world-class stations which we would now
like to develop to world-class standards. So, at least that would make a
beginning so that we would be able to set a standard for us.''
53. The Committee further wanted to know if the Ministry had a clear road map
with regard to upgradation of Railway stations. The Ministry in a written reply stated
as under:—
"593 stations have been selected as model stations for the purpose of
providing upgraded passenger amenities. These stations include all A-1, A
and B category of stations and also some other stations which belong to
other categories. The desirable amenities viz. Retiring room, waiting room,
public address system/computer based announcement system, electronic
train indicator board, public phone booths, water coolers, standardized
signages etc. are required to be provided at these stations depending upon
the category of the station. So far, 259 stations have been developed as
model stations.
In addition, during the year 2006-07, 334 stations and 303 stations during
2007-08 have also been selected as modern stations. So far, 242 stations
have been developed as modern stations. The thrust areas to be given
attention at these stations are:—
(i) Improvement in the facade of the station building, (ii) Improvement in
the circulating area so as to ensure proper entry and exit of vehicles etc;
(iii) A lighting tower at an appropriate place to be installed for proper

23
illumination; (iv) Improved modern, cost effective lighting arrangements at
the platforms, concourse etc; (v) Renovated water booths; (vi) Renovated,
modern, Pay & Use toilets; (vii) Good Waiting and Retiring Rooms with
modern furniture; (viii) Good passenger guidance system including signages
and coach indication boards; (ix) Improvement to the passenger service;
(x) Improvement of booking and enquiry offices to give them a facelift;
(xi) Lighting of booking office, the queuing area in front of booking windows,
it may also be clarified that there are many stations which figure both in the
list of model and modern stations.''
54. Without establishing a time limit for a project strictly adhering to it, many
ambitious projects have not seen the light of the day. Keeping this fact in mind, the
Committee were eager to know the target date that has been fixed for developing or
completion of at least minimum five model World class railway stations in first hand
in the country and what action was being taken to select more number of stations
per Railway Division for being developed as world class stations. The Ministry
explained their case as follows:—
"Twenty three (23) stations have been identified for development into World-
class Stations. Ministry of Railways' endeavour is to appoint the
concessionaire for redevelopment of New Delhi Railway Station during the
year 2008-09 and have the Master Plan and Feasibility Reports prepared for
four other stations, namely Patna, Agra, Amritsar and Secunderabad during
the year 2008-09 so that selection of concessionaire for these stations can
go ahead. Other stations will be taken up in a phased manner, thereafter. As
far as New Delhi Railway Station is concerned, the Architect and technical
Consultant has been working on the project since July, 2007 and would
complete their assignment in a month's time. The Financial Consultant and
the Legal Adviser are being appointed. The pre-qualification process for
shortlisting of eligible bidders for the financial bid has been initiated. This
is being done as per the model request for Qualification (RFQ) document
issued by Ministry of Finance. The process for financial bid is targeted to
commence in April, 2008 and is likely to be completed in July-August, 2008.
Stations other than the 23 already identified would also be considered for
development as world-class Station based on their potential to be so
developed."
XIV . GREEN TOILET SCHEME
55. The Audit examination conspicuously brought out that the Integrated Railway
Modernisation Plan (2005-10), envisaged development of an environmental friendly
coach will a Controlled Discharge Toilet System (CDTS). As per the plan a target of
8,000 coaches was set for fitting CDTS during the five-year period 2005-10,
subsequently scaled down to 5,000 coaches. As against this, only 261 coaches had
been turned out with CDTS (March 2006). At this rate, the Railways are unlikely to
achieve the target of 5,000 coaches by the end of 2010. Complete shift to Zero
Discharge Toilet System is also remote.

24
56. Informing the Committee about the new ventures taken up by the Ministry
regarding inclusion of Bio degradable toilet systems to tackle the problem of night
soil, the Chairman, Railway Board informed as under:—
"There are cases where the staff refused to work in that area because they
were not prepared to touch the night soil or get into a problem. Therefore,
we knew that the only solution was to go in for mechanized method of
cleanliness. While, on one ground we have started providing CC aprons,
concrete aprons so that they can be washed soon after the train departs.
But even that itself is a very costly one. It is not very much liked. Now, we
have just stared the first lot of coaches. We have done it in one train, that
is, Prayagraj, where we have biodegradable toilets. The means, the night
soil, which falls inside the bin of the toilet, actually gets converted into
water because of bacterial effect. It gets converted into water and semi-
solid, which can be later on taken off and the water can be drained off. This
is, in fact, a trial. It has already been found successful."
57. Elaborating on the subject, he further informed as under:—
"Now, we are starting it in a second train between Rewa and Nizamuddin.
The train has started now. It is an overnight trains concept where we will
be using this. The idea is to propagate this system more and more so that
finally we do away with the system of scavenging. It is because the biggest
problem of the Indian Railways has been night soil because the stink in the
stations is because of night soil falling on the track. It will take some time,
no doubt. But at least effort has been started and we would like to go in a
bigger way now for providing this facility on the train."
58. On being inquired as to how the Railways are going to implement the green
toilet project on all  the trains in the country and also about the funds allocated for
the purpose, the Ministry in a written note stated as under—
"In line with the Environment protection policy of the Government, Indian
Railway have planned to install environment friendly green toilets project
on all passenger coaches.
One trial rake of New Delhi-Rewa Express has been fitted with
'Biodegradation' type Green Toilet. Other designs/technology of
environment friendly toilets system is also under study of the Ministry of
Railways, Field trials are being conducted and performance shall be
monitored for design validation before considering universal implementation
on all Indian Railways Coaches.
Funds to the tune of Rs. 2450 crore have been sanctioned to fit "Green
Toilets" in 24500 coaches to start with"
XV . INADEQUATE V ATS  AND WASTE DISPOSAL SYSTEM
59. Vats are secondary collection points where the garbage collected from dustbins
and garbage offloaded from trains is dumped for further carting away to landfill sites.

25
There are usually located in the circulating areas inside the station premises. Garbage
disposal from vats on stations was largely outsourced by Indian Railways. Out of
276 A, B and C category stations selected for examination by the Audit; garbage
collection was outsourced in 145 stations. Out of the remaining stations, while
disposal in some stations was carried out by the local municipal authorities, in a
large number of stations, there was no formal mechanism for disposal of garbage
and the garbage collected from the stations was dumped in open areas outside the
station premises.
XVI. GARBAGE SCATTERED OUTSIDE VAT
60. Audit pointed out that the quantity to be handled  was not prescribed in the
garbage disposal contracts in 107 out of 145 stations selected for examination. Penal
clauses for deficient performance were not incorporated in outsourced contracts of
26 stations. Even where the penalty clauses were included and penalties imposed,
the amounts were too meager in some railways to act as an effective deterrent for
deficient performance. Some of the issues highlighted by Audit in this regard are as
under.
l The frequency prescribed for garbage collection was not followed and
garbage was not collected completely from vats with the result that heaps
of garbage were found scattered near the vats on various stations including
Delhi station. Cases were also noticed, where the frequency of grabage
disposal was just once/twice in a week and even this was not adhered to by
the contractors. the only record maintained to monitor the contractual work
was a Log Book, which did not contain any indication of the processes and
frequency actually followed and the quality of work done. For instance, at
Ludhiana the garbage collected was dumped by the contractor within the
station premises, though the contract clearly specified that it should be
disposed off at a place at least five kms. away from the station premises.
l V ats were not provided in 78 out of 276 stations visited. Where vats were
not provided within the station premises, the garbage collected from the
dustbins had to be taken to the municipal vats outside the station premises.
However, in the absence of regular collection of garbage from these vats the
approach road to stations remained dirty and littered with garbage. Sixty per
cent of the respondents to the survey also opined that the approach roads
were generally dirty.
l The entry points for vats were found blocked by carts, porters and vehichles,
which prevented collection of garbage in dust bins and vats for final disposal
in 18 stations.
l Even in stations where garbage disposal was managed departmentally, there
was no laid down process and frequency. Garbage from the vats was not
removed regularly. As a result, they were found overflowing with garbage.
l In violation of extant regulations, garbags was being burnt in 26 stations
which included important station such as New Delhi, Hazrat Nizamuddin,
Mumbai CST, Kalyan, Dadar, Dombivili etc.
l In smaller stations belonging to the D and E category, garbage disposal was
virtually non-existent. Garbage was either burnt or thrown out in the open at
one end of the platform or outside the station premises in low lying areas.

26
61. Thus, the garbage disposal mechanism as well as the infrastructure was
inadequate and the Railways were not able to effectively dispose off the garbage
generated within the station premises or offloaded from trains.
62. Responding to a query regarding innovative steps and ambitious projects taken
up by the Ministry towards garbage disposal on the Railway premises and whether
this work was being assigned to a professional agency or individuals with necessary
skills to handle such a job, the Ministry in a written note stated as under:—
"Dynamic garbage cleaning frequency has been introduced wherein
frequency is related to rate of garbage collection. Penal clause in the
contracts for garbage cleaning have been incorporated and penalty in
commensurate to default are imposed. For garbage disposal on the Railway
premises, more and more professional agencies having necessary skills are
being involved to handle the job."
63. Fixing up of responsibility with regard to Sanitation related activities and
effective deterrence against non-adherence to cleanliness standards are the keys to
ensure requisite standards in Railway  premises. Audit has very clearly highlighted
this in its report. Perturbed about dismal situation on this issue, the Committee desired
to know whether the Ministry had taken up any steps to conduct surprise checks
and for fixing responsibility on erring Officials for not adhering to and carrying out
sanitation work in Railway premises. The Ministry presented their position as under:—
"Inspections are carried out frequently by the supervising authorities who
assess the standard of cleanliness and take remedial steps—both short as
well as long term. Surprise checks/drives are also carried out at regular
intervals to ensure maintenance of prescribed standards of cleanliness.
Erring staff/official are appropriately taken up under D & AR. In case where
the sanitation work is carried out contractually, the contractors are suitably
fined for non-adherence to the prescribed norms.
Teams of Directors from the Ministry of Railways had recently conducted
inspection of some of the major Railway stations of all the Zonal Railways
to assess the progress on 'Touch & Feel' items including Cleanliness and
Sanitation."
XVII. INADEQUACY OF WASHABLE APRONS
64. Cement concrete washable aprons with built in high-pressure jet pumps are
extremely essential to keep the tracks between platforms clean of night soil and also
to clean the coaches of short distance trains that return to their originating stations
without any primary or secondary maintenance in coaching yards. The absence of
washable aprons results in accumulation of night soil and garbage on the track within
the station premises seriously compromising hygiene and resulting in increased pests/
rodents.
65. Audit review highlighted that Non-availability of washable aprons and poor
maintenance of existing washable aprons compounded by the inadequate water
supply restricted the use of machines for cleaning. Consequently, the night soil and

27
waste collected near the tracks had to be disposed off manually, even though manual
scavenging was banned by Government of India through the 'Employment of Manual
Scavengers and construction of Dry Latrines (Prohibition) Act 1993' and Supreme
Court had also issued directions regarding the same.
XVIII. INADEQUACY OF DRAINS AND SEWERAGE SYSTEM
66. Maintenance of a main drainage system to ensure easy and free flowing of
waste water and cut out/side drains at intermediate points of station buildings and
platforms to carry waste water to the main drain are vital in ensuring that the
environment is hygienic and in sanitized condition. Review of the stations and joint
inspections conducted over various zonal railways revealed various problems such
as blockage of drainage systems with weeds, refuse and silt resulting in stagnation
of waste water (101 out of the 358 stations reviewed), poor design of the drains with
incorrect gradients, absence of cut out drains or links to the main drains, poor
maintenance resulting in broken and dilapidated drains etc. These included important
stations such as Mumbai CST, Howrah, Bangalore City, Dadar, Mumbai  BCT and
Bhubaneswar.
67. Thus, due to non-provision and inadequate maintenance of drains and
sewerage lines, the drains meant to clear wastewater and to maintain healthy
surroundings were, instead, health hazards in themselves.
68. Explaining the Railways' case on the matter, Member Traffic Railways stated
as under:—
"We have a major problem at stations and still do of drainage because our
stations are now getting located at the centre of towns and cities. There is
a problem outside stations of water accumulation and drainage. We normally
tackle it within our station premises. We try and coordinate with the local
municipality to see whether we can improve the drainage at the station. We
have met with success somewhere and in some places it still continues to
be a problem. But we are taking up this issue of drainage and to a great
extent we are also covering the drain so that the atmosphere created is much
cleaner at the station."
XIX. INEFFECTIVE UTILISATION OF MACHINES
69. Of 298 stations reviewed by the Audit, cleanliness activities were mechanised
fully only in five A category stations. The activities were partially mechanised in 58
A category and 30 B and C category stations and in the remaining 205 stations the
activities were still being carried out manually. Thus, though mechanised cleaning in
stations covering all important areas was envisaged as far back as August 2000,
Railways have not taken it up on the required scale. In many stations, the floor of
only the main platform was conducive to mechanised cleaning, while the other
platforms could not be washed due to their uneven surface.
70. As a result, mechanised cleaning, which is a superior means of maintaining
cleanliness on station premises remained largely ineffective.

28
XX. INADEQUATE TOILETS AND URINALS
71. Railway Board prescribed a minimum requirement of ten toilets and ten urinals
for A Category, six each for B category and four each for C category railway stations
to be provided on platforms as well as waiting halls/sheds. It was seen that—
l Of the 298 stations reviewed, 128 stations had not provided for required
number of toilets as per the minimum scale.
l The joint inspection of stations revealed that there was no water supply in
urinals and toilets provided on station premises over 21 stations, including
New Delhi, Amritsar, Sealdah, Bardhaman etc.
l During joint inspections, the existing toilets and urinals were also found in
unusable condition due to water logging, leaking roofs, broken taps, broken
pans, tiles and walls, missing outlets and pipes, broken or nonfunctional
cisterns, poor lighting etc. The cleaning of the toilets including the ladies'
toilets was also extremely poor with stagnation of waste and emitting foul
smell.
72. Non-availability of required number of toilets and their unusable condition
deprived passengers of a vital amenity and led to open defecation, creating an unclean
and unhygienic condition in station premises.
l Work studies to determine the scale of facilities to be provided in normal
'Pay and Use' toilets were not conducted in 142 stations out of 237 (298-61)
stations reviewed. However, the number of 'Pay and Use' toilets provided
was much lower than the numbers assessed.
l Of 298 A, B anc C category stations 'Pay and Use' toilets were not provided
at all in 61 stations. In 135 stations these were not provided on island
platforms. Toilets for handicapped passengers were not provided in
118 stations.
73. In the survey conducted  by the Audit on important stations, 67 per cent
passengers opined that the number of toilets on railway platforms was insufficient.
Similarly, 51 per cent passengers felt that the number of toilets in waiting rooms was
insufficient. Eighty-five per cent passengers surveyed found the toilets dirty.
74. Replying to a specific question regarding norms fixed  for the number of public
toilets to be opened/operated in each railway station, the Ministry informed as
under:—
"Stations have  been classified into various categories depending upon
annual passenger earnings of the station.
Norms  for providing urinals and latrines for passengers have been fixed
with reference to category of station for the purpose of minimum essential
amenities.
Comprehensive policy guidelines regarding construction of public toilets
on Public-Private-Partnership (PPP) model have been issued to Zonal

29
Railways. Deluxe and normal toilets are constructed by the interested firms
at their own  cost and shall be operated and maintained by them on "Pay &
Use" basis. Non-Government Organisations (NGOs) have also  been
participating in tenders in operations of such public toilets.
Possibilities are being explored to further extend the scheme of "Pay & Use"
toilets (both deluxe and normal) at more and more stations keeping in view
the growing number of passengers."
XXI. INADEQUACY OF DRINKING W ATER
75. Railway Board prescribed a minimum requirement of 12 taps per platform for
category A and B railway stations and six taps per platform for category C stations
for providing piped drinking water to the passengers. While recommending a higher
scale based on actual passenger traffic it was suggested that taps should be
distributed in such a manner  that every alternate coach gets the benefit of a tap.
Audit highlight Joint inspection carried out revealed that:—
l That twenty eight per cent of A catrgory stations and 30 per cent of
B category stations had not provided  tapped drinking water at the
recommended  scale. Out of this, one third of such A category and  more
than half of B category stations including important stations like  Mumbai
CST, Mumbai Central, Chennai Central, Chennai Egmore  etc., did not meet
even the bare minimum requirements. Similarly 65 per cent of C category
stations had not provided for tapped drinking water at the  recommended
scale, of which half the  number did not meet the minimum requirement.
l Water booths/taps were either found to be defective or in broken condition
Audit review brought out that in 61 stations and were not usable, which
reflected the poor station of maintenance of amenities at stations. The area
surrounding the water taps was found covered with slush and dirt, thereby
making the atmosphere around it unclean and unhygienic and rendering the
amenity unfit for use. Thus provision of water booths and taps in their existing
state created a major health hazard.
l Frequency of bacteriological testing and required chlorine level testing or
drinking water (both tapped and packaged water) varied for each stations
and the samples taken were also not uniform.
76. Inadequate drinking water supply compounded by dirty and unhygienic
surroundings made not only the amenity unfit for use, but also added to the unclean
environment on the railway stations.
77. As regards steps taken or proposed to be taken by Railways to provide clean
and uncontaminated drinking water at railway stations and platforms and whether
water purifiers have been installed at railway stations to provide pure drinking water
to the general passengers, the Ministry replied as under:—
"Instructions exist that concerned supervisors and officers of the Railway
station should conduct periodical surprise checks in order to maintain safe
supply of drinking water. Regular checks are carried out to ensure the
availability of clean and uncontaminated water. Pure and safe drkinking water

30
known as "Rail Neer" bottled by the Indian Railway Tourism & Catering
Corporation (IRCTC) is also available for the passengers against payment
at important stations. Chlorination of water is carried out regularly in order
to make water free from bacteria and to prevent contamination during
delivery of water to end users. Water pruifiers are also provided at important
locations."
XXII. DEFICIENCIES IN MANPOWER MANAGEMENT ON STATIONS
78. Of the 298 stations selected in audit, cleanliness on 187 stations was maintained
departmentally. Review and inspection of these stations revealed that manpower was
a basic constraint, which affected the quality of cleanliness provided at stations. It
was observed that:
l There were no norms for providing safaiwalas at stations. In most of the
stations, the sanctioned strength was based on requirement of staff assessed
far back when the stations were first introduced. The existing strength of
safiwalas was not commensurate with the actual requirements. For instance,
the sanctioned strength safiwalas at Hazrat Nizamuddin station has remained
the same since 1958, although the number of passengers had gone up more
than three fold.
l Further, vacancies existed in large numbers even against the sanctioned
strength in the cadre of safaiwalas in many stations across the zonal railways.
The percentage of vacancies ranged up to even 34 per cent (ECR).
l The shortage of safaiwalas in most stations was further compounded with
the high rate of absenteeism amongst them. The rate of absenteeism for a
period of six months from October  2005 to March 2006 ranged upto even
80 per cent in A category stations, 100 per cent in B category stations and
60 per cent  in C category stations.
l The issue of imparting training to safaiwalas was handled as a shortterm
measure by most of the zonal railways. Training to supervisors was not
planned by any railways except SER and East Coast Railway (ECR). Training
courses were conducted in zonal training centres and other training institutes
by only four zonal railways NR, NCR, SER and ER during 2005-06.
79. Thus, shortages of safaiwalas, high absenteeism amongst them and inadequate
training by zonal railways contributed toward deficient performance and unclean
environment on stations maintained departmentally.
80. The Committee in specific query wanted to know whether the present strength
of Safaiwalas is sufficient and whether Railways are satisfied with their quality of
cleanliness work. In this connection, the Ministry in  a post evidence reply
intimated:—
"As per the figures available in Board's office in Book of Sanction as on
01-04-2005, on-roll strength of Safai Karamchari in the Railways is
approximately 49,700. Railways is a vast organization spread across the

31
country and manpower planning on the Railways  is adjusted according to
the changing needs of the organization. In case of Safai Karamchari, it is
difficult to create yardstick or norms due to various factors like local
infrastructure and climatic conditions, availability of water and different
levels of mechanization of the cleaning process. Further in spite of
availability of Safaiwalas, there may not be the desired level of cleanliness
due to heavy congestion of platforms with passengers and continuous
movement of trains at stations."
81. The committee further probed whether any training programme has been
conducted in this regard.The Ministry responded as under:—
 "At present there is no organized and systematic training for Safaiwalas,
Most of the training is on-the-job training wherever new technology has
been inducted."
XXIII. CONTRACTS—POOR CONTRACT MANAGEMENT
82. Of 298 stations selected by Audit, cleanliness on 113 stations was outsourced
either fully or partially. Inspection of these stations and review of 86 contracts revealed
deficiencies in contract management which led to compromise on quality of service
rendered by the contractors and ineffective cleaning initiatives:—
l The terms and conditions of various outsourced contracts were not well
defined. While in some cases the processes and frequencies of cleanliness
activities were not defined, in many others, the manpower to be provided
and the cleaning machines to be utilised by the contractor, were not spelt
out. As a result, the contractors across various zonal railways employed lesser
resources thereby compromising the quality of cleanliness.
l Penal clauses for unsatisfactory discharge of cleaning activities were not
incorporated in five agreements of outsourced works. In three stations, no
agreement was entered into though the cleaning activities were outsourced.
l Contracts were invariably awarded to the contractors without prescribing
any minimum standards that the contractors would have to adhere to and
also to the lowest bidder irrespective of viability of rates. As a result,
contractors not only compromised on the machines to be used but also
tended to use cheap daily labour without any basic training to carry out the
cleanliness activities. The Railways did not ensure that there was no violation
of the various statutory provisions such as Minimum Wages Act etc., while
effecting payments to the workers engaged by  contractors (SCR, SWR).
Moreover, due to constant changes in the labour force, the quality of
cleaning was sub-standard.
83. Joint inspection of stations  also reflected poor quality of work for maintenance
of cleanliness  and  sanitation on railway stations. As a result, apart from dirty and
unhygienic toilets, tracks adjacent to platforms, drains, circulating  area, platforms,
waiting halls/retiring rooms, foot over bridge, concourse etc., on a  large number of
stations were also found unclean and dirty.

32
84. In the  passenger survey 59 per cent were of the  opinion that railway platforms
were either 'generally dirty' or 'not so clean'. Similarly, 51 per cent to 61 per cent
passengers felt that the circulating areas, approach to the railway stations, approach
to platforms, foot over bridges, sub ways, seating areas on platforms and  waiting
rooms were either 'generally dirty' or 'not so clean'. Further, 76  per cent  of  the
passengers felt that the toilets were either 'generally dirty' or 'not so clean'. In order
to improve  cleanliness, a majority (54 per cent)  of passengers believed that  increasing
the number of safaiwalas would help while 30  per cent were of the opinion that
provision of sufficient water for cleaning will improve the situation.
85. The Committee specifically desired to know about the designated authority
responsible for supervising outsourced services on Indian Railways. The Ministry
in a written note categorically informed that the authority/department doing the
outsourcing is responsible for monitoring and supervision of the outsourced services.
86. In connection with mechanised cleaning in  railway stations, the Committee
desired to know whether this is done  departmentally or is outsourced through  private
parties. The Ministry in this regard informed the Committee as follows:—
"One of the  following systems is being adopted for mechanized cleaning
at  stations (i) All the work related to mechanized cleaning including
deployment of manpower  is done departmentally; (ii) The various
equipments  required for cleanliness is  supplied by private parties but  the
manpower  is deployed departmentally; and (iii) Outsourcing to agencies is
done for both  equipment and manpower. However, an overall departmental
supervision is maintained."
XXIV. UNAUTHORISED USE OF STATION PREMISES
87. Most of the railway stations across all Zonal Railways normally have a
circulating area outside the station premises. Presence of unauthorized vendors/
hawkers and urchins in the station premises hamper cleanliness related activities apart
from placing a strain on already stretched resources. The Railway Protection Force
(RPF) is responsible for the guarding of railway property in railway stations and
eviction of unauthorised persons. Audit review of  records and  inspection of  the
selected stations, however,  inter-alia revealed that:—
l Through a total of 2,43,615 unauthorised hawkers and other  unauthorised
persons were evicted during 2005-06 from various  stations selected for
review, this was obviously inadequate and did not  prevent unauthorised
entry into the stations as the monitoring  mechanism at the various  entry
points to station  premises was weak.
88. The Committee in this regard, specifically desired to be  informed about the
Agency/Department responsible for maintaining the Circulating area in Railway
stations. Keeping in view the threat perceptions and contribution of unauthorized
entrants towards dismal cleanliness conditions  on the stations, the Committee wanted
to know about any effective mechanism that has been evolved by the  Ministry to

33
man all the entry and exit points on the Railway stations. The Ministry accordingly
informed as under:—
"Maintenance  of the circulating area entails under the overall supervision
of the  commercial and medical department. The cleanliness is carried out
from time to time depending upon the real requirement. As regards,
preventing the entry of unauthorized persons in Railway premises including
Railway platforms, RPF staff are deployed to regulate access control  at
important Railway Stations. Trespassing, unauthorized hawking and
begging, nuisance etc., are punishable  offences under various sections of
the Railways Act 1989. commercial, Traffic,  Vigilance and RPF staff of certain
rank have been empowered for enquiry and  prosecution of such offences.
Regular drives are conducted by RPF to prevent  unauthorized persons from
entering into Railway premises and running trains. In  the year 2007, about
15 lakh offenders have been prosecuted by the RPF under  various Sections
of the  Railways Act for offences like trespassing, causing public  nuisance,
unauthorized hawking, vending, begging and ticket less travel etc. It is  not
possible to man all entry and exit points on Railway stations. However, the
important/main entry/exit gates at stations are manned and in addition checks
are carried out in the premises to check unauthorized persons. It has also
been proposed to install Access Control components like Perimeter wall/
fencing, automatic vehicle scanner, door frame metal detectors etc. at the
identified vulnerable Railway Stations over Indian Railways which inlude
all the suburban stations of four metropolitan cities of the country."
XXV . DEFICIENT MONITORING MECHANISM
89. Perodical inspection of cleanliness activities, whether done departmentally or
contractually, serves as a vital quality assurance mechanism. Quality assurance can
only be ensured through continuous monitoring and effective compliance to the
deficiencies pointed out by the inspecting authorities.  Audit review however revealed
that:—
l Norms for inspection of stations, coaching yards and trains by various
authorities were not prescribed either by Railway Board or by the respective
zonal railways. Even at the divisional level, norms for inspection were laid
down by very few divisions. As a result, a number of stations including major
A, B, and C category stations such as Bhavnagar, Allahabad, Calicut, Kanpur,
Alleppey, Villupuram, Virudhnagar, Bagnan etc., were not inspected at all
during the year 2005-06.
l Even where inspections were carried out, the cleanliness aspects were not
covered in many of them. Further, even where specific aspects relating to
cleanliness were pointed out, the follow up action was inadequate. Joint
inspections revealed that the deficiencies pointed out by verious inspecting
authorities continued to exist, indicating that the monitoring mechanism was
ineffective.
90. The Committee enquired if there is any proposal to make it mandatory/
compulsory for senior Railway officials to undertake rail journey in second class/

34
unreserved compartments at periodical intervals to have a first hand experience about
the problem being faced by the passengers/rail users. The Ministry informed as
under:—
“..................... however, senior Railway officials inspect trains including
second class/unreserved coaches from time to time to identify the on-board
deficiencies and take corrective measures as warranted. Multi Disciplinary
Service Improvement Groups (SIGs) at the Zonal/Divisional and station level
have been activated to inspect passenger amenities including cleanliness
in trains and to suggest/take remedial measures for rectifying the
deficiencies and shortcomings.”
91. As regards outsourcing, the Committee desired to find out the extant
mechanism available in Railways to oversee the works outsourced to the private
parties/agencies and also whether Railways propose to create the same for having
proper supervision/control over private parties. The Ministry while explaining their
case responded as under:—
“............ Several clauses are incorporated in the tender conditions such as
frequency of cleaning, use of quality tools and detergents, deployment of
manpower etc. The actual work of the contractor is supervised by the Railway
Officials on continues basis and appropriate action is taken against the
contractor if there is any deficiency.”
XXVI. CLEANLINESS OF TRAINS
92. Cleaning of trains includes cleaning in coaching yeards (EMU car sheds for
EMU trains) at the originating stations during primary maintenance, at the destination
station during secondary maintenance as well as en route cleaning. Short distance
trains are cleaned at the station platform itself as the time available between their 'up'
and 'down' movements is less than two hours and not enough to take them to the
coaching yards. Apart from these laid down routine maintenance activities, Railways
also introduced 'Clean Train Station' (CTS) scheme at select stations for en route
cleaning of trains.
93. For assessing the adequacy of steps taken by the Railways towards providing
a clean environment to the passengers during their journey, cleanliness related
activities on trains undertaken in 32 coaching yards and 9 EMU car sheds overall
the zonal railways were reviewed. An assessment of the CTS scheme implemented
so far was also undertaken in audit.
94. The review disclosed inadequate infrastructure and resources in coaching yards
and trains ineffective pest control and bed linen contracts and deficiencies in the
implementation of CTS.
95. On being inquired about the designated officer responsible for Sanitation on
running trains, the Ministry in written note stated as under:—
“Under the On Boards Housekeeping Scheme, which is outsourced, the
Contractor has an Executive Housekeeper, who is required to supervise and
oversee the cleaning/sanitation operations in the running trains. He is

35
Server-1/E/Report LS\187ls\187ls
required to maintain a constant liaison with the Coaching Depot Incharge
and provide him the feedback/report after each trip.
96. While responding to a query about any specialized institutional mechanism in
place to oversee sanitation activities at Railway station and on running trains, the
Ministry in a written note informed as under:—
"A comprehensive 'On Board House Keeping Service' scheme has recently
been launched by the Railways. Adequately trained staff provided by a
professional agency shall escort prestigious Mail/Express Trains and carry
out frequent On Board Cleaning of Coach Toilets in compartment using
efficient tools/implements and also collect waste/garbage in waste bags. The
waste so collected are disposed off at nominated en route stations.
Outsourced sanitation and cleaning activities in running trains as above
are being monitored by means of the following (i) Passenger feedback;
(ii) Linking of payments and penalty to the passenger satisfaction index
based on passenger feedback; (iii) Taking note of passenger observation
on complaint book available with train superintendent; and (iv) Launching
of special drives and incognito checks by Railway officials in trains."
XXVII. DEFICIENT INFRASTRUCTURE IN TRAINS
97. Provision of adequate number of dustbins and toilets in trains and their proper
maintenance are vital for maintaining cleanliness and hygiene in coaches. The waste
generated in the pantry cars and coaches is supposed to be collected in the dustbins
provided on the train and disposed off at nominated stations en route.
l Joint Inspection of trains by the Audit over various zonal railways revealed
that in most of the trains, dustbins were provided in AC coaches only.
Dustbins were not provided in unreserved coaches in any of the trains
inspected. The sleeper coaches, particularly of long distance trains were not
provided with dustbins. As a result, vestibule passages between coaches
were found littered with uneaten food, used plastic plates, teacups, etc., with
no provision for cleaning en-route or else the garbage was thrown out onto
the track.
l Even the capacity of the dustbins provided in pantry cars was inadequate
considering the large quantity of food waste generated and the dustbins
were found to be overflowing.
l The cleaning contracts of IRCTC provided for garbage disposal without
stipulating the manner in which the disposal was to be carried out. Moreover,
no penal clause was included in the contract conditions for improper garbage
disposal. In 30 out of 39 trains inspected en route it was seen that most of
the garbage from trains was thrown out by the caterers though collection
points/stations for collection of garbage were designated. Audit brought out
that the pantry car staff of Konark Express and Kushinagar Express was not
aware of the designated stations though the CCM had issued specific
instructions in this regard.

36
l In the survey, conducted by the Audit 67 per cent respondents felt that
dustbins provided were inadequate. An overwhelming 74 per cent of
respondents found the dustbins in coaches overflowing with garbage, not
usable and unclean.
98. As regards whether passenger amenities provided were commensurate with
the ever-increasing passenger traffic, the Ministry's explanation was an under:—
"Passenger amenities at stations are provided as per stipulated norms based
on the category of railway stations and volume of passenger traffic handled.
Recently, all Zonal Railway have confirmed that passenger amenities as per
norms have been provided at all railway stations except at one station on
Western Railway. Deficiency in passenger amenities at this station is being
made good by Mumbai Rail Vikas Corporation (MRVC).
Augmentation of the passenger amenities to handle increasing passenger
traffic is a continuous process and works are taken up for the provision of
additional passenger amenities at station for handling increased traffic as
and when required."
99. Taking note of the audit observation the Committee also desired to know whether
the Ministry had a system in place to constantly monitor the workability of various
installed equipments etc. on running trains especially on prestigious trains like Rajdhani
and Shatabdi. The Ministry while explaining their position explained as under:—
"Yes. Adequately trained coaching depot supervisor/technicians escorts
select prestigious trains like Rajdhani/Shatabadi and ensure satisfactory
functioning of the systems/equipment provided in coaches. To the extent
possible, deficiency/defects encountered enroute are set right by the
escorting staff. In any case, the systems are checked for/set right during
the next scheduled maintenance in the coaching depots where adequate
facilities & infrastructure is available."
XXVIII. DEFICIENT IMPLEMENTATION OF CLEAN TRAIN STATION SCHEME
100. The scheme 'Clean Train Station (CTS)’ was launched in October 2002, as a
major initiative for improving train cleanliness. Under this scheme, mechanized
en route cleaning of trains was introduced during halts at identified stations on major
trunk routes of Indian Railways. As per the scheme select trains were to be cleaned
at the nominated stations and necessary arrangements were to be made on the
specified platforms in a planned manner.
101. The CTS scheme was introduced in 28 stations of which 14 were outsourced
and 14 were departmentally handled. The following deficiencies were noticed in the
execution of the scheme:—
l A large number of nominated trains could not be attended to due to non-
placement of the trains on the nominated platforms. (Asansol, Jhansi,
Guwahati, New Jalpaiguri and Ahmedabad). As a result, the trains could not
be cleaned at all. The percentage of trains cleaned fully per week was as low
as four per cent at Jhansi.

37
37
l At some stations in ER, even the nomination of platforms was not done
judiciously. For instance, platform No. 4 of Asansol was nominated, though
this platform normally caters to trains in the 'up' direction not nominated for
CTS operations.
l Inadequate coordination between departments also resulted in non-
availability of adequate infrastructure and requisite time for implementing
the scheme.
102. Thus, the CTS scheme, though a good initiative, remained largely ineffective
in its present state of implementation and did not achieve its perceived objectives.
103. Chairman, Railway Board, during the course of evidence on the subject while
deborating on the matter stated as under:-—
“..........In the meanwhile, the Department is also trying to work out and see
whether at the originating points, we could have a better system of
cleanliness so that once the train starts from the stations with full cleanliness,
there after we have accompanying staff. This can be outsourced where a
person will be responsible for the cleanliness part of it. He will ensure that
the toilets are cleaned. He will have high power jet machines which can be
brought in. Let us say that the train stops at Mughalsarai. The jet machine
can be brought in and it can be used to clean the toilets. So, efforts are
now being made to improve this area. So this is one area.........”
104. In related context, the Chairman also stated:—
“.....The next, of course, is the biggest one in which we are also trying to
first of all involve the entire process, that is, to go in for world-class station.
We have picked up 22 stations as world class stations which we would
now like to develop to world-class standard. As you have rightly said, we
do not have a standard today for which we would surely like to work on.
For this, again we have made a beginning and we have started first getting
New Delhi, Patna and Jaipur Stations being developed under world-class
model stations by using foreign consultants to develop these stations in
such a way that all these aspects are taken care.”
XXIX. USER PERCEPTION AND AWARENESS
105. Maintaining a clean and hygienic environment in stations and trains, on a
sustainable basis, require active support and co-operation from passengers and other
users. Continuous interaction with the users and constant understanding of their needs
and perspective as well as educating passengers is one of the most effective means of
improving the  standard of cleanliness. A mechanism of Zonal Railway Users' Consultative
Committee (ZRUCC) at the zonal level and Divisional Railway Users' Consultative
Committee (DRUCC) at the divisional level also exists to address these issues. Review
revealed that measures adopted to create user awareness were inadequate and user
perception was not being harnessed to bring about improvements in the system.

38
106. User awareness measures involve making the users aware of the amenities
existing in the station and trains, educating the users and also to make them aware
of their role in maintaining cleanliness and hygiene in stations and in trains. In addition
to announcements on railway stations through public address systems, most of the
zonal railways had spelled out various initiatives such as launching mass campaigns
through print and electronic media, launching awareness drives, putting up hoardings
and using Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) to educate the users. In this area, the
following deficiencies of Railways have been observed:
l Though the list of amenities provided in the station was normally displayed
in stations over all zonal railways, sign boards indicating the location of
dustbins were not available in many stations.
l Public announcements were also not frequently made. Sixty-five per cent of
the survey respondents had either never heard the announcements regarding
cleanliness in stations or had heard them only 'sometimes'.
l User awareness of availability of complaint books was very low. The location
at which complaint books were available was not displayed in many stations.
Thus, the users could not use the same to lodge their complaints or to record
their suggestions.
l There was no sustained plan to constantly educate the users on various
issues relating to cleanliness i.e. avoid the use of toilets during train halts at
stations, spitting, graffiti, littering, defacing the platforms, posters, etc. In
the LHB coaches that have been introduced recently in some Rajdhani trains,
directions for using the newly designed toilets were not displayed causing
inconvenience to passengers.
107. Concerned about the Audit findings, the Committee desired to know about
any action plan that the Ministry had envisaged for creating awareness among the
passengers about the maintenance of cleanliness in stations premises, platforms,
waiting rooms and proper use of toilets etc. In this regard the Ministry in a written
note infomed as under:—
“For creating awareness among the passenger about the maintenance of
cleanliness in stations premises, platforms, waiting rooms and proper use
of toilets. Zonal Railways are undertaking the following steps (i) Publicity
campaigns through display of posters, banners, distribution of leaflets;
(ii) Announcements over the Public Announcement System; (iii) Publicity
through CCTV etc; (v) Involvement of scouts and guides and NGOs to
educate the users; (v) Display of notices in trains requesting passengers
not to use train toilets while the train is stationary at station; (vi) Printing
of slognas in tickets, reservation slips, tender notices etc; (vii) Arranging
'Nukkad Nataks' (street plays) in station vicinity; and (viii) Bio degradable
covers/bags are distributed to travelling public to deposit the garbage/litters
and deposit the same in dustbins only”.

39
XXX. USER PERCEPTION
108. Of the 3,719 respondents to whom a survey questionnaire was administered
by Audit, 44 per cent were frequent travellers and 47 per cent were occasional
travellers. The general perception of the respondents on the state of cleanliness in
Indian Railways was:—
l "Seventy-five per cent respondents felt that cleanliness in Indian Railways
was generally inproving over the years.
l An overwhelming 84 per cent of the respondents believed that various places
in the station premises were mostly overcrowded. Fifty-three per cent of the
respondents were certain and another 23 per cent felt that 'may be' reducing
crowds could help improve cleanliness. It was opined that crowds could be
reduced by preventing unauthorised persons from entering the station premises.
l Fifty-one per cent respondents felt that passengers were responsible for dirtying
the platforms and the tracks between the platforms, whereas 20 per cent felt that
vendors were responsible. Forty per cent respondents felt that vendors in station
premises were adequate in their present form and thirty per cent opined that
vendors were adequate but their area of operation should be limited."
109. According to the respondents, the main causes that contributed to lack of
cleanliness were insufficient amenities and infrastructure, persence of unauthorised
persons in stations and overcrowding, lack of awareness among passengers, shortage
of staff, absence of involvement of top management, deteriorating work culture and
lack of responsibility among staff.
110. The suggestions for improvement in cleanliness included increasing the scale
of amenities, preventing entry of unauthorised users, increasing passengers awareness
and providing them with a handout on cleanliness matters as soon as they board
the train, involving passengers in cleanliness drives, introducing mechanised cleaning,
providing training to staff and creation of a separate department that solely caters to
cleanliness and proper accountability of staff.
111. Cleanliness and sanitation on Indian Railways was not receiving due
importance and was secondary to other activities. The expenditure on providing and
maintaining a clean and hygienic environment was inadequate. Standards for
performance were not laid down, infrastructure was inadequate and deficient,
passenger amenities were not commensurate with increasing passenge traffic, waste
management was ineffective, railway stations were overcrowded due to unauthorised
use and harnessing user perception was ineffective especially in A, B and C category
stations where 85  per cent of the passenger traffic was handled. Involvement of
multiple departments with complex reporting structures only compounded the issue.
In the last few years, the Railways have taken a number of initiatives to address the
issue of cleanliness and sanitation, such as CTS, cleaning squads in running trains
etc. Nevertheless, the magnitude of the problem is such that unless tackled on a war
footing, it cannot be adequately dealt with. The Railways need to evolve performance
criteria for every cleanliness related activity and ensuer effective supervision. The
initiatives need to be cohesive, systematic and sustainable.

40
XXXI. GRIEVANCE REDRESSAL OF PASSENGERS
112. Responding to a question about mechanism evolved by the Ministry for a
responsive and effective grievance redressal of passengers at railway stations and
in trains with respect to cleanliness and sanitation the Ministry in a detailed reply
stated as below:—
"On Indian Railways, there is a laid down system of registration of
complaints including cleanliness, by passengers. At all stations a complaint
cum suggestion book is maintained with the Station Manager/Station
Superintendent. In trains, Guards of passenger and Mail/Express trains carry
such complaint books. In addition, the Manager of the pantry car is also
required to make the complaint book available to passengers on demand.
The complaints/suggestions given by the travelling public are duly
acknowledged at the time of registration. Each complaint/suggestion is then
investigated/examined properly and a reply is sent to the complainant. The
AGMs at zonal level and ADRMs at divisional level function as nodal
agencies for public grievances who review the performance and position of
public complaints regularly. Even at Railway Board's level, this aspect is
emphasized during various meetings which zonal railways attend in the
Board. The number of complaints received on Zonal Railways under the
heads of cleanliness at stations and in trains during the period April to
December, 2007 as compared to April to December, 2006 is under:
Sl.No. Causes April to April to Percentage
December, 2006 December, variation
2007
1. Cleanliness at stations 330 323 -2.12%
2. Maintenance/cleanliness 749 729 -2.67%
of coaches
XXXII. CATERING AND HYGIENIC FOOD
113. Concerned about the deteriorating quality of food served in the trains
especially Rajdhani and Shatabdi, the Committee desired to know from the Ministry
whether it proposed to bring about policy changes in catering so that the old
standards of food are restored. The Ministry in a written response stated as under:—
"Improvement is an ongoing process. Catering services of Indian Railways
receive constant attention of the Zonal Railways as well as Indian Railway
Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC), a wholly owned company of
Indian Railways formed to upgrade and professionalize the catering and
hospitality services of Indian Railways. IRCTC is setting up multi-cuisine
state-of the-art Food Plazas, Automatic Vending machines dispense hot and
cold beverages, and modernizing Railways' existing base kitchens. Regular
monitoring of catering services is done by Railways and IRCTC officials.
IRCTC has engaged independent food audit agencies to ensure quality of
food being supplied to the passengers of Indian Railways. All good practices

41
Server-1/E/Report LS\187ls\187ls
like, progressive ISO (International Organization for Standardization) and
HACCP (Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Points) certification of catering
units are being followed. As per normal practice, complaints received from
passengers are monitored by IRCTC and action like warning, imposition of
fine, termination of contract, etc. are taken on cases found substantiated.
IRCTC has set up control rooms at New Delhi, Mumbai, Kolkata, Chennai
and Secunderabad for receipt and redressal of complaints. Each of these
control rooms has personal computers with boardband connectivity and
dedicated telephone lines, Any passenger can  make a telephone call to
any of these control rooms and immediate action is taken on these
complaints/suggestions.
   In addition to above, steps like customer satisfaction Survey conducted
through M/s IMRB International, Food Audit done by M/s TUV Sud Asia
on 112 units including trains, Base Kitchens & Food Plazas, engagement of
M/s Rites for ISO 22000:2005 certification of mobile as well as static units,
conducting special drive on premium trains including Rajdhani, Shatabdi
and other Mail/Express trains through Quality Control Professionals (QCPs)
so as to improve quality of catering services, introduction of Coloured Menu
cards depicting a-la-carte items along with their rates etc, are being  taken
from time to time to effect improvement in catering services."
114. As outsourcing in catering has not yielded very satisfactory results, the
Committee intended to know as to what measures have been adopted by the MInistry
to ensure that outsourcing in Railway sanitation is able to achieve its desired
objectives. The Ministry, in a written note informed the Committee as under:—
"Railways are outsourcing certain activities in a phased manner where the
system is not very satisfactory, not manageable and not cost effective. In
addition where certain activities which require professional input and the
same are not available within the organisation, outsourcing is being done.
The outsourcing of sanitation has also been done with this perceptive.
Where the cleaning activities are outsourced, standards of cleanliness
schedule/frequency with respect to desilting of drains, rag picking, washing
and cleaning of entire station area including waiting/retiring rooms, toilets,
garbage disposal etc., to be maintained are prescribed in the tender
conditions, depending on the local conditions like category of station,
number of trains handled, number of passengers dealt with, number of
platforms, area to be cleaned, civic sense of passengers, type of infrastructure
and other factors.
Supervision/monitoring are being conducted regularly at various levels to
assess the level of cleanliness. Occasional cleanliness drives are also
conducted for strengthening the cleanliness machinery and also for
identifying shortcomings, if any, which are appropriately addressed to.
Contractors are suitably warned, fined and even the contract terminated, if
the prescribed level of cleanliness is not achieved."

CHAPTER II
115. Considering the larger importance and topicality of the subject, the Committee
had decided to elicit the response of interested organizations/public through a press
communique. A large number of suggestions have since been received from
individuals and organizations regarding 'Cleanliness and Sanitation in Indian
Railways'. A total of 147 Memoranda have since been received from various individuals
and organizations from across the country and abroad. This includes various
suggestions from individuals like Shri Rajesh R. from Thane, Shri Vijay Jain from
Dallas, USA and organizations like Aqua Max, Mother Indus Aqua Solutions (P) Ltd.
and Advisor Society of Senior Citizens. A gist of the important points and issues
culled out of these suggestions received by the Committee is produced below:—
l Need to hasten upgradation of railway stations;
l Maintenance of cleanliness and sanitation on platform, trains, tracks, pantry
cars, in and around the railway stations;
l Education as well as constant and concerted awareness building in respect
of cleanliness and sanitation;
l Regulation of crowd in railway stations and creation of groups amongst
passengers for promoting awareness;
l Unhygienic and poor quality of food supplied in trains to be addressed;
l Rates of tea/snacks served at railway stations/platforms to be fixed/
retionalised;
l Making food optional in Rajdhani trains, thereby giving passengers a choice;
l As outsourcing in catering has failed, outsourcing in railway sanitation has
to be re-considered in this light;
l Reputed NGOs may be contracted for the job of cleanliness and sanitation—
privatization and handing over this job to prestigious organizations, like the
Sulabh International;
l Initiatives for relocation of slums/clusters on  either side of the tracks, proper
alternatives to be provided to the slum dwellers;
l Rural public are not well acquainted with the western styles toilets—Indian
style toilets to be promoted specially in second class compartments;
l Strictness and accountability at higher supervisory levels is required in
respect of celanliness and sanitation, scapegoats at lower levels should not
be made;
l Child labour involved in sanitation on running trains should be banned;
42

43
l The systems of Delhi Metro can be incorporated;
l The issue of cleanliness is inter-connected with other broader issues such
as crowd regulation and passenger traffic-holistic approach is thus required;
l Increase in railway manpower is badly required in keeping with increase in
volume of traffic;
l Railways profits to be set apart as cleanliness and sanitation fund—no cess
is required and passengers should not be burdened with such a levy; and
l Railways should not turn into a pure commercial organization—social
objectives should not be lost sight of.

PART II
Recommendations and Observations
116. The Committee note that Indian Railways cover over 8 thousand stations
and ferry  around 16 million passengers everyday which comprise of various socio-
economic backgrounds and literacy levels. Keeping in view the magnitude and scale
of operations of Railways, the Committee has examined this subject with utmost
profundity. The Committee's  Recommendations which  have been brought out in
the successive  paragraphs are based on the audit findings and Committee's  own
inquiry based on written and oral evidence  tendered before the  Committee by the
officials of the Ministry of Railways. The Committee also sought responses from
interested organizations and members of the public  for understanding this subject
in depth.  A close scrutiny of the subject and the material gathered by the Committee
reveals  a sorry state of affairs as far as cleanliness and sanitations on Indian
Railways is concerned. The deficiencies and  shortcomings which warrant immediate
attention of the railways have been brought out in the successive paragraphs.
Committee's  examination of the subject has led to inescapable conclusion that
cleanliness and sanitation activities on Railways  require immediate attention of
the Ministry. The Committee are astonished to note that Railways are yet to adopt
any standards or performance indicators (i.e.  the expected quality of the outcome)
for any cleanliness related activity carried out in stations and in trains against
which the  actual performance could be judged. The Committee also note that
standards  for supervision were also not prescribed by Railways for any cleanliness
related activity on stations and in trains. The Ministry in their detailed reply in
this regard have stated that they have devised a comprehensive plan  for the purpose
while  admitting that prescribing physical benchmarks for the standard of
cleanliness is not possible as the level of cleanliness is not quantifiable. In  this
connection the Committee strongly feel that Ministry must resort to out-of-box
thinking on this issue and display readiness and swiftness to measure the sanitary
conditions. The Committee recommend that there should be daily routine checks
by the Divisional General Managers and  inspections atleast once in every  fortnight
and it should be video recorded to clearly keep a track record of the sanitation levels
available on the platform and Railway premises. Strict actions must be taken against
the offenders who resort to spillage etc. on the platforms. This can be easily done
with the help of CCTV  cameras on all the major stations across the country which
have been earmarked for 'World Class Standards'.
The Committee further note the 'Clean Hour Concept' i.e. during a notified lean
period entire  station premises are throughly cleaned on daily based should be
vigorously followed by all the zones. In this connections, the Committee desire that
the Recommendations, furnished by the task force constituted to address the issues
of cleanliness, gadgets and manplower should  be executed in letter and spirit.
Moreover, the Ministry must bring out a status report on the subject of execution
of these recommendations  within six months of presentation of this report.
44

45
117. The Committee are constrained to note that low priority  has been accorded
to sanitation and cleanliness activities  on Indian Railways  owing to a wide spectrun
of responsibilities  assigned   to various functionaries  like Chief Health  Inspector/
Health Inspector (CH/HI) Station Masters/Managers etc. Moreover, absence of a
comprehensive action plan at the apex level led to effort  towards cleanliness
remaining as isolated efforts,  with sporadic instructions being issued from time to
time without  being cohesive. It is appealling  to learn  that even at the Railway
Board level different directorates were responsible for different areas of cleanliness
related  activities and schemes. It is observed that multiple departments like
commercial, medical and engineering departments are involved in cleaning
operations. The Committee are of the opinion that the  responsibility for cleaning
should lie with one department most preferably with the medical department since
their awareness levels and sensitivity  regarding cleanliness is expected to be better
than others. Various  small  controls handed out to various departments/agencies
should be clubbed  together for effective handling and financial viability. The
Committee desire that the Ministry should create a comprehensive mechanism with
a  clearly laid out reporting structure whereby the responsibility of  maintaining
cleanliness and hygienic surroundings at railway stations  and  in trains, exclusively
vests with one nodal  agency i.e. medical department. Also all the other departments
such as Engineering, Mechanical and others would work in conjunction and unison
with Medical Department. The Committee recommend that the decision taken by
Railways should be finalized within six month of the presentation of this report.
118. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that Additional General
Manager is the nodal officer at the Zonal level. The Committee strongly recommend
that the Ministry should constitute a Committee to  look into the entire gamut of
issues regarding lack of co-ordination and  clarity of approach vis-a-vis  Cleanliness
and Sanitation amongst various  departments of the Railways. The Committee desire
that they be informed  about the steps taken by the Ministry  to ensure better co-
ordination  between the various concerned departments. Regarding the creation of
a new post of Member exclusively for Cleanliness and Sanitation, the Ministry have
informed the Committee that this will lead to  overlapping/duplication of functions
with the other Board Members which  itself will defeat the very purpose for which
the post is created. The Ministry have also stated that responsibility  of cleanliness
has been appropriately distributed among board Members and they are looking after
their respective areas of cleanliness with utmost focus and control over the
department under them. This does not address the anomalies that allocation of
multiple and varied tasks to specialized functionaries resulted  in diffused  focus
on maintaining cleanliness on railway stations. Owing to  wide spectrum of
responsibilities assigned to Station Master/Manager etc., cleanliness was viewed
as a very low priority area. Since the responsibility  of maintenance of cleanliness
even within the station premises rested with  different departments various areas
were left unattended due to lack of  effective co-ordination. The Committee have taken
a very serious view of  the matter and desire that an independent authority at the apex
level solely  responsible for Cleanliness and Sanitation on Indian Railways should be
created under intimation to the Committee to oversee and co-ordinate such  efforts

46
amongst various  departments of Indian Railways. This will facilitate  a focussed
approach in policy making and development of a comprehensive  action plan at the
apex level including budgetary consideration for a sub-head specifically assigned
for Cleanliness and Sanitation activities. In view  of this, the Committee very strongly
reiterate that the Ministry must  strengthen co-ordination efforts and put in place
an institutionalized  mechanism at the apex level at the earliest but definitely by the
time of furnishing Action Taken  Replies to the recommendations contained in this
Report dedicated towards Cleanliness and Sanitation on Indian Railways to  establish
a clear cut administrative control in this respect. If required, the function of medical
department may be placed directly under this apex body.
119. The housekeeper  should undertake periodic inspection within the  trains
several times a day and may also be required to carry and display a  ckecklist of his
inspected items which may be submitted to the concerned  authorities at terminal
stations. In addition, the Committee is also of the view that if required the help of
Travelling Ticket Examiners (TTEs) or any other person so authorized may be taken
to complement the work of the Executive Housekeeper. The person so authorized
may not only be directly responsible for cleanliness and sanitation, but may also
help in ensuring the 'system of checks and balances as far as cleanliness in the
running trains is concerned.
As regards  the designated officer responsible for Sanitation on running trains,
the Ministry have informed the Committee that under the On Board Housekeeping
Scheme, which is outsourced, the Contractor has an Executive Housekeeper,  who
is required  to supervise and oversee the cleaning/sanitations operation in the
running trains. The Committee feel that this executive housekeeper's  presence
should be made more visible, it can  be done by  providing him a special uniform and
nameplate. His presence should be widely publicized to the travelling passengers
by way of public address system at the beginning of the journey.
120. Another area which has caught the serious attention of the Committee and
where the Ministry need to take concerted action  is the area of Waste Management.
The Committee are appalled  to note that  the Ministry does not  have a policy on
waste management. The Ministry in their reply have categorically informed the
Committee on this issue. Review of selected stations  over all zonal railways revealed
that Railways  did not have any mechanism to realistically assess the quantum of
garbage generated at any of these stations. Consequently,  large  quantities of garbage
were either  not reaching the vats or were strewn all over the place  in the surrounding
areas and adround the vats at any given point in time creating an unhygienic
atmosphere within the station premises. Large  quantities of garbage were removed
sporadically once in  a while. Moreover, in the absence of any assessment of quantum
of garbage  generated,   the infrastructure provided for garbage collection and
arrangements made for  garbage disposal in railway station were adhoc, inadequate
and unrealistic. The Committee, therefore, recommend  to the Ministry to upgrade
the existing infrastructure relating to garbage disposal on railway stations. The
Ministry in a note furnished to the Committee have admitted  that  the tools and
implements used in this regard are still very rudimentary.  It is  very disturbing to

47
note that the Ministry have been found wanting with  regards to their efforts towards
garbage disposal and management.
Scrutiny of the standard conditions of contracts of Indian Railways Catering  and
Tourism Corporation (IRCTC)  revealed that  there were no provisions regarding
either porper disposal or segregation of waste before  its disposal. Further, no penalty
was prescribed for improper disposal of waste. The Committee desire that  the
Ministry must form a high level study group  to clearly bring out the various
deficiencies in the existing mechanism and must take steps  to modernize garbage
collection and disposal methods  being undertaken on Indian Railways. The
Committee strongly recommend that Railways must frame a policy on waste
management and  lay down a mechanism whereby the quantum of garbage  generated
on stations (including garbage collected from trains and disposed off at nominated
stations) can be assessed realistically so that adequate collection, segregation and
disposal facilities along  with  necessary infrastructure can be put in place by the
authorities. The Committee desire this to take place within 6 months of the
presentation of the Report. The policy so framed should be in compliance with extant
regulation and be applicable even in the case of outsourced contracts.
The issue of garbage segregation into biodegradable and non-biodegradable  by
providing separate bins for garbage collection must be seriously taken care of by
the Ministry and should be accorded due priority. It is dismaying to note that except
for Gwalior and Jhansi,  there was no mechanism to segregate such  waste, not
even in the four metropolitan cities. The Committee further recommend that  while
making use  of plastic for such purposes, the  Ministry must not lose sight of
environmental concerns and ensure that applicable  rules are adhered to. The
Committee would like to be informed in detail about the corrective  measure taken
by the Railways in this regard in Action Taken Replies furnished by the Ministry.
121. The Committee found that lack of co-ordination in  budgetary provisions
and absence of an overall financial plan to tackle cleanliness related  issue acted as
a major impediment  towards realizing cleanliness related goals in Indian Railways.
The Committee have been given to understand that the working group on cleanliness
suggested creation of a separate minor head  under operating  expenses traffic to
book all the expenses of operating nature for cleanliness and housekeeping of stations,
platforms,  concourses and other areas. However in stark contradiction to this
suggestion the expenditure on various cleanliness activities was booked to different
accounting heads depending upon the department   undertaking the activity. The
Committee have also learnt that the Railways did not have a mechanism to either
assess the  extent of expenditure incurred on cleanliness or to monitor this activity.
The Committee are of the opinion that creation of a separate minor head under
operating expenses will definitely rationalize   the accounting  process and will at the
same time  bring forth  an alignment in the  budgeting process geared towards specific
allocation for cleanliness and sanitation. The Ministry however, in a written note have
informed the Committee that  the accounts of expenditure on specific items of
sanitation  and cleanliness, which form part of the projects under various plan heads,
are not amenable for separation. Therefore, it may not  be possible to work out  the

48
percentage  of surplus being allocated specifically for sanitation and cleanliness.
Not agreeing with  the contention of the Ministry, the Committee  recommend that
Railways need to assess the financial requirements for cleanliness related activities
and provide for them in the budget specifically. This would also enable Railways in
monitoring of the cleanliness initiatives and  to find focused allocation to this prime
area. They also need  to have an overall financial plan for provision of infrastructure,
amenities,  user awareness campaign etc., as per an action plan and actual field
requirements.
The Committee would like to be apprised of the Action Taken by the Railways in
this  regard at the earliest but definitely whilst  furnishing the Action Taken Replies
to  the Committee within the stepulated timeframe. Further it has come to
Committee's  notice that foot over bridges,  booking offices, washable aprons, draines,
water supply,  waiting hall/shed, seating arrangements etc.,  which impact the
cleanliness levels is booked to Plan head  'Passenger Amenities'. Even under this
Plan head, the Railways spent Rs. 256.24 crore during 2005-06, equivalent  to only
1.5  per cent of the total capital expenditure incurred and 1.69 per cent of the
earnings from passenger services. Thus, the Railways had spend comparatively a
very meager amount for providing  infrastructure and amenities to the passengers
on railway stations. This resulted inadequate infrastructure, aminities and resources
which had an  adverse impact on the cleanliness and sanitation levels of   railway
premises. The Ministry in a note furnished to the Committee have  informed that
the amount likely to be spent on creating additional cleanliness related facilities is
very nominal in the current  years i.e. 0.1% of the investible  surplus, the  same
will increase substantially in the coming year considering   the cost of the projects
undertaken. The Committee recommend that the Ministry must outlay a dedicated
budget exclusively meant   for sanitation and cleanliness on Indian Railways with a
provision for year wise increment  on the same. The Committee expects  the
incremental increase to be registered in the ensuing Railway  budget.
122. The Committee have observed several shortcomings  in the garbage collection
area. The Committee understand that vats are secondary collection points where the
garbage from dustbins and garbage off loaded from trains is dumped for carting away
to land-fill sites. After going through the entire information and evidence collected
by the Committee they feel that this area is still a neglected area. The Committee
recommend that number of  vats  should be increased at the station so that littering of
the waste is not a common sight around the station areas. They also recommend that
such vats should be covered and hygienically maintained and periodically cleaned as
per the established guidelines the Committee strongly desire that  Railway priorities
provision of garbage collection units after assessing the requirement on a  realistic
basis  and ensure  proper collection and disposal of garbage. Suitable manpower should
be deployed to man these collection centres. In cases where such activities are
outsourced, the erring contractors must  be penalized  for lack of proper disposal
and non-adherence to  quality benchmarks meant for this purpose. Responsibility
and accountability should  be clearly identified to enable  action for deficient
performance. A senior level officer should be designated for overseeing  and
supervising these activities on a weekly basis. The Ministry must ensure that garbage

49
disposal undertaken at these units is done as per extant  rules  and regulations.
Transportation  of garbage  to disposal sites should be done in the most careful way
by resorting  to highest professional standards. Garbage disposal contracts and
Rag picking contracts must be given to very reputed organizations through a very
transparent process. Performance of the  contractors   should be regularly
reviewed. The Committee also desire that a penal clause should be prescribed and
resorted to in all outsourced contracts  where disposal of waste is done in an
improper way. The Committee have found that all kinds of garbage both recyclable
and non-recyclable  were collected in the same bins in violation of extant  rules in
various zonal railways including at the four metropolitan cities i.e. New Delhi,
Kolkata, Mumbai and Chennai. The Committee have taken a very serious  view of
this laxity on the part of the Ministry  and desire  that the Ministry must ensure
that this practice is discountinued with immediate  effect and they  must take
necessary action to provide all the requisite infrastructure for this purpose.
123. The Committee are of the opinion that  Railways need to draw up a plan of
action with  identified milestones for provision of adequate infrastructure namely
water supply, washable aprons, drains and  sewerage system and machines  along
with conducive platform surfaces for each station duly prioritising requirements.
In this connection the Chairman, Railway Board during the  course of the evidence
held on the subject informed the Committee about 22  stations proposed to be
developed into world class stations. The Ministry further apprised the Committee
about 593  stations selected as a model stations for the purpose of providing upgraded
passenger amenities. Instructions given  to DRMs  regarding picking up of five
stations on an annual basis towards their development on the touch and feel basis to
have the best of the passenger amenities, cleanliness  circulating  area etc. is a
step in the right direction.
The Committee nevertheless, desire that  Railways must ensure that these steps
are taken at  the earliest and the Ministry must not adopt a lackadaisical approach
in this case. Decentralisation of financial powers to DRMs with delegation of power
for sanctioning works  up to Rs. 30 lakh for a particular station on passenger
amenities is also an attempt which will help in improved standards on sanitation
and cleanliness. However, the Committee desire that the Ministry should ensure
that involved executives  must display caution as well as responsibility  while
exercising these powers. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry
should devise  a time frame within which the selected stations will be upgraded to
desired levels as far  as passengers amenities are concerned. The Committee desire
that the Ministry expedite all the efforts in this direction and  they  should  informed
the Committee about the developments  made in this direction in a phased manner.
The repair and maintenance of the infrastructure so created should be ensured
through a suitable monitoring mechanism.
124.  The Committee understand that the number of coaches in long distance as
well as short distance trains have also increased  with the increased quantum of
passengers traffic. Contrary to this, the Committee find that number of water-taps
at the platform are not enough to realistically cater  to the demand of the increased

50
quantum of passengers. At times, especially during the summer months, long queues
are seen at  the taps. Frightening situation is also observed if the stoppage time of
the train is  of very short duration. In view of this, the Committee feel that this
situation can be  easily solved  by increasing  the number of taps of potable water at
all the stations. By doing so lesser number of passengers will accumulate on one
tap at  a given point of time which will check the spilling of water around the  tap
and will also be explored if modernized taps such as push  button taps as seen at the
airports can be introduced not only  to maintain the cleanliness standards but also
to check littering in terms of discarded water bottles. The Committee, therefore,
desire that the number of taps  be increased expeditiously in phased manner at all
stations throughout the country.  The steps initiated in this regard should be
intimated to the Committee and they are confident  that the Ministry will take all
necessary steps based on their recommendation to bring about tangible results.
125. The Committee are of the firm opinion that Railway must not lose sight of
the big picture while executing their duty  to the nation. Cleanliness and Situation
on Indian Railway should be manifested as a top priority in every fresh project that
the Railways undertake and consolidated  emphasis paid to the existing ones.
The experience of Delhi Metro in monitoring Cleanliness and Sanitation
standards is worth emulating. While contesting the Committee's suggestion
regarding practice and procedures being followed by the Delhi  Metro, the Ministry
stated  that Delhi Metro is not catering to the kind of heterogenous crowd that
Railways do. Howevwer, Delhi has increasingly started catering to crowd from
various walks  of life while includes literate, semiliterate  and illiterate passengers.
Moreover, sanitation and cleanliness are very contagious. It has been  observed  that
in Delhi Metro the entire work culture and attitudes of both the functionaries and
traveling public have been more amenable to clean and neat surroundings. And this
has been made possible only by the prevalent neat and clean conditions on the Metro
premises. The Committee understand that major part of Metro operations  are
covered and fully air-conditioned and the journey is comparatively of lesser duration.
Still that cannot be a reasons for the Railways not to emulate this experience. With the
availability  of bins and clean surfaces, supervision with CCTV cameras, regular
announcements regarding this subject and visible presence of staff who cater to this
aspect, Committee are sure that Railways can definitely achieves the targets in this
respect. Ministry submission in this regard stating inclusion of modern machines, active
supervision and overhauling of existing infrastructure by overhauling  of platform
surfaces with the inclusion of Kota stone etc.  is a positive signal. It needs to  be
followed to the extent where the difference is tangibly felt by the
passengers.  The Committee still feel that  Ministry's  efforts in this regard
should be widely publicized and should be spearheaded by the Chairman
Railway Board itself coupled with on-the-spot checks by Board Members
or divisional Managers on a bid-monthly basis that will send a clear signal
to  all concerned regarding the seriousness of the senior  executive towards
this cause. The Committee recommend very  strongly that the Ministry display
enhanced enthusiasm towards this aspect and lead by example. Mor eover,

51
while handing out contracts to private, parties, the Ministry must ensure that the
functionary and supervisory authorities are not the same.
126. Another area which has drawn attention of the Committee is the upgradation
of toilets standards. After analyzing all the information, the Committee recommend
that the Railways should expedite the process of providing Controlled Discharge
Toilet System/Zero Discharge Toilet System toilets in as many trains/coaches as
possible to improve the quality of hygiene. The Committee have been informed that
Indian Railways have planned to install environment friendly green toilet projects
on all passenger coaches. Further more funds to the tune of Rs. 2450 crore have
been sanctioned to fit "Green Toilets'' in 24500 coaches to start with. The Committee
hope and desire that this project is completed within a specified time frame. The
Ministry should unequivocally intimate the Committee about the time schedule made
for this purpose. Also the Ministry must ensure that the money meant to be spent
for the purpose is not transferred elsewhere and is judiciously spent.
The committee have also been informed during the course of the evidence that
the Railways have started providing concrete aprons on the tracks so that they can
be washed soon after the train departs. In this respect, the Committee desire that the
Ministry must ensure that there is no paucity of these aprons while the entire Railway
system is provided with Zero Discharge Toilets. The Committee further recommend
that the Ministry must ensure that there is no manual scavenging in violation of
'Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of dry latrines (Prohibition)
Act 1993' and direction of the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Explaining the delays in
providing concrete aprons, Railways have informed that it was mainly due to long
traffic blocks required and that the design was undergoing changes. In committee's
view Railways' reply only underlines the fact that non-provision of washable aprons
and deficient maintenance of the existing ones has compromised effective cleaning
of Railway tracks adjacent to platforms. The Committee are unhappy with the
lackadaisical approach of the Ministry towards the cleanliness of railway tracks. The
Committee strongly recommend that Ministry should implement all the projects
geared towards sanitation on platforms and railway tracks in an efficient and time
bound manner and should keep the Committee informed about the developments.
The Committee have noted that there has been manifold surge in the number of
passengers using railways as their mode of transportation. The committee are not
oblivious to the fact that all passengers amenities are directly related in terms of
numbers and infrastructrue to the increase in number of passengers. In this context,
the Committee can clearly see that the number of toilets at the Railway stations have
not increased proportionately with the increase in quantum of passengers. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the number of toilets, urinals at the platform/
waiting rooms should be increased forthwith under intimation to the Committee. The
Committee further recommend that the Ministry must ensure that toilets meant
especially for the facility of people with special needs and bassinets for infants should
be adequately provided both on Railway stations and on running trains. While
supplying this reply, the Committee would like to know the total number of existing
toilets at the time of presentation of this Report and accretion in the number that
took place on the recommendation of the Committee.

52
127. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that additional General
Manager at Zonal level, Additional Divisional Railway Manager at Divisional level
and Station Manager/Station Superintendent at station level are the nodal officers/
supervisors who co-ordinate with various departments responsible for sanitation and
cleanliness. The Committee desire that Railways should prescribe norms for regular
inspections by various officers for all categories of stations and ensure that
deficiencies pointed out by the inspecting authorities are actively followed up and
rectified. The Committee have been informed by the Ministry that there is no flying
squad in the Ministry to conduct surprise check ups with regard to Cleanliness and
Sanitations. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry should formulate
a permanent mechanism to conduct such surprise checks. The frequency of these
periodic checks should be clearly outlined and the creation of a deterrence should
be accorded top priority by the Ministry.
128. The Committee have noted shortcomings in execution of penalty against those
invloved in defacing of Railway property and littering etc. In this regard the Committee
desire that enforcement of penalty and proper fencing should be ensured by the
Ministry at the divisional level. Morever, the Ministry should clearly look at the
sources of Garbage generation and try to avoid its spillage on the Railway premises.
The Committee have also noted that garbage from the pantry cars is dumped in the
station yard itself without adhering to prescribed procedures of further disposal. Apart
from the disposable glasses, polythene, water bottle etc. create bulk of the garbage
and also block the drain leading to water logging and accumulation of filth. The
Committee further strongly recommend that vendors operating on the stations should
be directly held responsible for this spillage and should be suitably penalized. The
Committee desire that the Ministry should ensure complete and adequate fencing
of station premises thus avoiding entry of unauthorized persons like beggars, urchins
and unauthorized vendors as they also contribute towards lack of cleanliness and
sanitation on the Railway premises. The security on the station premises should be
a key concern for the Ministry and presence of unauthorized persons on the station
has to be dealt by any renewed mechanism to be devised by Railways in the manner
they deem appropriate. The Committee further recommend that penal measures be
strengthened to serve as an adequate deterrent against unauthorised occupation
and misuse of Railway property.
129. The Committee are perturbed to note the Audit observation regarding heavy
absenteeism, poor work ethics and lack of motivation among the Safaiwalas. The
Committee are of the opinion that role of the Safaiwalas is very inportant and low
morale of these Safaiwalas will definitely cause sanitation efforts on Indian Railways
to suffer. While explaining their case on the matter and the efforts taken to remedy
the situation, the Ministry informed the Committee that heavy absenteeism, poor
work ethics and lack of motivation among the Safaiwalas is due to multiple factors
viz. lack of promotional avenues, low self esteem, lack of variety in work environment,
repetitiveness of job, shift duties, etc. The Committee have been further informed
that Counselling by supervisors on the job, development of training module and
periodic training provision, awards and incentives for outstanding performers,
improvement in work environment by increasing mechanized cleaning, better

53
implements and equipments viz. floor scrubber and dryers, floor washing and
scrubbing machines, high pressure jet cleaner, wet and dry mops, vaccum cleaners,
manual sweeping machines etc. are some of the steps taken to upgrade the morale of
these Safaiwalas. The committee are appalled to note that there was no training module
for these Safaiwalas and it was only after the Audit observations that the Ministry
realized such a need. It is needless to mention that priority be accorded by the
Ministry to Sanitation works. The Committee hope that the Ministry will take up this
issue in right earnest and also take steps to strengthen the cadre of Safaiwalas.
130. Whilst deposing before the Committee, the Chairman, Railways Board was
candid enough in his admission that there lie some anomalies regarding the promotion
of Safaiwalas which negatively contributed towards their morale and also affected
their performance. The Committee are happy to note this candid admission by the
Chairman, nevertheless, they feel that Railway Board has not addressed this problem
effectively enough so as to take it to a logical conclusion. In all the information
supplied by the Railways to the Committee, it is gleaned that no clear-cut promotional
avenues have been put in place to regulate the promotion of Safaiwalas working not
only at the platform but also at the yards and other establishments of Railways. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that clear-cut and effective promotional policy for
Safaiwalas to boost their morale towards their duty should be devised by the Railways
within six months under intimation to the Committee and should be implemented
expeditiously.
131. The Committee have taken due note of the existing deficiencies in contract
management which as observed have led to compromise in quality of service rendered
by the contractors and have also resulted in ineffective cleaning initiatives. The
Committee have found that the terms and conditions of various outsourced contracts
were not well defined. While in some cases the processes and frequencies of
cleanliness activities were not defined, in many others, the manpower to be provided
and the cleaning machines to be utilised by the contractor, were not spelt out. As a
result, the contractors across various zonal railways employed lesser resources
thereby compromising the quality of cleanliness. Audit further revealed that penal
clauses for unsatisfactory discharge of cleaning activities were not incorporated in
five agreements of outsourced works. In three stations, no agreement was entered
into though the cleaning activities were outsourced. Award of contracts to the
contractors without prescribing any maximum standard that the contractors would
have to adhere to and also to the lowest bidder irrespective of viability of rates has
been viewed very seriously by the Committee. In this connection, the Committee
very strongly desire that the Ministry must fine tune the system of Outsourcing in
Railways. The Ministry should explore the possibilities of fixing responsibility on
those officials who handed out faulty contracts and must ensure that system for
outsourcing is made fool proof. Moreover, the Committee desire that there should
be an effective supervisory mechanism in place to ensure that such anomalies are
not repeated in future.
132. The scheme 'Clean Train Station' (CTS) was launched in October, 2002, as a
major initiative for improving train cleanliness. Under this scheme, mechanised

54
enroute cleaning of trains was introduced during halts at identified stations on major
trunk routes of Indian Railways. As  per the scheme select trains were to be cleaned
at the nominated stations and necessary arrangements were to be made on the
specified platforms in a planned manner. However, to the utter dismay of the
Committee it has been found that a large number of nominated trains could not be
attended to due to non-placement of the trains on the nominated platforms. At some
stations in East Railway, even the nomination of platforms was not done judiciously.
Inadequate coordination between departments also resulted in non-availability of
adequate infrastructure and requisite time for implementing the scheme.Thus the CTS
scheme though ambitious and well intentioned could not achieve its perceived goals.
Chairman Railway Board during the course of evidence also apprised the Committee
of various initiatives being taken by the Ministry which include cleaning of the trains
at their originating point with high powered jet machines. The Committee hope that
Ministry will take remedial action to plug the gaps and intensify their efforts towards
achieving the said objective of the scheme in a sustained manner.
133. In Committee's view a responsive and effective grievance redressal of
passengers at railway stations and in trains with respect to cleanliness and sanitation
is of extreme importance in order to restore faith of the travelling passengers on the
systems in place in the Indian Railways. Responding to a question about the
mechanism evolved by the Ministry in this regard the Ministry informed the Committee
that there is a laid down system of registration of complaints including cleanliness,
by passengers. At all stations a complaint-cum-suggestion book is maintained with
the Station Manager/Station Superintedent. In trains, Guards of passenger and Mail/
Express trains carry such complaint books. In addition, the Manager of the pantry
car is also required to make the complaint book available to passengers on demand.
The complaints/suggestions given by the travelling public are duly acknowledged
at the time of registration. The Committee are not happy with the reply of the Ministry.
The Committee recommend that the Ministry must strengthen the existing mechanism
of grievance redressal. The designated officer meant for the purpose should be easily
approachable to the travelling passengers. The Ministry should further ensure that
this system is modernized with the effective usage of technology. There should be
an automatic system of complaint registration and a time limit should be prescribed
for the redressal of these complaints. The Committee strongly recommend the setting
up of a call centre especially for the purpose. This facility can also be utilized for
voicing and registering security concerns of the travelling passengers. A team of
officials should be allocated this task and they should be allocated this function on
the running trains. While selecting the team, the Ministry must keep in mind that it
displays readiness and cheerfulness in sorting out the problems of those in distress.
Moreover contact numbers of the concerned officials should be prominently
displayed within the coaches to reassure the passengers on the subject.
134. The Committee have learnt that various flaws exist in the execution of
mechanized cleaning in various A and B category stations. The Committee have noted
that in major stations like Howrah, Asansol, Bangalore Cantt., Hubli, New Delhi, H.
Nizamuddin, Delhi, Chennai Central, Chappra etc. mechanized cleaning remained
largely in effective due to non availability of smooth platform surfaces and various

55
associated problems. It has been quite clear to the Committee that the Railways tried
to execute this program without necessary infrastructure in place. The Committee
note that the Ministry's approach in this regard lacked proper vision and
comprehensive planning. The Committee are appalled to note that such an ambitious
program was initiated without keeping in view the hurdles and possible solutions in
mind. The Committee, therefore, very strongly recommend that the Ministry ensure
that a suitable infrastructure is laid down to carry out such cleaning on all selected
stations. The Committee further recommend that the Ministry must identify the flaws
that were not perceived at the Planning stage of this program and take steps to rectify
the same without any further loss of time.
135. Providing safe, tasty and hygienic food on Indian Railways is the duty of
the Ministry and the concerned Department i.e. Indian Railway Catering and Tourism
Corporation (IRCTC). The satisfaction level of travelling public which provides revenue
to the Ministry should be given top  priority. The Committee have noted various
complaints regarding lack of hygiene and maintenance of base kitchen in the Railways.
The Ministry in their reply have apprised the Committee about various certifications
that have been acquired by the house keeping services of the Ministry. The Committee
laud the acquisition of the international certifications and hope that the corporation
will provide efficient services to the travelling passengers and take into account the
various tastes of the heterogeneous travelling public while serving them with smile.
The rates of various eatables both on the running trains and on platforms must be
rationalized. The Ministry must curb the tendency of various vendors to charge
exorbitant prices from the travelling public as far as food and beverage is concerned.
The Ministry must inform the Committee about the steps taken in this regard. The
Committee further recommend that the menu available on various prestigious trains
like Rajdhani, Shatabdi etc. should have more variety and the passengers should be
given an opportunity to exercise their choice while selecting the menu. The Committee
have also taken note on the fact that outsourcing in catering services has not yielded
very satisfactory results. The Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry should
enquire into this matter in depth and if necessary the role of the Indian Railways
Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) be further  enhanced to expand its catering
services  within the running trains and starting more food outlets at the stations.
Where any inadequacy is found in getting the quality food by the passengers, the
Ministry must take stern action.
N
EW DELHI; SANTOSH GANGWAR,
17 February, 2009 Chairman,
28 Magha, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

ANNEXURE I
MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2007-2008) HELD ON 17TH JANUARY , 2008
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1830 hrs. in Committee Room 'D', Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri R.L. Jalappa
5. Shri Brajesh Pathak
6. Shri Mohan Singh
7. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
8. Shri Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri V . Narayanasamy
10. Shri Janardhana Poojary
11. Dr. K. Malaisamy
12. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Vinod Rai — C&AG
2. Shri N.R. Rayalu — Dy. C&AG  (Railways)
3. Ms. Meera Swarup — Principal Director (Railways)
56

57
Representatives of Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)
1. Shri K.C. Jena — Chairman, Railway Board and  Ex-officio
Principal Secretary to the Government of India
2. Ms. Sudha M. Chobe — Financial Commissioner, Railways &
Ex-officio Secretary to the Government of India
3. Shri S.K. Vij — Member Engineering, Railway Board &
Ex-officio Secretary to the Government of India
4. Shri R.K. Rao — Member Mechanical, Railway Board &
Ex-officio Secretary to the Government of India
5 Shri S.S. Khurana — Member Staff, Railway Board & Ex-officio
Secretary to the Government of India
6. Shri V .N. Mathur — Member Traffic, Railway Board & Ex-officio
Secretary to the Government of India
7. Dr. V .K. Ramteke — Director General (RHS)
8. Shri M.K. Sinha — Director General(RPF)
9. Shri M. Irshad — Additional Member(ME)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the members of the visiting
delegation of Finance & Economic Development Portfolio Committee and Public
Accounts Standing Committee of Kwazulu-Natal Province, South Africa, Recalling
the close historical ties and cultural heritage shared between India and South Africa,
the Chairman gave a brief outline of the role of the Public Accounts Committee in
Indian Parliamentary System, its origin, composition, scope, functions and
achievements in ensuring Executive accountability to the Legislature, Expressing her
thanks to the Hon'ble Chairman, PAC for convening the meeting, Ms. Joanne Mary
Downs the co-Group Leader and Chairperson of Public Accounts Standing Committee
of Kwazulu-Natal Province outlined in brief the functions and working of their
Committee. Thereafter, the Chairman and Members of the Committee and the members
of the  visiting delegation exchanged views, ideas and experiences on the role,
functioning and other procedural matters relating to the working of their respective
Committees.
The meeting over, the visiting delegation thereafter departed.
3. Thereafter, the Committee took up the oral evidence on Chapter II of C&AG's
Report No. 6 of 2007 (Performance Audit) Union Government (Railways) relating to
"Cleanliness and Sanitation on Indian Railways." At the outset, the Chairman, PAC
extended a hearty welcome to Shri Vinod Rai, who has recently taken over as the
Comptroller and Auditor General of India. The Officers of the C&AG of India then
briefed the Committee on important points arising out of the aforesaid Audit Report.
4. Then the representatives of the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) were called
in. The Chairman read out the provisions of Direction 58 of the Directions by the

58
Speaker  regarding confidentiality of proceedings. Thereafter, the Committee
commenced oral evidence on the subject.
5. The Chairman, Railway Board explained the factual position on the points arising
out of the Audit Report and replied to the various points/queries raised by the
Members.
6. To certain queries for which the witnesses could  not give satisfactory replies,
the Hon'ble  Chairman directed the representatives of the Ministry of Railways
(Railway Board) to furnish the requisite information in writing at the earliest particularly
on the issues relating to:—
l Need to select more number of stations per Railway Division for being
developed as World class stations;
l Fixing of time frame for repairing/replacing broken/unusable passenger
amenities related infrastructure viz. toilets, urinals, watertaps, washable
aprons etc.;
l Need for centralized monitoring mechanism at the highest level to coordinate
multiple departments regarding cleanliness and Sanitation;
l Need to improve quality and quantity of food supplied in trains;
l Public Awareness campaign in respect of cleanliness and sanitation;
l Number of Station Manager/Health Inspectors against whom action taken
for negligence/delinquency of duty in respect of cleanliness and sanitation;
and
l Monitoring mechanism for overseeing the performance of outsourced jobs.
7. The evidence on the subject remained inconclusive and the Committee decided
to hold another sitting on a subsequent date after the receipt of the written information
from the Ministry on the points raised by Members during the meeting.
8. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE SIXTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-2009) HELD ON 28TH AUGUST, 2008
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1330 hrs. on 28th August, 2008 in Committee
Room "C'', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Furkan Ansari
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri Shailendra Kumar
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Shri Brajesh Pathak
9. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
10. Shri Sita Ram Singh
11. Shri Kharabela Swain
12. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
13. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
14. Prof. P.J. Kurien
15. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Deputy Secretary-II
Representatives  of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Bharti Prasad — D eputy C&AG
2. Ms. Meera Swarup — Pr. Director of Audit (Railways)
3. Shri Ashutosh Joshi — Director Audit (Railway Board)
59

60
Representatives of Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) and Indian Railway
Catering and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC)
1. Shri K.C. Jena Chairman, Railway Board
2. Ms. Sudha M. Chobe Financial Commissioner, Railways
3. Shri S.K. Vij Member Engineering, Railway Board
4. Shri Sukhbir Singh Member Electrical, Railway Board
5. Shri R.K. Rao Member Mechanical, Railway Board
6. Shri S.S. Khurana Member Staff, Railway Board
7. Shri V .N. Mathur Member Traffic, Railway Board
8. Dr. Nalin Shinghal Managing Director, IRCTC
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit officers to
the sitting.
3. Thereafter, the Committee proceeded to take further oral evidence of the
representatives of Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) and Indian Railway Catering
and Tourism Corporation (IRCTC), on the subject "Cleanliness and Sanitation on
Indian Railways'' as featured in Report No. 6 of 2007 of C&AG of India. The Committee
were given a brief account of the action taken by the Ministry with regard to the
audit findings. The Members then sought clarifications on certain points arising out
of Audit Report and the replies furnished by the Ministry on the queries raised in
the previous sitting on the subject. Hon'ble Chairman, PAC desired that a
questionnaire based on each of the Audit Report comments, duly incorporating the
queries of the Members may be sent to the Ministry and they may be asked to give
a written submission on these points. The Committee also expressed the view that
they may undertake an on-the-spot visit of some railway stations, if so required,
during the course of the examination of the subject.
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE III
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2008-2009) HELD ON 30TH JANUARY , 2009
The Committee sat from 1400 hrs. to 1500 hrs. on 30th January, 2009 in
Room No. "139'' Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Shri Santosh Gangwar—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
3. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
4. Shri K.S. Rao
5. Shri Kharabela Swain
6. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Raashid Alvi
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary-II
Officer of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Ms. Meera Swarup — Pr. Director of A udit
2. At the outset , the Chairman, welcomed the Members of the Committee to the
sitting, The Committee then took up for consideration and adoption the draft Report
on Chapter-II of C&AG's Report No. 6 of 2007, Union Government (Railways -
Performance Audit) relating to "Cleanliness and Sanitation on Indian Railways".
After some deliberation, the Committee adopted the draft Report with some minor
changes and authorized the Chairman to finalise and present the same to the
Parliament in the light of factual verification done by Audit.
The Committee then adjourned.
61

Report No. 6 of 2007 (Railways) ANNEXURE IV
Chapter 2
Cleanliness and Sanitation on Indian Railways
2.1 Highlights
l Railways had neither developed any standards as benchmarks for various
cleanliness activities nor a cohesive action plan detailing milestones and
the roadmap for achieving them. At the zonal level, the norms were either
totally absent or not comprehensive enough, rendering the cleanliness
efforts ineffective.
(Para 2.9.1)
l Multiple departments were involved in cleanliness activities leading to lack
of coordination among them and rendering the cleanliness efforts ineffective.
As such, accountability did not go with responsibility.
(Para 2.9.2)
l Railways neither had any mechanism to assess or control the level of
expenditure on maintenance of cleanliness in stations and in trains nor a
policy on waste management. Large quantities of garbage were found lying
in station premises due to inadequate infrastructure, deficient waste
collection and disposal mechanism.
(Paras 2.9.3, 2.9.4 and 2.10.1)
l Inadequate provision of water supply, washable aprons, drains and sewerage
system and ineffective utilisation of machines were major handicaps in
providing a clean and hygienic evironment in the railway premises.
(Paras 2.10.2 to 2.10.5)
l Passenger amenities such as toilets and urinals, drinking water, seating
arrangements and waiting halls were not commensurate with the quantum
of passengers using them and were poorly maintained, thereby straining
existing amenities and hampering cleanliness efforts with passengers
overcrowding the station premises. This was further complicated by the
failure to prevent unauthorised persons from entering stations premises.
(Paras 2.10.6 to 2.10.8 and 2.10.11)
l Inadequate training compounded with a high incidence of absenteeism among
safaiwalas in stations maintained departmentally resulted in deficient
performance.
(Para 2.10.9)
l Inadequate mechanism to monitor the work of contractors for outsourced
cleanliness activities including pest control and bed linen washing contracts
led to compromise in quality of work done.
(Paras 2.10.10, 2.11.2 and 2.11.3)
62

63
l The cleaning of coaches in coaching yards and EMU car sheds was found
ineffective as the infrastructure and resources were inadequate and the
quality of supervision was deficient. Infrastructure in trains namely, dustbins
and toilets, were also inadequate.
(Para 2.11.1)
l The Clean Train Station scheme introduced for en route cleaning of trains
was largely ineffective due to a number of deficiencies in its implementation.
(Para 2.11.4)
l Measures adopted to create user awareness of utilising existing amenities
as stations and in trains were inadequate. User abuse of facilities was not
monitored effectively. Further, user perception was not being harnessed to
bring about improvements in the system.
(Para 2.12)
2.2 Gist of recommendations
l Railways should evolve performance criteria or standards for each and every
cleanliness related activity and its supervision over all zonal railways. A
comprehensive overall action plan at the apex level should be prepared
addressing all cleanliness related issues followed by zonal action plans
dovetailed with the overall action plan.
l Railways should consider rationalising the reporting structure and putting
in place a system whereby the responsibility of maintaining clealiness and
hygienic surroundings at railway stations and in trains, exclusively vests
with one authority.
l Railways need to assess the financial requirements for cleanliness related
activities and provide for them in the budget specifically. This would also
enable monitoring of the cleanliness initiatives. Similarly, the Railways also
need to have an overall financial plan for provision of infrastructure,
amenities, user awareness compaigns etc., as per an action plan and actual
field requirements.
l Railways need to frame a policy on waste management in compliance with
extant regulations. A mechanism may be put in place to realistically assess
the quantum of garbage generated so that adequate facilities and
infrastructure such as dustbins and vats can be provided. Proper collection
and disposal of garbage also needs to be ensured.
l Railways need to draw up a plan of action with identified milestones for
provision of adequate infrastructural facilities such as water supply,
washable aprons, drains and sewerage system and mechines along with
conducive platform surface and ensure that they are maintained properly.
Railways also need to provide  for adequate infrastructure and resources
in coaching yards and trains to enable cleaning of coaches in a more effective
manner.

64
l For effective and efficient implementation of schemes such as 'Pay and Use'
Toilets and 'Clean Train Station', Railways should provide for facilities as
planned and ensure proper coordination between the departments besides
effective monitoring and supervision.
l Railways need to adequately provide and maintain passenger amenities like
toilets and urinals, water booths, seating arrangements and waiting halls
commensurate with the quantum of passenger traffic handled at the stations.
l The manpower requirements at the stations need to be reviewed and
provided for, apart from instituting a mechanism for training and controlling
absenteeism. Further, quality benchmarks should be prescribed for
outsourced cleanliness related activities. Quality of supervision should also
be improved.
l Railways should institute a sustainable mechanism to restrict entry access
to prevent unauthorised entry into station premises.
l Railways should strive to enhance the level of user awareness on a large
scale and to initiate effective means of harnessing user perception to bring
about improvements in the system.
2.3 Introduction
Railways are the most preferred mode of transport for the masses in India, running
9,000 trains reaching 8,000 stations and handling approximately 1.4 crore passengers
per day. One of the commitments of the Railways in its 'Citizen's Charter on Passenger
Services on Indian Railways' is to provide safe and dependable train services to the
passengers and ensure adequate passenger amenities in trains and at railway stations,
which includes provision of clean and hygienic surroundings both at railway stations
and in trains. The charter also lays down railways' commitment towards setting up a
responsive and effective grievance redressal machinery for time bound resolution of
complaints and grievances of the passengers.
2.4 Organisational structure
A number of directorates in Railway Board are responsible for dealing with the
issue of cleanliness in the Railways. While Mechanical and Engineering directorates
are responsible for maintenance and cleanliness of coaches in service, the Health
Directorate is responsible for cleanliness of a few railway stations through Chief
Health Inspectors (CHI). However, the overall cleanliness at railway stations is the
responsibility of Chief Commercial Managers in zonal railway Headquarters and
Divisional Railway Managers in Divisions, under the overall direction of the
Commercial directorate.
2.5 Audit Objectives
The review on cleanliness and Sanitation of Indian Railways was carried out with
view to assess whether:
l the plans and policies framed to maintain cleanliness and management of
waste generated in railway stations and in trains were adequate;

65
l the cleanliness and sanitation measures undertaken by Indian Railways at
railway stations were adequate and effective;
l cleanliness and sanitation measures undertaken by Indian Railways in trains
were adequate and effective; and
l the feedback mechanism was adequate and useful in improving the system.
2.6 Audit scope and methodology
The present review was confined to cleanliness on station premises and in trains
including their cleaning in coaching yards and EMU car sheds. Station cleanliness
covers cleanliness in the circulating area, outside the station building and inside the
station including platforms, the concourse, track within the station area, foot over
bridges, drains etc. The policy decisions taken by Railway Board during the past
five years in respect of cleanliness and sanitation were studied and their
implementation over various zonal railways was reviewed on a selected sample of
stations, trains and coaching yards. In addition, schemes for improving cleanliness
and sanitation on stations and trains viz. 'Pay and Use Toilets' and 'Clean Train Station'
were also reviewed.
The records relating to planning, policy decisions and implementation of these
decisions were studied over various zonal railways. Joint inspections with railway
authorities were carried out on the stations, trains and coaching yards to capture
the actual conditions in the field.
A survey questionnaire was developed in consultation with Consumer
Coordination Council, Noida and was administered on randomly selected passengers
(3,719 respondents) on fifteen
1 selected stations to assess the passengers’ perception
on various aspects of cleanliness and their views on level of cleanliness on stations
and in trains over Indian Railways. An attempt was also made to grade the stations
based on the existence of a few identified parameters and their standard of
maintenance as observed during the course of audit and joint inspections
(Annexure XIX).
2.7 Sample selection
Railways categorise stations on the basis of earnings. This categorisation has
been followed in the selection of the sample size also as it broadly reflects the number
of passengers using a station. A Sample of 358 stations from various categories was
selected for undertaking the review. Thirty two coaching yards and nine EMU car
sheds were also selected over all Indian Railways (sixteen zonal railways and Metro/
Kolkata) including 128 trains for cleaning and maintenance of trains. Further, en-route
garbage collection was also reviewed in 39 selected trains (Annexure. XX).
2.8 Acknowledgement
The audit plan and methodology including the audit objectives were discussed
by Principal Directors of Audit in all zonal railways with the respective General
1 New Delhi, Delhi, Hazrat Nizamuddin, Mumbai Central, Mumbai CST, Dadar, Howrah, Sealdah,
Kharagpur, Chennai Central, Chennai Egmore, Secunderabad. Ahmedabad, Guwahati and
Gorakhpur.

66
Managers and concerned departmental heads in the entry and exit conferences. The
input provided on various aspects including suggestions for sample selection is
acknowledged with thanks. The co-operation extended by Railway Board and all zonal
railways during the course of audit and the support provided by railway officials
while conducting joint inspections in the field is appreciated. The review note was
discussed by Deputy Comptroller and Auditor General with the Chairman, Railway
Board and other Members in the exit conference after issue to the Ministry of Railways
in November 2006.
2.9 Plans and policies
Railway Board had issued instructions on various cleanliness related aspects from
time to time. In this regard, a Sanitation Manual was brought out in August 2000.
The manual did not address all the problems identified  comprehensively and left
various areas such as waste management uncovered. The manual was under  revision
(October 2006).
A working  group comprising five officers of Railway board constituted  to work
out constructive suggestions for cleanliness at stations and on trains suggested
(September 2002)   an action plan for development of infrastructure, tools, delegation
of powers and  budget allocation, public-private participation, education of users,
modification in coaches, amendment in rules and improving staff motivation.
'Operation Cleanliness' was launched on 15  August, 2002  and  a Task force was
constituted to address the issues of assessment of cleanliness gadgets and manpower.
This review  of cleanliness and sanitation was undertaken against the background
of the above mentioned policy decisions and revealed inadequacy of standards,
action plan and norms on cleanliness, absence of an unified  department responsible
for cleanliness  and involvement of multiple departments, insufficient expenditure on
cleanliness and inadequacy of policy on waste  management as brought  out below.
2.9.1 Inadequacy of standards, action plan and norms on cleanliness
Maintaining a clean and hygienic environment in station premises and in trains
by Indian Railways is imperative since an average of 1.4  crore passengers frequent
the  railway stations and travel in the trains every day all over the  country. It is,
therefore essential that quality  standards in line with  international best practices
providing  benchmarks or goals are prescribed, along with a  comprehensive action
plan, identifying milestones and providing a road map.  The action plan should
translate into norms for every cleanliness related activity to  achieve the prescribed
standards. It was observed  that:
l Railways were yet to adopt any standards or performance indicators (i.e. the
expected quality of the outcome)  for any cleanliness related activity carried
out in stations and in trains against which the actual performance could be
judged. Standards  for supervision were also not prescribed  for any
cleanliness related activity on stations and in trains.
l Cleanliness was largely viewed as a secondary activity, subservient to other
activities  such as maintenance, as was done in the coaching yards,  where

67
while certifying  a train as fit for next journey, the certificate provided was
limited to maintenance of coaches and the cleanliness activities carried out
were not certified.
l Railway Board issued directives to all zonal railways (November 2002) to
come up with their own short-term, medium-term and long-term action plans
on  issues identified by the working group and  implement them in a time
bound  manner. However, Railway Board  neither   set any milestones  nor
any roadmap for comprehensively addressing  the issue of maintenance   of
cleanliness and sanitation on railway premises. There was no comprehensive
action plan at the all India level  with specific targets and lines of action.
l Further, action plans, even on these limited issues,  were not prepared by
eight out of the sixteen zonal railways (WR, SR, NEFR, ECR, SWR, NCR,
WCR and SECR).  Wherever prepared, action plans were not related to
availability or augmentation of infrastructure and requisite resources. As
such, these plans were not realistic and, thus, not very practical.
Consequently, most of the issues set out even under short  term and medium
term plans were either not implemented or  were implemented only partially.
l Emphasis  was given more on short term campaigns and occasional
cleanliness drives instead of having a regular, sustained plan for cleaning
the premises (CR, SER, NR and NWR). The action plans of different divisions
of ER revealed the priority areas differed from division to division, and were
not in conformity with that  of the zonal headquarters.
l In order to lay down norms for specific cleanliness related activities, zonal
railways were required to issue joint procedural  orders/circulars laying down
norms for cleaning  activities on railway premises. It was observed  that while
two zonal Railways (NCR and SWR) did not issue any Joint Procedure
Orders (JPOs), those issued by eleven zonal railways were without defining
any norms (process/frequency).
l The JPOs issued by  various divisions of ER, SER and ECoR did not address
the issue of cleanliness in trains and also left various areas  in the station
premises such as  ceilings of platforms, retiring rooms, waiting  rooms, drains,
tracks beyond platform area, water booths etc., uncovered. In SER,  these
orders were not circulated to station authorities for implementation, defeating
the very purpose  for which they were framed. These JPOs also did not
prescribe any norms for supervision.
Due to absence of standards, cleanliness initiatives were carried out without
accountability and the Railways had no mechanism  to assess the effectiveness  of
the various measures. Absence of a comprehensive action plan at the apex level led
to efforts towards cleanliness remaining as isolated  efforts, with sporadic instructions
being issued from time to time without being cohesive. Thus, the planning itself was
deficient and resulted in poor cleanliness and sanitation on the Railways as brought
out in subsequent paragraphs.

68
Recommendations
Railways should evolve performance criteria or standards for each and every
cleanliness related activity and its supervision over all zonal railways. Planning
should be systematic with on overall action plan at the apex level comprehensively
addressing all the issues relating to cleanliness followed by zonal action plans
dovetailed with the overall action plan for achievement of  the prescribed standards
and translated  into orders at the micro level  detailing processes, frequencies and
responsibilities of all activities including supervision.
2.9.2 Multiplicity of departments involved in maintaining cleanliness
Ideally, a  unified command structure in the organisational hierarchy would  ensure
accountability and thereby effective performance  of a  function. Where a number of
departments  are responsible, coordination and co-operation among them  is
paramount to ensure  effectiveness.
The responsibility of maintenance of cleanliness on railway premises rested with
a number of departments viz. Commercial, Medical, Engineering, Mechanical, Electrical
etc. While the Engineering department looked after the construction, repair and
maintenance of civil engineering works, the cleaning  of  station premises and
coaching yards rested  with Medical, Commercial and Mechanical departments. Of
the 298 stations (A,B and C categories selected  for  review in audit, Medical
department was responsible for maintenance of  cleanliness on 128  railway  stations
and Commercial/Operating department  was responsible for maintenance of
cleanliness on 160  railway stations. Six stations were jointly maintained by the
Commercial and Medical departments while four stations were maintained by the
Engineering departments . Thus, there was no rationale behind some of the stations
being looked after  by Medical and some  by Commercial departments and the
responsibilities were vested with these  departments historically. It was  further
observed that:
l Besides  maintaining cleanliness in stations maintained by  the Medical
department, the Chief Health Inspector/Health Inspector (CHI/HI)  was also
responsible for  health education of the railway community, participation in
health programmes, inspecting and ensuring quality of food and water sold
on stations and in colonies etc. As a result, their focus on maintaining
cleanliness on railway stations  was diffused. Further, the reporting structure
was also complex since the CHI/HI  reported  administratively to the Station
Manager and functionally to the Senior Divisional Medical Officer or Chief
Medical Supervisor in Medical department.
l Station Masters/Managers are primarily responsible for operations such as
reception and departure of  trains from the station, shunting of trains,
management  of signals and level crossings, undertaking operating
inspections of the station, repair and maintenance of station buildings, tools
and equipment, water supply arrangements etc. Cleanliness, thus, was a very
low priority area  for them in view of the wide spectrum of responsibilities.

69
l Further, the responsibility for maintenance of cleanliness even within the
station premises rested with different departments. For instance, within the
station premises   the responsibility of cleaning the walls up to six feet (three
metres in some cases)  rested with the Medical/Commercial department
whereas  above six feet (three  metres in some cases) the  Engineering
department was responsible. Similarly, for the foot over bridges on the
platform, while the responsibility of cleaning the steps rested with Medical/
Commercial department, cleaning the  ceilings of the   foot over bridges was
the responsibility of the Engineering  department. Cleaning of  electric fittings
and fans was the responsibility of Electrical  department while the Signal
and Telecommunication department was responsible for clocks and speakers.
This resulted in areas  being left unattended to due to lack of coordination.
l Though the Station Manager was made responsible for all cleanliness
activities, the staff  of engineering, electrical, signal and telecommunication
departments worked under the administrative control of their respective
departments. At the lowest level, cleanliness activities were carried out by
safaiwalas. However, there was no unified  cadre of safaiwalas and the various
departments  controlled their respective cadres of safaiwalas.
l Even at the Railway Board level,   different directorates were responsible
for different areas of cleanliness related activities and schemes. This would
affect  policy making and development  of a comprehensive action plan at
the apex level including budgetary considerations.
The Railways replied (December 2006)  that instructions had been issued in 2001
regarding the administrative arrangements. They also stated that exclusive Health
Inspectors were to  be provided at important stations under the administrative control
of the Station Manager and that service improvement groups had been formed for
ensuring unkeep of passenger amenities. However, these efforts were not  adequate
as even five years after the issue of these orders coordination problems continue.
This is substantiated  by the adverse impact on cleanliness levels as brought out in
this  report.
Recommendations
Railways should consider rationalising the reporting structure and putting in
place a system whereby the responsibility of maintaining cleanliness and  hygienic
surroundings at railway stations and in trains, exclusively vests with one authority.
Alternatively, the mechanism  for ensuring coordination and co-operation amongst
the various departments should be  strengthened.
2.9.3 Insufficient expenditure on cleanliness
The Working Group on Cleanliness suggested creation of a separate minor head
under Operating Expenses — Traffic to  book all the  expenses of operating nature
for cleanliness  and housekeeping  of stations, platforms, concourses and other areas.
However, the expenditure on various cleanliness activities was booked to different
accounting   heads depending upon the department undertaking the activity. The

70
Railways did not have a mechanism to either assess the extent of expenditure incurred
on cleanliness or to monitor this activity. As a result, budgetary provisions were
also not coordinated and there was no overall financial plan to tackle cleanliness
related issues.
The infrastructure such as station buildings, platforms, foot over bridges, booking
offices, washable aprons, drains, water supply, waiting hall/shed, seating arrangements
etc., which impact the cleanliness levels is  booked to Plan head 'Passenger Amenities'.
Even under this Plan head the Railways spent Rs. 256.24 crore during 2005-06,
equivalent to only 1.5 per cent of the total capital expenditure incurred and 1.69 per
cent of the earnings from passengers services. Thus, the Railways had spent a very
small amount for  providing infrastructure and amenities to the passengers on railway
stations. This resulted in inadequate infrastructure, anenities and resources which
had an adverse impact on the cleanliness and sanitation levels of railways premises
as detailed in subsequent paragraphs (Paragraphs 2.10.1 to 2.10.8).
In addition, no separate imprest was provided with Station Managers for purchase
of cleaning items. Wherever required, these had to be purchased from the regular
imprest meant inter alia for a variety of miscellaneous expenditure not necessarily
related to cleanliness. Even this regular imprest was not provided to the Station
Managers in many stations. On some stations, imprest provided was inadequate.
The quantum of imprest was also not laid down and varied from as little as Rs. 100
(Majerhat, ER) to Rs. 5,000 (Pune, CR). As a result, there was a shortage of even
basic consumables such as bleaching powder, phenyle, lime, brooms etc.
Recommendations
Railways need to assess the financial requirements for cleanliness related
activities and provide for them in the budget specifically. This would  also enable
monitoring of the cleanliness initiatives. Similarly, the Railways also  need to have
an overall financial  plan for provision of infrastructure, amenities, user awareness
campaigns etc. as per an action plan and actual field requirements.
2.9.4 Policy on waste management
Railways generate large quanities of waste on railway stations and trains
consisting of disposable packaging waste (both paper and plastic) and food waste
etc. Effective waste management includes assessment of garbage generated, provision
of infrastructural facilities, arrangements for collection of  waste, their segregation
and disposal  duly complying with the extant rules and regulations. A review of waste
management in railway stations and trains over various  zonal railways revealed the
inadequacies in the waste management  policy as brought out below:
2.9.4.1  Lack of assessment of quantum of garbage generated
Solid waste management begins with the assessment of the quantum of garbage
generated at stations and in trains. This essentially provides the basis for assessing
the infrastructure required for collection and disposal of waste. Review of selected
stations over all zonal railways revealed that Railways did not have any mechanism
to realistically assess the quantum of garbage  generated at any of these stations.

71
However, Rail India Technical and Economic Services Limited 2 (RITES) had
estimated that on an average 64 grams of garbage was generated per passenger  per
day in railway stations on Indian Railways. Over the years, with increased usage of
disposable packaging material including plastic water bottles and aluminum  foils,
this  quantum (which was assessed more than ten years back), would  only have
increased considerably
3. Nonetheless,  using the estimate of  64 grams per passenger
per day, the garbage generated at some selected  stations which handle more than
50,000 passengers per day was  assessed in audit as a test case to evlauate whether
Railways were geared towards handling the garbage generated at these stations.
It was observed that garbage disposal  was far below gargage generated in most
of the important stations as shown in the following table:—
Name of the Zonal No. of Estimated quantity of Quantum of Difference
stations R ailway passengers garbage generated garbage disposed (Col 4-5)
per day per day @ 64 gms per per day (Metric
passenger (Metric tones)  tones)
(Metric tones)
New Delhi NR 390000 24.96 15.00 9.96
Delhi NR 320525 20.51 10.00 10.51
Mumbai CST CR 310415 19.87 0.50 19.37
Ahmedabad WR 69755 4.46 0.35 4.11
Consequently, large quantities of garbage were either not reaching the vats or
were strewn all over the place in the surrounding areas and around the vats at any
given point in time creating an unhygienic atmosphere within the station premises.
Large quantities of garbage were removed sporadically once in a  while. Moreover,
in the absence of any assessment of quantum of garbage  generated, the infrastructure
provided for garbage collection  and arrangements made for garbage disposal in
railway stations were adhoc and inadequate  as discussed in paragraph 2.10.1. The
Railways have stated that the deduction that large quantities of garbage were not
reaching the vats was  hypothetical. However,  the statement is not tenable, as the
Railways do not have an independent assessment of garbage generation. Further,
the garbage strewn around in the station premises substantiates that audit view.
2.9.4.2 Non-segregation of solid waste
As per the Municipal Solid Wastes (Management and Handling) Rules, 2000, solid
waste generated should be segregated into biodegradable and non-biodegradable
by providing  separate  bins for garbage collection. With increasing use of various
kinds of packaging material for food items including  plastic, segregation becomes
all the more important. Thus, it is necessary that  the terms and conditions of the
catering contracts bind the contractors to adhere to these laws failing which penalty
would need to be levied.
2 A Public section undertaking under the Ministry of Railways.
3 A study by Barod a Staff College estimated that 47 Rajdhani Trains, carrying on an average
1000 passengers per day, serving three  meals in 15 packages would generate 77.20 crore units
of waste packages per year.

72
A review of the standard conditions of contracts of Indian Railways Catering and
Tourism Corporation (IRCTC) revealed that there were no provisions regarding either
proper disposal or segregation of waste before its disposal. Further, no penalty was
prescribed for improper disposal of waste. Inspection of railway station over various
zonal railways also revealed that except in Gwalior and Jhansi, there was   no
mechanism to segregate biodegradable and non-biodegradable waste in any railway
station, including at the  four metropolitan cities i.e.  New Delhi, Kolkata, Mumbai
and Chennai. All kinds of garbage recyclable and non-recyclable were collected in
the same bins, in violation of extant rules.
Recommendations
Railways need to frames a policy on waste management and lay down a
mechanism whereby the quantum of garbage generated on stations (including
garbage collected from trains disposal off at nominated stations) can be assessed
realistically so that adequate collection, segregation and disposal facilities along
with necessary infrastructure can be put in place by the authorities. The policy
should be in compliance with extant regulations and be applicable even in the
case of outsourced contracts.
2.10 Cleanliness of railway stations
Cleanliness in stations includes maintaining cleanliness in the circulating area
outside the station buildings and on platforms, in the concourse, waiting rooms,
retiring rooms, toilets, tracks adjacent to platforms, foot over bridges and drains and
sewers inside the stations premises in addition to a proper waste management system.
For providing a clean and hygienic environment to the passengers in railway
premises, the Railways need adequate infrastructure as well as amenities
commensurate with the quantum of passenger traffic handled at stations. Railway
Board  laid down guidelines (June 2003) prescribing a quantitative  scale of minimum
essential amenities for each category  of station. These  amenities were to be
augmented at a higher scale based  on actual passenger  traffic handled and were
called 'recommended amenities'.  Some of these amenities have a direct bearing on
cleanliness of stations such as drinking  water, seating arrangements, waiting halls,
toilets and urinals. The deficiencies  in these areas were also pointed out in audit
earlier
 4. In addition, Railway Board also introduced the scheme of 'Pay and Use toilets'
for improving sanitation on railway stations.
The railway stations are maintained either  departmentally  through safaiwalas or
through outsourced agencies. Effective manpower management and contract
management are, therefore, essential this apart, the Railways should  have a
mechanism to prevent unauthorised use of stations as well as an effective  monitoring
mechanism in place to ensure  quality in all cleanliness related activities.
A review  revealed deficiencies  in waste collection and disposal mechanism,
inadequacies in the provision of infrastructure  such as water supply, washable
4 Chapter 2 of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India Union Government
(Railways) No. 9A of 2002.

73
aprons, drains and sewerage system etc, inadequacies in the provision of  passengers
amenities such as toilets and urinals, drinking water, seating arrangements and waiting
halls, inadequate training compounded by a high  incidence of absenteeism among
safaiwalas, deficiencies in contract management, widespread unauthorised use of
station premises and a deficient monitoring mechanism as brought  out in the
following paragraphs.
2.10.1 Inadequacy of infrastructure and ineffective wastemanagement
The implementation of the process of waste management includes collection of
all the generated waste in dustbins and vats, after  due segregation into biodegradable
and non-biodegradable waste and disposal at regular intervals adhering to the laid
down rules and procedures.
2.10.1.1. Inadequate dustbins
Dustbins are primary garbage collection points within the station premises. It  is
necessary that dustbins are provided  in adequate numbers and at convenient location
so that passengers/users could use them  conveniently. Railway Board, however,
had not prescribed any scale for providing dustbins in the stations. It was observed
that:
l Requirement of dustbins was not assessed by railways in 76 per cent (250
out of 329 stations
 5) of the stations reviewed. Even  where assessments
were made, the dustbins  were far short of the assessments.
l Thus, only 25 stations out of a total of 329 stations reviewed were provided
with dustbins as per the assessed requirement. Further, there were lacunae
even in the assessments.
l The criteria adopted for assessment of  number of dustbins was not clear in
most of the stations. For instance, the  requirement of dustbins in Rai Bareily
having an area of  42,713 sqm and Guntur having  an area of 43,238 sqm,
catering to 4,525 and 18,530 passengers per day was assessed as one and
two respectively.
l Forty-two Stations including Saharanpur, Unnao, Siwan, Raipur etc. did not
have a single dustbin on the date of joint inspection.
l A comparison of total  area in the station premises, number of platforms  and
the dustbins provided on 19 A category stations handling more than 35,000
passengers per day  revealed that the number of dustbins provided was
grossly inadequate (Annexure XXI). There were no laid  down norms  for
providing  dustbins on railway stations and the number of dustbins per 10,000
passengers ranged from as low as less than 0.17 in Bardhaman to  28,50 in
Chennai Central. Similarly, one dustbin was catering to an area ranging from
246.39 sqm in Hazarat Nizamuddin station as compared to 21.769 sqm in
Bardhaman.
5 Of the total 358 stations reviewed, information in respect of 29 stations (C,D, and E) category
not available.

74
l Dustbins were found in broken/defective condition, overflowing with garbage
or were not located at convenient places in a large number of stations. The
frequency of emptying the dustbins was also not laid down.
l During   the joint inspections, garbage was found lying scattered all over
the premises, on platforms in circulating areas and in other open areas in
62 stations. Further, it was seen that garbage was being thrown on the
platforms by the users and subsequently  swept out and thrown on the side
of the track by the safaiwalas in 73 stations and there was no proper
mechanism of collecting the same for  disposal. This included important
stations, such as New Delhi, Hazarat Nizamuddin, Delhi, Bhubaneswar,
Rourkela, Durgapur, Ranchi, Bhopal, Mysore, Hubli, Ahmedabad, Ratlam,
Jammu Tawi, Guwahati, Tirupati, Dadar etc.
l Signages indicating the lcoation of dustbins were not available on any of
the stations selected in the sample.
Thus, inadequate provision of dustbins and their poor condition rendered the
process of garbage collection from its point of origin effective.
In  the survey conducted on important metro stations of Indian Railways, 60 per
cent of respondents felt that the dustbins at railway stations were not adequate.
Further, 62 per cent of passengers were of the opinion  that dustbins were not
conveniently located and 76 per cent, an overwhelming majority, opined that they
were unclean, overflowing with garbage or unusable. The  respondents also
suggested use of bigger dustbins and of better design.
2.10.1.2 Inadequate vats and waste disposal system
V ats are secondary collection points where the garbage collected from dustbins
and garbage offloaded from trains is dumped for further carting away to landfill sites.
These are usually located in the circulating areas inside the station premises. Garbage
disposal from vats on stations was largely outsourced by Indian Railways. Out of
276 A, B and C category stations garbage collection was outsourced in 145 stations.
Out of the remaining stations, while disposal in some stations was carried out by the
local municipal authorities, in a large number of stations, there was no formal
mechanism for disposal of garbage and the garbage collected from the stations was
dumped in open areas outside the station premises.
As already pointed out in paragraph 2.9.4.1, the quantum of garbage disposed
was much lower than the garbage generated at the stations. It was seen that:
l The quantity to be handled was not prescribed in the garbage disposal
contracts in 107 out of 145 stations. Penal clauses for deficient performance
were not incorporated in outsourced contracts of 26 stations. Even where
the penalty clauses were included and penalties imposed, the amounts were
too meagre in some railways to act as an effective deterrent for deficient
performance.

75
l The frequency prescribed for garbage collection was not followed and
garbage was not collected completely from
vats with the results that heaps of garbage
were found scattered near the vats on
various stations including Delhi station.
Cases were also noticed, where the
frequency of garbage disposal was just
once/twice in a week and even this was not
adhered to by the contractors. The only
record maintained to monoitor the
contractual work was a Log Book, which
did not contain any indication of the
processes and frequency actually followed
and the quality of work done. For
instance, at Ludhiana the garbage
collected was dumped by the contractor
within the station premises, though the contract clearly specified that it
should be disposed off at a place at least five kms. away from the station
premises.
l V ats were not provided in 78 out of 276 stations visited. Where vats were
not provided within the station premises, the garbage collected from the
dustbins had to be taken to the municipal vats outside the station premises.
However, in the absence of regular collection of garbage from these vats the
approach road to stations remained dirty and littered with garbage. Sixty per
cent of the respondents to the survey also opined that the approach roads
were generally dirty.
l The entry points for vats were found blocked by carts, porters and vehicles,
which prevented collection of garbage in dustbins and vats for final disposal
in 18 stations.
l Even in stations where garbage disposal was managed departmentally, there
was no laid down process and frequency. Garbage from the vats was not
removed regularly. As a result, they were found overflowing with garbage.
l In violation of extant regulations, garbage was being burnt in 26 stations,
which included important stations such as New Delhi, Hazrat Nizamuddin,
Mumbai CST, Kalyan, Dadar, Dombivili etc.
l In smaller stations belonging to the D and E category, garbage disposal was
virtually non-existent. Garbage was either burnt or thrown out in the open at
one end of the platform or outside the station premises in low lying areas.
Thus, the garbage disposal mechanism as well as the infrastructure was inadequate
and the Railways were not able to effectively dispose off the garbage generated within
the station premises or offloaded from trains.
Garbage scattered outside vat at Delhi

76
Recommendations
Railways need to prioritise provision of garbage collection units such as dustbins
and vats after assessing the requirement on a realistic basis and ensure proper
collection and disposal of garbage. Both responsibility and accountability should
be clearly identified to enable action for deficient performance.
2.10.2 Inadequate water supply
Adequate water supply is essential for washing the coaches, concrete washable
aprons, cleaning platforms and to maintain cleanliness in toilets and urinals and other
passenger amenities on station premises. It was observed that out of 298 stations
(A, B and C categories) reviewed, water supply was inadequate on 34 stations over
various zonal railways including stations like New Delhi, Amritsar, Howrah, Sealdah,
New Jalpaiguri, Gondia, Visakhapatnam, Hubli, Arakkonam, Jammu Tawi, Ranchi,
Ratlam, V adodara etc. Twenty-one per cent of D and E category stations also had
water problems. Deficient water supply hampered cleaning of washable aprons and
toilets as brought out below.
2.10.3 Inadequacy of washable aprons
Cement concrete washable aprons with built in high-pressure jet pumps are
extremely essential to keep the tracks between platforms clean of night soil and also
to clean the coaches of short distance trains that return to their originating stations
without any primary or secondary maintenance in coaching yards. The absence of
washable aprons results in accumulation of night soil and garbage on the track within
the station premises seriously compromising hygiene and resulting in increased pests/
rodents. Railway Board directed (June 2003) zonal railways that washable aprons
should be provided in a planned manner to cover stations from where trains terminate
or originate or stop from longer duration in the morning hours. Provision of washable
aprons on category A stations over various zonal railways revealed that washable
aprons were either not provided at all or were not provided on tracks between all
platforms in 69 per cent of the A category stations reviewed (Annexure XXII). It was
further observed that:
l Existing washable aprons were not maintained properly and were found in
broken condition in 15 stations including important stations such as Mumbai
Central, Bandra Terminus, Sealdah, Kharagpur, Ranchi, Bilaspur, Lokmanya
Tilak Terminus, Pune, Surat, Ballarshah etc.
l Non-availability of washable aprons and poor maintenance of existing
washable aprons compounded by the inadequate water supply restricted the
use of machines for cleaning, Consequently, the night soil and waste
collected near the tracks had to be disposed off manually, even though
manual scavenging was banned by Government of India through the
'Employment of Manual Scavengers and Construction of dry latrines
(Prohibition) Act 1993' and Supreme Court had also issued directions
regarding the same.
Railways stated (December 2006) that delays in providing these aprons were
mainly due to long traffic blocks required and that the design was undergoing

77
changes. The Railways' reply only underlines the fact that non-provision of washable
aprons and deficient maintenance of the existing ones has compromised effective
cleaning of railway tracks adjacent to platforms. This also violates the directives of
Government of India and the Supreme Court banning manual scavenging.
2.10.4 Inadequacy of drains and sewerage system
Maintenance of a main drainage system to ensure
easy and free flowing of waste water and cut out/
side drains at intermediate points of station
buildings and platforms to carry waste water to the
main drain are vital in ensuring that the environment
is hygienic and in sanitised condition. Review of
the stations and joint inspections conducted over
various zonal railways revealed various problems
such as blockage of drainage systems with weeds,
refuse and silt resulting in stagnation of waste water
(101 out of the 358 stations reviewed), poor design
of the drains with incorrect gradients, absence of
cut out drains or links to the main drains, poor
maintenance resulting in broken and dilapidated
drains etc. These included important stations such as Mumbai CST, Howrah,
Bangalore City, Dadar, Mumbai BCT and Bhubaneswar.
Thus, due to non-provision and inadequate maintenance of drains and sewerage
lines, the drains meant to clear waste water and to maintain healthy surroundings
were, instead, health hazards in themselves.
2.10.5 Ineffective utilisation of machines
Over the past few years, the Railways have introduced use of various machines
for cleaning within railway premises. V arious machines such a flipper machines,
vacuum blowers, dry vacuum sweepers, high pressure jet machines, wet scrubber
dryers etc., were introduced for cleaning of floors and platform surfaces in the station
premises. Maintenance of smooth platform surfaces is vital to ensure that cleaning
activities undertaken through machines are effectively carried out. Review in audit
and joint inspection of selected stations across various zonal railways revealed that:
l Of 298 stations reviewed, cleanliness activities were mechanised fully only
in five
6 A category. The activities were partially mechanised in 58 A category
and 30 B and C category stations and in the remaining 205 stations the
activities were still being carried out manually. Thus, though mechanised
cleaning in stations covering all important areas was envisaged as far back
as August 2000, Railways have not taken it up on the required scale.
l Even where introduced, mechanised cleaning remained mostly ineffective,
as smooth platform surfaces for facilitating use of machines were not ensured.
Platforms at a number of stations including important stations were uneven,
Open drain near Platform No. 8 at
Dadar
6 Ambala, Kathgodam, Hubli, Bangalore City and Bhopal

78
damaged at places, brick laid or covered with bitumen, which prevented usage
of machines for cleaning.
l In many stations, the floor of only the main platform was conducive to
mechanised cleaning, while the other platforms could not be washed due to
their uneven surface.
l Major stations where mechanised cleaning was hampered due to the above
mentioned reasons included Howrah, Asansol, Bangalore Cantt, Hubli,
New Delhi, H. Nizamuddin, Delhi, Chennai Central, Chhapra, Gorakhpur,
Gonda, Lucknow, Mau Jn., Hubli etc.
l Apart from the above, mechanised cleaning was also hampered due to
machines remaining out of order, non-availability of electric points, lack of
trained staff to operate the machines, etc., on stations such as Sealdah,
Mumbai Central, Patna and Bhubaneswar.
As a result, mechanised cleaning, which is a superior means of maintaining
cleanliness on station premises remained largely ineffective.
Recommendations
Railways need to draw up a plan of action with identified milestones for provision
of adequate infrastructure namely water supply, washable aprons, drains and
sewerage system and machines along with conducive platform surfaces for each
station duly prioritising requirements. The repair and maintenance of the
infrastructure so created should be ensured through a suitable monitoring
mechanism.
2.10.6 Inadequate toilets and urinals
Railway Board prescribed a minimum requirement of ten toilets and ten urinals for
A Category, six each for B category and four each C category railways stations to be
provided on platforms as well as waiting halls/sheds. It was seen that—
l Of the 298 stations reviewed, 128 stations had not provided for required
number of toilets as per the minimum scale (Annexure XXIII).
l The joint inspection of stations revealed that there was no water supply in
urinals and toilets provided on station premises over 21 stations, including
New Delhi, Amritsar, Sealdah, Bardhaman etc.
l During joint inspections, the existing toilets and urinals were also found in
unusable condition due to water logging, leaking roofs, broken taps, broken
pans, tiles and walls, missing outlets and pipes, broken or non-functional
cisterns, poor lighting etc. The cleaning of the toilets including the ladies'
toilets was also extremely poor with stagnation of waste and emitting foul
smell.

79
l The toilets were found locked at a
number of stations due to various
reasons such as wrong location, non-
availability of water etc. For instance in
Midnapur station of Kharagpur division
on SER, it was observed that a toilet had
been constructed in between platform
Nos. 2 and 3 and adjacent to the track.
The toilet was, however, kept locked, as
it was not safe for the public to use it.
At Jamalpur on ER, the toilets were used
for storage and kept locked.
l Further, in some stations, toilets for
handicapped were found inaccessible.
l The above mentioned deficiencies in infrastructure were also indicative of
deficient planning and coordination between various departments.
Non-availability of required number of toilets and their unusable condition
deprived passengers of a vital amenity and led to open defecation, creating an unclean
and unhygienic condition in station premises.
Further, Railway Board had framed detailed guidelines in May 2000 for
construction, maintenance and operation of 'Pay and Use' toilets for improving
sanitation at stations. Normal 'Pay and Use' toilets were to be provided at all A,B
and C category stations in both circulating areas as well as on all island platforms,
whereas the ambitious 'Deluxe Pay and Use' toilets with value added services were
to be constructed by professional organisations and provided at all A category
stations. The normal 'Pay and Use' toilets were to be constructed and maintained by
the Railways, but their operation and cleaning was to be handed over to private
organisations/contractors. Audit review disclosed that:
l Work studies to determine the scale of facilities to be provided in normal
'Pay and Use' toilets were not conducted in 142 stations out of 237 (298-61)
stations reveiwed. However, the number of 'Pay and use' toilets provided
was much lower than the numbers assessed.
l Of 298 A, B and C category stations 'Pay and Use' toilets were not provided
at all in 61 stations. In 135 stations these were not provided on island
platforms. Toilets for handicapped passengers were not provided in
118 stations.
l Sixty-six toilets were found locked/unfit for use due to infrastructural
problems on 33 stations including Mumbai CST, Bandra Terminus, Kanpur,
Gwalior, Jhansi, Pune, Khudra Road, Vizianagaram, Kanyakumari,
Yeshwantpur, Kanpur, Bangarpet, etc.
l Further, 'Pay and Use' toilets constructed at Amritsar, Beas, Jalandhar City,
Pathankot and Chakkibank stations of Ferozepur division on NR were not
Inaccessible toilet for the handicapped
at Dadar

80
handed over to the contractors till date (August 2006) due to interference of
employee unions. Consequently, 'Pay and Use' toilets at these stations
remained non-operational. Despite this the regular safaiwalas posted for
cleaning the stations were unproductively engaged for maintenance of these
toilets, which only worsened the shortage of regular safaiwalas at these
stations.
l Deficiencies in the contracts for maintenance were also observed. In some
stations formal contracts were not concluded and the Railways did not collect
licence fees. Fresh agreements were not entered into with the contractors
even long after the expiry of previous contracts.
l At Hazrat Nizamuddin station, the toilet provided for handicaped passengers
in the waiting hall was  found locked on the day of inspection. At Delhi
station, the toilet for handicapped passengers was not accessible as the ramp
was obstructed by a manhole. Separate ladies' toilets for the physically
challenged were not provided. The policy also did not carry any directives
regarding the same.
l Various other deficiencies such as non-maintenance of complaint books, non-
display of rate lists, dirty toilets with choked outlets and emitting foul smell,
leakages of roof, broken floor/tiles, missing taps, scanty water supply were
noticed at many stations.
l None of the zonal railways except for NR and NCR had provided 'Deluxe
Pay and Use' toilets.
Thus, the scheme of 'Pay and Use' toilets in its present state was ineffective in
improving sanitation at stations.
In the survey conducted on important stations, 67 per cent passengers opined
that the number of toilets on railways platforms was insufficient, Similarly, 51 per
cent passengers felt that the number of toilets in waiting rooms was insufficient.
Eighty-five per cent passengers surveyed found the toilets dirty.
2.10.7 Inadequacy of drinking water
Railway Board prescribed a minimum requirement of 12 taps per platform for
category A and B railway stations and six taps per platform for category C.
Stations for providing piped drinking water to the passengers. While
recommending a higher scale based on actual passenger traffic it was suggested
that taps should be distributed in such a manner that every alternate coach gets the
benefit of a tap. Joint inspection carried out revealed that:
l Twenty eight per cent of A category stations and 30 per cent of B category
stations had not provided tapped drinking water at the recommended scale.
Out of this, one third of such A Category and more than half of B category
stations including important stations like Mumbai CST, Mumbai Central
Chennai Central, Chennai Egmore etc., did not meet even the bare minimum
requirements. Similarly 65 per cent of C category stations had not provided

81
for tapped drinking water at the recommended scale, of which half the number
of did not meet the minimum requirement.
l Water booths/taps were either found to be defective or in broken condition
in 61 stations and were not usable, which reflected the poor state of
maintenance of amenities at stations. The area surrounding the water taps
was found covered with slush and dirt, thereby making the atmopnere around
it unclean and unhygienic and rendering the amenity unfit for use. Thus
provision of water booths and taps in their existing state created a major
health hazard.
l Frequency of bacteriological testing and required chlorine level testing of
drinking water (both taped and packaged water) varied for each station and
the samples taken were also not uniform.
Inadequate drinking water supply compunded by dirty and unhygienic
surroundings made not only the amenity unfit for use, but also added to the unclean
environment on the railway stations.
2.10.8 Inadequacy of seating arrangements and waiting halls
Railway Board envisaged a minimum requirement of 100 seats per platform for A
category stations,75 seats per platform for B category stations and 60 seats per
platform for C category stations with a recommended higher norm for providing
seating arrangements based on quantum of
passengers handled at the respective stations.
It was observed that 49 per cent of stations
were not provided with seating arrangements
on platforms as per the recommended scale.
More than three-fourths of the number of
such stations had not even met the minimum
essential requirements. (Annexure XXIV).
Similarly,Railway Board has laid down
minimum requirement of 100 sqm. for A
category and 50 sqm. for B category stations
for waiting halls on the station premises and
a recommended higher norm for providing
waiting halls based on the actual passenger traffic. It was seen that 50 per cent of
stations had not provided for waiting halls on station premises at the recommended
scale. On six stations, even the minimum essential norms were not met.
Apart from inadequate provision of waiting halls, the condition of the existing
facilities was also found to be unsatisfactory with the roofs of the waiting halls leaking,
the floors damaged or flooded, dirty toilets and broken washbasins, thus, rendering
them unusable. Inadequate seating arrangements on platforms and waiting halls led
to the passengers crowding the platforms and the concourses, which not only added
to the litter on the platrorms but also adversely hampered the cleaning activities.
Washbasin in waiting hall at New Delhi

82
Recommendations
Railways need to provide for passenger amenities like toilets and urinals
(including 'Pay and Use' toilets), water booths, seating arrangements and waiting
halls commensurate with the quantum of passenger traffic handled at the stations.
Their maintenance to specified standards requires intense monitoring and a suitable
mechanism needs to be put in place urgently.
2.10.9 Deficiencies in manpower management on stations
Of the 298 stations selected in audit, cleanliness on 187 stations was maintained
departmentally. Review and inspection of these stations revealed that manpower was
a basic constraint, which affected the quality of cleanliness provided at stations. It
was observed that:
l There were no norms for providing safaiwalas at stations. In most of the
stations, the sanctioned strength was based on requirement of staff assessed
far back when the stations were first introduced. The existing strength of
safaiwalas was not commensurate with the actual requirements. For instance,
the sanctioned strength of safaiwalas at Hazrat Nizamuddin station has
remained the same since 1958, although the number of passengers had gone
up more than three fold.
l Further, vacancies existed in large numbers even against the sanctioned
strength in the cadre of safaiwalas in many stations across the zonal railways.
The percentage of vacancies ranged up to even 34 per cent (ECR).
l The shortage of safaiwalas in most stations was further compunded with
the high rate of absenteeism amongst them. The rate of absenteeism for a
period of six months from October 2005 to March 2006 ranged upto even
80 per cent in A category stations, 100 per cent in B category stations and
60 per cent in C category stations.
l Stations with high rates of absenteeism included Mumbai Central,
Mughalsarai, Patna, Asansol, Malda, Raibareli, Tatanagar, Allahbad, Udaipur,
Habibganj, Guna, Beawar, Marwar Ambernath, Chembur, Vile Parle,
Arakkonam, Gummidipundi etc.
l The issue of imparting training to safaiwalas was handled as a short-term
measure by most of the zonal railways. Training to supervisors was not
planned by any railways except SER and ECoR. Training courses were
conducted in zonal training centres and other training institutes by only four
zonal railways NR, NCR, SER and ER during 2005-06.
Thus, shortages of safaiwalas, high absenteeism amongst them and inadequate
training by zonal railways contributed toward deficient performance and unclean
environment on stations maintained departmentally.
Recommendations
The manpower requirements at the stations need to be reviewed and provided
for, apart from instituting a mechanism for training of the staff and controlling
absenteeism.

83
2.10.10 Outsourced contracts-Poor contract management
Of 298 stations selected in audit, cleanliness on 113 stations was outsourced either
fully or partially. Inspection of these stations and review of 86 contracts revealed
deficiencies in contract management which led to compromise on quality of service
rendered by the contractors and ineffective cleaning initiatives:
l The terms and conditions of various outsourced contracts were not well
defined, While in some cases the processes and frequencies of cleanliness
activities were not defined, in many others, the manpower to be provided
and the cleaning machines to be utilised by the contractor, were not spelt
out. As a result, the contractors across various zonal railways employed lesser
resources thereby compromising the quality of cleanliness.
l Penal clauses for unsatisfactory discharge of cleaning activities were not
incorporated in five agreements of outsourced works. In three stations, no
agreement was entered into though the cleaning activities were outsourced.
l Contracts were invariably awarded to the contractors without prescribing
any minimum standards that the contractors would have to adhere to and
also to the lowest bidder irrespective of viability of rates. As a result,
contractors not only compromised on the machines to be used but also
tended to use cheap daily labour without any basic training to carry out the
cleanliness activities. The Railways did not ensure that there was no violation
of the various statutory provisions such as Minimum Wages Act etc., while
effecting payments to the workers engaged by contractors (SCR, SWR).
Moreover, due to constant changes in the labour corce, the quality of
cleaning was sub-standard.
l In addition, there were various other shortcoming such as supervisors of
one department being unaware of the terms and conditions of the contract
entered into by another department (Raipur, SECR), award of contracts
despite unsatisfactory performance of the contractor (WR) and the use of
Railway safaiwalas to assist contractors resulting in avoidable recurring
expenditure towards pay and allowances. (Sawai Madhopur and Kota in
WCR).
l Poor supervision by zonal railways also led to deficient quality of the work
done by the contractor. For instance, in contracts where usage of machines
was defined, it was found that the contractors were not using the defined
machines and cleaning was done manually (Hubli in SWR, Sambalpur in
ECoR, Jabalpur, Katni, Kota, Sawai Madhopur in WCR). The only evidence
of supervision from the Railway's side was a log book, which was poorly
devised. It neither contained the processes/frequencies followed not
comments of the supervising authority. It was also silent about the details
of manpower, machinery, tools and materials used in the field. In some
stations, even the log book was not maintained. The poor quality of record
keeping and supervision of outsourced works did not, thus, yield the required
outcome and outsourced cleanliness contracts remained ineffective.

84
Joint inspection oF stations also reflected poor quality of work for maintenance
of cleanliness and sanitation on railway stations. As a result, apart from dirty and
unhygienic toilets, tracks adjacent to platforms, drains, circulating area, platforms,
waiting halls/retiring rooms, foot over bridge, concourse etc., on a large number of
stations were also found unclean and dirty.
In the passenger survey 59 per cent were of the opinion that railway platforms
were either 'generally dirty' or 'not so clean'. Similarly, 51 per cent to 61 per cent
passengers felt that the circulating areas, approach to the railway stations, approach
to paltforms, foot over bridges, sub ways, seating areas on platforms and waiting
rooms were either 'generally dirty' or 'not so clean'.
Further, 76 per cent of the passengers felt that the toilets were either 'generally
dirty' of 'not so clean'. In order to improve cleanliness, a majority (54 per cent) of
passengers believed that increasing the number of safaiwalas would help while
30 per cent were of the opinion that provision of sufficient water for cleaning will
improve the situation.
Recommendations
Quality benchmarks should be prescribed for outsoruced cleanliness related
activities. The quality of supervision should be enhanced to ensure that the quality
benchmarks are achieved and those responsible for supervision are accountable
for deficent performance.
2.10.11 Unauthorised use of station premises
Most of the railway stations across all zonal railways normally have a circulating
area outside the station premises. Presence of unauthorised vendors/hawkers and
urchins in the station premises hamper cleanliness related activities apart from placing
a strain on already stretched resources. The Railway Protection Force (RPF) is
responsible for the guarding of railway property in railway stations and eviction of
unauthorised persons. A review of records and inspection of the selected stations,
however, revealed that:
l Though a total of 2,43,615 unauthorised
hawkers and other unauthorised persons
were evicted during 2005-06 from various
stations selected for review, this was
obviously inadequate and did not
prevent unauthorised entry into the
stations as the monitoring mechanism at
the various entry points to stations
premises was weak. Most of the stations
did not have adequate fencing.
Unauthorised vendors, hawkers,
beggars, urchins were present all over
the place inside the station premises in
Encroachment and garbage at PF 6
in Dadar

85
63 A and B category stations such as Mumbai CST, Mumbai BCT,
Ahmedabad, Dadar, Kalyan, Nagpur, Pune, New Delhi, Hazrat Nizamuddin,
Sealdah, Vishakhapatnam, Tirupati, Ambala, Bhopal, Bardhaman, Malda Town,
Bokaro Steel City, etc.
l These unauthorised vendors had even put up stalls, trolleys on platforms
selling various commodities and even temporary daily markets on the
platforms of the stations (Bardhaman, Asansol and most of the sub-urban
stations on ER and SER). unauthorised cycle stands, unauthorised
constructions and stray cattle were common evidencing the fact that the
occasional eviction drives were inadequate and ineffective.
Recommendations
Railways should institute a sustainable mechanism to restrict entry acces to
prevent unauthorised entry into station premises. The penal measures also need to
be strengthened to serve as an adequate deterrent against unauthorised occupation
and misuse of railway property.
2.10.12 Deficient monitoring mechanism
Periodical inspection of cleanliness activities, whether done departmentally or
contractually, serves as a vital quality assurance mechanism. Quality assurance can
only be ensured through continuous monitoring and effective compliance to the
deficiencies pointed out by the inspecting authorities. It was, however, seen that:
l Norms for inspection of stations coaching yards and trains by various
authorities were not prescribed either by Railway Board or by the respective
zonal railways. Even at the divisional level, norms for inspection were laid
down by very few divisions.  As a result, a number of stations including
major A, B, and C category stations such as Bhavnagar, Allahabad, Calicut,
Kanpur, Alleppey, Villupuram, Virudhnagar, Bagnan etc., were not inspected
at all during the year 2005-06.
l Even where inspections were carried out, the cleanliness aspects were not
covered in many of them. Further, even where specific aspects relating to
cleanliness were pointed out, the follow up action was inadequate. Joint
inspections revealed that the deficiencies pointed out by various inspecting
authorities continued to exit, indicating that the monitoring mechanism was
ineffective.
Recommendations
Railways should prescribe norms for regular inspections by various officers for
all categories of stations and ensure that the deficiencies, pointed by the inspecting
authorities are actively followed up and rectified.
2.11 Cleanliness of trains
Cleanliness of trains includes cleaning in coaching yards (EMU car sheds for EMU
trains) at the originating stations during primary maintenance, at the destination station
during secondary maintenance as well as enroute cleaning. Short distance trains are

86
cleaned at the station platform itself as the time available between their 'up' movements
is less than two hours and not enough to take them to the coaching yards. Apart
from these laid down routine maintenance activities, Railways also introduced 'Clean
Train Station'  (CTS) scheme at select stations for en route cleaning of trains.
For assessing the adequacy of steps taken by the Railways towards providing a
clean environment to the passengers during their journey, cleanliness related activities
on trains undertaken in 32 coaching yards and 9 EMU car sheds over all the zonal
railways were reviewed. An assessment of the CTS scheme implemented so far was
also undertaken in audit.
The review disclosed inadequate infrastructure and resources in coaching yards
and trains, ineffective pest control and bed linen contracts and deficiencies in the
implementation CTS as brought out in the following paragraphs.
2.11.1 Inadequate infrastructure and resources in coaching yards and trains
Railway Board has prescribed six hours for primary maintenance of trains in
coaching yards including the cleaning of coaches and pantry cars. While the
maintenance of the coaches is mainly carried out by the staff of Mechanical
department, cleaning of coaches was outsourced either fully or partially in 12 out of
32 depots/coaching yards selected. These coaching yards handled 8,198 trains and
1,88,008 coaches per month. A sample of 80 trains (58 Primary maintenance trains
and 22 secondary maintenance trains) was selected to assess the effectiveness of
cleanliness related activities undertaken in the selected coaching yards. Further,
48 trains were selected to assess the cleaning of trains on platforms during round
trip maintenance and 39 trains were inspected to assess garbage disposal mechanism
at nominated stations en route.
2.11.1.1. Inadequate infrastructure and resources in coaching yards
The cleaning of trains in coaching yards and EMU car sheds in undertaken as a
part of the Mechanical maintenance of trains. While mechanical maintenance is
certified, the cleanliness activities carried out on trains are not certified. All trains,
irrespective of the time and distance of one run, received the same attention in the
coaching yards and there was no mechanism in place for differentiating a train that
has traversed a very long distance from other trains traversing relatively shorter
distances. The cleanliness related activites at coaching yards/depots, EMU car sheds
and on platforms were reviewed and it was further observed that:
l Of the 32 coaching yards reviewed, there were shortages of safaiwalas in
19 coaching depots. Of these, in 11 yards, cleaning of coaches and pantry
cars was carried out departmentally. The shortage ranged up to 80 per cent
(New Coaching Complex, Sealdah, ER) in the selected coaching depots. The
percentage of absenteeism was also as high as 46.52 per cent (Durg, SECR)
during Oct 2005 to March, 2006.
l In two depots (Guwahati, NEFR and Puri, ECoR), despite cleaning being
outsourced completely, 68 safaiwalas continued to be on rolls without being
relocated to other places.

87
l In respect of 22 out of 80 trains, the time available for maintenance in
coaching yards was less than the prescribed 6 hours and was, thus,
inadequate. The time was further reduced in some cases due to delayed arrival
of trains. It was observed that 19 trains which arrived at coaching yards for
maintenance were late on 307 out of 484 occasions in the month of
June 2006. Non-availability of sufficient time for cleaning of trains led to
incomplete and deficient cleaning of coaches and pantry cars.
l For Rajdhani/Shatabdi trains which were sent to the coaching depots for
secondary maintenance, it was observed that the escorting staff (including
pantry and linen staff) remained in the train and continued using the facilities
in the coaches during cleaning and maintenance of the trains. The presence
of the escorting staff, ranging up to even 32 persons, in the pantry cars/
coaches of the train hampered the cleaning activities of the coaches,
particularly the pantry cars. Similar problems existed where the time for
primary maintenance was short.
l In respect of four coaching yards, the manpower requirement was not
specified in the agreements of the outsourced contracts.
The cost of cleaning per coach was found to vary from Rs.13 (SR) to Rs. 244
(NEFR and SER) per coach. One firm charged different rates for the same
activity on different railways. (Rs. 178 in ECoR and Rs. 244 in NEFR).
l The amount of imprest provided to the in-charge of coaching depot ranged
from Rs. 1,000 (Vishakhapattnam, ECoR maintaining 370 trains per month) to
Rs. 60,000 (Satragachi, SER maintaining 870 trains per month). Thus, the
amount was not commensurate with the number of trains dealt with. The
imprest was predominantly used for maintenance activities of the coaches
in the yard. At Puri, ECoR, the CDO was not provided with any imprest.
Coaching depots of SER, SWR and NER also faced problems in the supply
of consumables.
l In August, 2004, in a meeting of Chief Rolling Stock Engineers, it was decided
to set up at least one Automatic Coach Washing Plant in each Railway by
the end of the financial year 2004-05. It was however, observed that automatic
coach washing plants were not set up in any zonal railway except ER and
WCR. The percentage utilization of the plant at Tikiapara Coaching Yard (ER),
was only 30 to 40 per cent (August 2006) and a majority of trains passed
unwashed. The time allowed for each train was also inadequate leading to
incomplete washing of rakes. Thus, the objective of providing automatic
coach washing plants at least at some select locations remained largely
unachieved.
l In addition, deficiencies in the existing infrastructure such as absence/
inadequate number of washable aprons, washable aprons in broken and
unusable condition, non-availability of adequate number of machines,
machines lying out of order and holding capacity of pit lines being less than
the rake length etc., existed which resulted in ineffective cleaning activities.

88
l The score sheets maintained for assessing the performance of the contractors
did not have provisions for recording the actual deployment of manpower.
The manpower actually provided by the contractor could also not be
ascertained as the Log Book/Register was not maintained. As such, the
monitoring mechanism for watching the performance of the contractors was
weak.
l Cleaning operations of 48 trains, on the platforms were inspected jointly with
railway authorities. The time available for these trains at the stations ranged
from ten minutes to nine hours. It was seen that trains having less than one
hour between arrival and departure could not be cleaned completely due to
shortage of staff and resources.
2.11.1.2 Deficient infrastructure in trains
Provision of adequate number of dustbins and toilets in trains and their proper
maintenance are vital for maintaining cleanliness and hygiene in coaches. The waste
generated in the pantry cars and coaches is supposed to be collected in the dustbins
provided on the train and disposed off at nominated stations en-route.
l Joint inspection of trains over various zonal railways revealed that in most
of the trains, dustbins were provided in AC coaches only. Dustbins were
not provided in unreserved coaches in any of the trains inspected. The sleeper
coaches, particularly of long distance trains were not provided with dustbins.
As a result, vestibule passages between coaches were found littered with
uneaten food, used plastic plates, teacups, etc., with no provision for cleaning
en-route or else the garbage was thrown out onto the track.
l Even the capacity of the dust bins provided in pantry cars was inadequate
considering the large quantity of food waste generated and the dustbins
was found to be overflowing.
l The cleaning contracts of IRCTC provided for garbage disposal without
stipulating the manner in which the disposal was to be carried out. Moreover,
no penal clause was included in the contract conditions for improper garbage
disposal. In 30 out of 39 trains inspected en-route it was seen that most of
the garbage from trains was thrown out by the caterers though collection
points/stations for collection of garbage were designated. The pantry car
staff of Konark Express and Kushinagar Express was not aware of the
designated stations though the CCM had issued specific instructions in this
regard.
l In the survey, 67 per cent respondents felt that dustbins provided were
inadequate. An overwhelming 74 per cent of respondents found the
dustbins in coaches overflowing with garbage, not usable and unclean. The
same number also admitted that they either threw left over food and
casseroles out of the window or left them near their seats. The passengers
surveyed suggested improving the design of dustbins by providing larger
dustbins with wider mouths and deeper storage space.

89
l Apart from inadequate dustbins, the condition of coaches and toilets in
coaches was also reviewed in the joint inspections. It was observed that
toilets, seats, berths, passages of 21 trains particularly were found to be
excessively dirty and unclean. Water logging in toilets and roof leakage
as well as unauthorized hawkers and beggars were also noticed in some
trains.
l The Integrated Railway Modernisation Plan (2005—10), envisaged
development of an environment friendly coach with a controlled Discharge
Toilet System (CDTS). As per the plan a target of 8,000 coaches was set for
fitting CDTS during the five-year period 2005—10, subsequently scaled
down to 5,000 coaches. As against this, only 261 coaches had been turned
out with CDTS (March 2006). At this rate, the Railways are unlikely to achieve
the target of 5,000 coaches by the end of 2010. Complete shift to Zero
discharge Toilet System is also remote.
Thirty nine per cent of the respondents to the survey felt that toilets in coaches
were 'not so clean'. Sixty-one per cent felt that the number of toilets in long distance
trains was inadequate and 72 per cent stated that the toilets in coaches were either
not cleaned en-route or were cleaned only sometimes. Eighty-one per cent
respondents felt that the entrances of the coaches were generally dirty with garbage
or were wet with water overflowing from toilets. Sixty per cent of respondents also
opined that seats and berths in coaches were not usually clean.
Recommendations
Railways need to provide for adequate infrastructure and resources in coaching
yards as well as trains to enable cleaning of coaches in a more effective manner.
Quality of supervision should also be improved. Railways should expedite setting
up of automatic coach washing plants at important locations to cater to the
increasing requirements and to ensure effective mechanised cleaning of coaches.
Railways should also expedite the process of providing Controlled Discharge Toilet
System/Zero Discharge Toilet System toilets in coaches to improve the quality of
hygiene.
2.11.2 Ineffective pest control contracts
In order to avoid presence of insects and rodents in the coaches, pest control
measures need to be undertaken in coaches at periodical intervals. Pest control in
trains was mostly outsourced. Forty-two contracts entered into during the past one/
two years for pest control across all the zonal railways were reviewed in audit and
the following deficiencies were observed.
l The quality of disinfectants and chemicals to be used was not categorically
mentioned in most of the contracts. Out of the 42 contracts examined, only
eight contracts finalized by four zonal railways (one by SER, two by NR,
three by NEFR and two by SECR) prescribed the quality of the chemicals
and insecticides to be used. An analysis of the pest control contracts
awarded to the same firm (M/s Shatabdi Pest Control Ratlam) by two zonal
railways, revealed that where contracts were finalised at very low rates

90
(ranging from Rs. 8,000 per annum to Rs. 38,000 per annum on NR), the
process defined was only spraying of pesticide, whereas where the rates
were higher (Rs. 11 lakh to Rs. 24 lakh per annum on SECR) the process also
specified the pesticides to be used. Thus, the quality of pesticide treatment
on NR was inevitably compromised.
l Various other deficiencies such as non-renewal of pest control contracts (SR-
EMU car shed, ECoR-Puri Coaching Y ard), non-adherence to the frequency
of pest control (Howrah and Sealdah) and shortfall in number of coaches
actually treated affected the quality of pest control. Due to non-vacation of
Pantry Cars by the staff, the contractor could not undertake pest control on
a number of occasions on ER.
l Deficiencies in pest control were noticed on 1162 occasions during 2005-06
of which 878 were recorded against M/s Central Warehousing Corporation,
the firm undertaking pest control in the coaching depots of New Delhi, Delhi
and Hazrat Nizamuddin. Apart from imposing nominal fines as per the terms
of the contract, Railways did not take any effective remedial measures.
Instances of fines not being imposed on the contractor for insufficient
pest control treatment were also noticed.
l In addition, passengers had also recorded 303 complaints regarding presence
of cockroaches and rats in trains in one year alone. Maximum complaints
were recorded on trains based at Bandra terminus and Ahmedabad in WR.
l Twenty-two per cent of the respondents to the survey confirmed to have
seen cockroaches or rats in trains 'most of the time', whereas 44 per cent
stated to have seen them 'sometimes'.
l Deficient contract management and weak monitoring along with failure to
set quality benchmarks for the contractors' performance, thus, led to
unsatisfactory performance by the contractors resulting in passenger
dissatisfaction and ineffective pest control.
Recommendations
Railways should lay down quality parameters for the pesticides used by the
contracted agencies to ensure effective pest control in trains apart from laying down
strict standards for performance.
2.11.3 Ineffective bed linen contracts
Bed linen is provided by Railways to passengers traveling in AC coaches.
Washing of bed linen was mostly outsourced. Ninety-two contract entered into by
all zonal railways for washing bed linen were reviewed and the deficiencies observed
were as follows:
l No quality benchmarks for performance were set for the contractors and they
could not be held accountable for deficient performance. The quantum of
check of washed linen supplied by the contractor was not prescribed in many
agreements. In contracts which provided for random sample checks, the daily

91
checking of washed linen was not carried out as per the prescribed
percentage.
l At the New Coaching Yard, Sealdah, ER, the percentage of unsatisfactory
cleanliness of linen was found to be 25 per cent to 60 per cent for non-
Rajdhani trains. However, the quantity sent back for rewash was negligible
as there was a shortage of stock and the linen which had not been cleaned
satisfactorily was issued for use. The records relating to the bedrolls were
not properly maintained and, therefore, the number of bedrolls in train, on
hand and with contractor could not be reconciled in ECoR.
l Quality of washed linen was found unsatisfactory on several occasions and
complaints of stains in the washed linen were also received from passengers
on several occasions (308 complaints in 14 coaching yards in 2005-06 as per
the complaint books make available). Apart from imposing nominal fines as
per the terms of the contract, Railways did not initiate any effective remedial
measures for their non-recurrence.
l Thirty-five per cent respondents of the survey felt that bed linen supplied
was clean only 'sometimes' whereas eight per cent felt that bed linen provided
was rarely clean.
Thus, deficient contract management coupled with failure to set quality
benchmarks for the contractors' performance led to unsatisfactory performance by
the contractors resulting in passenger dissatisfaction.
Recommendations
Railways should prescribed quality benchmarks for washing linen and institute
an effective mechanism to secure compliance of the set benchmarks.
2.11.4 Deficient implementation of Clean Train Station Scheme
The scheme 'Clean Train Station' (CTS) was launched in October 2002, as a major
initiative for improving train cleanliness. Under this scheme, mechanized en-route
cleaning of trains was introduced during halts at identified stations on major trunk
routes of Indian Railways. As per the scheme select trains were to be cleaned at the
nominated stations and necessary arrangements were to be made on the specified
platforms in a planned manner.
The CTS scheme was introduced in 28 stations of which 14 were outsourced and
14 were departmentally handled. The following deficiencies were noticed in the
execution of the scheme:
l A large number of nominated trains could not be attended to due to non-
placement of the trains on the nominated platforms. (Asansol, Jhansi,
Guwahati, New Jalpaiguri and Ahmedabad). As result, the trains could not
be cleaned at all. The percentage of trains cleaned fully per week was as low
as four per cent at Jhansi.
l At some stations in ER, even the nomination of platforms was not done
judiciously. For instance, platform No. 4 of Asansol was nominated, though

92
this platform normally caters to trains in the 'up' direction not nominated for
CTS operations.
l Inadequate coordination between departments also resulted in non-available
of adequate infrastructure and requisite time for implementing the scheme
as bought out below:
♦ The Engineering department did not ensure that drains were covered
with slabs, thus, hampering the movement of cleaning staff and their
cleaning activities. Further, timely release of water by the Engineering
department on arrival of the train was also not ensured affecting cleaning
activities.
♦ As per the contract, though 20 minutes' time was given to the contractor
to clean the trains, the Operating department did not allow a stoppage
time of 20 minutes as it affected the super-fast status of the trains. As
a result, the cleaning of coaches was left incomplete. (ER)
♦ Delay together with lack of coordination between various departments
prevented implementation of CTS at Itarsi station so far (August 2006)
even though the tender was accepted and issued in April 2006.
Machines, DG sets, electrical points were not provided and approvals
to the layout plan were not given by the Engineering, Electrical and
S&T departments of the zonal railway.
l The contractors did not deploy sufficient number of personnel to undertake
the work effectively and efficiently (Ahmedabad and Visakhapatnam).
l Problems of power supply also led to incomplete cleaning of coaches (Jhansi).
l In the joint inspection it was found that only a part of the targeted number
of coaches (mainly AC coaches) were cleaned fully, some coaches were
cleared partially or not cleaned at all. As a result, garbage was found littered
in the vestbules. Even the staff of the contractor was found littering/spitting
in the coaches. This indicated lack of adequate supervision and monitoring.
l In respect of fourteen stations where CTS was carried out departmentally,
inadequate manpower, inadequate time, lack of machines, not nominating
platforms/trains for CTS, less stoppage time of trains, lack of supervision
and monitoring were the main reasons for ineffective implementation
Thus, the CTS scheme, though a good initiative, remained largely ineffective in
its present state of implementation and did not achieve its perceived objectives.
Recommendations
Railways should ensure provision of adequate infrastructure, proper
coordination between the departments and placement of trains on nominated
platforms besides effective monitoring and supervision of the work of the contractors
in order to implement the scheme effectively and efficiently.

93
2.12 User perception and awareness
Marinating a clean and hygienic environment in stations and trains on a
sustainable basis, requires active support and co-operation from passengers and other
users. Continuous interaction with the users and constant understanding of their
needs and perspective as well as educating passengers is one of the most effective
means of improving the standard of cleanliness. A Report No. 6 of 207 (Railways)
mechanism of Zonal Railway Users' Consultative Committee  (ZRUCC) at the zonal
level and Divisional Railway Users' Consultative Committee (DRUCC) at the divisional
level also exists to address these issues.
Review revealed that measures adopted to create user awareness were inadequate
and user perception was not being harnessed ot bring about improvement in the
system as brought out below:
2.12.1 Inadequate measures for creating user awareness
User awareness measures involve making the users aware of the amenities existing
in the station and trains, educating the users and also to make them aware of their
role in maintaining cleanliness and hygiene in stations and  in trains. In addition to
announcements on railway stations through public address systems, most of the
zonal railways had spelled out various initiatives such as launching mass campaigns
through print and electronic media, launching awareness  drives, putting up hoardings
and using Closed Circuit Television (CCTV) to educate the users. Implementation of
these measures for creating user awareness was reviewed and it was observed that:
l Though the list of amenities provided in the station was normally displayed
in stations over all zonal railways, sign boards indicating the location of
dustbins were not available in many stations.
l Public announcements were also not frequently made. Sixty-five per cent of
the survey respondents had either never heard the announcements regarding
cleanliness in stations or had heard them only 'sometimes'.
l User awareness of availability of complaint books was very low. The location
at which complaint books were available was not displayed in many stations.
Thus, the users could not use the same to lodge their complaints or to record
their suggestions. In the  survey, 56 per cent respondents admitted that they
were not aware of how and where to lodge a complaint. Thirty per cent stated
that complaint books were never provided on demand and another 26 per
cent felt that they were provided to them only sometimes.
l There was no sustained plan to constantly educate the users on various
issues relating to cleanliness i.e., avoid the use of toilets during train halts
at stations, spitting, graffiti, littering, defacing the platforms, posters, etc. In
the LHB coaches that have been introduced recently in some Rajdhani  trains,
directions for using the newly designed toilets were not displayed causing
inconvenience to passengers.
l User abuse of facilities was also not being effectively monitored. Defaulting
users were not punished on a regular basis to serve as a deterrent to other

94
users. Fifty per cent of the respondents were certain that imposing fines
would work and another 28 per cent felt that 'may be' imposing fines would
work.
2.12.2 Ineffective mechanism of obtaining user perception
Rules
7 provide  that DRUCC would ordinarily meet once in a quarter, but not less
than three times a year. Similarly ZRUCC would ordinarily meet three  times a year.
The meetings of DRUCC and ZRUCC over all the zonal railways during the year
2005-06 were reviewed and it was observed that the meetings held were fewer than
the prescribed norms in most of the zonal railways. Further, the issues pertaining to
cleanliness and sanitation were discussed in a very few meetings. The mechanism of
DRUCC and ZRUCC was, therefore, serving a very limited purpose for addressing
the issue of cleanliness. Further, as the complaint/suggestion book mechanism was
also weak, the Railways were not able to harness user perception to bring about
improvements in the system.
Of the 3,719 respondents to whom, a survey questionnaire was administered by
Audit, 44 per cent were frequent travellers and 47 per cent were occasional travellers.
The general perception of the respondents on the state of cleanliness in Indian
Railways was:
l Seventy-five per cent respondents felt that cleanliness in Indian Railways
was generally improving over the years.
l An overwhelming 84 per cent of the respondents believed that various places
in the station premises were mostly overcrowded. Fifty-three per cent of the
respondents were certain and another 23 per cent felt that 'may be' reducing
crowds could help improve cleanliness. It was opined that crowds could be
reduced by preventing unauthorised persons from entering the station
premises.
l Fifty-one per cent respondents felt that passengers were responsible for
dirtying the platforms and the tracks between the platforms, whereas 20 per
cent felt that vendors were responsible. Forty per cent respondents felt  that
vendors in station premises were adequate in their present form and thirty
per cent opined that vendors were adequate but their area of operation should
be limited.
According to the respondents, the main causes that contributed to lack of
cleanliness were insufficient amenities and infrastructure, presence of unauthorised
persons in stations and overcrowding, lack of awareness among passengers, shortage
of staff, absence of involvement of top management, deteriorating work culture and
lack of responsibility among staff.
The suggestions for improvement  in cleanliness included increasing the scale of
amenities, preventing entry of unauthorised users, increasing passenger  awareness
and providing them with a handout on cleanliness matters as soon as they board
7Para 517 of Indian Railway Code for Traffic (Commercial) Department (1993 Revised 
Edition).

95
the train, involving passengers in cleanliness drives, introducing  mechanised
cleaning, providing training to staff and creation of a separate department that solely
caters to cleanliness and proper accountability of staff.
Recommendations
Railways should strive to enhance the level of user awareness on a large scale
and to initiate effective means of harnessing user perception to bring about
improvements in the system.
2.13 Grading of stations
An attempt was made to grade 173 A category stations including in the sample
with regard to their cleanliness, based on some of the important parameters assessed
such as availability and maintenance of infrastructure and cleanliness related
amenities, waste management, staff absenteeism and unauthorised use of stations.
Weights were assigned to each of these parameters to accommodate their relative
importance. The details of weightage given and final grading indicated that:
l Of the stations graded against a possible score of 300, the maximum points
awarded was only 183 (Secunderabad and Chennai Central) as there were
deficiencies in one area or the other. On an average, stations over SR and
CR fared much better than the stations over other zonal railways.
l Premier stations such as Delhi, New Delhi or Mumbai CST ranked below
stations such as Chennai, Mumbai BCT and Howrah. New Delhi station
particularly, ranked far below other stations due to serious deficiencies in
infrastructure, garbage disposal as well as passenger amenities.
l Stations which had better infrastructure and fewer encroachments also had
a better level of cleanliness. Some of these stations were Secunderabad,
Hyderabad, Trivandrum Central, Rajkot, Ambala, Tiruchirapalli, Vizianagaram,
Akola, Miraj and Tirunelveli.
l The garbage disposal mechanism was better in stations such as
Secunderabad, Hyderabad, Chennai Central, Chennai Egmore, Howrah etc.
(Annexures XXV and XXVI).
2.14 Conclusion
Cleanliness and sanitation on Indian Railways was not receiving due importance
and was secondary to other activities. The expenditure on  providing and maintaining
a clean and hygienic environment was inadequate. Standards for performance were
not laid down, infrastructure was inadequate and deficient, passenger amenities were
not commensurate with increasing passenger traffic, waste management was
ineffective, railway stations were  overcrowded due to unauthorised use and
harnessing user perception was ineffective especially in A, B and C category stations
where 85 per cent of the passenger traffic, was handled. Involvement of multiple
departments with  complex reporting structures only compounded the issue.
In the last few years, the Railways have taken a number of initiatives to address
the issue of cleanliness and sanitation, such as CTS, cleaning squads in running

96
trains etc. Nevertheless, the magnitude of the problem is such that unless tackled on
a war footing, it cannot be adequately dealt with. The Railways need to evolve
performance criteria for every cleanliness related activities and ensure effective
supervision. The initiatives need to be cohesive,  systematic and sustainable.

Chapter 2: Cleanliness and Sanitation on Indian Railways
Annexure XIX
(Para No. 2.6)
CONSUMER COORDINATION COUNCIL
(AN ISSUE BASED NATIONAL COALITION OF CONSUMER ORGANISATIONS)
(Regd. .Society Certificate No. S/24045/1993)
A-20 & 21 (NITS Bldg.), Institutional Area, Sector-62, NOIDA-201307
Tel. 0120-2404273 Email: cccdel@del3.vsnl.net.in, director@core.nic.in
Survey Questionnaire on Cleanliness in Indian Railways
There is  a general feeling that our country is not very particular about cleanliness.
Same situation prevails in the Railways. We are trying to   improve the state of affairs
and we seek your co-operation in this regard. We shall be thankful, if you could
kindly spare a few moments and put across your views on cleanliness in the Railways
as you see today and the way to improve the situation. Your views may please be
given  on the following points in the proforma given below:— (Please tick your choice)
Date................................................. Time.........................................  Location................................................................................................
1. Your name please:......................................................................... Contact Number .............................................................................
(i) Train No.: ...........................................................................................................................................................
(ii) From...........................................................................  To....................................  Class of travel : ...........................................
(iii) PNR number/ticket number (for unreserved passengers) : .............................................................................................
 2. How often do you travel?
a. (i) Frequent (ii) Occasional (iii) Seldom
b. (i) Short distance (ii) Long distance
3. What is your perception on the state of cleanliness in Indian Railways over the years?
a. Improved significantly b. Imroving c. Worsening d. Can't say
4. How do you find the
Generally clean Not so clean Generally dirty
(a) approach to the railway station
(b) approach to the platform
(c) booking area
(d) Platforms
(e) Staircases (Foot overbridges)
(f) Subways
(g) Seating areas on platforms
(h) Waiting rooms

98
5. (a) Are the above mentioned areas generally crowded?
Always Most of the times Sometimes Never
(b) Will reducing the crowds improve cleanliness?
Yes No. May be
(c) Any comments on how can this be achieved?
6. (a) Who do you feel is responsible for dirtying the platforms and tracks between platforms?
Passengers Railways staff V endors Others (plaese specify)
(b) What is your opinion on the number of vendors on platforms?
More in number Adequate in the present  Adequate but there area of Less in Number
form operation should be limited
7. Toilets in stations
(a) Is the number of toilets or the platforms sufficient?
Y es No Don't Know
(b) Do you find them
Generally Clean Not so clean Generally dirty
(c) Is the number of toilets in the waiting halls sufficient?
Y es No Don't Know
(d) Do you find them
Generally clean Not so clean Generally dirty
(e) What could be done to keep the toilets clean and odour free?
Adequate no. of safai-karamcharis Sufficient water for cleaning Others (pl. specify)
8. Dustbins in stations
(a) Do you find adequate number of dustbins on the stations?
Always Most of the times Sometimes Never
(b) Are they conveniently located?
Always Most of the times Sometimes Never
(c) Do you find them
Generally clean Not so clean Overflowing with garbage Not usable
9. Coaches
(a) Are the seats and berths in the Coaches clean?
Always Sometimes Seldom
(b) How do you find the entrance and the area around the toilets?
Generally clean and dry Not so clean Generally dirty with garbage Wet with water
overflowing from toilets

99
(c) How can be area be kept clean? Suggestions, if any
(d) Have you seen rats or cockroaches in coaches?
Always Most of the times Sometimes Never
(e) Are dustbins provided in every coach at either end?
Ye s N o
(f) Are the dustbins adequate?
Ye s N o
(g) Do your find the dustbins
Generally clean Not so clean Overflowing with garbage Not usable
(h) How can their design be improved?
10. Toilets in coaches
(a) Are the toilets clean at the originating station?
Generally clean Not so clean Generally dirty
(b) Is the number of toilets in coaches in long distance trains adequate?
Ye s N o
(c) Are the toilets cleaned enroute?
Always Most of the times Sometimes Never
(d) Do you suggest present design of Toilets/Taps need improvement? (In what way please specify)
11. Bed rolls/linen
(a) Is the bed linen supplied in coaches clean?
Usually Sometimes Rarely
(b) How is the bed linen provided?
In packed cover Provided looses Covers torn
12. (a) Should vendors be allowed in the coaches?
Yes In restricted numbers Not at all
(b) Does the catering staff maintain cleanliness while handling food?
Yes all of them Some of them None of them
(c) How do you dispose off the leftover food and casseroles etc.?
Throw in the dustbin Leave it near the seat for the catering staff to pick up Throw out of the window
13. User feedback
(a) Do you know where and how to lodge a complaint?
Ye s N o
(b) Are the  complaint/suggestion books provided to you on demand?
Always Most of the times Sometimes Never

100
14. Passenger awareness
(a) How often have you heard announcements on PA Systems on platforms regarding cleanliness?
Always Most of the times Sometimes Never
(b) How often have you seen message/sign boards on the platforms to maintain cleanliness?
Always Most of the times Sometimes Never
(c) Will imposing fines work?
Yes No May be Can't say
15. What are the obstacles to cleanliness?
Inadequate seating Inadequate waiting rooms Parcels and goods stacked Others,
arrangements capacity on platforms (Please specify)
16. What are the main causes contributing to lack of cleanliness in stations and in trains?
17. What could be done to improve the standard of cleanliness?

101
Annexure XX
(Para No. 2.7)
Sample selection for Perfomance Audit Review on 'Cleanliness and Sanitation on Indian Railways'
Zonal Railway Stations (Category) Coaching Yards EMU Trains
carsheds
A B C D E Coaching Round Trip En route
yards maintenance waste
manage-
ment
1 2 3 4 56 78 9 1 0 1 1
Eastern Sealdah Naihati Majerhat Sainthia Nasibpur Tikiapara Coachin Car shed, 2301 2023/2024 2311
Railway Howrah Sonarpur Baruipur Chittaranjan Khana Complex, Howrah Barasat 2305 5627/5628 2312
Bardharman Bandel Habra New Coaching 3005 3005
Asansol Bolpur Barasat Complex, Sealdah 5959 3006
Durgapur Tarakeswar Dankuni 2313
Malda Town Srirampur Nabadwipdham 2343
Jamalpur Rampurhat Pundooah
Baidyanathdham Kamarkundu
South-eastern Kharagpur Midnapur Panskura Adra Muri Coaching depot, Car Shed, 2841 3301/3302 8030
Railway Rourkela Chakradharpur Mecheda Bankura Garbeta Santragachi Tikiapara 8030 8029
Tatanagar Bagnan Coaching Depot, 8183/ 2841
Bokaro Steel City T ata Nagar 8184 2842
Ranchi 327/328
Northern New Delhi Phagwara Kunda Seohara Coaching Car Shed, 8237/8238 2917/2918 2302
Railway Hazrat Chakkibank Harnam Ganj Moga Depot, Amritsar Jalandhar 4649/4650 310/309 2312
Nizamuddin
Delhi Rampur Kotdwara Jagadhari Coachin 2459/2460 2013
Ludhiana Chandausi Batala Depot, Lucknow 2229/2230 2029
Amritsar Kalka Barog 2419/2420 2MGN/4SRM
Jammu Tawi Patiala 2036/2035 428/429
Moradabad Amethi 1PRL/351

102
Dehradun Ayodhya 2 LBM/2LV
Haridwar 1FBL/2VPL
Ambala 3 SL/2SL
Saharanpur 1VPL/4 FBL
Lucknow 1509/1510
Barabanki 1 SL/4 SL
Unnao 352/ 2FBL
Rai Bareily 1 LV/ 1LBM
2FBL/2PRL
Central MumbaiCST Ballarshah Ambernath Dhamangao Ajni Lokmanya Car Shed, 1015/1016 1403 1015/1016
Railway Dadar Badnera V adala Road Nandgaon Tilak(T) K urla 1013/1014
Lokmanya Tilak(T) Chalisgaon Chembur Wadi Coaching Depot 6345/6346 1019/1020
Kalyan Shegaon Karjat Mumbai CST 1019/1020
Nagpur Satara Titwala Coaching Depot 1011/1022
Chandrapur Daund Dombivli 2809/2810
Bhusawal Dehu Road
Akola Pimpri
Manmad
Pune
Kolhapur
Miraj
Solapur
Gulbarga
Ahmed Nagar
Western Mumbai Central Bilimora V ile Parle Udavada Paldhi Coaching Depot, Car Shed, 2902 4708 2903
Railway Bandra Terminus Nandurbar Malad Kosambi Barejai- Bandra Terminus Mumbai 8033 9115 2904
V api Mahesana Borivali Nandej Coaching Depot, Central 9037/39 2951
Surat Maninagar Dhanu Road Ahmedabad 2471 2952
V ododara Nagada
Anand Dahod
Bharuch Surendranagar
Ankleshwar Porbandar
1 2 3 4 56 78 9 1 0 1 1

103
Ahmedabad
Gandhidham
Ratlam
Ujjan
Indore
Rajkot
Bhavnagar
Southern Chennai Central Chengalpattu Chennai MMC Palani Tiruchen- Train Care Centre, Car Shed, 2656 2711/2712 2621/2622
Railway Chennai Egmore V irudhunagar Suburban Guruvayur dur Basin Bridge A vadi 2842 2679/2680 2007/2008
Madurai V illupuram Terminal Nagore Coach Care Centre 6346
Tirunelveli Alleppey Tiruvallur Trivandrurm Central 6322
Tiruchcirapalli Kanyakumari Arakkonam
Palghat Chennai Beach
Calicut T ambaram
Coimbatore Gummidipoondi
Erode Thirumylai
Mangalore
Salem
Trivandrum Central
Ernakulam Jn.
Nagercoil Jn.
Quilon Jn.
South-central Secunderabad Chirala Lingampalli Kakinada Port Bhongir Mega Coaching Car Shed, 7064 7255/7030 2429/2430
Railway Hyderabad Basar Dabirpura Miryalaguda Amkai Depot, Moula Ali 7016 7229/7256 7064/7063
Kazipet Annavaram Secunderabad 7050 2715/2716
Kacheguda T anuku Coaching Depot, 5089
Vijayawada Renigunta V ijayawada 2714
Rajahmundry Dharmavaran 2713
Eluru Adoni 2711
Ongole Nagarsol 2718
Kakinada Town
Guntur
Guntakal

104
Tirupati
Raichur
Nanded
Aurangabad
North-eastern Lucknow Khalilabad Kanpur, Anwarganj Aishbage Carriage and wagon 5007/5008 5016 2533/2534
Railway Gorakhpur Lakhimpur Haldwani Pantnagar Depat, Luchnow 6093/6094 5204 2553/2554
Gonda Sitapur Carriage and wagon 5003 8201/8202
Rawatpur Barhni Depot, Gorakhpur 2555 5007/5008
Badshahnagar Izatnagar 1015/1016 2553/2554
Lucknow City Laklkuan
Basti V aranasi City
Kathgodam Bhatni
Deoria Sadar
Allahabad City
Manduadih
Mau Jn.
Chhapra
Ballia
Siwan
Northeast Silchar Alipurduar Jn. New Bongaigaon Chaparmukh
Coaching  2423/2435 801 UP 2506
Frontier Guwahati Rangiya Lumding Badarpur Depot, 2505/2506 710 DN 505
Railway Dimapur Bongaigaon Coaching Depot, Guwahati  2504/2503 5960
Dibrugarh Town New Jalpaiguri  5741/5742 5959
New Tinsukia  703/704
Tinsukia
New Coochbehar
Katihar
New Jalpaiguri
Southwestern Hubli Bijapur Arasikere Kengeri Coaching Depot, 2726 2079/2080 6505/6506
Railway V asco Gadag NanjangudBangalore City 7306 581/582 6589/6590
Belgaum Hospet Town Coaching Depot, 2627
Bangalore City Bangalore Cantt. Hubli 2079
1 2 3 4 56 78 9 1 0 1 1

105
Y eshvanthpur Bangarapet
Mysore Davangere
Hassan
West-central Jabalpur Damoh Shamgarh Shridham Bhopal Coaching 1473/1474 (9304/549) 2121/2122
Railway Katni Guna Suhagpur Yard 1267/1268 2001/2002 2321/2322
Satna Gangapur City Coaching Depot, 3025/3026
Bhopal Bharatpur Jabalpur 2061/2062
Habibganj 1449/1450
Itarsi 2411/2412
Bina
Kota
Sawaimadhopur
North-western Jodhpur Nagaur Sikar Jhunjhunu Carriage and wagon 2462 1JA 9008/9007
Railway Bikaner Churu Chirawa Depot, Jodhpur 2466 2 JB 2968/2967
Hisar Hanumangarh Coach care Complex- 2968 339/340
Bhiwani Marwar Jaipur
Ajmer Beawar
Udaipur
Abu Road
Jaipur
Alwar
Rewari
North-central Jhansi Orai Khaga Ramgarh Coaching Yard 2417/2418 1339/40
Railway Gwalior Chitrakootdham Achhnera Allahabad 4511/4512 362/61
Banda Karvi New Washing Siding 2178
Agra Cantt Lalitpur Yard, Agra Cantt 2162
Mathura Fatehpur
Agra Fort Naini
Raja Ki Mandi Bhatapara
Allahabad Champa
Kanpur Rajnandgaon
Aligarh

106
Tundla
Etawa
Mirzapur
South-east Bilaspur Dongargarh Amgaon Coaching Depot, 8235/8236 321/322 2853
Central Raipur Bhilai Bilaspur 8239/8240 1509/1510 2854
Railway Durg Coaching Depot, 2853/2854 8237
Gondia Durg 8238
Eastcoast Cuttack Khurda Road Titlagarh Rahama Coaching Yard Puri 2815 2821 2815
Railway Puri Sambalpur Byree Coaching Yard 8401 219 8401
Bhubaneswar Rayagada Visakhapatnam 2838
Berhampur 2727
Visakhapatnam 8563
Vizianagaram 2803
East-central Mughalsarai Anugraha Dalsingh SaraiPradhankhanta Coaching Depot, Car Shed, 2553/2554 8185 UP 2024/23
Railway Gaya Narayan Road Sindri B.H. Barauni   Jhajha 5276/5275 5610 Dn 2553/54
Dhanbad Parasnath Coaching Depot, 5097/5098
Danapur Jhajha Darbhanga 2565/2566
Patna Jn. Baktiarpur Jn. 2561/2562
Arrah Kiul 4674/4650
Patna Sahib Mokama
Samastipur Sitamarhi
Raxual Sonepur
Darbhanga
Saharsa
Mujafarpur
Hajipur
Khagaria
Metro/Kol Dum Dum Car shed,
Rabindra Sarobar Noapara
1 2 3 4 56 78 9 1 0 1 1

Annexure XXI
(Para No. 2.10.1.1)
Statement showing the number of dustbins at important stations
Name of the Zonal No. of No. of Total area T otal No. Area in Dustbins
station R ailway passengers platforms (both of dust- sqm per per
circulation bins dustbin 10,000
area and passen-
area inside gers
the station
premises)
(sqm)
1 2 345 6 7 8
Howrah ER 700000 9 17000 50 340 0.71
Sealdah ER 111254 12 45662 121 377.37 10.88
Bardhaman ER 59942 5 21769 1 21769 0.17
New Delhi NR 390000 12 113412 177 640.75 4.54
Delhi  NR 320525 20 90195 50 1803.9 1.56
Hazarat NR 194894 7 30799 125 246.39 6.41
Nizamuddin
Mumbai CST CR 310415 15 38040 55 691.64 1.77
Dadar CR 88334 8 22101 18 1227.83 2.04
Kalyan CR 159116 8 27012 26 1038.92 1.63
Nagpur CR 37000 7 28733 69 416.42 18.65
Pune WR 46165 7 18370 30 612.33 6.5
Surat WR 69355 4 31700 13 2438.46 1.87
V adodara WR 46510 5 97075 30 3235.83 6.45
Ahmedabad WR 69755 14 82992 70 1185.6 10.04
Chennai S R 52639 10 38142 150 254.28 28.5
Central
Secunderabad SCR 39921 10 79260 101 784.75 25.3
Bhopal WCR 22638 5 26117 44 593.57 19.44
Patna  ECR 49240 9 12540 40 313.5 8.12
Muzaffarpur ECR 36000 6 60953 63 967.51 17.5
107

Annexure XXII
(Para No.  2.10.3)
Statement showing the number of a category stations provided with inadequate
washable aprons
No. of A Important No. of A Some   important   stations   where
category stations where category washable aprons were not provided
stations washable aprons stations on all platforms
where were not provided where
washable at all washable
aprons were aprons were
not provided provided
partially
48 Bardhaman, 84 Howrah, Sealdah, Kharagpur, Hazrat
Bokaro Steel City, Nizamuddin, Jammu Tawi, Chennai
Raibareili, Calicut, Central, Chennai Egmore, Dadar,
Gulbarga, Kalyan, Bandra Terminus, Ahmedabad,
Belgaum, T irupati, Vijayawada, Hubli, Itarsi,
Sawaimadhopur, Patna Jn., Mughalsarai, Gorakhpur,
Lucknow City, Chappra Allahabad, Dimapur, Puri,
Hajipur, Tinsukia, Bhubaneswar, Tatanagar, Rourkela,
Berhampur Bilaspur
108

Annexure XXIII
(Para No. 2.10.6)
Statement showing the number of stations where toilets and urinals were not as
per the minimum essential requirement
Category of Number of stations Names of some of the important stations
stations where toilets and urinals
(Number of were not as per
stations minimum essential
visited) requirements
A (173) 78 Rourkela,  Dehradun,  Ahmedabad,
Hyderabad,  Lucknow,  Gorakhpur,
Allahabad City, Tinsukia, Hubli, Mysore,
Agra Cantt, Visakhapatnam, Dhanbad, Ranchi
B (91) 38 Sonarpur, Chakradharpur, Lakhimpur,
Lalkuan, Bangalore Cantt, Guna, Sonepur
C (34)       10 Dankuni, Bagnan, Malad, Chembur, Titwala
Annexure XXIV
(Para No.  2.10.8)
Statement showing the number of stations with inadequate seating arrangements
Category of Number of Number of stations Name of the stations where
stations stations where where seating seating arrangements were
(Number of seating arrangements were not as per minimum require-
stations arrangements not as per ments
visited) were not as per minimum essential
recommended requirements
scale
12 3 4
A (173) 94 71 Mumbai    CST,    Ratlam,
Gorakhpur,   Jhansi,   Gwalior,
Mughalsarai, Patna, Kharagpur,
Rourkela
B (91) 37 32 Chengalpattu,      Izatnagar,
Beawar,   Fatehpur,   Sonepur,
Midnapur
C (34) — 14 Chennai   Central   Suburban
Terminal,   Dombivili,   Malad,
Chennai Beach
109

110
Annexure XXV
(Para No. 2.13)
Grading Matrix
Item of Infrastructure/ Weightage Availabilty The condition of infrastructure as per joint
resources/processes inspection
12 3 4 5 6 7 8
Norms for cleanliness 5 Not available Available Inadequate Adequate
01 1 2
Water supply 10 Not available Inadequate Adequate
012
Drains and sewerage system 5 Not available Partially available Available Partially usable Fully usable
012 1 2
Washable aprons 5 Not available Partially available Available Partially usable Fully usable
012 1 2
Effluent treatment Plants 2 Not available Available Not used Effectively used
01 0 1
Waiting hall/shed 5 Below Minimum Below recommended As per recommended
essential norm  norm norm
012
Seating arrangments 5 Below Minimum Below recommended As per recommended
on platform essential norm norm
012

111
Toilets and urinals 10 Below Minimum Below recommended As per recommended Not usable Partially Fully usable
essential norm norm norm usable
012 0 1 2
Pay and Use toilets 10 Not available Not available as per RB Available as per RB Not usable Partially Fully usable
directives directives usable
012 0 1 2
Consumables 5 Not available Partially available Available
012
Mechanised cleaning 5 Not available Partially available Available Not usable Partially Usable
equipments usable
012 0 1 2
Safaiwalas 5 Below sanctioned As per sanctioned Low High
strength strength effectiveness effectiveness
12 1 2
Dustbins 5 Not available Partially available Available Not usable Partially usable Fully usable
012 0 1 2
Vats 5 Not available Available Partially usable Fully usable
01 1 2
Garbage disposal mechanism 10 Not available Partially available Available Inadequate Adequate
012 1 2
12 3 4 5 6 7 8

112
Encroachments/Unauth- 8 Encroachments No encroachments
orised persons 0 1
Total 100
Criteria adopted for filling in data pertaining to stations for various parameters are as follows:—
Norms: Have been considered as available where JPOs were issued detailing processes and frequency of various  cleanliness relat ed
activities. They have been considered adequate where JPOs covered all areas of cleanliness in station premises.
Water supply: Has been considered as adequately available based on the review of records of respective stations and position no ticed
during joint inspections conducted.
Drains and sewerage system and washable aprons: Availability was assessed based on availability on all platforms and usability assessed
based on their condition as verified during joint inspections.
Effluent Treatment Plants: Availability assessed on existence and effectiveness assessed with reference to their extent of util isation
and frequency of testing.
Waiting hall/seating arrangements: Assessed based on their norms for minimum essential and recommended requirements.
Toilets and urinals: Assessed based on their norms for minimum essential and recommended requirements and condition as per the
position noticed during joint inspections conducted.
Pay and use toilets: Assessed based on directives issued by Railway Board and their implementation over selected stations besid es
their conditions as noticed during joint inspections.
Consumables: Based on the regularity of their supply from respective divisions.
Mechanised cleaning: Assessed based on their extent of availability and their utilisation.
Safaiwalas: Effectiveness assessed based on the percentage of absenteeism. Considered low if percentage of absenteeism is 35% a nd
above and vice versa.
12 3 4 5 6 7 8

113
Dustbins: Assessed based on their norms for minimum essential and recommended requirements and condition as per the position
noticed during joint inspections conducted.
V ats: Assessed based on their extent of availability and condition  as per the position noticed during joint inspections conducted.
Garbage disposal mechanism:
Adequacy assessed based on the waste collection and disposal mechanism and position noticed during joint inspections conducted.
Encroachments: Based on whether there were encroachments on the stations or not.

114
Annexure XXVI
Grading of stations
(Para No. 2.13)
           Maximum score 1 0 2 0 2 0 2 0 2 1 0 1 0 4 0 4 0 1 0 2 0 2 0 2 0 1 0 4 0 8 300
Zonal Station
Railway
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
SCR Secunderabad (SC)  0 20 5 5 0 5 5 40 10 10 20 20 10 5 20 8 183
S R Chennai Central (MAS) 0 20 5 5 0 5 10 40 20 10 20 10 5 5 20 8 183
CR Bhusaval (BSL) 0 20 10 10 0 10 10 40 20 10 0 10 5 10 10 8 173
ER Asansol (ASN) 5 20 5 20 0 5 10 40 10 10 10 5 5 5 10 8 168
CR Lokmanya Tilak (LTT) 0 20 10 10 0 10 10 40 20 10 10 0 5 10 10 0 165
S R Chennai Egmore (MS) 0 20 5 5 0 5 10 40 10 10 10 10 5 5 20 8 163
CR Manmad (MMR) 0 20 10 20 0 5 10 40 10 10 0 10 5 10 10 160
S R Tiruchirapalli (TPJ) 0 20 5 10 0 10 10 20 10 5 20 20 5 5 10 8 158
CR Nagpur (NGP) 20 10 0 20 5 10 40 10 10 0 10 5 0 10 0 150
CR Solapur (SUR) 0 20 10 10 0 5 10 40 20 10 0 10 55 10 0 155
ECoR Bhubaneswar (BBS) 5 20 5 5 0 5 10 20 10 10 10 20 5 5 10 8 148
S R Trivandrum Central (TVC) 0 20 5 10 0 5 5 20 10 10 20 20 5 5 10 8 153
WR Bhavnagar Pra (BVP) 0 20 20 5 0 10 10 40 0 10 0 10 5 5 10 8 153
WR V adodara (BRC) 0 10 10 5 0 10 5 40 20 10 0 20 5 5 10 0 150
Norms
Water supply
Drains and
sewerage
Washable
approns
ETP
Waiting hall
Seating
arrangements
Toilets and
urinals
Pay and Use
toilets
Consumables
Mechanised
cleaning
equipments
Safaiwalas
Dust bins
Vats
Total
Encrachments
Disposed System

115
SCR Eluru (EE) 0 20 5 0 0 5 10 20 10 10 20 20 5 5 10 8 148
WCR Jabalpur (JBP) 0 20 5 10 0 10 5 20 10 10 20 10 5 5 10 8 148
WCR Satna (STA) 0 20 5 5 0 10 10 20 10 10 20 10 5 5 10 8 148
WR Gandhidham (GIM) 0 20 20 0 0 10 0 40 20 10 0 5 0 5 10 8 148
WR Indore (IND) 0 20 20 5 0 10 10 40 0 10 0 5 5 5 10 8 148
CR Kalyan (KYN) 0 20 10 5 0 5 5 20 20 10 5 20 5 10 10 0 145
ER Howrah (HWH) 5 10 5 10 2 10 5 20 10 10 10 10 5 5 20 8 145
WR Mumbai Central (BCT) 0 20 10 10 0 10 5 40 20 10 0 5 0 5 10 0 145
WR Surat (ST) 0 20 10 10 0 10 10 20 10 10 5 20 5 5 10 0 145
ECoR Cuttack (CTC) 5 20 5 10 0 10 10 20 10 5 10 10 5 5 10 8 143
ECoR Vizianagaram (VZM) 5 20 5 10 0 5 10 20 10 5 10 10 5 5 10 8 143
NCR Jhansi (JHS) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 20 10 10 20 10 5 5 20 8 143
NFR Guwahati (GHY) 0 20 5 10 0 10 0 20 10 10 20 10 5 5 10 8 143
SCR Hyderabad (HYB) 0 20 5 5 0 5 10 0 10 10 20 20 5 5 20 8 143
SCR Rajahmundry (RJY) 0 20 5 5 0 5 10 20 10 10 20 10 10 0 10 8 143
SCR Vijayawada (BZA) 0 20 5 5 0 5 5 20 10 10 20 10 10 5 10 8 143
SER Kharagpur (KGP) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 20 40 10 0 10 5 5 10 8 143
S R Ernakulam Jn. (ERS) 0 20 5 5 0 5 10 20 10 10 20 10 5 5 10 8 143
S R Madurai (MDU) 0 20 5 5 0 5 10 20 10 10 20 10 5 5 10 8 143
S R Tirunelveli (TEN) 0 20 5 5 0 5 10 20 0 10 20 20 5 5 10 8 143
WR Rajkot (RJT) 0 20 20 5 0 10 0 0 20 10 20 10 5 5 10 8 143
NR Ambala (UMB) 0 20 10 10 0 5 0 20 10 10 20 20 0 5 10 0 140
CR Ahmednagar (ANG)  0 20 5 0 0 5 0 40 20 10 0 10 5 5 10 8 138
NCR Allahabad (ALD) 0 20 5 5 0 10 10 20 10 10 10 10 5 5 10 8 138

116
NCR Kanpur (CNB) 0 20 5 5 0 10 10 20 10 10 10 10 5 5 10 8 138
NWR Bikaner (BKN) 0 20 5 5 0 10 0 20 10 10 20 10 5 5 10 8 138
SCR Ongole (OGL) 0 20 5 5 0 5 10 20 10 10 20 10 10 0 10 8 138
WCR Kota (KOTA) 0 20 5 5 0 5 10 20 10 10 0 20 5 5 10 8 138
CR Akola (AK) 0 20 20 20 0 10 10 0 10 10 0 20 5 10 10 0 135
CR Pune (PUNE) 0 20 20 20 0 5 10 20 10 10 0 10 5 5 10 0 135
ER Malda Town (MLDT) 5 20 5 5 0 5 10 20 10 10 10 10 5 5 10 0 135
SWR Bangalore City (SBC) 0 20 5 5 2 5 10 20 10 10 10 5 5 5 10 8 135
NR Delhi (DLI) 0 20 5 5 0 5 5 20 10 10 10 10 5 5 10 8 133
SCR Guntur (GNT) 0 20 5 5 0 10 10 0 10 10 20 10 10 5 10 8 133
S R Calicut (CLT) 0 20 5 5 0 5 5 20 10 10 20 10 5 5 10 8 133
S R Coimbatore (CBE) 0 20 5 5 0 5 5 20 10 10 10 10 5 5 10 8 133
SR Salem (SA) 0 20 5 5 0 5 10 20 10 10 10 10 5 5 10 8 133
WR Ujjain (UJN) 0 20 10 10 0 10 10 20 10 10 0 10 5 5 10 8 133
ECoR Visakhapatnam (VSKP) 5 10 5 5 0 5 5 10 10 10 10 20 5 5 10 0 120
ER Jamalpur (JMP) 5 10 5 5 0 10 10 20 10 10 10 20 5 5 10 0 130
CR Gulbarga  (GR) 0 20 20 0 0 5 10 0 20 10 0 20 5 10 0 8 128
CR Miraj (MRJ) 0 20 20 10 0 10 0 0 10 5 0 20 5 10 10 8 128
ECoR Puri (PURI) 5 20 5 5 0 10 5 20 0 10 10 10 5 5 10 8 128
ECR Raxaul (RXL) 0 20 5 5 0 5 5 20 10 10 0 20 5 5 10 8 128
NR Jammu Tawi (JAT) 0 10 5 5 0 10 10 20 10 10 10 10 5 5 10 8 128
NR Moradabad (MB) 0 20 5 10 0 10 0 20 10 10 0 10 10 5 10 8 128
NR Saharanpur (SRE) 0 20 10 10 0 5 0 20 10 10 10 10 0 5 10 8 128
NWR Jaipur (JP) 0 20 5 10 0 10 10 20 10 10 0 5 5 5 10 8 128
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19

117
SCR Kacheguda (KCG) 0 20 5 5 0 10 10 0 10 10 20 10 5 5 10 8 128
S R Erode (ED) 0 20 5 10 0 5 10 0 10 10 20 10 5 5 10 8 128
CR Dadar (DR) 0 20 10 5 0 0 5 10 10 10 10 10 5 10 10 0 115
ER Durgapur (DGR) 5 20 5 0 0 5 10 20 10 10 10 10 5 5 10 0 125
ER Sealdah (SDAH) 5 10 10 5 0 5 10 20 10 10 10 10 5 5 10 0 125
NR Ludhiana (LDH) 0 20 5 5 0 10 10 0 10 10 10 20 10 5 10 0 125
ECor Berhampur (BAM) 5 20 5 0 0 5 10 10 10 5 10 10 5 5 10 8 118
NER Lucknow (LJN) 0 20 5 10 0 5 5 0 10 10 20 10 5 5 10 8 128
NFR Katihar (KIR) 0 20 5 5 0 10 10 20 10 5 0 5 5 5 10 8 123
NFR New Tinsukia (NTSK) 0 20 5 5 0 10 10 20 10 5 0 10 5 5 10 8 123
NR Amritsar (ASR) 0 10 5 10 0 5 5 20 10 5 10 10 10 5 10 8 123
NWR Alwar (AWR) 0 20 5 0 0 10 10 20 10 10 0 10 5 5 10 8 123
SECR Raipur (R) 0 20 5 10 0 5 0 20 10 10 5 20 0 0 10 8 123
S R Qulion Jn. (QLN) 0 20 5 0 0 5 10 20 10 10 10 5 5 5 10 8 123
WCR Katni (KTE) 0 20 5 0 0 10 10 20 10 5 5 5 5 5 10 8 123
WCR Sawaimadhopur (SWM) 0 20 5 0 0 5 5 20 10 10 0 20 5 5 10 8 123
WR Anand (ANND) 0 20 20 0 0 5 5 20 10 5 0 10 5 5 10 8 123
NR Hazrat Nizamuddin (HNZM)0 20 5 5 0 5 5 20 10 10 10 10 5 5 10 0 120
WR Ahmedabad (ADI) 0 20 10 5 0 10 10 0 20 5 10 10 5 5 10 0 120
ECR Danapur (DNR) 0 20 5 5 0 10 0 20 0 10 0 20 5 5  10 8 118
ECR Patna Jn. (PNBE) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 20 10 10 10 5 5 5 10 8 118
ECR Samastipur (SPJ) 0 20 5 5 0 5 5 20 10 10 0 10 5 5 10 8 118
NCR Gwalior (GWL) 0 20 5 5 0 10 0 0 10 10 0 20 5 5 20 8 118
NER Gorakhpur (GKP) 0 20 5 5 0 10 0 0 10 10 20 10 5 5 10 8 118

118
NFR Dimapur (DMV) 0 20 5 5 0 10 0 20 10 10 0 20 0 0 10 8 118
NR Rai Bareily (RBL) 0 20 5 0 0 5 10 20 10 10 0 5 10 5 10 8 118
NWR Hisar (HSR) 0 20 5 5 0 10 0 20 10 0 0 20 5 5 10 8 118
NWR Jodhpur (JU) 0 20 5 5 0 10 0 20 10 10 0 10 5 5 10 8 118
SER Bokaro Steel City (BKSC) 0 20 5 0 0 5 0 10 20 10 0 20 5 5 10 8 118
WCR Bhopal (BPL) 0 20 5 10 0 5 5 20 10 5 5 5 5 5 10 8 118
WR Ankleshwar (AKV) 0 20 10 0 0 10 10 0 10 10 0 20 5 5 10 8 118
CR Mumbai CST (CSTM) 0 20 5 10 0 5 0 10 10 10 10 10 5 10 10 0 115
ER Bardhaman (BWN) 5 10 5 0 0 5 10 20 10 10 10 10 5 5 10 0 115
NR New Delhi (NDLS) 0 10 5 10 0 5 5 20 10 10 10 10 5 5 10 0 115
SECR Bilaspur (BSP) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 20 10 5 5 20 5 5 10 0 115
ECR Ara (ARA) 0 20 5 0 0 5 0 20 20 10 0 10 5 0 10 8 113
NCR Agra Cantt (AGC) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 0 10 10 10 20 5 5 10 8 113
NER Allahabad City (ALY) 0 20 5 5 0 10 10 0 10 10 0 20 5 0 10 8 113
NFR New Jalpaiguri (NJP) 0 10 5 5 0 10 0 20 10 5 0 20 5 5 10 8 113
NR Lucknow (LKO) 0 20 5 10 0 5 5 10 10 10 0 10 5 5 10 8 113
NWR Ajmer (AII) 0 20 5 5 0 10 0 20 10 10 0 5 5 5 10 8 113
SCR Aurangabad (AWB) 0 20 5 5 0 5 10 0 10 10 10 10 5 5 10 8 113
SCR Kakinada Town (CCT) 0 20 5 0 0 5 10 20 10 0 0 20 5 0 10 8 113
SCR Tirupati (TPTY) 0 20 5 5 0 5 10 0 10 10 0 20 5 5 10 8 113
S R Palghat (PGT) 0 20 5 10 0 5 5 0 10 10 0 20 5 5 10 8 113
WR Bandra Terminus (BDTS) 0 20 10 5 0 10 10 20 10 5 0 10 0 0 10 0 110
ECR Gaya (GAYA) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 20 10 10 0 5 5 5 10 8 108
ECR Hajipur (HJP) 0 20 5 0 0 5 0 0 20 10 0 20 5 5 10 8 108
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19

119
NER Kathgodam (KGM) 0 20 5 10 0 5 10 0 0 10 0 20 5 5 10 8 108
NFR Tinsukia (TSK) 0 20 5 0 0 0 10 0 10 10 0 20 10 5 10 8 108
SCR Kazipet (KZJ) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 20 10 5 5 5 5 5 10 8 108
SCR Nanded (NED) 0 20 5 0 0 10 10 0 10 10 10 5 5 5 10 8 108
Sr Mangalore (MAQ) 0 20 5 0 0 5 10 0 10 10 0 20 5 5 10 8 108
WCR Habibganj (HBJ) 0 20 5 5 0 5 5 20 10 10 0 5 5 0 10 8 108
WR Vapi (V API) 0 20 20 0 0 10 10 0 20 5 0 10 0 0 10 0 105
ECR Darbhanga (DBG) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 0 10 10 0 20 5 5 10 8 103
ECR Dhanbad (DHN) 0 20 5 5 0 10 0 0 10 10 10 5 5 5 10 8 103
ECR Mughalsarai (MGS) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 20 10 10 0 5 5 0 10 8 103
ECR Muzaffarpur (MFP) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 0 20 10 0 10 10 0 10 8 103
ECR Saharsa (SHC) 0 20 5 0 0 5 0 20 10 10 0 10 0 5 10 8 103
NCR Agra Fort (AF) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 20 10 0 0 10 5 5 10 8 103
NER Ballia  (BUI) 0 20 5 5 0 10 0 0 10 10 0 20 5 0 10 8 103
NWR Bhiwani (BNW) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 20 10 0 0 10 5 5 10 8 103
NWR Rewari (RE) 0 20 5 5 0 10 10 0 10 10 0 5 5 5 10 8 103
S R Nagercoil Jn. (NCJ) 0 20 5 0 0 5 10 20 0 10 0 5 5 5 10 8 103
SWR Mysore (MYS) 0 20 5 5 0 10 10 0 10 10 0 5 5 5 10 8 103
WR Ratlam (RTM) 0 10 10 10 0 10 0 0 20 10 0 5 5 5 10 8 103
CR Kolhapur (KOP) 0 20 5 0 0 5 10 0 10 5 0 10 5 10 10 8 98
ECR Patna Saheb (PNC) 0 20 5 0 0 5 0 0 20 10 0 10 5 5 10 8 98
NFR New Coochbehar (NCB) 0 20 5 0 0 5 0 0 q10 5 0 20 10 5 10 8 98
RR Dehradun (DDN) 0 20 10 5 0 5 0 0 10 10 0 10 5 5 10 8 98

120
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
NWR Abu Road (ABR) 0 20 5 0 0 10 10 0 10 10 0 5 5 5 10 8 98
NWR Udaipur (UDZ) 0 20 5 5 0 10 0 0 10 10 0 10 5 5 10 8 98
SCR Raichur (RC) 0 20 5 0 0 5 10 0 0 10 0 20 5 5 10 8 98
SECR Gondia (G) 0 10 5 10 0 5 0 10 10 10 5 5 5 5 10 8 98
SECR Durg (DURG) 0 10 5 5 0 5 0 20 10 10 0 10 5 5 10 0 95
SER Tatanagar (TATA) 0 20 10 5 0 5 0 20 10 5 0 5 5 0 10 0 95
WR Bharuch (BH) 0 20 20 0 0 10 0 0 10 5 0 10 5 5 10 0 95
ECR Khagaria (KGG) 0 20 5 0 0 5 0 0 20 10 0 10 5 0 10 8 93
NCR Aligarh (ALJN) 0 20 5 0 0 5 0 0 10 10 0 20 5 0 10 8 93
NC R Banda (BNDA) 0 20 5 0 0 10 0 0 10 0 0 20 5 5 10 8 93
NCR Mirzapur (MZP) 0 20 5 0 0 5 10 0 0 10 0 20 5 0 10 8 93
NER Basti (BST) 0 20 5 0 0 10 0 0 10 10 0 10 5 5 10 8 93
NER Chhapra (CPR) 0 20 5 5 0 5 10 0 10 10 0 5 5 0 10 8 93
NER Gonda (GD) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 0 10 10 0 10 5 5 10 8 93
NER Siwan (SV) 0 2 0 5 0 0 5 0 2 0 1 0 1 0 0 5 0 0 1 0 8 9 3
NFR Silchar (SCL) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 0 10 10 0 10 5 5 10 8 93
NR Barabanki (BBK) 0 20 10 0 0 5 0 0 0 10 0 20 5 5 10 8 93
NR Haridwar (HW) 0 20 5 10 0 5 0 0 10 5 0 10 5 5 10 8 93
SCR Guntakal (GTKD) 0 20 5 5 0 5 10 0 0 5 10 5 5 5 10 8 93
SER Rourkela (ROU) 0 10 5 5 0 5 0 0 10 10 0 20 5 5 10 8 93
SWR Hubli (UBL) 0 10 5 5 0 5 5 0 10 10 5 10 5 5 10 8 93
WCR Bina (BINA) 0 20 5 10 0 5 0 0 10 10 0 5 5 5 10 8 93
WCR Itarsi (ET) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 0 10 10 0 1015 5 10 8 93
NCR Mathura (MTJ) 0 20 5 5 0 5 10 0 10 0 0 5 5 5 10 8 88

121
NCR Raja Ki Mandi (RKM) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 0 10 0 0 20 5 0 10 8 88
NCR Tundla (TDL) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 0 0 10 0 20 5 0 10 8 88
NER Deoria Sadar (DEOS) 0 20 5 0 0 10 0 0 10 10 0 10 5 0 10 8 88
NER Rawatpur (RPO) 0 20 5 0 0 5 0 0 0 10 0 20 5 5 10 8 88
SWR Belgaum (BGLI) 0 20 5 0 0 5 10 0 10 10 0 5 5 0 10 8 88
SWR V asco-Da-Gama (VSG) 0 20 5 5 0 5 5 0 0 10 5 5 5 5 10 8 88
C R Chandrapur (CD) 0 20 10 0 0 5 10 0 10 5 0 10 5 0 10 0 85
SER Ranchi (RNC) 0 10 5 10 0 5  0 0 10 10 0 10 5 10 10 0 85
NER Lucknow  City (LC) 0 20 5 0 0 5 0 0 10 10 0 10 5 0 10 8 83
NFR Dibrugarh Town (DBRT) 0 20 5 5 0 0 0 0 0 5 0 20 5 5 10 8 83
NER Badshahnagar (BNZ) 0 20 5 10 0 5 0 0 0 0 0 10 5 5 10 8 78
NER Mau Jn. (MAU) 0 20 5 0 0 10 0 0 0 10 5 5 5 0 10 8 78
SWR Yesvantpur (YPR) 0 20 5 5 0 5 0 0 0 10 0 5 5 5 10 8 78
NCR Etawah (ETW) 0 20 5 0 0 5 0 0 0 10 0 5 5 0 10 8 68
NER Manduadih (MUV) 0 20 5 0 0 5 0 0 0 5 0 10 5 0 10 8 68
NR Unnao (ON) 0 20 5 0 0 5 0 0 0 10 0 5 0 0 10 8 63
GMGIPMRND—1333LS—05.06.2009.