39
PROCUREMENT AND UTILISATION OF
PLANT AND EQUIPMENT IN DRDO
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
(DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI


THIRTY-NINTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
PROCUREMENT AND UTILISATION OF
PLANT AND EQUIPMENT IN DRDO
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
(DEPARTMENT OF DEFENCE RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT)
[Action Taken  on 16th Report of Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on ........................................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ...............................................
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
February, 2007/Magha, 1928 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1824
Price: Rs. 47.00
©2007 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2006-2007) ................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
PART I
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by Government ..................................................................... 6
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations  which  the  Committee do
 not desire to pursue in view  of  the  replies  received from
Government .......................................................................... 35
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been  accepted  by  the  Committee
and which require reiteration ............................................... 36
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations   in   respect  of    which
Government have furnished interim replies ........................ 37
PART II
Extract of Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2006-07) held on 13.02.2007 ............................................. 38
APPENDIX
Observations and Recommendations... ............................... 40

COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri R.L. Jalappa
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Prof. M. Ramadass
9. Shri M. Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Mohan Singh
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
13. Shri M.A. Kharabela Swain
14. Shri K.V. Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri R.K. Dhawan
19. Dr. K. Malaisamy
20. Shri V. Narayanasamy
21. Shri Janardhana Poojary
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
5. Shri N.K. Jha — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Thirty-Ninth Report on Action Taken by Government on the Observations
and Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 16th Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on "Procurement and Utilisation of Plant and Equipment in DRDO".
2. This Report was considered and adopted  by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 13th February, 2007. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the
Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and Recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and have
also been reproduced in a consolidated from in Appendix to the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA
Chairman,
15 February, 2007 Public Accounts Committee.
26 Magha, 1928 (Saka)
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the  Government
on the Observations/Recommendations contained in their Sixteenth Report
(14th Lok Sabha) in Paragraph 5.1 of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General
of India for the year ended 31 March, 2003 (No. 6 of 2004), Union Government
(Defence Services—Army & Ordinance Factories) relating to “Procurement and
Utilisation of Plant and Equipment in DRDO”.
2. The Sixteenth Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 10th August, 2005
contained 14 Observations/ Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes in respect of
all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the Ministry of
Defence and these are broadly categorized as under:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by Government:
Paragraph Nos. 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 70, 71, 72 & 73
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from Government:
Paragraph No. -NIL-
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph No. -NIL-
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
Paragraph No. 69
3. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Defence have been
reproduced  in the relevant chapters of this Report. In the succeeding paragraphs, the
Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of their
Observations/Recommendations, made in the Original Report, which need reiteration
or merit comments.
(A) Deficiences in Planning for Procurement of Plants and Equipments in
DRDO [Paragraph 61]
4. In paragraph 61 of their Original Report, the Committee had noted that eight
equipment costing Rs. 1.75 crore required for specific projects undertaken by five
laboratories/establishments namely Armament Research and Development
Establishment, Pune (ARDE), Defence Metallurgical Research Laboratory, Hyderabad
(DMRL), Vehicle Research Development Establishment, Ahmednagar (VRDE), High

2
Energy Material Research Laboratory, Pune (HEMRL) and Soild State Physics
Laboratory, Delhi (SSPL) were received either after the closure or at the fag end of the
project. As regards utilization of the equipment, which could not be substantially used
for the specific purpose, the Committee were informed that these were used in
subsequent projects. In order to ensure timely procurement of requisite equipments
and their effective utilisation for the intended purpose, the Ministry had stated that
Purchase Management Procedure was suitably amended and instructions had
accordingly been issued to all concerned laboratories/establishments for strict
compliance of the amended Procedure including regular reporting by them to the DRDO
Headquarters. It was further stated that with the commissioning of Integrated Material
Management Software (IMMS) by the laboratories of DRDO, expectedly by August
2005, lead time for procurement of equipment would be curtailed substantially thereby
helping in their timely acquisition. The Committee were  concerned to note equipment
could not be put to use in the specific projects as envisaged in the procurement planning.
It was altogether a different proposition that those equipments  were utilized in
subsequent projects. While taking note of the steps taken by the Ministry to plug
deficiencies in the system of procurement planning, the Committee had desired that an
institutional mechanism should be put in place to monitor implementation of the revised
procedure by field formations with a view to strengthening procurement system.
5. Apprising the Committee about the steps taken to rectify the deficiencies in the
procurement planning, the Ministry of Defence in their Action Taken Note have stated
that as per direction of the Committee an Institutional Review Mechanism has been
introduced. In order to ensure timely procurement of requisite equipment and its
utilization for intended purpose PM-2003 document has been amended on 20 July
2005 wherein Annual Action Plan for procurement and installation and commissioning
of equipment/machinery will be meticulously drawn by Lab/Estt. well in advance.
They will be quarterly reviewed (as on 31 March, 30 June, 30 Sept and 31 Dec) by
Lab Project Directors with a view to ensure timely procurement of stores and help in
completing the objective of projects within PDC. The provision of forwarding the
Annual Reports by Labs/Estt. have been incorporated w.e.f. Financial year 2006. On
receipt of reports Head Quarter Defence Research Development Organization will
review these reports during first quarter of next financial year and submit the same to
Secretary, Defence R&D. Further, IMMS software implementation will help in constant
monitoring of the procurement cases from initiation to the placement of supply order.
6. The Committee while expressing their satisfaction over the measures taken
by the Ministry for ensuring timely procurement of requisite equipment and its
utilization for the intended purpose by the various Labs/establishments of DRDO,
recommend that the progress made in regard to submission of Annual Action
plan for procurement, installation and Commissioning of equipment/Machinery
by various laboratories/establishments and the review conducted of these Annual
Action Plan (AAP) by the Defence Research Development Organization (DRDO)
may be apprised to them. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the
progress made in implementation of Integrated Material Management Software
(IMMS) software and the benefits accrued therefrom in cutting down the time
for procurement and installation of equipment/Machinery.

3
(B) Procedural Shortcomings in the Procurement Process [Paragraph 62]
7. The Committee in their original Report, had found that besides deficient
procurement planning, the procurement process in DRDO was also afflicted by
serious procedural shortcomings. The Purchase Management Procedure of DRDO,
issued in July 2000, had stipulated that open/global tenders should be invited to
generate as much competition as possible. However, to the contrary, in 17 out of 30
cases in respect of five laboratories, limited tenders were resorted to on grounds of
urgency for effecting purchases. The Committee were disturbed to note that out of 5
cases processed as urgent, three orders were placed after 13 to 21 months of raising
of demands. In 12 other cases, the time gap between the raising of demand and
actual ordering ranged from 5 to 11 months in 8 cases and over 12 months in four
cases. In the opinion of the Committee, the grounds of urgency to justify limited
tendering thus had become questionable in such cases. The Secretary, DRDO also
was very candid in admitting that resorting to limited tender on grounds of urgency
in such a large number of cases was not procedurally justified and could lead to
some lapses. The Committee had been informed that with the amendment effected
in the procurement procedure in DRDO,  the processes of procurement had been
specified with better clarity that would help reduce margin of error on the part of
operating units. While appreciating the efforts made by DRDO in right earnest, the
Committee had desired that, in future, cases of procurement under urgent
circumstances should be critically analysed and closely monitored so as to ensure
that delegated power was not misused and objective of procurement was fully
achieved.
8. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Note, have stated that for close monitoring
and critical analysis of procurement under urgency, instructions were issued to all
DRDO Labs vide letter dated 17 August, 2005 asking them to comply with the
following course of action:—
(a) Unless there is real urgent requirement, merely for prioritizing the demand,
it will not be marked 'urgent' on form DRDO MM-06 (Demand).
(b) Demand will be initiated on 'urgent' basis only depending on justifiable
user's urgency, items which are on critical path and arising out of urgent
requirement by the services.
(c) Urgency of all such above cases will be specifically monitored till the
placement of order and finalisation of the supplies. If the item is urgent, it
must be followed up with required seriousness.
(d) Indiscriminate use of limited tenders merely on pretex of urgency will be
avoided.
It has futher been stated that the procurement under Limited Tendering by the
DRDO Labs during the period 01 January, 2005 to 25 September, 2005 has been
reviewed. It has been reported that out of total cases initiated for procurement under
Limited Tendering, by the Labs 25% cases are stated to be on urgency basis and the

4
average time taken for placing the supply orders by the Labs is from three to four
months. In other 75% cases reasons give by the Labs are :—
(i) Sources of supply are definitely known and Limited; (ii) Sources short-listed
from past experiences of open tenders, (iii) Item being very specific in nature
(sensitive and strategic)/not in public interest; and (iv) Required for trials."
9. The Committee note from the reply furnished by the Ministry that in 75 per
cent of the cases where limited tendering was resorted to by DRDO on an urgency
basis, the average time taken by placing the supply orders has not been mentioned.
further, in 25 per cent of these cases, the reasons for limited tendering were not
given. The Commitee desire that the full details such as reasons for resorting to
limited tendering and the average time taken for placing orders after raising of
the demand and actual time taken in delivery of stores from the date of placement
of supply orders in respect of each of the case may be furnished. While expressing
satisfaction over the steps taken by the Ministry for streamlining the procedure
relating the procurement of stores on urgency basis, the Committee expect that
DRDO should strictly monitor the cases where limited tendering is resorted by
the laboratories/establishments on an urgency basis. It should also be ensured
that such cases are kept to the barest minimum possible. The Committee would
also like to be apprised of the progress made by the laboratories/establishments
in this regard and the number of cases where limited tendering was resorted to
on grounds of urgency after issue of the revised guidelines/instructions.
(C) Failure of suppliers to adhere to the prescribe time schedule for delivery
of equipments. [Paragraph 64]
10. The Committee, in Paragraph 64 of their Original Report, had noticed the failure
of suppliers to adhere to the prescribed time schedule for delivery of equipment. The
Committee had found that as against Rs. 67.58 lakh to be recovered by way of liquidated
damages in 36 cases on account of delayed delivery,  liquidated damages amounting
to Rs. 0.46 lakh was recovered only in one case. Surprisingly, in the remaining 35
cases, an amount of Rs. 67.12 lakh leviable was waived by the Directors of the concerned
laboratories/establishments. The Ministry had merely stated that decision was taken
to waive the liquidated damages as developmental delays were not attributable to
suppliers. Taking strong exception to the decision taken in the matter, which led to
apparent loss of revenue to Government, the Committee had recommended that these
cases be reviewed by DRDO with a view to ascertain  the bona fide of the decision
taken retrospectively. Also, the Ministry should place before the Committee the outcome
of the review and action taken thereon within a period of three months of the presentation
of this Report.
11. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Note, have stated that 35 cases where the
Liquidated Damages (LD) was waived by Labs, were reviewed by DRDO HQrs and
the reasons as given by the Labs for waiver of LD are:— (a) The delay in approval of
drawings by Lab; (b) Delay in chemical analysis of material by Lab; (c) Delay in
inspection by Lab; (d) Delay in issue of Custom duty exemption certificate (C-DEC);
(e) Delay in shipment from principal; (f) Delay in pre-despatch inspection; (g) Delay

5
in receipt of import items by the manufacturers; (h) Delay due to sanctions imposed
by US; and (i) Delay in receipt of Export Licence. In order to overcome such instances
the following course of action has been taken by DRDO.
(i) Revised TPC/NC format of minutes has been circulated to all the Labs in
which all clauses including LD has been mentioned.
(ii) Close monitoring of CDEC is being carried out now, all efforts are being
made to see that there are no delays for issue of CDEC.
(iii) Further instructions on Liquidated damages have been forwarded to all Labs/
Estts. vide this HQ letter No. DMM/PP/0000405/M dated 07 November,
2005.
It has further stated that in cases where the delay is due to approval of drawings,
chemical analysis of material, pre-despatch inspection and inspection by Lab, the same
are being reviewed by DRDO HQrs. Based on the above inputs from the Labs necessary
instructions will be issued for maintaining the time frame for above activities.
12. From the Reply furnished by the Ministry, the Committee note that out of
nine reasons that have been advanced by the respective laboratories/
establishments for waiver of liquidation damages from the suppliers in 35 cases
involving Rs. 67.12 lakh, four reasons namely delay on account of approval of
drawings, chemical analysis of material, pre-dispatch Inspection and inspection
by Labs were stated to be on  account of lapses by the concerned Labs/
establishments and could not be attributable to the suppliers. The Committee
recommend that these reasons should be critically reviewed by DRDO and the
outcome of the such review along with corrective measures taken to prevent
recurrence of such instances should be apprised to them. They would also like to
be apprised of the instructions issued by the DRDO to Labs for prescribing the
time limit/frame for development activities that were required to be undertaken
by them so that the prescribed time schedule for delivery of equipments by
suppliers can be strictly adhered to.

CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Defence Research and Development Organization (DRDO) provides scientific
and technical support to the Armed Forces through design and development of new
and sophisticated equipment to meet operational requirements. A significant objective
of DRDO is the establishment of capability for indigenous production of equipment
with a view to attaining self-reliance in defence requirements. The mandate of DRDO
is accomplished through a network of 50 laboratories/establishments whose activities
are organized through specific projects. The Audit paragraph in question seeks a review
of procurement and utilization of imported and indigenous plant and equipment by
15 Research & Development (R&D) laboratories/establishments procured during the
period from 1997-98 to 2001-02. The Committee note that DRDO establishments
spent more than 45 percent of their budget on purchase of stores, plant and equipment.
The facts brought out in the Audit paragraph and subseqent examination by the
Committee reveal that procurement planning of material by DRDO and its utilisation
leave a lot to be desired.
[Sl. No. 1,  Appendix II, Para 60 of Sixteenth Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok
Sabha)]
Action Taken
The replies are given in subsequent Para Nos. 61 to 73.
Signature of
Chief Controller Research & Development (R)
Defence Research and Development Organisation
[Ministry of Defence/Department of Defence Research and Development
O.M. No. DBFA/FA/83640/M/01 dated 25th January, 2006]
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee
The Committee note that eight equipment costing Rs. 1.75 crores required for
specific projects undertaken by five laboratories/establishments (ARDE, DMRL,
VRDE, HEMRL and SSPL) were received either after the closure of the Project or at
the fag end of the project. The Ministry have attributed the reasons for delay in receipt/
installation of these equipments to re-floating of tenders, seeking technical clarifications,
embargo imposed for exporting equipment to DRDO etc. According to them, none of
the projects was delayed due to delay in receipt of these equipments.
[Sl. No. 2, Appendix II, Para 61 of Sixteenth Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
6

7
Action Taken
As per direction of PAC Institutional Review Mechanism has been introduced. In
order to ensure timely procurement of requisite equipment and its utilization for intended
purpose PM-2003 document has been amended vide Govt. of India, MOD letter
No. DMM/PP/0000203/M/2505/D(R&D) dated 20 July 05 where in Annual Action
Plan for procurement, installation and commissioning of equipment/machinery will
be meticulously drawn by Lab/Estt. well in advance.
On receipt of reports HQ DRDO will review these reports during first quarter of
next financial year and submit the same to Secretary Defence R&D.
Further IMMS software implementation will help in constant monitoring of the
procurement cases from initiation to the placement of supply order.
Signature of
Chief Controller Research & Development (R)
Defence Research and Development Organisation
[Ministry of Defence/Department of Defence Research and Development
O.M. No. DBFA/FA/83640/M/01 dated 25th January, 2006]

ANNEXURE-I
No. DMM/PP/0000203/M/2585/D (R&D)
Government of India
Ministry of Defence
Department of Defence Research & Development.
New Delhi, 20 July, 2005
CORRIGENDUM
The Purchase Management — 2003 (PM—2003) document issued vide No. MM/
PP/0000203/M/3045/D (R&D) dated 21 Aug. 2003 as amended by corrigendum
No. MM/PP/0000203/M/4563/D (R&D) dated 14th Dec. 2004 and MM/PP/0000203/
M/171/D (R&D) dated  19th Jan. 2005 is further amended to include the following
chapter after 11th Chapter.
Chapter 12
PROGRESS REPORT ON PROCUREMENT, UTILISATION OF STORES AND
DISPOSAL OF OBSOLETE STORES
Plant, equipment and material are the vital inputs for research and development
activities of DRDO Laboratories/Establishments and the cost of their procurement
constitutes a significant portion of the R&D Budget. It is, therefore, imperative that
timely action is initiated and appropriate monitoring mechanism is put in place in each
and every case of procurement installation and commissioning of equipment/machine.
As such an Annual Action Plan for procurement, installation and commissioning of
equipment/machine should be meticulously drawn well in advance. Annual Action
Plans must also be quarterly reviewed (as on 31st March, 30th June, 31st October and
31st December) by Lab/Project Director with a view to ensuring that timely procurement
of stores helps in completing the objectives of projects without any cost and time over
runs.
12.1 ANNUAL REPORT BY LABS/ESTTS
Labs/Estts. would forward reports to DMM/DRDO HQrs at the close of each
financial year covering instances of abnormal delay adversely affecting completion of
R&D Projects. Annual reports while covering the following instances or delay should
also incorporate the reasons for delay and recommend reasons for minimizing adverse
effects of delay on completion of R&D project.
(a) All cases, where internal lead time is more than one year i.e. where more
than one year is taken from demand initiation for procurement of stores and
issue of supply order.
(b) Instances of abnormal delay of more than one year in installation after the
receipt of machine/equipment in Lab/Estt.
8

9
(c) Any abnormal  under utilization of equipment due to delay in repair/
servicing/upgradation etc.
(d) Any equipment lying unused for a period exceeding six months.
(e) All cases where machines/equipment costing more than Rs. 5 Lakh are
received after the closure of the project or at the fag end of the project i.e.
3 months ahead of PDC.
(f) Delay of more than six months in disposal of surplus/obsolete equipment
after being recommended for disposal.
12.2 REVIEW OF ANNUAL REPORT BY DRDO HQrs
DRDO HQrs will review the annual report during first quarter of next financial
year and submit the same to the Secretary Defence R&D. Recommendations and
remedial measures suggested are to be scrupulously adhered to by the Laboratory
Director/Project Directors.
2. This issues with the concurrence of Ministry of Defence (Finance/R&D) vide
their ID No. 1722 IF (R&D) dated 19 July 2005.
Sd/-
(S.K. Deb)
Under Secretary to Government of India
To
The Director General Research & Development
Defence Research & Development Organisation
Ministry of Defence, New Delhi-110 011
Copy to:—
1. Controller General of Defence Accounts
2. Addl. FA(J) & Jt. Secy
3. All GC R&Ds
4. Chief Executive (CW&E)
5. CDA (R&D), New Delhi & Sub Offices
6. CDA(R&D), Bangalore and Sub Offices
7. CDA (R&D), Hyderabad and Sub Offices
8. Director of Audit, Defence Services, New Delhi
9. Director (Finance/R&D)
10. Directorate of Materials Management
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
The Committee find that besides deficient procurement planning, the procurement
process in DRDO is also afflicted by serious procedural shortcomings. The Purchase
Management Procedure of DRDO, issued in July 2000, stipulated that open/global
tenders should be invited to generate as much competition as possible. However, to

10
the contrary, 17 out of 30 cases in respect of five laboratories, limited tenders were
resorted to on grounds of urgency for effecting purchases. What is further disturbing
to note is the fact out of 5 cases processed as urgent, three orders were placed after
13 to 21 months of raising of demands. In 12 other cases, the time gap between the
raising of demand and actual ordering ranged from 5 to 11 months in 8 cases and over
12 months in four cases. In the opinion of the Committee, the grounds of urgency to
justify limited tendering thus become questionable in such cases. According to the
Ministry, limited tendering is chosen for cases whose source of supply are definitely
known and are limited, for reasons of security and public interest, when requirement
of stores is urgent and the desired delivery schedule cannot be met if open tenders are
invited. The Committee are aware of the unique nature of some of the stores required
in the context of research and development including the aspect of security and public
interest and render full credence to their procurement through the mode of limited
tendering. But the criticality of the matter lies in the fact that the desired delivery
schedule could not be adhered to in almost all the reviewed cases, for which general
procedure of open tendering was waived. The Secretary, DRDO was however, very
candid in admitting that resorting to limited tender on grounds of urgency in such a
large number of cases was not procedurally justified and could lead to some lapses.
The Committee have been informed that with the amendment effected in the
procurement procedure in DRDO, the processes of procurement have been specified
with better clarity that would help reduce margin of error on the part of operating
units. While appreciating the efforts made by DRDO in right earnest, the Committee
desire that in future cases of procurement under urgent circumstance should be critically
analysed and closely monitored so as to ensure that delegated power is not misused
and objective of procurement is fully achieved. The Committee would like to be
furnished a status report about the procurement made under limited tendering
consequent to issuance of Procurement Procedure-2004.
[Sl. No. 3, Appendix II, Para 62 of Sixteenth Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
For close monitoring and critical analysis of procurement under urgency, instructions
were issued to all DRDO Labs vide this HQ letter No. DMM/PP/0000405/ M
dated 17 August, 2005 (copy enclosed at Annexure-II)
Further the procurement under Limited Tendering has been reviewed. DRDO Labs
were asked to forward the report of Limited Tendering procurement during the period
1 January 05 to 25 September 05. The report from the Labs were perused and following
status is reported:
(a) Out of total cases initiated for procurement under Limited Tendering,
25% cases are on urgency basis and the average time taken for placing the
supply orders by the Labs is from three to four months.
(b) In other 75% cases reasons given by the Labs for procurement of other
items under limited tendering are as under:—
(i) Sources of supply are definitely known and Limited.
(ii) Sources short-listed from past experiences of open tenders.

11
(iii) Item being very specific in nature (sensitive and strategic)/ not in
public interest.
(iv) Required for trials.
Signature of
Chief Controller Research & Development (R)
Defence Research and Development Organisation
[Ministry of Defence/Department of Defence Research and Development
O.M. No. DBFA/FA/83640/M/01 dated 25th January, 2006]

ANNEXURE-II
Date: 17 August, 2005
To
The Director
(All Labs/Estt.)
Sub:— Initiation of Demands
It has been observed that Labs are initiating the demands on urgent basis in most of
their procurement cases where as the time taken from initiation of demand to placement
of order in these cases in very long and in same cases it is more than one year. This has
been adversely commented upon by Public Accounts Committee (PAC) and Audit
while reviewing DRDO procurement performance.
2. In order to avoid such observation in future following course of action is required
to be followed:
(a) Unless there is real urgent requirement, merely for prioritizing the demand,
it will not be marked 'urgent' on form DRDO MM-06 (Demand).
(b) Demand will be initiated on 'urgent' basis only depending on justifiable
user's urgency, items which are on critical path and arising out of urgent
requirement by the services.
(c) Urgency of all such above cases will be specifically monitored till the
placement of order and finalisation of the supplies. If the item is urgent, it
must be followed up with required seriousness.
(d) Indiscriminate use of limited tenders merely on pretext of urgency will be
avoided.
3. All Lab Directors are requested to kindly ensure action on all the above aspects.
Sd/-
(C.M. Dhawan)
Director (MM)
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
4. The Comittee note that the purchase Management Procedure prescribed a normal
time limit of 12 months for different activities in purchase. The Committee however,
observe that in 22 out of 50 cases of procurement in respect of four laboratories, the
prescribed time limit was not adhered to. The Ministry took the stand that as these
equipments were to be specifically developed for DRDO need, it took time to reach to
desired specifications. The Committee have  been further informed that with the
commissioning and implementation of Integrated Management Software, such delays
in placement of order are expected to be curbed. The Committee recommend that this
12

13
deficiency should be addressed in time with the amended Procurement Procedure so
as to reduce the internal lead time to the barest minimum.
[Sl. No. 4, Appendix II, Para 63 of Sixteenth Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
All Labs have been instructed as per guidelines given in Purchase Management to
strictly abide one year realistic time for processing the demands from initiation to
placing of supply of order falling which they will have to forward the demand for
revalidation with proper justification to this HQrs. Further Labs will have to forward
Annual Report to the HQrs. In all cases where internal lead time is more than one year
would be reviewed by the HQrs (Annexure-I para 12.1 (a) refers).
Sd/-
Signature of
Chief Controller Research & Development (R),
Defence Research and Development Organisation.
[Ministry of Defence/Department of Defence Research and Development
O.M. No. DBFA/FA/83640/M/01 dated 25th January, 2006]
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
Another disquieting aspect noticed by the Committee relates to failure of suppliers
to adhere to the prescribed time schedule for delivery of equipment. The Committee
find that as against Rs. 67.58 lakh to be recovered by way of liquidated damages in 36
cases on account of delayed delivery, liquidated damages amounting to Rs. 0.46 lakh
was recovered only in one case. Surprisingly, in the remaining 35 cases, an amount of
Rs. 67.12 lakh leviable was waived by the Directors of the concerned laboratories/
establishments. The Ministry have merely stated that decision was taken to waive the
laboratories/establishments. The Ministry have merely stated that decision was taken
to  waive the liquidated damages as development delays were not attributable to
suppliers. Taking strong exception to the decision taken in the matter, which led to
apparent loss of revenue to Government, the Committee recommend that these cases
be reviewed by DRDO with a view to ascertain the bonafide of the decision taken
retrospectively. Also, the Ministry should place before the Committee the outcome of
the review and action taken thereon within a period  of three months of the presentation
of this Report.
[Sl. No. 5, Appendix II, Para 64 of Sixteenth Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As advised by the Committee, 35 cases where the  L.D. was waived by Labs, were
reviewed by DRDO HQrs. and the reason as given by the Labs for waiver of L.D. are
as under:
(a) The delay in approval of drawings by Lab.
(b) Delay in chemical analysis of material by Lab.
(c) Delay in inspection by Lab.

14
(d) Delay in issue of Customs duty exemption certificate (C-DEC).
(e) Delay in shipment from principal.
(f) Delay in pre-despatch inspection.
(g) Delay in receipt of imported items by the manufacturers.
(h) Delay due to sanctions imposed by US.
(i) Delay in receipt of Export Licence.
In order to overcome such instances the following course of action has been taken
by DRDO.
(i) Revised TPC/NC Format of minutes has been circulated to all the Labs in
which all clauses including L.D. has been mentioned.
(ii) Close monitoring of CDEC is being carried out now, all efforts are being
made to see that there are no delays for issue of CDEC.
(iii) Further instructions on Liquidated damages have been forwarded to all
Labs/ Estts. vide this HQ letter No. DMM/ PP/ 0000405/ M dated
07 November,2005 [Annexure-II (a) refers]
In case of (a), (b), (c) and (f) where the delay is due to approval of drawings,
chemical analysis of material, pre-despatch inspection and inspection by Lab, are being
reviewed by DRDO HQrs. Based on the above inputs from the Labs necessary
instructions will be issued for maintaining the time frame for above activities.
Signature of
Chief Controller Research & Development (R),
Defence Research and Development Organisation.
[Ministry of Defence/Department of Defence Research and Development
O.M. No. DBFA/FA/83640/M/01 dated 25th January, 2006]

ANNEXURE-II (a)
Date: 7 November, 2005
To
The Director
(All Labs/Estts.)
Sub: Liquidated Damages
1. In the report of PAC on 'Procurement and Utilisation of Plant and Equipment', a
very serious view has been taken of not imposing the Liquidated Damages for delayed
deliveries, in its true objectivity. The reasons for delays of delivery of Eqpt./items not
attributable to the suppliers have to be weighed in its correct perspective. The Committee
has observed that taking a lenient view on the subject leads to apparent loss of revenue
to the Government. All the Labs are therefore advised to follow the relevant clauses of
DRDO Purchase Procedure pertaining to TPC/NC negotiations, supply order terms
and conditions, revision of Delivery Period and Monitoring/reviewing of progress of
cases leading to liquidated damages strictly. The delay/fault on part of the firm for not
adhering to the delivery schedules shall be taken seriously and liquidated damages
must be levied. There should be no relaxation on part of the Labs for imposing of LD,
wherever it is required.
2. In exceptional cases, matter shall be referred to DMM, DRDO HQrs with full
details and justification for approval of CFA.
3. All Lab Directors are requested to monitor the above aspects.
Sd/-
(C.M. Dhawan)
Director (MM)
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
The Committee observe that there were abnormal delays ranging upto 13 years in
installation of six machines valuing Rs. 13.78 crore in four laboratories/establishments
namely, DMRI, CVRDE, DRDL. and TBRL. A detailed review of some of the cases
revealed that the suppliers were responsible for the delays and no time frame for
installation of the equipment had either been laid down in the contracts. Other reasons
for the delay in installation/commissioning of the equipment were, damaged condition
of the equipment received, delay in repair or replacement of the damaged parts by the
suppliers etc. The Committee deplore in particular, the delay of 13 years in installation
of one equipment namely 200 KW Dynamometer at CVRDE. The Committee
15

16
cannot  but conclude that these cases have brought into sharp focus the inept handling
of procurement contract and poor monitoring on the part of DRDO. The secretary
DRDO however, assured the committee that every  effort would be made by the Ministry
to ensure that such unjustifiable delays do not recur. Since delay in installation of
equipment contributes to delay in execution of time-bound projects, the Committee
recommend that DRDO should address these lacunae with immediate effect.
[Sl. No. 6, Appendix II, Para 65 of Sixteenth Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In order to overcome abnormal delays in installation of equipment, a new
chapter XII has been added in our Purchase Management Manual in which it has been
indicated that instances where delay in installation is more than a year after receipt of
Equipment by Lab. A report shall be submitted to HQ DRDO during first quarter of
the next financial year for review [Annexure-I para 12.1 (b) refers]
Also, wherever the installation of the Equipment is important factor, steps have
been taken during negotiation that 20% to 30% of payment shall be released only after
installation and Equipment acceptance by the Lab.
In the new TPC/NC format circulated to all Labs for implementation, clauses of
installation and payment terms are indicated separately. This will take care the requisite
requirement.
Signature of
Chief Controller Research & Development (R),
Defence Research and Development Organisation.
[Ministry of Defence/Department of Defence Research and Development
O.M. No. DBFA/FA/83640/M/01 dated 25th January, 2006]
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
The Committee's examination further revealed that there was under-utilisation of
four equipment valuing Rs. 5.60 crore due to delay in repair/upgradation in respect of
four laboratories namely, SSPL, RCI, PXE and CVRDE. The Committee have been
given to understand that repair of direct import equipment take time as the firms are
not ready  to give bank guarantee for equipment and it is risky to send the equipment
for repair due to Commerce Control Laws. The provision of Annual Maintenance
Contract in case of direct import equipment is also limited to the availability of service
centre of the Original Equipment Manufacturer in the country. The Committee do
appreciate the impedements faced by DRDO in this regard, but they equally concerned
about fall in performance of concerned laboratories due to delay in repair/upgradation
of requisite equipment. The Committee desire that as far as repair/upgradation of
indigenous equipment are concerned, Store Management Guidelines issued in 2004
be implemented and monitored so that laboratory performance is not affected, at least
on this count.
[Sl. No. 7, Appendix II, Para 66 of Sixteenth Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]

17
Action Taken
The Stores Management Guidelines (SMG-2004) documents has been circulated
to all DRDO Labs for implementation. However, in case of any abnormal under
utilization of equipment due to delay in repair/servicing/upgradation etc., a report
would be submitted by the Lab to HQ DRDO during the first quarter of next financial
year for review purposes [Annexure-I para 12.1 (c) refers]
Signature of
Chief Controller Research & Development (R),
Defence Research and Development Organisation.
[Ministry of Defence/Department of Defence Research and Development
O.M. No. DBFA/FA/83640/M/01 dated 25th January, 2006]
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
The Committee find that four equipments valued at Rs. 3.21 crore were lying unused/
unserviceable/surplus in two laboratories viz. DMRL and ITR. The Committee
examined in detail two cases relating to procurement of Cryogenic Gas Charging Plant
and Automatic Weather and Picture Transmission system.
[Sl. No. 8, Appendix II, Para 67 of Sixteenth Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Detailed reply given in paras 68 & 69.
Sd/-
Signature of
Chief controller Research & Development (R),
Defence Research and Development Organisation.
[Ministry of Defence/Department of Defence Research and Development
 O.M. No. DBFA/FA/83640/M/01 dated 25th January, 2006]
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
The Cryogenic Gas Charging Plant which was purchased in 1992 by DMRL at a
cost of Rs. 25 lakh for conversion of liquid argon into gas failed to generate the required
purity of argon, even though the procurement was custom-designed. The equipment
was lying unutilized till February, 2003 and was awaiting disposal, having been declared
surplus. The Committee note that the performance of the plant was demonstrated at
the firm's premises by using a substitute gas i.e. liquid nitrogen in lieu of liquid argon,
which was stated to be not available. The DMRL scientists however accepted the
performance  status of plant. But what is intriguing to find is the fact that the plant
subsequently failed to perform for several years due to non-availability of high purity
Liquid argon. It is evident that DMRL scientist faltered in accepting the performance

18
demonstration of the plant with a substitute gas rather than with the liquid argon the
required purity. Furthermore the Committee are extremely unhappy to note that the
plant has been declared surplus later on and decision was taken to dispose of the same.
Considering the highly unprofessional attitude of the DMRL scientiests, as exhibited
in the instant case, that led to idling of investment to the tune of R. 25 lakh, the
Committee recommend that the matter be looked into by DRDO with a view to taking
appropriate administrative action. The Committee should be apprised of the action
taken in the matter within a period of three months.
[Sl. No. 9, Appendix II, Para 67 of Sixteenth Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The matter was taken up with DMRL by this HQ and their reply is enclosed at
Annexure III. It may be seen from the reply that Lab has assured that such situation
will not reoccur in future.
The individual responsibilities cannot be fixed in this case as the National Scenario
on availability of Argon Gas has changed.
Signature of
Chief Controller Research & Development (R),
Defence Research and Development Organisation.
[Ministry of Defence/Department of Defence Research and Development
O.M. No. DBFA/FA/83640/M/01 dated 25th January, 2006]

ANNEXURE-III
No. DMRL/MMD/PAC
Head Government of India, Ministry of Defence
Materials Management Research & Development Organisation
DEFENCE METALLURGICAL RESEARCH
LABORATORY
PO: Kanchanbagh, Hyderabad-500 058
PHONE: 040-2458 6421 FAX: 040-2434 3373
Date: 26-09-2005
To
The  Director
Directorate of Materials Management
Defence Research & Development Organisation
R&D HQrs., Sena Bhawan
New Delhi 110 011 Fax No. 011-2301 4835
Attention:Col AK Dimri, Jt Dir (MM)
Sub: "Procurement of Plant and Machinery in DRDO''—AUDIT PARAS
Ref: FAX DMM/HQ DRDO Dt: 21-09-2005 from Col AK Dimri, Jt. Dir (MM)
Our reply to the observations in the PAC report is enclosed.
Sd/-
(TSRK Sastry)
Date: September, 26, 2005 26-9-05
Encl: As above
Reply to observations in the PAC Report
Sub: "Procurement of Plant and machinery in DRDO"—AUDIT PARAS
Ref: FAX dated 21-09-05 : DMM/DRDO from Col AK Dimri, Jt. Dir (MM)
During the nineties, DMRL could not get the required supplies of High Purity
Argon gas for running its Hot Isostatic Press (HIP) facility because of an overall shortage
of the gas. Difficulties associated with the transport of the gas cylinders from Bombay
compounded the problems. Each run of HIP consumes at least 150 cubic metres of
gas, approximately equivalent to  20 cylinders.
At this point of time, M/s Bhoruka Gases Ltd., offered to supply liquid argon that
could be converted to argon gas. DMRL found this offer to be attractive and took a
decision to procure a Cryogenic gas charging plant that would convert liquid argon
19

20
into argon gas. Another advantage in this offer is the case with which liquid argon
could be transported because of its smaller volume compared to argon gas.
The cryogenic gas charging plant in question was procured from M/s IBP Ltd.
(a govt. of India Undertaking), Nasik at a cost of Rs. 25.0 lakhs. During acceptance
tests at works liquid nitrogen was used in lieu of liquid argon because of the latter's
non-availability. However this did not constitute any compromise or dilution of the
testing protocol as both the substances are equally acceptable by virtue of the similarity
in their properties.
Meanwhile, it was learnt that M/s Bhoruka Gases Ltd., had started producing Argon
gas from liquid Argon and DMRL got the gas thus produced analysed from a reputed
laboratory in Hyderabad. It was found that the quality of the gas was not suitable for
HIP as the impurities could damage the sensitive molybdenum heating elements that
would ultimately result in the breakdown of the entire system. If this gas had to be
used, the only option before DMRL was to import a purifier plant at a cost of around
Rs. 50.0 lakhs for treating the gas. Considering the prohibitive cost of the purifier, this
option was not pursued further.
The equipment was lying idle, DMRL explored the possibilities of transferring the
facility to register laboratories. There was no positive response to this effort and a
decision was taken to this equipment as surplus and accordingly steps were taken to
dispose it through established norms.
It is thus obvious that our intention was just to overcome the situation created by
the scarcity of argon gas by finding an alternate route. Unfortunately, it did not
materialize because of developments beyond our control. However, we would be careful
to prevent recurrence of such situations in future.
Sd/-
(TSRK Sastry), Sc"F"
Dt: September 26, 2005 20-9-05
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
In the backdrop of the case involving procurement of Automatic Weather and Picture
Transmission Systems, the Committee recommend that DRDO in future should refrain
from dealing with such firms whose performance is found to be unsatisfactory and, in
particular, those against whom DRDO has filed a case in any court of law including
Consumer Forum. The Ministry should also consider blacklisting such firms. The
Secretary DRDO in a written communication has assured the Committee that the firms,
whose performance is found to be unsatisfactory, would be de-registered and would
not receive invitation to bid in respect of either limited/open tenders. As regards
blacklisting, it has been stated that DRDO presently follows the Government of India,
Directorate General of Supply & disposal procedure. The Secretary, DRDO has also
assured the Committee that DRDO does not and will not deal with any firm that has
failed to deliver and against whom DRDO has filed a case in any court of law including

21
consumer forums. The Committee desire that the Ministry should stand committed to
adhere to the assurance made in principle.
[Sl. No. 11, Appendix II, Para 70 of Sixteenth Report of PAC
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The firm who have been deregistered/blacklisted by DRDO/MOD have been placed
on DRDO intranet and internet (DRDO website). The list of the firm deregistered/
banned is placed at Annexure-VI.
Signature of
Chief Controller Research & Development (R)
Defence Research and Development Organisation.
[Ministry of Defence/Department of Defence Research and Development
O.M. No. DBFA/FA/83640/M/01 dated 25th January, 2006]

ANNEXURE-IV
DMM/PP/0000405/PC
Govt. of India/Min. of Defence
Dte. of Material Management
'B' Wing, Sena Bhawan,
New Delhi-110 011
17 May, 2005
To
The Directors
(All Labs/Estts. of DRDO)
DE-REGISTRATION OF FIRMS
It was mentioned in the assurances given by SA to RM to the honourable Chairman
of PAC in respect of Audit para 5.1 of the C&AG report No. 6 of 2004 relating
procurement and utilization of plant and equipment in DRDO that information will be
provided about de-registered firms whose performance is found to be unsatisfactory.
In the interest of sharing of information across all  Labs and Transparency, the list of
all deregistered/banned firms is enclosed as Appendix 'A'.
2. In view of above, necessary action may be taken at your end.
Sd/-
(OM Dhawan)
Dir (MM)
For DG R&D
Encl: As  Stated
22

ANNEXURE-IV (Contd.)
APPENDIX 'A'
A consolidated list of firms banned by Govt. of India, is as follows:
Name of firm Address Period of ban Ban applicable
To Allied
Firms/subsidiaries
(i) M/s Anand Metal C-143 Naraina 10 years w.e.f. yes
Works, New Delhi Industrial Area 29.1.2002
Phase I
New Delhi-28
(ii) M/s Ambica 74, Jamunalal Bajaj 10 years w.e.f. yes
Processing Ind. Street Calcutta-07 30.1.2002
Calcutta-07
(iii) M/s Dawer Verka, 10 years w.e.f. yes
Rubber Ind. Amritsar 30.1.2002
Punjab-01 Punjab-143001
(iv) M/s Champion No. 167/2 10 years w.e.f. yes
Pipe Ind. Mariswamyapa Lane, 29.01.2002
Bangalore SJP Road Cross,
Bangalore-560002
(v) M/s Grid India A-2/121 10 years w .e.f. yes
Power Cables Janak Puri 08.02.2002
Pvt. Ltd. New Delhi-58
New Delhi-58
(vi) M/s Anilmaa B-17, Jhilmil 05 years w.e.f. yes
Associates Indl. Area, 29.01.2002
Delhi-95 Shahadara,
Delhi-95
(vii) M/s Magnotronics, 119-120 Gangan Deep 10 years w.e.f. yes
New Delhi-08 12, Rajindra Place 29.01.2002
New Delh-110008
2. Particulars of the firm de-registered by the DRDO Lab due to unethical business
practice of the firm.
M/s Reliance Fire & Safety Equipments (P) Ltd.
Plot No. 5, Syedjalal Garden,
West Marredpally,
Secunderabad—500002
23

ANNEXURE-IV (Contd.)
DMM/PP/0000404/M
Govt. of  India/Min. of Defence
Dte. of Material Management
'B' Wing, Sena Bhawan
New Delhi- 110 011
28 Feb. 2005
To
The Directors,
(All Labs/Estts. of DRDO)
SUB: De-Registration of Firms: Assurances by SA to RM to PAC in respect of audit
paragraph 5.1 of the C&AG report No. 6 of 2004 Relating to procurement and
utilisation of Plant and Equipment in DRDO
One of the points figured in the assurances given by SA to RM to the honourable
Chairman of PAC in respect of above referred audit para pertaining to providing
information about de-registered firms whose performance is found to be unsatisfactory.
In the interest of greater transparency and sharing of information across all Labs,
DRDO proposes to place on its public website a list of all de-registered firms.
2. in view of above, it is desired that all Labs/Estts of DRDO should forward name(s)
of any firm(s) which have been de-registered by any Labs/Estts by 11 March, 2005 to
DMM so that a consolidated list could be put up on DRDO website by 18 Mar. 2005.
3. All Labs/Estts will also keep in view the assurance given by SA to RM that
DRDO will not deal with any firm that has failed to deliver and against whom DRDO
has filed a case in any court of law including consumer forums, while awarding  contracts
in future.
Sd/-
(CM Dhawan)
Dir(MM)
For DG R&D
24

ANNEXURE-IV (Contd.)
DMM/PP/0000405/PC
Govt. of India/Min. of Defence
Dte. of  Material Management
'B' Wing, Sena Bhawan
New Delhi- 110 011
21 July 2005
To
The Director,
DESIDOC
Metcalfe House, Delhi
Sub: De-Registration of Firms
It is desired by the Competent Authority that name of firms which have been banned
by Govt. of India/De-registered by DRDO as given in appendix 'A' may be hosted on
DRDO Website on Internet in the interest of sharing of information across all Labs
and maintaining transparency.
2. This issue with the approval of CC R&D (R)
Sd/-
(CM Dhawan)
Director(MM)
25

ANNEXURE-IV (Contd.)
APPENDIX 'A"
List of the firm(s) banned by Govt. of India.
1. M/s Denel, South Africa
2. It has been decided with the approval of Secretary(DP) that no officer from the
Ministry of Defence should give an appointment to  M/s Optic Electronic  Pvt.
Ltd. (OPEL), Noida, manufacturers and exporters of defence Systems including
Periscopic Observation Devices etc. until further notice as their activities are
suspect and under investigation.
3. Particulars of firms de-registered by the DRDO Lab due to unethical business
practice of the firm.
(a) M/s Reliance Fire & Safety Equipments (P) Ltd.
Plot No. 5, Syedjalal Garden,
West Marredpally
Secunderabad-500002
(b) M/s Anika Instruments Pvt Ltd., New Delhi
(c) M/s HACE India Ltd.,
B-505, Ansal Chamber
Bhikaji Cama Place
New Delhi
26

 ANNEXURE-IV (Contd.)
CONFIDENTIAL
NO.DMM/PP/0000205/M
Govt of India/Min. of Defence
Res. & Dev. Orgn.
Dte. of Material Management
'B' Wing, Sena Bhawan
New Delhi- 110011
Dated 05 Oct. 2005
The Director
(All Labs/Estts)
Sub:— Ban on dealing with M/s Shogi Communications and Associated companies
MOD has advised to ban all dealing with the owner of M/S Shogi Communication
Pvt. Ltd. and M/s Sidhi Tech Services Ltd. and M/s Secure Telecome Pvt. Ltd. Hence
you are requested to cease any dealing with these companies.
Sd/-
(CM Dhawan)
Director (MM)
For Dir. Gen. Res. & Development
27

28
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
The Committee are constrained to point out that there were delay ranging from 3 to
12 years in disposal of surplus/obsolete machines costing about Rs. 4.71 crore in
3 laboratories namely CVRDE, DRDL and DMRL. The Committee have been given
to understand that long delays occurred in disposal of surplus/obsolete equipment
because the quoted price of the equipment were much lower than the assessed value of
the equipment i.e. the Reserved Guiding Price (RGP) fixed by the designated
Committee. According to the Ministry, if the highest bid is less than 50% of the RGP
fixed there is no option except to re-float after refixing the RGP as per the present
rules. The Committee do appreciate the problems faced by DRDO in this regard. In
the face of the fact that equipment could not be sold even at reasonable price, the
Committee desire the DRDO should work out a scheme, as suggested by Secretary
DRDO, where technical institutions, engineering colleges and IIT institutions can take
some of these equipment for imparting training. In the opinion of the Committee, this
is judicious proposition for salvaging the best out of suplus/obsolete equipment rather
than striving for disposing those at a throw-away price. The Committee recommend
that the Ministry should come out with a policy to give effect to the proposal  at the
earliest.
[Sl. No. 12, Appendix II, Para 71 of Sixteenth Report of PAC
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In order to prevent the Delay in disposal of surplus/obsolete eqpt./machines, the
suggestions made by the Committee to dispose off some of the equipment to Engineering
Colleges, IITs and other Academic Institutions, have been implemented by instructing
all Labs vide this HQ letter No. DMM/PP/0000405/M dated 27 September 2005 (copy
enclosed at annexure-V).
Sd/-
Signature of
Chief Controller Research & Development(R)
Defence Research and Development Organisation
[Ministry of Defence/Department of Defence Research and Development
O.M. No. DBFA/FA/83640/M/01 dated 25th January, 2006]

ANNEXURE V
NO. DMM/PP/0000405/M
Govt. of India
Ministry of Defence
Res. & Dev. Orgn.
Dte. of Materials Management
'B' Wing, Sena Bhawan
New Delhi-110 011
Dated 27 Sep. 2005
The Director,
(All Labs/Estts)
Sub:— Action Taken on The Recommendations Contained in The 16th Report of PAC
(14th Lok Sabha) on Procurement and Utilisation of Plant & EOPT in DRDO
In the report of PAC 'on procurement and utilization of plant and Eqpt. in DRDO,
it has been pointed that there have been delays ranging from 3 to 12 years in disposal
of surplus/obsolete machines in some of the labs. The Committee has felt that
identification of surplus items and their disposal has to be made a regular and a time
bound exercise to realize optimum sale value. However the Committee was made
aware of the fact that long delay occurred in disposal of surplus/obsolete eqpt. because
the quoted price of the eqpt. were lower than the assessed value of eqpt. i.e. Reserve
Guiding Price (RGP) fixed by designated committee. If the highest bid is less than
50% of RGP there is no option except to refloat after refixing the RGP as per present
rules. The Committee did appreciate the problem. The Committee has further desired
that DRDO should work out a scheme for speedy disposal as suggested by secretary
DRDO where Tech. Institution, Engineering college and IITs, can take some of these
equipment for imparting training. This is a judious proposition for salvaging the best out
of surplus/obsolete eqpt. rather than striving for disposing these at a throw away prices.
2. In view of the above all Labs Directors attention is invited to the MOD letter No.
95665/DS/RD-29/26815/DS(R&D) dt. 07 June 1989, Wherein instructions are already
existing vide letter under reference for gifting/issue of obsolete eqpt./machinery to
universities and Govt. managed colleges/institutions. The letter under reference lays
down the adoption of procedure to be followed with given terms and conditions. A copy
of the letter is displayed on DRONA for necessary action and speedier disposal action.
Hence all Labs are instructed to kindly take the immediate drive for disposal in terms of
the above letter under reference. This should be done on a regular and time bound basis.
3. After having taken the above action, for left over eqpt. further disposal action
may be taken as per instructions given by chapter 20 of Stores management guidelines
2004, wherein procedure and guidelines specified in MOD letter No. DP&RM/PO/
8951/D/R&D dt. 02 March, 1993 refers.
4. In connection with disposal of obsolete stores please also refer to amendment in
purchase management 2003, Issued vide MOD letter No. DMM/PP/0000203/M/2505/
D/R&D dt. 20 July 05, vide which for progress of disposal of stores, an annual report
is to be submitted by all Labs/estts. for review by this Hq.
Sd/-
(C.M. Dhawan)
Director (MM)
29

30
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
The Committee note that Material Management Policy of DRDO envisages
implementation of a computer based information system to ensure most effective
research and development. The Committee have been informed that such a system
will be in place by August, 2005. Since Ministry claimed that with the commissioning
of information management system, the procurement system in DRDO and other allied
arena would be streamlined, the Committee desire that efforts should be made to fructify
the project within the stipulated period.
[SI. No. 13, Appendix II, Para 72 of Thirty-Ninth Report of PAC
(Fourteen Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The implementation of a computer-based information system in Material
Management (IMMS) has been completed in 20 Labs of DRDO. A copy of the
implementation plan is enclosed at Annexure-VI.
As on date, it has been implemented in 24 Labs and in remaining 2 Labs
implementation is under progress.
Signature of
Chief Controller Research & Development (R)
Defence Research and Development Organisation
[Ministry of Defence/Department of Defence Research and Development
O.M. No. DBFA/FA/83640/M/01 dated 25th January, 2006]

ANNEXURE-VI
DMM/PP/0000405/M/I
v)Z&'kkldh; uañ%
DO No.:
Hkkjr ljdkj] j{kk ea=ky;
Government of India, Ministry of Defence
j{kk vuqla/kku ,oa fodkl laxBu
Defence Research & Development Organisation
lkexzh izca/k funs'kky;
Directorate of Materials Management
dejk uañ 237] ^ch* foax] lsuk Hkou] ubZ fnYyh&110011
Room No. 237, 'B' Wing, Sena Bhavan, New Delhi-110011
nwjHkk"k@Tele: 23014835
QSDl@ Fax: 23014835
fnukad@ Date 13 June, 2005
To
The Director
(All Labs/Estts)
Sub:— Implementation of Integrated Materials Management Software (IMMS) package
 in DRDO Labs/Estts
1. Reference this Hqrs. letter of Even No. dated 02 March, 2005.
2. As you are aware a Supply Order has been placed by this Hqrs on M/s Netcom
Data Systems, Pune for implementation of IMMS in DRDO Labs/Estts. The
Coordinator nominated from your Lab/Estt may liaise with M/s Netcom Data Systems
for implementation of IMMS, therefore, required access in the Lab/Estt and necessary
support may be provided for smooth implementation of IMMS.
3. The Installation and Training Plan for IMMS for Delhi, Bangalore and Hyderabad
Zone is enclosed as Appendix 'A'.
4. Detailed Hardware has already been provided to your Lab/Estt and installation
of Hardware & related system software packages would have been completed by
M/s CMC as per terms and condition of S.O. as intimated by Director CS/DRDO
Hqrs. vide letter No. DCS/PR/9008/01/003/04-05 dated 21st Feb. 2005.
5. IMMS software will be installed by M/s Netcom Data Systems as per enclosed
schedule. Software will be customized Lab/Estt-wise. To accommodate the respective
Lab/Estt. hierarchical structure, operational requirements and access to data as per the
required level.
6. The other terms and conditions for implementation will be as per S.O. of even
No. dated 10 June, 2005 (copy of this S.O. has been already forwarded to your
Lab/Estts.)
31

32
7. In view of above, officer nominated by your Lab/Estt for coordinating
implementation of IMMS may liaise with M/s Netcom Data Systems and provide
necessary H/w and limited access to Lab/Estts premises as required.
8. In case of any difficulty this office may be informed.
Sd/-
(C.M. Dhawan)
Director (MM)

ANNEXURE-VI (Contd.)
IMMS
Installation and Training Plan
1. Delhi Zone:
Sl. No. Period Labs Lab Names
1. 13th June 2005 2 SSPL-Delhi
23rd July 2005 DIPAS-Delhi
2. 25th July 2005 3 LASTEC-Delhi
10th September 2005 INMAS-Delhi
TBRL-Chd
3. 12th September 2005 3 SASE-Chd
26th October 2005 DEAL-Dehr
DMSRDE-Kan
4. 28th October 2005 3 DLJ-Jodh
10th December 2005 IRDE-Dehr
DRDE-Gwal
2. Bangalore Zone:
Sl. No. Period Labs Lab Names
1. 20th June 2005 2 LRDE-Blr
31st July 2005 CABS-Blr.
2. 1st August 2005 2 CAIR-Blr
15th September 2005 DARE-Blr
3. 15th September 2005 2 ADE-Blr
29th October 2005 MTRDC-Blr
4. 1st November 2005 1 NPOL-Cochin
15th December 2005
3. Hyderabad Zone:
Sl. No Period Labs Lab Names
1. 11th July 2005 2 ITR-Balasore
15th August 2005 PXE-Balasore
2. 17th August 2005 2 NSTL-Vizag
30th September 2005 PO(M)-Hyd
3. 03rd October 2005 2 ASL-Hyd
13th November 2005 ANURAG-Hyd
4. 15th November 2005 2 DMRL-Hyd
30th December 2005 DLRL-Hyd
33

34
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee
To sum up, since a substantial portion of the DRDO budget is spent on purchase of
materials, a fool-proof procurement planning and effective utilization of plant and
equipment needs to be ensured at laboratories/establishments level to derive maximum
value for money. Since availability of equipment is critical for the completion of
projects, this would also ensure timely completion of projects within the projected
costs. The Committee feel that identification of surplus item and their disposal has to
be made a regular and time-bound exercise to realize optimum sale value. Moreover,
machines remaining idle for want of repairs need to be renewed on a regular basis and
immediate action taken for their early repairs. Further, creation of a central data base
of prospective suppliers that is accessible to all the laboratories/establishments needs
to be made a prioritized task for avoiding delays in location of reliable supplies. The
role of DRDO as a progressively evolving organization rendering invaluable service
for achievement of self-reliance in the Defence sector, has always been applauded by
the Committee. With the present global scenario and prevailing security situation, the
role of DRDO assumes greater importance. The Parliament is generous in granting
huge sums of money for Research & Development activities. At the same time it expects
that value for tax-payers money is achieved and accountability to expenditure is ensured.
The Committee, therefore, urge upon DRDO to look into the observations and
recommendations made in this report in the right perspective.
[Sl.No. 14, Appendix II, Para 73 of Sixteenth Report of PAC
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As indicated in the preceeding paras all steps would be taken in right perspective
by DRDO to ensure that procurement planning and utilisation of plant and equipment
are fool-proof and effective respectively. Besides, it would also be ensured that
identification of surplus items and their disposal is made a regular and time-bound
exercise to realize optimum sale value.
Sd/-
Signature of
Chief Controller Research & Development (R)
Defence Research and Development Organisation
[Ministry of Defence/Department of Defence Research and Development
O.M.No. DBFA/FA/83640/M/01 dated 25th January, 2006]

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
GOVERNMENT
-Nil-
35

CHAPTER IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
-Nil-
36

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
Recommendation
 In the other case, Integrated Test Range (ITR) procured two systems viz Automatic
Weather System and Automatic Picture Transmission System at a cost of  Rs. 34.16 lakh
from a private firm in June 1988 and February, 1989 respectively which remained idle
because the firm failed to install the system. The Committee note that the matter was
taken up by ITR with the National Consumer Forum, which gave the verdict in favour
of the laboratory in October 2002 and directed the supplier to supply new system of
latest specification by April 2003. The firm however did not supply the equipment
despite the verdict by the National Consumer Forum. The matter was subsequently
followed up with the firm and when the firm failed to install the equipment, legal
action was initiated by ITR. The Committee desire that the matter should be vigorously
pursued for expeditious installation of the equipment or realizing adequate
compensation for the same.
[Sl. No. 10, Appendix II, Para 69 of Sixteenth Report of PAC
Fourteenth (Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The matter is continuously being pursued and the status is as under:
(a) Contempt of the court has already been filed against M/s Hace India Ltd.
Delhi erstwhile M/s Anika Instruments (P) Ltd, New Delhi on 04 Oct. 2005
in National Consumer disputes Redressal Commission New Delhi.
(b) Hearing of the contempt of the court is being scheduled on 07 Nov. 05 as
intimated by Lab's Advocate Shri S. S. Sabarwal. As on date Advocate had
attended the hearing on 07 Nov., 2005. The decision of the court was to
submit the details of correspondence made with the firm w.e.f. the date of
issuance of court order dated 21 Oct.' 02 within a period of 15 days. The
detailed correspondence was submitted before the court on 05 Dec. 05.
Next hearing date is on 02 Feb., 2006.
Sd/-
Signature of
Chief Controller Research & Development (R)
Defence Research and Development Organisation
[Ministry of Defence/Department of Defence Research and Development
O.M.No. DBFA/FA/83640/M/01 date 25th January, 2006]
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
15 February, 2007 Chairman,
26 Magha, 1928 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
37

PART II
EXTRACT OF  MINUTES OF THE SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2006-2007) HELD ON 13th FEBRUARY, 2007
The Committee sat from 1030 hrs. to 1315 hrs. on 13th February, 2007 in Committee
Room "B", Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Brajesh Pathak
7. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
8. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
9. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
12. Dr. K. Malaisamy
13. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Sectrtary
3. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Assistant Director
Officers of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1.  Shri B.K. Chattopadhyay — ADAI (Reports Central)
2. Dr. A.K. Banerjee — DGACR
3. Shri A.N. Chatterjee — Director General (Performance Audit)
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and Audit officials to the
sitting of the Committee. The Committee then took up for consideration the following
draft Reports and adopted the same without any modifications/amendments.
(i)   *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** ***
38

39
(ii) Draft Report on Action taken on the recommendations contained in the
16th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to "Procurement and
Utilisation of Plant and Equipment in DRDO".
The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these Reports in the light of
verbal and consequential changes arising out of factual verification by Audit or
otherwise and to present the same to Parliament.
3.   *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** ***
   *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** ***
   *** *** *** ***
*** *** *** ***
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations/Recommendations
No. No. Department
12 3 4
1. 6 Defence The Committee while expressing their satisfaction
(Department over the measures taken by the Ministry for ensuring
of Defence timely procurement of requisite equipment and its
Research and utilization for the intended purpose by the various
Development) Labs/establishments of DRDO, recommend that the
progress made in regard to submission of Annual
Action Plan for procurement, installation and
Commissioning of equipment/Machinery by various
laboratories/establishments and the review
conducted of these Annual Action Plan (AAP) by
the Defence Research Development Organization
(DRDO) may be apprised to them. The Committee
would also like to be apprised of the progress made
in implementation of Integrated Material
Management  Software (IMMS) software and the
benefits accrued therefrom in cutting down the time
for procurement and installation of equipment/
Machinery.
2. 9 -do- The Committee note from the reply furnished by
 the Ministry that in 75 per cent of the cases where
 limited tendering was resorted to by DRDO on an
urgency basis, the average time taken for placing
the supply orders has not been mentioned. Further,
in 25 per cent of these cases, the reasons for limited
tendering were not given. The Committee desire that
the full details such as reasons for resorting to limited
tendering and the average time taken for placing
orders after raising of the demand and actual time
taken in delivery of stores from the date of placement
of supply orders in respect of each of the case may
be furnished. While expressing satisfaction over the
steps taken by the Ministry for streamlining the
procedure relating to procurement of stores on
urgency basis, the Committee expect that DRDO
should strictly monitor the cases where limited
tendering is resorted by the laboratories/
establishments on an urgency basis. It should also
be ensured that such cases are kept to the barest
40

41
minimum possible. The Committee would also like
to be apprised of the progress made by the
laboratories/establishments in this regard and the
number of cases where limited tendering was
resorted to on grounds of urgency after issue of the
revised guidelines/instructions.
3. 12 Defence From the Reply furnished by the Ministry, the
(Department of Committee note that out of nine reasons that have
Defence been advanced by the respective laboratories/
Research and establishments for waiver of liquidation damages
Development) from the suppliers in 35 cases involving Rs. 67.12
lakh, four reasons namely delay on account of
approval of drawings, chemical analysis of material,
pre-dispatch inspection and inspection by Labs were
stated to be on account of lapses by the concerned
Labs/establishments and could not be attributable
to the suppliers. The Committee recommend that
these reasons should be critically reviewed by
DRDO and the outcome of the such review along
with corrective measures taken to prevent recurrence
of such instances should be apprised to them. They
would also like to be apprised of the instructions
issued by the DRDO to Labs for prescribing the time
limit/frame for development activities that were
required to be undertaken by them so that the
12 3 4
MGIPMRND—303LS—06.03.2007