EIGHTEENTH  REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH   LOK SABHA)
PILGRIMAGE TO SABARIMALA—
HUMAN PROBLEMS AND ECOLOGY
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
Presented to Lok Sabha on 1 December, 2005
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 1 December, 2005
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November 2005/Kartika1927 (Saka)

18
PILGRIMAGE TO SABARIMALA—
HUMAN PROBLEMS AND ECOLOGY
MINISTRY OF ENVIRONMENT AND FORESTS
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2005-2006
EIGHTEENTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

PAC No. 1792
Price: Rs. 24.00
© 2005 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE 2005-2006 .......................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... (v)
REPORT.............................................................................................................. 1
PART  II
Minutes of the sittings of Public Accounts Committee held on 21st December,
2004, 30th June, 2005, 14th July, 2005 and 14th November, 2005. ................... 31
APPENDIX
Statement of Observations and Recommendations ........................................ 39
(ii)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Shri R. L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Dr. R. Senthil
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
12. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
13. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
14. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Dr. K. Malaisamy
19. Shri V . Narayanasamy
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
21. Shri Jairam Ramesh
22. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of Public Accounts Committee, having been authorised by the
Committee to submit this Report on their behalf, do present this Eighteenth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on "Pilgrimage to Sabarimala—Human Problems and Ecology."
2. The Committee had presented to the House a Preliminary Report on the subject
on 4 February, 2004. The Preliminary Report was based on the findings of the Public
Accounts Committee during their study visit to Kochi and Sabarimala in October,
2003 and January, 2004. Subsequently, the Committee further examined the subject
and the issues arising therefrom in the context of the action taken replies on the
Preliminary Report. Based on the deposition made by the representatives of the
Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of Kerala and the Travancore
Devaswom Board before the Committee, their written submissions and the findings of
the Committee during their study visit to Kochi/Sabarimala from 18—20 October 2005,
this Report has been prepared. The Committee considered and adopted this Report at
their sitting held on 14 November, 2005. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the
Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in the Appendix to the
Report.
4. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the Officers of Ministry of
Environment and Forests, Government of Kerala and Travancore Devaswom Board
for the cooperation extended by them in furnishing information to the Committee.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
17 November, 2005 Chairman,
26 Kartika, 1927 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

REPORT
Background
Shri Dharma Sastha temple at Sabarimala in the State of Kerala, where the presiding
deity is Lord Ayyappa is situated on a hilltop at a height of 467 metres above sea level
deep in the dense forest in the southern most part of the Periyar Wild Life Sanctuary
in the  Western Ghats.  The Shrine located at a distance of  over 200 kms. from Cochin
is  situated amidst the reserved forest area in Ranni Taluk of Pathanamthitta district of
Kerala. The temple is accessed by a footpath starting from the foothill Pampa which
gets its name from the river flowing around it. The distance between the foothill and
the temple located at the top of a steep hill is around 5 kms., which is covered on foot
by the pilgrims.
2. This internationally famous Shrine, believed to be of great antiquity, attracts
millions of pilgrims from all over India and abroad. The unique feature of this temple
is that it is open for worship to people of all faiths irrespective of caste, creed or social
status. This, indeed, is a very rare and unusual instance of communal harmony and
excellent example of  national integration.
3. The Travancore Devaswom Board which is responsible for managing the
affairs of the Sabarimala Shrine, is an autonomous body constituted under the
Travancore Cochin Hindu Religious Institutions (ICHRI) Act XV of 1950. The
constitution of the Devaswom Board was based on a convenant entered into by the
Maharaja of Travancore (an erstwhile princely State) in May 1949, which was
concurred and guaranteed by the Government of India.  As per the ICHRI Act,
Travancore Devaswom Board has the full authority to administer the temples under
its control. Sabarimala is one among  those temples. The income derived from here
is approximately Rs. 70 crores in one season. Of this, more than 50% is expended
every year at Sabarimala. There are 1208 temples under the Travancore Devaswom
Board and about 5000 employees. All these depend mainly on the income of
Sabarimala as the income from other temples are comparatively less. Audit of
Travancore Devaswom Board is undertaken by the auditors appointed by the Hon’ble
High Court of Kerala.
4. The Public Accounts Committee (2003-2004) had undertaken a study visit to
Cochin on 20 October, 2003 wherein the Committee inter-alia took up for discussion
paragraph 3.1 of the Report of the Committee and Auditor General of India (Report
No. 5 of 2002) relating to the Zoological Survey of India under the Ministry of
Environment and Forests.  This audit paragraph inter-alia dealt with the survey on
the faunal resources in the various eco-systems of the country with particular reference
to the status survey of endangered species conducted by the Zoological Survey of
India. The faunal survey covered the Western Ghats region also. In this regard, the

2
Committee were informed by the Ministry of Environment and Forests that the
Zoological Survey of India did not conduct any survey of the faunal resources or
endangered species in the Periyar Wild Life Sanctuary. The Committee wanted to
look into the reasons as to why such a survey has not been conducted. In the
course of this study, a serious issue was brought to the attention of the Committee
relating to the pilgrimage to the world famous Sabarimala, located in this Sanctuary
and the controversy relating to the impact of this pilgrimage on the eco-system of
the sanctuary.  Realizing the importance of this issue, the Committee decided to
examine it in all its dimensions.
5. It was brought to the notice of the Committee that this ancient hill shrine has
attracted pilgrims over many centuries. In the earlier stages, the number of pilgrims
was less due mainly to the lack of road communication and hazardous nature of the
trek through dense forest which was infested with wild animals. But as per a report
submitted to the Committee (Sabarimala Enclave Management prepared by the School
of Sciences, Mahatma Gandhi University, 2001) by the Department of Forests,
Government of Kerala, there has been a phenomenal increase in the number of pilgrims
during the past 40 years. According to the estimate submitted to the Committee by the
Devaswom Board, about 3 crores of pilgrims have visited the temple during the
festival season beginning from November 15, 2003 and ending on 14th January, 2004.
In terms of the number of pilgrims visiting this temple, Sabarimala is one of the major
pilgrim centres in the world.
6. Further, according to the Travancore Devaswom Board, this massive inflow of
pilgrims into the temple area has created serious problems of spatial and logistical
management resulting in unimaginable miseries to the devotees. Since the Sabarimala
Shrine formed part of the Periyar Tiger Sanctuary, the strict law of conservation came
into force and the State forest authorities did not allow any kind of repairs maintenance
or development work in the temple area, which has aggravated the problems of the
pilgrims who are deprived of even the minimum basic amenities. The demand of the
Travancore Devaswom Board for additional forest land to develop facilities for pilgrims
had thus been rejected by the State Forest Department on the ground of “conservation
of wild life and ecological protection”.
7. The Committee during the aforesaid study visit to Cochin heard the
representatives of the Devaswom Board and the Government of Kerala as well as
the representatives of the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests. The officials
of the Devaswom Board led by its President, Dr. N. Babu submitted a note to the
Committee containing the legal status of the Board, a brief history of the temple at
Sabarimala and the nature of the problems being faced by the pilgrims.  This note
also contained a request that the holy Sabarimala Shrine and its surrounding areas
should be delinked from the Periyar Sanctuary for the proper development of
Sabarimala.
8. The Committee visited  Sabarimala on 13th January, 2004 on the occasion of
Makara Sankranthi during the peak pilgrim season in order to get a first-hand view of
the problems of the pilgrims. While at Sabarimala, the Committee held a meeting with
the representatives of the Government of Kerala as well as of the Devaswom Board.

3
The Minister in charge of Devaswom, Government of Kerala also participated in the
discussions which inter-alia dealt with the inhuman conditions in which the pilgrims
stay at the temple precincts and the surrounding area. The environmental issues
relating to the pilgrimage also came up for discussion.  During this meeting,
Dr. N. Babu, the President of the Travancore Devaswom Board, in his oral presentation,
emphasised the point that Sabarimala and its sacred forest was included in the Periyar
Sanctuary in 1978 ignoring the views of the Board which is the principal agency
responsible for providing basic amenities to the pilgrims. He further stated that the
Department of Forests, Government of Kerala have adopted an unreasonable attitude
towards the basic needs of Sabarimala’s pilgrims and have turned down all proposals
submitted by the Board in this regard.
9. During the aforesaid meeting at Sabarimala, the Travancore Devaswom Board
submitted a note to the Committee stating  inter-alia that prior to promulgation of the
Forest (Conservation) Act of 1980, the Devaswom Board could provide adequate
facilities to the lakhs of pilgrims visiting the Shrine. But thereafter the situation has
changed as the State Forest Department did not even consider the legitimate rights
and privileges of the Devaswom Board with regard to utilisation of even the area
under their title (13.35 acres) not to mention the area under lease and possession
(168.35 acres) and the area under permission (63.00 acres). The Board submitted that
since the temple was situated in the southernmost fringe of the Tiger Reserve, it is
easy and practicable to delink 500 hectares of  forest land from the Periyar Tiger
Reserve. The Board gave an undertaking to protect the entire allotted area in an
eco-friendly manner with least disturbance to the flora and fauna existing there. Drawing
attention of the Committee to the magnitude of the problem of overcrowding in the
temple area aggravated by shortage of land available for development, the President
of the Travancore Devaswom Board referred to the accidents which took place at
Sabarimala during the festival season in the year 2000 in which 52 persons died in a
stampede.
10. The representatives of the Government of Kerala, took the position that what
pilgrims expect at Sabarimala is not a “leisure sojourn” but a “modicum of facilities
to enable them to complete the pilgrimage to their satisfaction”. They were of the
view that the demand made by the Devaswom Board for additional land was never
ending and unreasonable. They further state that the Forest Department has already
released 55.9 hectares of forest land to the Devaswom Board and further requested
the Committee to advise the Devaswom Board to adopt a strategy for sustainable
and eco-friendly development of Sabarimala pilgrimage facilities. In this  connection,
in a detailed note on Sabarimala pilgrimage management and ecological conservation
of the surrounds submitted to the Committee, the Government of Kerala sought to
explain that  what was needed at Sabarimala was a sensible and humanitarian
approach, which can solve the problems of both humans and nature. They informed
that the Supreme Court in WPC No. 212/2001 has directed the Central and State
Governments and the Devaswom Board not to carry out any non-forest activity at
Sabarimala, which are not permitted by the Central Government under the Forest
(Conservation) Act.

4
11. During the course of their on-the-spot visit to Sabarimala, on 13th January,
2004,  the following facts came to the notice of the Committee:—
(i) The total area available at Pampa, which is a base camp  for pilgrims, is only
10 acres and during the peak season this area becomes an  ocean of
humanity. Similarly, the total area available at the temple site (Sannidhanam)
is only 50 acres which has to hold a few lakhs of devotees every day
during the season.
 (ii) Thousands of devotees were sleeping on hard ground in the forest in the
night without any protective roof all along the hilly footpath. At Sannidhanam,
it was a shocking sight to see countless number of people of all ages sleeping
on the ground and the Members of the Committee had to literally walk over
them. On enquiry, it was found  that these pilgrims have been staying there
for a number of days in this condition. There were no toilet facilities, clean
drinking water or hygienic food available to them. Every inch of available
space around the temple was occupied by the devotees, many of whom had
come from different States. The whole area was stinking as it was not possible
to undertake any kind of cleaning of the open drains with the limited
infrastructure available there. Accommodation being extremely limited in the
temple precincts, each room was occupied by 40 to 50 people.
 (iii) Two extremely rough, stony and steep tracks connect Pampa and
Sannidhanam. Most of the pilgrims trek barefoot along these tracks. These
tracks were found to be too narrow to contain the heavy flow of pilgrims.
Railings have been put up only on some stretches of the track and some
very steep stretches have no railings at all to hold on to while climbing up
and down the steep slopes. On enquiry as to why the railings have not been
put up all along the track, the Devaswom Board officials informed that the
Department of Forests had prohibited further fixing of the railings as it would
obstruct the movements of elephants and leopards.
 (iv) The temple authorities informed that their requests for permission to widen
the tracks was turned down by the Department of Forests on the ground
that it would lead to destruction of forest. It was further informed that during
the peak season, the pilgrims have to stand in the queue for 12 to 18 hours in
the hot sun without any toilet facility, water or food or any protective roof. A
proposal to construct a queue complex to avoid this situation was reportedly
rejected by the State Government. There were no toilet facilities anywhere
along  the hill track which is used by millions of pilgrims including old
women. Besides, there was no proper arrangement for the supply of clean
drinking water on the route. As a result, the pilgrims had to depend upon
poor-quality bottled and other water available in the makeshift stalls en-
route at exorbitant rates. Adequate medical facilities were not available either
on the route or at Sannidhanam.
 (v) The major source of water supply was river Pampa, which gets extremely
polluted during the festival season as the huge mass of pilgrims, who
converge at Pampa, use the river for taking a ritual bath as well as cleaning

5
themselves after easing themselves in the vicinity of the river. They were
compelled to do it because adequate toilet facilities were not available in this
area. The same water which gets polluted with human excreta and other filth
due to mass defecation of pilgrims in and around the river is said to be used
for cooking as well.
12. In the light of the findings of the Committee during the study visit and, in view
of the seriousness of the problem involving huge inflow of pilgrims and inability of
the authorities to provide the basic amenities to them due to various reasons, the
Committee had an apprehension that the present condition at Sabarimala might  lead
to some great tragedy.  They, therefore, decided to bring it to the urgent notice of
Parliament through a Preliminary Report on the subject.  Accordingly, under Rule 276
read with Rule 277(2) of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha, 63rd Report of PAC relating to “Pilgrimage to Sabarimala – Human Problems
and Ecology” was prepared and presented to House on 5th February, 2004.  This
Report contained the brief description of the problem and the preliminary observations
of the Committee on the subject. Observations contained in Preliminary Report have
been summed up as under :—
 (i) Recognising the crucial importance of Conservation of the Eco-system, the
Committee made it very clear that they do not approve of any unrestrained
attempts to destroy the forest for whatever purpose.
 (ii) The conflicting perspectives of the Forest Department and the Travancore
Devaswom Board on the issue of a proper solution to the problems of the
pilgrims and the overall development of Sabarimala as a National Pilgrim
Centre have come in the way of any serious and genuine attempt in this
direction.  In the opinion of the Committee, the problems relating to the
Sabarimala Pilgrimage should not be looked at merely from the environmental
angle.
 (iii) Total lack of sanitation, clean drinking water, hygienic food, toilets facilities
etc. in a place visited by a staggering number of devotees within a short
span of  two months cannot be explained away by saying that the concept of
‘comfort’ is alien to the ethos of Sabarimala Pilgrimage.
 (iv) The Committee were given to understand that the inclusion of temple area in
the Sanctuary was really coming in the way of all developmental activities in
Sabarimala. It was therefore observed that the temple area should be delinked
from the Sanctuary and developed without causing environmental
degradation, particularly since the Shrine does not fall in the core area of the
Sanctuary and is situated only in the buffer zone.
 (v) Long term development at Sabarimala could be undertaken on the basis of
Master Plan in consonance with the broader considerations of the ecology
of the region.  The implementation of this Master Plan could be done under
the supervision of an expert body.

6
(vi) In the meantime, certain short term measures should be taken to alleviate the
miseries of pilgrims by way of lack of widened hill tracks, toilet facilities,
clean water, food, medical facilities etc.  Scientific methods may be applied to
undertake waste management in the area, to clean the river Pampa  and raise
the level of water table in the area.
(vii) Sabarimala should be developed like Vaishno Devi Temple in Jammu or other
major Pilgrim Centres in India.  A Committee consisting of the Ministry of
Environment & Forests, Government of India, the Minister of Forests and
the  Minister of Devaswom, Government of Kerala should be constituted at
the apex level to give necessary impetus to the process of development of
Sabarimala.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Environment & Forests
13. Pursuant to the presentation of Preliminary Report  to the Parliament, the
Ministry of Environment & Forests  furnished action taken notes on the Observations
of the Committee.
According to the Ministry of Environment and Forests, the major action taken
by them included constitution of a  Committee for suggesting a viable strategy to
redress the problems relating to Sabarimala keeping in mind the conservation
values and problems faced by the pilgrims.  This Committee was mandated to
assess  the magnitude of pilgrim visitation, the impact of such visitation on the
wildlife habitat, review of institutional and other administrative mechanism in
place for regulating such tourist visitation, and to suggest a viable strategy for
ensuring conservation status of the area, facilitating the pilgrim visitation. This
Committee was stated to have met several times and subsequently, the Secretary,
Ministry of Environment and Forests also made a field visit to Periyar Tiger
Reserve, Sabarimala and the nearby areas from 25 to 27 July, 2004 for a spot
appraisal of the Sabarimala Temple Complex and the traditional pilgrim route from
Pampa to Sannidhanam. The senior officials from the Forest Department and the
National River Conservation Directorate, Ministry of Environment & Forests also
accompanied the Secretary during the field visit, in addition to officials from the
State Government and the Travancore Devaswom Board. Subsequently, a detailed
discussion was held with the President, Travancore Devaswom Board at Pampa,
where implementation of the Pampa River Action Plan under the National River
Conservation Plan was also reviewed. Later,  a detailed discussion was held in
Trivandrum with senior officials from the State Government and representatives
of Travancore Devaswom Board, apart from the Chief Secretary, Government of
Kerala.
14. The Ministry have further stated in their Action Taken Note that the experience
of travelling through the forest is an inseparable part of Sabarimala pilgrimage, which
should not be deprived to the pilgrims on account of unplanned masonry structures
in the area. The situation also warrants regulation of pilgrim crowd size, through a
holistic, professionally drawn “Master Plan” for a period of at least 50 years, which
can also consider the wise practices being followed elsewhere in similar situations at

7
Tirumala-Tirupati and V aishno Devi Shrines. Therefore, it has been agreed upon that
the concerns of the PAC could be addressed amicably by resorting to the following
line of action:—
(i) Evolving a holistic Master Plan for facilitating Sabarimala pilgrim visitation
drawn by professionals in the field for a time period not less than fifty years,
which should also include institutional mechanisms for day-to-day
management and crowd regulation.
 (ii) C reating a high level coordination mechanism by the State Government of
Kerala for shaping and implementing the proposed Master Plan and
coordinating the Pampa River Action Plan.
 As a short term measure, considering the pilgrimage season, the State Government
was asked by the Central Government to examine the issues relating to sewage
treatment and related works in the leased out area and take  a view vis-à-vis the
clearance under Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980.
15. The Committee have been further informed by the Ministry in their Action
Taken Note that a high level coordination Committee has been constituted by
Government of Kerala for shaping and implementing the Sabarimala Master Plan and
coordinating Pampa River Action Plan under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary
to Government of Kerala.  The Government of Kerala has also entrusted the task of
preparing a Master Plan to a professional agency called Ecosmart India Limited.
16. In their Action Taken Note, the Travancore Devaswom Board have explained
their position in the matter as under :—
“There will not be much damage to the ecology due to the phenomenal increase
in the flow of pilgrims, since the festival season falls during November, 15th to
January, 20th –mainly in dry season.  The authorities with the help of pilgrims
have taken all precautionary measures to prevent any probable fire occurrence.
The Sabarimala region is a fully protected one from any kind of devastating
activities such as illicit felling, poaching, encroachments etc., because of the
presence of pilgrims and authorities of Travancore Devaswom Board throughout
the year.”
 On the delinking of the requisite area from the Periyar Tiger Reserve, they have
sought to explain that : —
“Sabarimala area which is situated in the southern most part of the Periyar Tiger
Reserve in the buffer zone, is well connected with good roads. Due to its
position in the sanctuary it will be possible to de-link the required area very
easily and add sufficient area from the nearby forest or even acquire a private
cardamom estate which is positioned approximately in the middle of the
sanctuary at Pachakkanam which is having an area of 800 acres.  After
de-linking from sanctuary the area is to be declared as a National Pilgrim Centre
and facilities to that extent also are to be provided.  Hence the only remedy is to
de-link the required area. Travancore Devaswom Board has requested an area
of 500 hectares.”

8
17. The Action Taken Notes of the Ministry of Environment and Forests did not
address the key issues raised by the Committee in their Preliminary Report, namely:—
(a) delinking of the temple area from the Periyar Tiger Reserve and its
development without causing environmental degradation; and
(b) constituting a Committee consisting of the Minister of Environment
and Forests, Government of India, the Minister of Forests and the
Minister of Devaswom Department, Government of Kerala at the apex
level to give necessary political impetus to the process of development
of Sabarimala.
The Action Taken Notes not having addressed the core concern of the Committee
and as also mentioned in the Preliminary Report, the subject required further
examination by the Committee to arrive at their final Observations and
Recommendations after hearing the views of the concerned Organisations/
Departments.  The Committee therefore decided to take oral evidence of the
representatives of the concerned Departments/Organisations, namely Union Ministry
of Environment and Forests, Government of Kerala and the Travancore Devaswom
Board.   The oral evidence was held on 21st December, 2004.
18. The Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests informed the Committee
during the evidence that proposals had been received from the Government of Kerala
for diversion of 24.15 hectares of forest land in the Periyar Tiger Reserve and other
reserved  forests for provision of necessary facilities to pilgrims. These were under
consideration in the Ministry as per statutory provisions and orders of the Supreme
Court.
19. When asked about the follow-up action taken by the Ministry subsequent
to the presenting of the Preliminary Report on the subject, the Secretary informed
that :—
 “A professional Agency has been appointed by the Kerala Government on the
advice of the Union Ministry to prepare a Master Plan for pilgrim management
and development of the entire Sabarimala Complex. This Master Plan will have
three phases, namely, immediate requirement for the first 1-2 years, medium-
term requirement of 5-10 years and long-term re-development of the entire complex
up to 50 years. The approved Master Plan will set forth any requirement for
diversion of forest land clearly specifying the location, extent and purpose for
which it has to be used.”
20. When the Committee made a pointed query on the diversion of forest land
required for operationalising the Master Plan, the representative of the Government
of Kerala, who was also present in the evidence, explained that :—
“After studying the Master Plan in consultation with the Travancore Devaswom
Board, taking the final view and then moving the  Environment Ministry of the
Government of India through our own Forest Department and asking for
alienation or de-linking of the area, which is deemed to be necessary, would be
the only way we can go forward.”

9
21. On a specific query by the Committee in this regard, the Secretary, Ministry of
Environment & Forests assured the Committee that: —
“If the Master Plan requires de-linking of the area from the tiger reserve, that
will be done.”
22. During the evidence, the Committee sought to know details about the proposed
Master Plan. The representative of the agency  entrusted with the formulation of the
Master  Plan, namely, ‘Ecosmart’  explained  as under :—
“The aim of the concept plan is to develop a comprehensive Master Plan for
the Sabarimala pilgrims. The most important aspect in this is undoubtedly
to cater to the comfort of the pilgrims and making the pilgrimage as an
enjoyable experience, while doing so to see that the environment is
protected. We are working on the basis of preparing a list of immediate
interventions that would need to be undertaken in order to augment the
situation. We will be outlining the development plan to be undertaken in the
next five to ten years which we believe will bring about a drastic improvement
to the current situation.”
23. Emphasising upon the need to decongest the temple area, he further
explained :—
“The Master Plan itself can unfold over the next fifteen years. The evolution of
the temple at Sabarimala shows that it has been growing in an ad-hoc manner,
currently occupying more than ten times of the area that it had occupied when
it was initially formed. The current situation is that the entire pressure of the
pilgrimage is felt on two spots only, which is Pampa and Sannidhanam. There
are no facilities at these two places to cater to the pilgrims. What we are
suggesting is to de-congest this area and adopt a regional perspective to its
development. What we are suggesting is development of peripheral areas such
as Erimeli, V andiperiyar and Nilackal to accommodate the rush of the pilgrims.
Nilackal* where land is available to the tune of 25 hectares, can be developed
as a primary base camp. Towns such as Erimeli and Pampa can be the secondary
or additional base camps where facilities can be provided. The purpose of this
land is also to provide a very rapid shuttle service to transport pilgrims from
Nilackal to Pampa and back as well as to provide a token system. Our Organisation
visited both Tirupati and Vaishnodevi to understand how pilgrimage is organised
there. Both these places are recognised as top  class pilgrim centres in this
country. Our aim is to bring Sabarimala into that league. The facility that we
envisage to provide at the base camps are the accommodation, dining hall
facilities, commercial facilities, parking, token distribution centres and to provide
infrastructure to make the pilgrims comfortable and to make the whole journey
a pleasant experience. We do recognise that Pampa will always remain the focal
point for the pilgrimage as the base camp for trekkers arriving from Erumeli as
well as the transit camp for pilgrims  arriving by road.”
*Nilackal, the base camp is about 17 kilometres from Pampa, the foothill, from where trekking
to the Shrine starts.

10
24. On the point relating to management of vehicular traffic in the area, he
inter-alia informed as under :—
“We suggest  that once the concept plan is put into perspective, a rapid shuttle
service should be provided from Nilackal to Pampa which means that a lot of
space at Pampa will be released. We suggest  that only a shuttle service and
emergency TDB service vehicles should be allowed entry into Pampa. Parking
of these vehicles will take place at a parking lot that already exists. It is more
than sufficient to cater to the vehicles. We also would like to explore the
possibility of an alternative system for the transportation of goods.”
25. Responding to the concern expressed by the Committee on lack of
accommodation for pilgrims as well as ‘Jyoti darshan’ facilities, he stated as follows:—
“We propose to undertake an area planning of Pampa and Sannidhanam in
order to increase the pilgrim accommodation that is currently available there; to
provide common facilities such as dining hall facilities, lockers etc. As the hon.
Member has mentioned, these are very important facilities to the pilgrims who
visit to see the “Jyoti”. Currently, all the pilgrims have no choice but to
congregate at a very few spots. It leads to a great deal of congestion. We
propose to de-congest this by making it possible for the people to view the
‘jyoti’ from several outlying spots as well.”
26. When the Committee desired to know whether the Ministry will ensure that the
funds for the plan are adequate, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests
assured the Committee as follows : —
“Whatever funds are required for implementation of the Master Plan, whether
they are from the State Government or they are from the Central Government or
they are from the Devaswom Board, we will expect that each partner will make
these funds available.”
27. When questioned about the time-frame of implementation of the proposed
measures to augment the facilities for pilgrims, the Secretary once again assured the
Committee that “there will be visible improvement before the next pilgrim season”.
28. With a view to find out the extent of progress with regard to the Sabarimala
Master Plan and to ensure creation of basic facilities for the pilgrims before the
pilgrim season in November, the Committee decided to take further evidence on the
subject on 20 June 2005.  Accordingly, when the communication of the oral evidence
was sent to the Ministry of Environment and Forests on June, 2005,  the Ministry
furnished to the Committee a written note dated 20.06.2005 stating that they have
given in principle approval for 110.524 hectares of forest land at Nilackal for the base
camp and the Standing Committee of the National Board for Wildlife had given their
consent for using 12.675 hectares of Periyar Tiger Reserve land in the Pampa—
Sannidhanam area. The Ministry  further informed  that parallel processing of the
case (12.675 hectares) under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 shall be taken up by
them after receipt of proposal from the State Government and as the Hon’ble Supreme
Court of India has imposed a ban on diversion of forest land in National Parks and

11
Sanctuaries, the user agency, namely Travancore Devaswom Board is required to
obtain case-specific permission from the Apex Court for this purpose.
29. The Ministry in their aforesaid written note  also stated that in order to begin
construction of the proposed temporary works before the pilgrim season (November,
2005), the Government of India have given final clearance for diversion of 60.14
hectares (out of 110.524 hectares) of forest land at Nilackal for the base camp. As for
the remaining area of 50.384 hectares at Nilackal, the Ministry have apprised that
compliance is awaited from the State Government. They have given a broad list of the
immediate and short-term interventions that have been proposed at Nilackal base
camp for the coming season as follows:
• Provision of parking facilities
• Solid waste management
• Water supply network
• Toilet blocks and sanitation facilities
• Building for administrative purposes
30. As regards the status of the Master Plan, the Ministry informed that the proposal
for preparing a long-term regional Master Plan, that will encompass all aspects of
regional development in the context of the Sabarimala pilgrimage, was submitted to
the Government of Kerala on 15 February, 2005 by the appointed agency, M/s Ecosmart.
However, till the date of this note from the Ministry, they did not receive approval
from the Government of Kerala.
31. During his deposition before the Committee during the oral evidence held on
30th  June, 2005, the representative of the appointed expert  agency Ecosmart  indicated
the progress  in the Master Plan as under: —
“The first and fundamental step that we have achieved since then is the fact
that an outline of the master plan for the Sabarimala has been prepared.  The
report has been approved and accepted by all stakeholders and this includes
the Government of Kerala including the Devaswom Board as well as the Forestry
Department of the Government of Kerala. Several other stakeholders including
the Ministry of Environment & Forests at the Centre as well have also accepted
it.”
32. The Committee took further oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry
of Environment and Forests, Government of Kerala and the Travancore Devaswom
Board on the subject  on 30 June, 2005 and  again on 14 July, 2005 to apprise themselves
on the progress of the Sabarimala Master Plan; the steps taken to implement the plan
including the immediate interventions required in the area for the benefit of the
devotees before the pilgrim season starts in November; the nodal agency which will
be responsible for coordination and speedy implementation; the funding mechanism
and finally the legal action required to be taken to de-link the requisite forest area for
undertaking development works at Pampa and the Sannidhanam.

12
33. Enumerating the various  facilities proposed in the outline of the Master Plan,
the representative  of Ecosmart stated that:—
“The plan also looks at several other aspects such as regional roads, health
services including a cardiac centre where several pilgrims in the past have lost
their lives while attempting this steep climb.  So, there is health facility, water,
special sanitation, solid waste management, and emergency and disaster
management in addition to these.  The plan also looks at providing for Queue
Complex, which will house about 15,000 pilgrims.”
34. About the proposed queue complex and  kiosk complex, the Committee were
further informed as under:—
“As you are aware, the pilgrims have to wait for over 13 to 14 hours which
causes an immense amount of hardship.  This is a queue that is absolutely
packed with and no facility is available in terms of either sanitation or water
supply.  As a consequence of which, what we are suggesting is we build a
queue complex, which will enable us to house about 15,000 pilgrims in over five
chambers where we would be in a position then to regulate the flow of the
pilgrims into the Sannidhanam area.  W e are looking at a traditional road pathway
itself, which is extremely narrow, and I think, the PAC Report had also
recommended that these track roads be widened. That is something we have
provided for in the 12.675 hectares proposed for diversion in the Periyar Tiger
Reserve Area.  Another is a kiosk complex, which is provided before entering
the sanctum area.”
35. In response to a related query regarding provision of other facilities to pilgrims,
the representative of Ecosmart explained as follows:—
“We have also looked at augmenting both the solid and liquid waste
management practices, construction of at least an additional thousand
toilet blocks and bath facilities at both Pampa and Sannidhanam.  We are
also proposing the widening of trek passes and also some safety barriers
and retaining walls that will provide greater safety to the pilgrims.  We are
also looking at the ropeway for transportation of goods.  Over 40,000
tonne of goods are transported to the temple at Sannidhanam each
pilgrimage season.  This is predominantly for preparing the prasadam.
What we are suggesting is that we could also do it through a ropeway.
We are also looking at widening of all the roads that lead to Pampa and
Sannidhanam in order to make it easier for the pilgrimage to reach Pampa.
We are looking at a detailed base camp at Nilackal to start with and later
on in other spheres.”
36. On the question of widening of roads, the Committee were  further informed as
under:—
“…… the road widening will have to be done uniformally to about 7.0 metre
with metal shoulders 1.5 metre on either side.”

13
37. Summing up the different stages of the outline of the Master Plan, the
representative of Ecosmart stated:—
“…….in a very broad nutshell, what we have attempted to do in the outline of
the Master Plan is to de-congest Sannidhanam and Pampa and the way we have
done is by looking at setting up of base camps at Nilackal, Uppupara, Sathram
and V andiperiyar with the largest base camp at Nilackal and that would bear the
entire flow of the pilgrims to come and there would be a regulated flow of the
pilgrims from Nilackal to Pampa and Sannidhanam. If you look at the stages of
the Master Plan itself, as I had mentioned, we have started with the immediate
interventions which look at what can be done for the ensuing pilgrimage season
in November, 2005 and we looked at pilgrim management, water and sanitation
and health care facilities.  All of which were needed critically to improve the
current situation.”
 Explaining the long-term planning as envisaged in the outline of the Master
Plan for bringing about improvements in the Sabarimala region as a whole, he
stated:—
“The Interim Plan which is up to 2015 would probably look at the implementation
of some of the infrastructure proposals in great detail and then the Master Plan
itself, which still remains to be done, would look at the entire pilgrimage in a
holistic manner and covers the entire region which I had mentioned spans close
to 150 miles from Sannidhanam area. It would look at land resources,
transportation, pilgrim facilities and infrastructure and that would cover a time
span of up to the year 2050.”
38. The Committee, enquired whether adequate drinking water could be made
available to all the pilgrims in the proposed Nilackal base camp. The representative of
the Travancore Devaswom Board responded as under:—
“Water supply is a major problem at Nilackal.  We have identified water sources
and construction work is on, which will be completed before November 15.  So,
the water problem will be solved for all the pilgrims who camp at Nilackal.
Pipeline is being laid and treatment plant is going on.  So, for all the pilgrims
assembled there, purified drinking water will be made available. If necessary,
additional pipelines will also be laid.”
39. Elaborating further on this issue, he stated that:—
“The other concern, was the scarcity of water during the pilgrim season. We
have proposed several interventions there including the optimisation of the
Triveni water supply scheme. In the immediate and long-term we are looking at
four check dams upstream of Pampa and the Kakki river to capture water during
the monsoon that would provide water for the pilgrims in the season. We are
also exploring the possibility of sourcing water from other areas upstream of
Sannidhanam so that instead of pumping it up, we could get water from upstream
areas as well.”

14
40. In response to a related query by the Committee on toilet facilities, he informed
that:—
“As regards sanitation, toilets have to be constructed.  We have to do that now
because we got the land two week’s back.  Now the tenders are to be floated as
we were not permitted to float the tenders before we get the land.  So, we have
done the work.  It will be done on war footing basis.  In the first phase, we
propose to construct 300 latrines at Nilackal for this season.”
41. When the Members expressed concern on the lack of medical facilities for
Sabarimala pilgrims, he informed that:—
“We also propose to construct hospitals but that is a long term planning.  We
will not be able to do this before this season.  In Pampa, we have got a hospital
and with the help of that we will be able to provide medical facilities at Pampa and
en route Sannidhanam.  There will be two cardiology units.  That is already there
and we want to make it a pucca arrangement.  But we are not sure because Pampa
and Sannidhanam area of 12.67 hectares belongs to Periyar Tiger Reserve (PTR).
After the sanction of the Government of India, the Supreme Court has to clear it
since it is a sanctuary.  Once the Supreme Court opens on 11th, we would be filing
an interlocutory application for permission to get the 12.67 hectares land.  After
getting that, we propose to construct two complexes, toilets, sanitation treatment
plants and permanent cardiology units.  At present, there are two cardiology
units and this for first aid.  Then the persons are shifted to Kottayam.  Once we
get the land, we will be able to do that.  But during this season, we will not be able
to do much work.”
42. With regard to a pointed query by the Committee on arrangements to control/
prevent any mishap/accident in Sabarimala. During the evidence held on 30th June,
2005,  the Secretary,  Devaswom Board responded as follows:—
“There is already a crisis management team which includes the District Collectors
& others.”
43. During the evidence held on 30th June, 2005, when the Committee expressed
concern over the fact that concrete results of the efforts made so far  are yet to show,
the Principal Secretary, Government of Kerala admitted as under:—
“I agree with you that on the ground so far we have nothing to show.  There are
many reasons.  One of the reasons is that we have got the final approval for
Nilackal only on 7th of June.  Now the Government of Kerala has constituted two
committees – one at the apex level with the Chief Secretary has the Chairman and
TDB President and other persons from various Departments and at the working
level under my chairmanship, there is another committee which is supposed to
monitor.  We have been meeting frequently but as can be seen, we do not have
any physical work done so far.  As the Commissioner has pointed out, I am
confident that before the onset of this pilgrimage season, we will have these
limited facilities, which have been detailed before you, in place so that the
experience of the pilgrims is better.”

15
44.  When asked specifically about the funds required to implement the Master
Plan, the Committee were informed that about Rs. 200 crore are required. The Secretary,
Ministry of Environment & Forests clarified in this regard that:—
“This plan has been detailed for the short-term, medium-term and long-term.
Detailing is under progress. The Rs. 200 crore relates to what is invested in the short-
term, the medium-term and the long-term. The point of detailing the medium-term and
long-term is underway and the detailing for the short-term has been done. Then there
is an estimated cost that we are looking for the immediate short-term intervention
which involves up-gradation of solid waste management system, sanitation services,
pilgrim management, and transportation services, including widening of trek path.
All that can be done before November, 2005. We have an indicative cost close to
Rs. 23 crore. This is just for the short-term that needs to be done. What needs to be
done in the immediate is here. For this, a sum of  Rs. 13 crore is required. Out of this,
there would be about Rs. 6 crore which is available under the Pampa Action Plan which
could be used for solid waste management, sanitation including provisioning of toilet
blocks, bathroom facilities at Pampa, Sannidhanam and along the trekking route. It also
involves public awareness and provision of mobile latrines as well. Out of Rs. 13 crore,
roughly Rs. 6 crore could come from the PAP fund which are available, as I mentioned,
close to Rs. 18 crore under the scheme currently. The rest of the
Rs. 7.5 crore would have to come from different sponsorships. For  upgrading health
care infrastructure, we have been approached by Dhanalakshmi Bank which are the
bankers to the TDB and Maa Amrithananda Ashram. They would like to contribute and
help in putting up facilities. Last time, the Hon’ble Member had also mentioned that
there was a lot of interest from the pilgrims themselves to contribute to this effort.”
45. On the funding issue, the Secretary, Ministry of Environment & Forests further
clarified  that:—
“With respect to the funding, the Central Government is responsible for funding
those elements of the Pampa Action Plan which relate to this Master Plan. The Pampa
Action Plan includes a part of the Pampa Action Plan.  But the Pampa Action Plan has
elements which are outside the Master Plan and which address issues going beyond
the project area.  What has been posed for external funding is the entire Pampa Action
Plan of which some component is part of the Master Plan.  But what is needed in the
immediate time horizon is, we have issued sanctions and if we receive a more detailed
proposal from the Kerala Government to meet the requirements in the short term to
medium term,  we would not wait for the JBIC funding.  JBIC funding is for the elements
which will come after five years or 15 years  This is what we have proposed to the JBIC.”
46. The Tranvancore Devaswom Board, in a subsequent written note, have further
explained in this regard that:—
“Various projects under solid waste management, water supply, sanitation and
public awareness have been identified under Pampa Action Plan to be implemented in
Pampa, Sabarimala and  surrounding region. The projects have been listed on a
priority basis and the implementation has been decided to be taken up in phases. The
projects under phase – I worth Rs. 18.45 crores has already been sanctioned.”

16
47.  Answering a specific question regarding the sources of funding various projects
under the Master Plan, the Travancore Devaswom Board, in their written note, have
informed as under:—
“Projects worth Rs. 319.7 crores under Pampa Action Plan have been identified.
The financing of these projects is on 70 : 30 ratio (Centre-State Government/Local
Bodies) under phase-I, out of the sanctioned amount of Rs. 18.45 crores, Rs. 75
lakhs has been released as a first instalment to the nodal agency (Kerala Water
Authority) for the execution of the sanctioned projects, out of which 35 lakhs has
been utilised till now by them. As regards the works at Nilackal, Pampa and
Sannidhanam, Devaswom Funds are utilised for the same except the works under
the Pampa Action Plan. Funds to the tune of Rs. 1614.49 lakhs is assigned under
Pampa Action Plan for Nilackal.”
48. About allotment of land, the Travancore Devaswom Board,   informed in their
written note furnished to the Committee on 11th July, 2005 that pursuant to the
recommendations in the outline of the Master Plan, they have submitted separate
proposals to this effect to the Government of India through the State Government.
These proposals are: (1) for diversion of 110.524 ha. at Nilackal and (ii) 12.675 ha. in
the Pampa-Sabarimala area coming under Periyar Tiger Sanctuary. The proposals
were submitted on 14.03.2005, 15.03.2005 and 24.03.2005. The Government of India
have accorded stage I clearance on 05.03.2005 for the land at Nilackal. Based on the
stage-I clearance, the Forest Department has directed the Travancore Devaswom
Board on 23.05.2005 to remit 6.41 crores  of rupees as net present value (NPV).
Accordingly, Travancore Devaswom Board has remitted the NPV. As per the conditions
of diversion of forestland, equal extent of land has to be given alongwith afforestation
cost. State Government have issued orders on 20.05.2005 transferring 305 acres of
Revenue Land to the Forest Department at Kampakkal in lieu of the land to be diverted.
49. The Travancore Devaswom Board, in the aforesaid written note, have further
stated that the Government of India have permitted the Travancore Devaswom Board
to undertake works for immediate intervention at Nilackal in 60.14 ha. land only. For
the remaining 50.384 hectares land, Government of India clearance is still awaited.  As
regards the land of 12.675 ha. to be diverted from the Periyar Tiger Reserve area,
Government of India have accorded preliminary sanction on 15.06.2005, subject to
approval of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India. Being Periyar Tiger Reserve area,
prior permission from the Supreme Court is needed for the diversion of land from
there, for which the Travancore Devaswom Board was moving the Hon’ble Supreme
Court. Subsequently, the Committee have been informed that the Interlocutory
Application was filed in the Supreme Court on 1 August, 2005. In this regard, the
Ministry of Environment & Forests have apprised the Committee vide their letter
dated September 9, 2005 that the Hon’ble Supreme Court have directed the Government
of India to issue orders for diversion of the aforesaid 12.675 ha. land from the Periyar
Tiger Reserve.
50. As per the latest communication received from the Travancore Devaswom
Board and the outline of the Master Plan submitted to the Committee by Eco Smart.,
in a nutshell, the following facilities will be provided to the Sabarimala

17
pilgrims under the proposed Master Plan in different stages involving different time
schedule as specified below:—
           Facility S tage
(i) Parking of vehicles. Immediate
(ii) Medical facilities. Immediate/Medium-term
(iii) Drinking water at all points. Immediate
(iv) Accommodation and resting places. Immediate/Medium-term
(v) Toilet, Bathrooms etc. at Pampa,
Sannidhanam & Nilackal. Immediate/Medium-term
(vi) Sewage clearance and treatment. Medium-term/long-term
(vii) Garbage disposal (Solid waste
management). Immediate
(viii) W idened trekking paths. Immediate
(ix) Drinking water facilities and toilet
en-route the trekking paths. Immediate
(x) Construction of Queue Complex. Short-term
(xi) Improved Darshan facilities. Medium-term/long-term
51. With regard to the Committee’s query on the implementation aspect of the
proposals envisaged in the Master Plan and monitoring thereof, the representative
of  Ecosmart  informed during the evidence held on 30th June, 2005 as under:—
“In terms of the implementation Committees, the apex level Steering Committee
has Chief  Secretary as its Chairman.  It also has the President, TDB as a
member. The other members include the Principal Secretary, Devaswom
Department, the Secretary, Forest and Wildlife and the Principal Secretary, Finance
Department. It was also decided that a representative of the Central Ministry of
Environment and Forests would be an observer on the steering level Committee.
There is also a working level Committee. These Committees have been made
after getting a Cabinet approval. The working level Committee is also being
constituted where the Principal Secretary, Devaswom Department and the
Commissioner, TDB are also members. Also, the Chief Conservator of Forests
and the Secretary of Forests are also members of this Committee. If necessary,
the Committee would include members from Ecosmart as well as the Police
Department, the District Collectorate and the Pollution Control Board. As I see,
in some sense these two Committees are key to implement  this whole process
because it is very much a multi-departmental effort that will have to be launched
in order to achieve the immediate interventions. I think perhaps even the apex
level Steering Committee unfortunately has not met formally so far. So, now that
the implementation plans are ready, there is a need to activate the Committee.
The working level Committee has met two to three times. But now I think there
is a need to meet more frequently in order to get down to the nitty-gritty of the
implementation.

18
………the apex Committee needs to have formal terms of reference, and it needs
to meet more frequently in terms of getting these actions done. The working
level Committee needs to coordinate among various different bodies. These
involve Forestry Department, Irrigation Department, and several State
Government agencies – Kerala Water Authority, Kerala State Electricity Board.
The entire coordination effort will have to be done by these two Committees.
Perhaps, a fortnightly monitoring mechanism has to be put in place if we have
to achieve this target before November, 2005.”
He further added:—
“We have prepared a detailed priority list of immediate interventions that need
to be taken up. This list is also being discussed with the Travancore Devaswom
Board, and the Government of Kerala. There is a consensus with everybody on
the implementation of this list.”
52. On this issue, Travancore Devaswom Board have stated in their written note
that a full-fledged works wing of the Board  will implement the projects and an officer
who has retired as Chief Engineer from State PWD has been appointed as Technical
Consultant. M/s Ecosmart has been appointed by the State Government for the
preparation of detailed estimates, sketches, Plan etc. and for rendering all necessary
assistance for the proper implementation for the intervention during this season and
for preparation of details relating to second phase.
53. In response to a query whether any separate agency is required for
implementation of the Master Plan, the Travancore Devaswom Board have submitted
that:—
“There are 1208 temples under the Travancore Devaswom Board and about
5000 employees. Since the administration of Sabarimala is fully within powers
of Travancore Devasom Board as per the Act, it has been stated that the
question of engaging any Agency/Committee or authority to administer/
implement any scheme does not arise. Moreover, legally also it is not correct.
Travancore Devaswom Board  can complete the works as per the Master Plan
with their own machinery, provided the land is made available as requested
for.”
54.  With regard to the immediate works to be completed before the pilgrim
season beginning in November 2005, the representatives of the Travancore
Devaswom Board assured the Committee during the oral evidence held on 14 July,
2005 that the required number of toilets, bathrooms, drinking water facility and
parking facility will be provided at the Nilackal base camp before the ensuing pilgrim
season.  Further, in a written note furnished subsequently to the Committee the
Travancore Devaswom Board stated that  a schedule of works has been prepared
by M/s Ecosmart (India) for the implementation of immediate intervention/
requirements for the ensuing pilgrim season.  The Travancore Devaswom Board
has committed to complete the immediate requirements before November, 2005, cost
of which is approximately estimated as Rs. 5 crores. According to them, immediate

19
works proposed to be undertaken at Nilackal base camp for the  ensuing season are
as under:—
I. Road— Widening and repairs of the existing roads.
II. Parking—Clearing the area of 30 acres by cutting un-yieldy Rubber
trees for parking of vehicles. 2500 vehicles can be parked in this area.
Apart from this 13000 heavy vehicles can be parked in the remaining
estate area without cutting trees.
III. Water Supply— There are four ponds in the estate area. These ponds
will be developed and maintained. Water from three ponds is for drinking
purpose. This will be after treating the water scientifically. Water of one
pond is to be used for other purpose. Apart from this, the possibility of
constructing one check dam in the stream near the boundary of the estate
is also under consideration.  Four tube wells will also be constructed for
uninterrupted water supply.
IV. Toilets— At present there are 70 toilets. In addition, 400 toilets will be
constructed before November 15, 2005.
V. Solid Waste Management Facilities.
VI. Fueling facilities and a full-fledged communication installation will be
made in Nilackal areas.
VII. In order to have law and order, pilgrim movement, control and traffic
control, a police station will be set apart and fire control station will also
be provided.
VIII. Shelters—Construction of a ‘nadapandal’ and other accommodation for
pilgrims staff, drivers etc. will be provided.
IX. Medical facilities at the base camp.
55. The Committee undertook a Study Visit to Kochi in the second week of October,
2005. They held informal discussion with the representatives of the Ministry of
Environment and Forests, Government of Kerala (Forest Department) and the
Travancore Devaswom Board on 18th  October, 2005 and  made an on-the-spot visit
to Sabarimala via Nilackal on 19th /20th October 2005.
56. During the discussion at Kochi, the Committee, at the outset, desired to be
apprised of the progress of the implementation of the various projects/facilities and
their completion before the ensuing pilgrim season as per the assurance given by the
Travancore Devaswom Board during oral evidences held earlier. The representatives of
the Travancore Devaswom Board informed that the entire stretch of land at Nilackal was
transferred to the Devaswom Board only about a month back and that the work with

20
regard to the following facilities had been already initiated  and all the requisite steps
are being taken by them with a view to complete the same by 10th November, 2005:—
Sanitation
(i) Construction of toilet blocks each having 40 units (Total 400 latrines).
(ii) Construction of bio-reactor (Advanced version of septic tank).
(iii) Construction of effluent collection sump at Nilackal.
(iv) Construction of oxidation pond and earthern  pond at Nilackal.
(v) Providing sewage network.
Water supply facilities
(i) Providing water supply network and toilet flushing network at Nilackal.
(ii) C onstruction of borewell at different locations at Nilackal.
Shelters
Construction of Nadapandal at Nilackal.
Pilgrim Management and Transportation
(i) Formation of Parking ground at Nilackal
(ii) Improvement of road at Nilackal.
Solid waste management
(i) Supply of litter bins.
(ii) Supply of pet bottle grinding machine.
(iii) Supply of Dumber bin placer trolly without prima mover and dumber
bin.
(iv) Developing composing yard.
Other facilities
Supply of 320KV A Generator set at Nilackal.
 57. The representative of the Travancore Devaswom Board also stated that
presently all the work being carried out at the base camp are in the nature of immediate
interventions and are in accordance with the outline of the Sabarimala Master Plan,
which has been approved by all stakeholders.
58. In a written note, the Travancore Devaswom Board have further informed that
certain facilities like upgradation of toilet blocks, water treatment unit at Nilackal,
construction of more borewells, pilgrim shelters, solid waste management facilities
like auto tippers, incinerator etc. will be ready only by the next pilgrim season at the
Nilackal base camp.
59. The Committee were informed that the Travancore Devaswom Board  have not
initiated any action on the Pampa-Sannidhanam area.  In this regard, the representative
of the Travancore Devaswom Board brought to the notice of the Committee that
although the Hon’ble Supreme Court has issued an order dated 26th  August,
2005 for diversion and transfer of 12.675 ha. of  forest land at Pampa-Sannidhanam
area directing the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests to issue clearance

21
for transfer of land, the Ministry have agreed in-principle to hand-over this piece of
land.    It was further stated that  the final  clearance has not been issued by the Ministry
inspite of the fact that the Devaswom Board has fulfilled all the conditions, namely,
payment of Net Present Value (NPV) and transferring equal area for afforestation.  The
representative of the Devaswom Board explained that since the requisite area had not
been made available to the Board, they would not be in a position to undertake any
construction work for immediate intervention at the Pampa-Sannidhanam area before
the ensuing pilgrim season.  He added that even if the requisite area was eventually
transferred to the Board before the season commences, they would not be able to
complete the works in time.
60. When the Committee specifically enquired during the discussion about the
pending clearance in the matter and the consequent delay in taking up essential works
in the Pampa-Sabarimala area, the representative of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests assured the Committee that the final clearance in the matter would be issued as
soon as the proposal was received from the Forest  Department, Government of Kerala.
The representative of the Forest Department, Government of Kerala then indicated that
they would forward the proposal immediately to the Ministry of Environment and
Forests. He also sought to impress upon the Committee that all the land proposed and
approved in the outline of the Sabarimala Master Plan had been cleared by the Forest
Department for transfer to the Devaswom Board and that there would  be no hitch
whatsoever in this regard. The representative of the Ministry of Environment & Forests
assured the Committee that final clearance would be issued within 3 days of receiving
the proposal from the State Government.
61. The Ministry of Environment & Forests subsequently  informed the Committee
in a written note that they  received the proposal from the State Government on
18th October 2005 (when the Committee discussed the matter at Kochi)  and they
have given final clearance for diversion and transfer of 12.675 ha. of forest land in
Periyar Tiger Reserve on 24th October, 2005.
62. With regard to the medium/long term interventions under the Master Plan, the
representative of the Travancore Devaswom Board informed the Committee that the
full-fledged Master Plan was expected to be ready only by July, 2006, which would
specify medium-term projects to be completed in a period of 10 years and long-term
projects to be undertaken in 50-year period.
63. On 19th/20th October, 2005, the Study Group of the Committee visited Nilackal
(enroute  Sabarimala), where a base camp for the pilgrims is to be developed.  After
visiting Nilackal, the Members proceeded to Pampa, the foothill, where the pilgrims
congregate before trekking to the Shrine, about 5 kms. away.
64. During this visit, the Committee noticed the following activities/deficiencies;
(i) At the base camp at Nilackal, work relating to the facilities like toilets, drinking
water, parking area, shelters etc. has been initiated.
(ii) The trekking paths were narrow,  rough and fragile.
(iii) Medical facilities including chemist shops were non-existent at Nilackal as
well as Pampa-Sannidhanam area.
(iv) There were no toilets on the way to the Shrine.
(v) Travancore Devaswom Board had not made any arrangements  for drinking
water enroute the Shrine.    There were only a few private vendors selling
mineral water.

22
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
65. Shri Dharma Sastha  temple at Sabarimala in the State of Kerala, where  the
presiding deity is Lord Ayyappa, is situated on a hill-top in a dense forest in the
southern most part of the Periyar Wild Life Sanctuary in the Western Ghats.  This
internationally famous shrine, believed to be of great antiquity, attracts millions of
pilgrims cutting across religions, castes and classes, exhibiting a remarkable
instance of communal harmony and national integration.   According to the
Travancore Devaswom Board, the statutory body responsible for the management of
the shrine, about 3 crore pilgrims visited the shrine during the festival season
beginning from November 15, 2003 and ending on 14th January, 2004.  The number
of pilgrims has been steadily increasing over the years as people have an unflinching
faith that Lord Ayyappa fulfils all their wishes and aspirations which inspires them
to make frequent visits to Sabarimala.  No wonder,   Sabarimala has acquired the
status of a major pilgrim centre.
66. Surprisingly, a pilgrim centre of such great significance and popularity
attracting a large  number of devotees from all over the country lacks even basic
facilities like clean drinking water, hygienic food, medical facilities, shelters,
dormitories and toilets.  This state of affairs has continued unattended over the
years causing avoidable suffering to the pilgrims, several of whom undertake the
pilgrimage year after year.    The Committee believe that efforts required to mitigate
the suffering of pilgrims wherever possible within the available resources did not
seem to have been made over the years by the State Government and the Devaswom
Board. Inspite of having enough resources at their command, the Devaswom Board
could not provide even basic facilities like temporary toilets, shelters,  drinking
water and normal medical facilities to the pilgrims under the pretext of non-
availability of requisite land for development.   The fact that timely steps were not
taken by the Travancore Devaswom Board and the Government of Kerala despite the
magnitude of the problem  is nothing but regrettable.
67.  Whatever steps have now been sought to be initiated  to create the basic
facilities at Sabarimala were done  only after the Public Accounts Committee took
notice of the genuine problems faced by pilgrims and decided to examine the issue in
all its dimensions.   This subject relating to the problems faced by the devotees  for
a pilgrimage to Sabarimala Shrine first came up before the Public Accounts
Committee in October, 2003, during the course of a discussion at Kochi with the
officials of the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests and the Government of
Kerala regarding faunal surveys in the Periyar Tiger Sanctuary.  It  was then
brought to the Committee’s notice that the Forest Department did not allow the
Sabarimala Shrine authorities to undertake  any kind of repairs, maintenance or
development work in the area surrounding  the  Shrine  due to its location on the
peripheral areas of the Periyar Wild Life Sanctuary although there was an urgent
need to develop the area to mitigate the problems of the pilgrims. The Committee
were given to understand by the Travancore Devaswom Board that proposals for
creating infrastructure to develop proper facilities for the pilgrims were rejected by
the Government on the ground of “conservation of ecology and wild life”, despite the

23
fact that no faunal survey was carried out in the area for several years.  The Travancore
Devaswom Board lamented that lack of even basic amenities for the ever-growing
number of pilgrims   around the temple area created serious problems of spatial  and
logistical management resulting in avoidable suffering to the pilgrims, particularly
while trekking  their way to the Shrine on  a steep hill track.
68. Considering the importance of the subject and the magnitude of the  problem,
the Committee thought it proper to visit the Sabarimala Shrine in the peak pilgrim
season in January, 2004 to see for themselves the nature and extent of the   problems
faced by the pilgrims there.   During their visit, they noticed  the plight of  pilgrims
coming  from different parts of the country,  who had congregated in large numbers
to pay their obeisance to Lord Ayyappa  on Makara Sankranthi day.  The Committee
during the journey up the hill saw countless number  of devotees sleeping on hard
ground in the forest at night without any protective roof along the hilly footpath.
Further, they noticed total lack of  clean drinking water or hygienic food available to
them.  The tracks were too narrow to bear the massive flow of pilgrims.  The
infrastructure available in the temple precincts was extremely sparse.  In view of the
alarming nature of the problems faced by  the  pilgrims visiting the holy Shrine and
due to the lackadaisical approach hitherto adopted by the authorities to provide a
viable solution, the Committee had an apprehension that the prevailing condition at
Sabarimala may lead to a major tragedy similar to  the stampede in the year 2000 in
which 52 persons had died.   The Committee, therefore,  considered it appropriate
and necessary to bring the matter to the urgent notice  of Parliament by way of a
Preliminary Report on the subject.
69. Before finalizing their Preliminary Report on the subject, the Committee had
taken into account the written notes submitted by the Travancore Devaswom Board
and the Kerala Government apart from their oral submissions made before the
Committee at Sabarimala.  In this connection, the Travancore Devaswom Board had
submitted a note to the Committee stating inter-alia that prior to promulgation of
the Forest (Conservation) Act of 1980, the Devaswom Board could provide adequate
facilities to the lakhs of pilgrims visiting the Shrine. But,  thereafter,  the situation
had changed as the State Forest Department did not even consider the legitimate
rights and privileges of the Devaswom Board with regard to utilisation of even the
area under their title (13.35 acres),  not to mention the area under lease and possession
(168.35 acres) and the area under permission (63.00 acres). The Board submitted
that since the temple was situated in the southernmost fringe of the Periyar Tiger
Reserve, it is easy and practicable to delink 500 hectares of  forest land from the
Tiger Reserve.  The representatives of the Government of Kerala, took the position
that what was needed at Sabarimala was a sensible and humanitarian approach,
which could solve the problems of both humans and nature. They informed that the
Supreme Court in WPC No. 212/2001 had directed the Central and State Governments
and the Devaswom Board not to carry out any non-forest activity at Sabarimala,
which were not permitted by the Central Government under the Forest (Conservation)
Act.  Taking into account both the submissions and the ground  realities noticed by
the Committee during their on-the-spot visit, a Preliminary Report on the subject
was thus finalized and presented to Parliament.

24
70. The Committee in their  Preliminary Report had suggested certain measures
which  inter-alia included de-linking the Sabarimala temple area from the Periyar
Wildlife Sanctuary and  the subsequent  long-term development of the area on the
basis of a Master Plan in consonance with the broader considerations of the ecology
of the region.  The Committee had opined  that Sabarimala could be developed like
Vaishno Devi Temple or other major pilgrim centres in the country.    As the long-
term development was bound to take some time, it was emphasized that certain short-
term measures should be expeditiously taken to alleviate the sufferings  of  the
pilgrims.
71. Responding to the suggestions of the Committee in their Preliminary Report,
the Ministry of Environment and Forests in their Action Taken Notes  stated that  the
problems faced by the pilgrims can be addressed by evolving a holistic Master Plan
for facilitating Sabarimala pilgrim visitation including institutional mechanisms
for day-to-day management and crowd regulation as well as by creating a high level
coordination mechanism under  the control of the State Government of Kerala for
implementing the Master Plan.  The Ministry also asked the State Government to
take a view vis-a-vis the environmental clearance required under the Forest
(Conservation) Act, 1980 for transferring forest land to the Travancore Devaswom
Board, the statutory body for managing the affairs of the Sabarimala Shrine.  The
Travancore Devaswom Board,  while explaining  their  position in this matter,  indicated
that Sabarimala area, situated in the southern most part of the Periyar Tiger Reserve,
was actually in the buffer zone and therefore it would be very much possible to
delink the required area for development works  from the Sanctuary  and transfer
the same to the Devaswom Board, while adding sufficient  substitute area from the
nearby forest.  The Devaswom Board assured that they would undertake to protect
the entire area that would be allotted to them  in an eco-friendly manner with the
least disturbance to the flora and fauna existing there.
72. The Committee  were  surprised that the Ministry of Environment and Forests
in their Action Taken Replies conveniently avoided the main issue of de-linking the
requisite area from the Periyar  Wild Life Sanctuary to facilitate development works
in the area.  Neither was there any mention about the short-term measures to be
initiated to alleviate the suffering of the pilgrims on account of lack of toilet facilities,
clean water, food, medical facilities etc. as had been desired by the Committee.
Instead, the Ministry merely asked the State Government to examine the issues and
take a view vis-a-vis the clearance under Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. There
was also no response from the State Government in this regard. The Committee was
thus inclined to conclude that the response of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests was unsatisfactory and rather vague and it failed to address the core concerns
expressed by the Committee in their Preliminary Report. This strengthened the
Committee’s resolve to have the matter examined further with a view to making the
concerned authorities realize the urgency and importance of the concrete  steps to
be taken in the matter.   Accordingly, the Committee decided to discuss the issues in
detail with the representatives of the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests,
State Government of Kerala and the Travancore Devaswom Board.

25
73. During the first oral evidence held in December 2004, the Ministry of
Environment and Forests submitted that the situation at Sabarimala warranted
regulation of flow of pilgrims  through a holistic “Master Plan”, drawn by
professionals, which should also include institutional mechanism for day-to-day
management.  The Committee were given to understand that   the “outline of the
Master Plan for Sabarimala”, to take care of the next 50 years,  was prepared by a
professional agency,  namely, M/s Ecosmart of India Ltd., Mumbai at the instance of
the State Government of Kerala.  It was explained that the  Master Plan outline
mainly dealt with the twin issues of pilgrim-management and crowd-regulation.  As
the entire pressure of the pilgrimage is being felt on two spots only, namely Pampa
(the foothill) and the Sannidhanam (sanctum sanctorum),  it was proposed to de-
congest this area under the Master Plan outline and develop peripheral areas such
as Erimeli, Vandiperiyar and Nilackal as base camps to accommodate  the rush of
pilgrims and regulate their movement towards Pampa and the Sannidhanam.  For
this purpose, a  rapid shuttle service was being proposed to transport pilgrims from
the primary base  camp at Nilackal to Pampa and back with the provision for a token
system for ‘darshan’.
74. Following this  oral evidence, the Committee did not hear anything on the
subject from the Ministry of Environment & Forests or the Government of Kerala
for about six months.  They then decided to call them again  to apprise themselves of
progress, if any, made by them in the matter.  On receipt of a communication from the
Committee in this regard,  the Ministry of Environment & Forests furnished  a
written note dated 20.06.2005 stating that they have given in principle approval for
110.524 hectares of forest land at Nilackal for the base camp and the Standing
Committee of the National Board for Wildlife had given their consent for using
12.675 hectares of Periyar Tiger Reserve land in the Pampa - Sannidhanam area.
The Committee were also informed by the Ministry that parallel processing of the
case (12.675 hectares) under the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 shall be taken up
by them after receipt of proposal from the State Government.   In this connection, it
was informed that as the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India has imposed a ban on
diversion of forest land in National Parks and Sanctuaries, the user agency, namely
Travancore Devaswom Board was required to obtain case-specific permission from
the Apex Court for this purpose.  Obviously,  the Ministry of Environment & Forests
woke up  only after the Committee  pursued the matter further and decided to take
stock of the progress made by them in this regard.  Subsequently during the evidence
held in June-July, 2005, the Committee were given to understand that   the ‘Outline
of the Sabarimala Master Plan’ has since been accorded approval  by all concerned
authorities, which infact implied that the  Outline of the Sabarimala Master Plan
had acquired the necessary status to set the stage for the holistic development of the
Sabarimala region.
75. The Committee note that broadly there are two stages proposed in the outline
of the Master Plan and its eventual development into a full-fledged Master Plan,
namely, (i) Immediate interventions by January, 2006 to upgrade the present level of
services i.e. pilgrim management, parking facilities, solid waste management, water
and sanitation facilities, health care etc. to improve the current situation and the

26
setting up of a base camp at Nilackal   (ii) Medium and long term interventions upto
the year 2015 & 2050 respectively to implement infrastructural proposals including
select Pampa River Action Plan proposals with required technical inputs.  This
includes further development of main base camp at Nilackal, establishing transit
camps along the pilgrimage route  in Uppupara, Erimeli and Vandiperiyar;
improvement in trek routes, Shuttle services, Queue Complex, Jyothi viewing points,
emergency & disaster management and rope way for transportation of goods.
76. With regard to the provision of funds to undertake construction and other
works as proposed in the outline of the Master Plan, the Committee note that the
Devaswom Board have stated that they are capable of bearing the expenditure for
short and medium term interventions.  In this connection, the Committee feel that
the cost for short term schemes/projects, which are required before the pilgrims
season begins in November, may not be much.  However, the Committee believe that
the medium and long term interventions, for which detailing is yet to be done,  may
require substantial funds.    The Committee therefore, expect that the Ministry of
Environment and Forests and Government of Kerala may extend all  possible financial
assistance and the cooperation to the Devaswom Board to mobilize the requisite
funds.   Efforts may also  be made to examine the feasibility of building a corpus out
of sponsorships, donations from pilgrims etc. in order to ensure that the
implementation of the proposed  Sabarimala Master Plan does not suffer on account
of paucity of funds.
77. The Committee have been informed that the implementation of the outline of the
Sabarimala Master Plan during the short-term has commenced under the aegis of the
Travancore Devaswom Board, which is the designated nodal agency for this purpose.
The Travancore Devaswom Board have contended  that they have the wherewithal to
implement  the Sabarimala Master Plan.  The Committee, however, feel that since the
Master Plan is a gigantic project involving several works and schemes,  both over the
medium-term (upto 2015) and the long-term (upto 2050), clarity of purpose coupled with
very sound and efficient organizational capabilities are necessary for its smooth
implementation.   Even though the Travancore Devaswom Board have assured the
Committee that they are capable of  implementing the proposed Sabarimala Master Plan,
the Committee feel that considering this  ambitious project, it would be better if the
Devaswom Board involves professional and competent agencies for the implementation
of the Master Plan so that the project is completed timely and successfully.
As the implementation of the Master Plan may involve different Departments/
Agencies of the State Government as well as outside agencies, the Committee
apprehend that coordination among them may pose a problem.   They  would, therefore,
urge  the Government of Kerala to extend all possible technical and material help
required by the Travancore Devaswom Board to meet the onerous responsibility
undertaken by them.  The Committee also desire that the Government should consider
conferring statutory status to the proposed Sabarimala Master Plan by enacting a
State Act for this purpose with a view to providing  the necessary legal sanction for
its smooth and expeditious implementation,  particularly  since the Master Plan
covers a wide time-span of  50 years involving steady financing and effective inter-
departmental  coordination.

27
 78. In their Preliminary Report, the Committee had recommended that a
Committee consisting of the Minister of Environment and Forests, Government of
India, the Minister of Forests and the Minister of Devaswom, Government of Kerala
should be constituted at the apex level to give necessary impetus to the process of
development of Sabarimala.  The Committee, however, note that instead of constituting
a high level political body suggested by them, only a coordination Committee
comprising of officials at the state level has been constituted by the Government of
Kerala under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary, with the President,
Travancore Devaswom Board and representatives from different Departments as
Members.  Further they note that at the working level, another Committee comprising
of various officials under the Chairmanship of the Principal Secretary, Devaswom
Department has been constituted to monitor the implementation of the projects/
schemes envisaged in the Master Plan outline.  The Committee feel  that the two-tier
arrangement presently made at the State level for monitoring the implementation of
the proposed Master Plan is rather inadequate and thus, needs to  be suitably
upgraded.  They desire that at the first level,  a Committee under the Chairmanship
of the Minister, Devaswom  to facilitate decision-making may be constituted and,
another Committee may be formed at the working level with the Chief Secretary as
the Chairman and the Principal Secretaries of all concerned Departments as
Members for regular monitoring and control of the implementation.  The Committee
believe that  such an arrangement will facilitate necessary political as well as
administrative impetus to the implementation of the Sabarimala Master Plan.   The
Travancore Devaswom Board, the statutory body responsible for the affairs of
Sabarimala and the implementation of the Master Plan should  work under the
guidance of the two-tier Committees proposed above.
79. The Committee note that the Master Plan outline envisages development of a
base camp at Nilackal, which is about 17 kms from Pampa, the foothill.  The requisite
land for this purpose (110.524 hectares) was allotted to the Travancore Devaswom
Board by the State Government.  The Committee are given to understand  that the
Government of Kerala have charged a price as  Net Present Value for the land
transferred to the Devaswom Board at Nilackal for the base camp, as according to
them the nature of land transferred to them at Nilackal was forest land and that it
was done in accordance with the guidelines of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests.  Keeping in view the larger public interest, the Committee  would like the
Ministry of Environment & Forests and the State Government of Kerala to examine
the feasibility of treating the transferred land at Nilackal as “Revenue land” instead
of “Forest land”  and consider waiver of the price charged as “Net Present Value”.
80. At the instance of the Committee, the Travancore Devaswom Board had given
an assurance  during the oral evidence that they would be in a position to complete
the immediate interventions envisaged in the Master Plan outline before the ensuing
pilgrim season.  As the Sabarimala long-term Master Plan was to be  ready only by
July, 2006, the Committee were anxious that atleast the immediate interventions
proposed in the Master Plan outline should be completed in time before the ensuing
pilgrim season.  Consequently the Committee undertook a study visit to Kochi/
Sabarimala from 18-20 October 2005 for an on-the-spot appraisal of the progress

28
made in the creation of the proposed facilities by way of immediate interventions for
the pilgrims. The Committee noticed that the construction of basic facilities like
toilets, drinking water pipelines, parking space for vehicles, shelters, sanitation
has been initiated by the Travancore Devaswom Board at Nilackal,  where a base
camp is being developed  for the pilgrims. According to the Travancore Devaswom
Board the land at Nilackal was transferred to them only  in September and they are
trying their best to complete these works before the beginning of the pilgrim season.
The Committee would expect the Travancore Devaswom Board to fulfill the
commitment made by them with regard to the immediate interventions at the base
camp.  Furthermore, the Committee would  like to emphasize that no untoward
incident should happen due to the presence of staggering number of pilgrims expected
to congregate in the shrine this season.  They therefore desire that the Travancore
Devaswom Board should also take immediate disaster-prevention measures for the
ensuing pilgrim season pending the commencement of projects over the medium/
long-term.
81. Apart from the base camp, the outline of the Sabarimala Master Plan also
envisages development of certain facilities on the way from  Pampa (the foothill)
enroute the Sannidhanam (the temple complex) like the Queue Complex, Cardiology
Units, drinking water facilities, widening of trekking paths, sewage treatment plants
etc.  In this connection, the Committee note that the Supreme Court vide their order
dated 26th August 2005, in response to the Special Leave Petition filed by the
Devaswom Board  has directed the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests to
grant permission to the Board to divert 12.675 hectares of land in the Periyar Tiger
Reserve for the development of road and for providing infrastructure facilities for
pilgrims visiting the Sabarimala Shrine.  However, during their recent visit to
Sabarimala on 18th October, 2005,  the representative of the Devaswom Board
informed that the final clearance for the transfer of the aforesaid land had not been
given till then by the Ministry of Environment and Forests and the Government of
Kerala.  While taking a serious view of the delay in effecting the transfer of the
requisite land and the lack of proper coordination between the Union Ministry and
the State Government, the Committee directed the representatives of both the Union
Ministry and the Forest Department, Government of Kerala to take immediate action
in the matter so that the proposed works to develop basic facilities in the Pampa-
Sannidhanam area can be executed without further delay.    The Committee understand
that on 18th October 2005, the State Government sent the proposal which was
eventually cleared by the Ministry of Environment and Forests on 24th  October
2005.  The Committee deprecate  the delay on the part of the Ministry of Environment
and Forests and the Government of Kerala to give the final clearance in the matter
due to which it would not be possible to alleviate the problems faced by the pilgrims
in the Pampa-Sannidhanam area for the ensuing season.  As the clearance has
finally been given, the Committee would now expect the Travancore Devaswom Board
to take up the immediate interventions proposed in the Master Plan outline at the
temple area (Pampa-Sannidhanam) in right earnest and execute the works on a war
footing so that a perceptible change  is visible in the temple area very soon. The
requisite facilities may include widening the trekking tracks leading to the shrine,

29
broadening the “darshan” space available for pilgrims and provision of alternate
points for viewing the auspicious “jyothi” in the distant horizon on Makara
Sankranthi day.
As considerable concern has been expressed by the environmentalists, the
Committee  desire that the Travancore Devaswom Board, in accordance with the
Supreme Court directive,  should take utmost care to  protect the fragile ecosystem
of the area while carrying out development works in the allotted land.  All the works
to be executed in the allotted area should be of essential nature only and  strictly
done in accordance with the outline of the Master Plan and the detailed long-term
Master Plan to be formulated in due course, while keeping the flora and fauna of the
area intact.  The Committee would also expect the Travancore Devaswom Board
authorities to ensure that any commercial exploitation of the allotted land does not
take place in the area at any cost.
82. The Committee note that the Outline of the Sabarimala Master Plan envisages
several projects and schemes in the Sabarimala region which inter-alia include
schemes for sewage, sanitation and drinking water.  These projects are proposed to
be  taken up on both the short-term and the medium-term basis and these are linked
to the Pampa River Action Plan, which is a separate centrally sponsored scheme
under the National River Control Directorate of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests, entailing reduction of  pollution in the  holy river Pampa, where pilgrims
take their ritualistic holy dip before visiting the shrine.  It is also the only source of
drinking water for the pilgrims.  It has been informed that the Union Ministry of
Environment and Forests  is mainly responsible for funding those elements of the
Pampa Action Plan which relate to the Sabarimala Master Plan and that sanctions
have been issued by the Ministry for funding those components which are to be taken
up immediately.  The Committee  desire that the Pampa Action Plan,  which has
significant schematic linkages with the Sabarimala Master Plan,  should be properly
dovetailed with  the related components of the Master Plan so that the development of
the region takes place in an integrated and holistic manner.  Steps should also be
taken to promote and ensure moisture-retention and raising of water-table in the
region so that ground-water can be developed and utilized as a source for the use of
pilgrims.  For this purpose, the Committee would like representatives from the
Ministry of Environment and Forests (National River Conservation Directorate) as
well as the Ministry of Water Resources (Central Ground Water Board) to be included
in the empowered Committees constituted at the State level to ensure proper
coordination with regard to the schemes under the Pampa Action Plan.
83. With a staggering number of pilgrims visiting the Sabarimala shrine every
day during the pilgrim season from November to January, crowd management and
regulation assumes top priority  for the local Administration.   In this connection,
the Committee recall the stampede in the year 2000 in which 52 lives were lost.
Strangely enough, the authorities did not bother to take requisite steps to improve
the situation, leave alone the measures for disaster prevention, until the matter
came up before this Committee.     According to the Travancore Devaswom Board, a
crisis management team exists  with District Collectors of the concerned areas as

30
its Members. It has also been informed now that the outline of the Sabarimala Master
Plan provides for queue complexes as a medium/long-term intervention for crowd
management.  While underlining the seriousness  of this issue as well as the fact
that the steps taken hitherto in this regard were grossly insufficient, the Committee
would strongly recommend enforcement measures including adoption of modern
disaster management  techniques in order to ensure a smooth and incident-free
pilgrimage.   They further recommend that  a well-equipped disaster management
cell should  be set up in the Travancore Devaswom Board to oversee the proper
implementation of all disaster-prevention measures.
84. The Committee have been seized of this matter for almost two years and have
been concerned about the problems faced by the pilgrims due to lack of basic amenities
in the area.  They have been urging  the concerned agencies, namely the Union
Ministry of Environment and Forests, the State Government of Kerala and the
Travancore Devaswom Board to work together and coordinate among themselves
with a view to making Sabarimala pilgrim-friendly.   To begin with,  the Committee
presented a Preliminary Report on the subject so as to bring to the notice of the
Parliament the problems faced by the Sabarimala Pilgrims and the immediate steps
required to alleviate the same.  After this Preliminary Report and subsequent
examination by the Committee of the various issues involved, the concerned
authorities sprung into action and the requisite land for the base camp at Nilackal
and  the Pampa – Sannidhanan area has been cleared and handed over to the
Travancore Devaswom Board. In the meantime, the Outline of the Sabarimala Master
Plan  has been prepared and approved by the Ministry of Environment and Forests,
Government of Kerala and The Travancore Devaswom Board.  The Travancore
Devaswom Board is now in a position to implement the short-term measures by way
of immediate interventions specified in the Outline to the Master Plan.  Further, a
detailed Master Plan for medium as well as long term measures is being prepared
and would be ready only by July, 2006. The Committee desire that they should be
apprised about the details of the Master Plan and the specific steps taken to
operationalise the Plan.  The Committee now vide this Report  have stressed the
need for timely completion of immediate interventions as outlined in the Master
Plan.  The Committee will  continue to closely watch the execution of these immediate
interventions and the progress made thereon.  The preparation, approval and
commencement of  the implementation of the full-fledged Master Plan will also
continue to be monitored by the Committee until the issues taken up by them are
resolved and taken to their logical conclusion.  The Committee may like to give a
final Report on the subject in due course after making an on-the-spot appraisal, if
necessary.
N
EW DELHI;     PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
17 November, 2005              Chairman,
26 Kartika, 1927 (Saka)            Public Accounts Committee.

PART II
MINUTES  OF  THE  TENTH  SITTING  OF  THE   PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)   HELD  ON   21ST   DECEMBER,  2004
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1730 hrs. on 21 December, 2004 in Committee
Room No. 139, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra         — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Dr. M. Jagannath
4. Shri Naveen Jindal
5. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
6. Dr. R. Senthil
7. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
8. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
9. Dr. K. Malaisamy
10. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment & Forests
1. Dr. Pradipto Ghosh — Secretary
2. Shri N.K. Joshi — Director General (Forests) &
Special Secretary
31

32
3. Dr. Rajesh Gopal — Inspector General Forests & Director
(Project Tiger)
4. Shri Naresh Dayal — Addl. Secretary
Representatives of the State Government of Kerala
1. Shri B.S Corrie — Chief Wild Life Warden
2. Dr. V .S. Varghese — Chief Conservator of Forests
Representatives of the Travancore Devaswom Board (TDB)
1. Shri G. Raman Nair — President (TDB)
2. Shri E. Bharat Bhushan — Principal Secretary (TDB)
3. Shri C.G. Sachidanadan — Commissioner (TDB)
2. At the outset, the Chiarman welcomed all the Members of the Committee and the
witnesses representing Ministry of Environment & Forests, State Government of Kerala
and Devaswom Board to the sitting of the Public Accounts Committee. The Chairman
also extended hearty welcome to Shri Naveen Jindal on his election to PAC. The
Chairman then apprised the Members about the background of the Preliminary report
of the Committee (63rd Report of PAC—13th Lok Sabha) relating to “Pilgrimage to
Sabarimala—Human Problems and Ecology", which was presented to Parliament on
5th February, 2004 by the predecessor Committee. He also informed the Members that
the presdecessor Public Accounts Committee had visited the temple shrine at
Sabarimala on 13-14 January, 2004 to get a closer view of the problems faced by
pilgrims who visit the temple in millions during the pilgrim season. The Chairman gave
a brief account of the observations and recommendations made by the Committee in
their Preliminary Report. Thereafter, the Committee took the evidence of the represen-
tatives of Union Ministry of Environment & Forests, Officers of State Government of
Kerala and Travancore Devaswom Board on the issues arising out of 63rd Report
(A Preliminary Report) regarding “Pilgrimage to Sabarimala—Human Problems and
Ecology.”
3. Since the Chairman, PAC had to attend a meeting called by Hon'ble Speaker, he
left the sitting of the Committee in mid-way and authorized Dr. M. Jagannath to Chair
the remaining part of the sitting.
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
5. The Committee informed the witnesses that they would undertake a visit to
Cochin next month and would hold further discussion with officials of the Government
as well as the representatives of the Devaswom Board on the subject. The Committee
intended to undertake a study tour during January, 2005 to some other places
including Cochin in connection with subjects under their examination.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES  OF  THE  THIRD  SITTITNG  OF   THE  PUBLIC   ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2005-2006)   HELD  ON   30TH  JUNE,  2005
The Committee sat from 1600 to 1715 hours on 30th June, 2005 in Committee
Room 'C', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Shri Brajesh Pathak
6. Shri Madal Lal Sharma
7. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
8. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
9. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri R.K. Dhawan
12. Shri V . Narayanasamy
13. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
14. Shri Jairam Ramesh
15. Prof. R.B.S. Verma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Ministry of Environment and Forests
1. Dr. Prodipto Ghosh — Secretary
2. Shri Naresh Dayal — Addl. Secretary
33

34
Representatives of the State Government of Kerala
1. Shri E.K. Bharat Bhushan — Principal Secretary
2. Shri L. Radhakrishnan — Secretary, Deptt. of Forests and Wild Life
Representatives of Travancore Devaswom Board, Kerala
1. Shri G. Raman Nair — President
2. Shri C.G. Sachidanandan — Commissioner
2. To begin with, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and informed them
about the retirement of Shri P.D.T. Achary, Secretary that day. The Committee then
placed on record their appreciation of the services rendered by Shri Achary for the
Lok Sabha Secretariat in general and the Public Accounts Committee in particular.
3. Thereafter, the representatives of the Ministry of Environment & Forests,
Government of India, State Government of Kerala and Travancore Devaswom Board
were called and the Committee took their oral evidence on the issues arising out of
63rd Report (A Preliminary Report) of Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha)
relating to "Pilgrimage to Sabarimala-Human Problem and Ecology" as well as the
pgoress achieved by them on various issues raised by the Committee during previous
oral evidence held on the subject.
4. As the evidence remained inconclusive, the Committee decided to take further
oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Environment & Forests,
officials of State Government of Kerala and Travancore Devaswom Board on the same
subject on 14 July, 2005.
5. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES  OF  THE  FIFTH  SITTING  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)   HELD   ON  14th   JULY ,  2005
The Committee sat from 1600 to 1700 hours on 14th July, 2005 in Room No. "139",
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
4. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
5. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
6. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
9. Dr. K. Malaisamy
10. Shri V . Narayanasamy
11. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
12. Prof. R.B.S. V erma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Representatives of Ministries/Departments/Organisations
Ministry of Environment & Forests
1. Shri Naresh Dayal — Addl. Secretary
2. Shri R.K. Vaish — Joint Secretary
3. Shri R.P.S. Katwal — Addl. DGF (Wild Life)
4. Shri G.K. Prasad — Addl. DGF (Forest Conservation)
35

36
5. Shri Jagdish Kiswan — IGF (Forest Conservation)
6. Dr. Rajesh Gopal — IGF & Director (Project Tiger)
State Government of Kerala
1. Shri Harihara Mahadevan — Additional Secretary, Devaswom
Department
2. Shri V. Gopinathan — Chief Conservator of Forests (Wildlife)
3. Shri P.K. Bharadwaj — Director, Project Tiger, Kottayam
Travancore Devaswom Board, Kerala
1. Shri G . Raman Nair — President
2. Shri Punalur Madhu — Member
3.  Shri M.B. Sreekumar — Member
4. Shri C.G. Sachidanandan — Commissioner
Consultants from M/s. Eco-Smart
1.  Shri Mahesh Babu
2.  Shri Chetan Zaveri
3. Ms. Sapna Rastogi
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members and the officials from the
Ministry of Environment & Forests, State Government of Kerala and Travancore
Devaswom Board (TDB) to the sitting, which was convened to take further oral
evidence on the points arising out of 63rd Report (13th Lok Sabha) of PAC relating to
"Pilgrimage to Sabarimala-Human problems and ecology".
3. Thereafter, consultants from ECOSMART, the agency which has prepared the
Master Plan for the development of infrastructure and facilities around Sabarimala,
made an audio-visual presentation to the Committee on the outline of the Master Plan,
highlighting various facilities proposed to be developed and the progress made thereon
so far. The representatives of the Ministry of Environment & Forests, Kerala
Government and the Travancore Devaswom Board then explained various points
relating to the subject and responded to queries raised by the Chairman and the
Members of the Committee. The representatives of the Travancore Devaswom Board
assured the Committee that as a short-term measure, requisite facilities like drinking
water, toilets, medical assistance, parking space and shelters will be developed and
provided for the pilgrims before the season which would begin in November this year.
The Committee expressed the view that they might visit the Shrine before the pilgrim
season so as to see for themselves the steps taken in this regard.
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE THIRTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2005-2006) HELD ON 14TH NOVEMBER, 2005
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. on 14th November, 2005 in Committee
Room 'C' Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Dr. M. Jagannath
4. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
5. Shri R.K. Dhawan
6. Dr. K. Malaisamy
7. Shri V . Narayanasamy
8. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
9. Shri Jairam Ramesh
10. Prof. R.B.S. V erma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1.  Shri U. Bhattacharya — ADAI (RC)
2. Dr. A.K. Banerjee — DG of A udit
3. Shri Roy Mathrani — Pr. Director (AB)
4. Shri R.K. Ghose — AG (Audit), Delhi
37

38
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development
1. Shri Anil Baijal — Secretary
2.  Shri P.K. Pradhan — Joint Secretary
3. Smt. Neena Garg — Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser
Representatives of Delhi Development Authority
1. Shri A.K. Patnaik — Finance Member
2. Shri V .K. Sadhoo — Pr. Commissioner
Representatives of Department of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi
1. Ms. Reena Ray — Secretary (Edu.)
2. Shri Vijay Kumar — Director (Edu.)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC  welcomed the Members and Audit Officers to
the sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee observed silence for a minute in memory of Shri K.R. Narayanan,
former President of India as a mark of respect to the  departed soul.
4.  Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration the following Draft
Reports:—
(i) "Pilgrimage to Sabarimala —Human Problems and Ecology".
(ii) C&AG's Report No. 3 of 2004 relating to "National AIDS Control Programme."
(iii) "Excesses Over V oted  Grants and Charged Appropriations (2003-04)".
(iv) Action Taken on 46th Report (13th Lok Sabha) relating to "Procurement of
Defective Sleeping Bags".
(v) Action Taken on 58th Report (13th Lok Sabha) Relating to "Excesses Over
V oted Grants and Charged Appropriations (2001-02)".
5. Barring Report on "National AIDS Control Programme", the Committee  adopted
all the Draft Reports without any changes. As regards, draft Report on "National AIDS
Control Programme", the Committee after some deliberation adopted the same subject
to some minor additions. The Committee, then authorised the Chairman to finalise
these Draft Reports in the light of changes suggested by Audit through factual verifi-
cation, if any, or otherwise and to present the same to Parliament.
6. ***  ***  *** ***
7 . *** *** *** ***
8 . *** *** *** ***
9. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
OBSERVATIONS  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/Department Observations and  Recommendations
No. No. concerned
12 3 4
1. 6 5 Introduction Shri Dharma Sashtha temple at Sabarimala in the
State of Kerala, where the presiding deity is Lord
Ayyappa, is situated on a hill-top in a dense
forest in the souther most part of the Periyar
Wild Life sanctuary in the Western Ghats. This
internationally famous shrine, believed to be of
great antiquity, attracts millions of pilgrims
cutting across religions, castes and classes,
exhibiting the remarkable instance of communal
harmony and national integration. According
to the Travancore Devaswom Board, the
statutory body responsible for the management
of the shrine, about 3  crore pilgrims visited the
shrine during the festival season beginning from
November 15, 2003 and ending on 14th January,
2004. The number of pilgrims has been steadily
increasing over the years as people have an
unflinchin faith that Lord Ayyappa fulfills all
their wishes and aspirations which inspires
them to make frequent visits to Sabarimala.
No wonder, Sabarimala has acquired the status
of a major pilgrim centre.
2. 66 Government of Kerala Surprisingly, a pilgrims centre of such great
and Travancore significance and popularity attracting a large
Devaswom Board number of devotees from all over the country
lacks even basic  facilities like clean  drinking
water, hygienic food, medical facilities, shelters,
dormitories and toilets. This state of affairs has
continued unattended over the years causing
avoidable suffering to the pilgrims, several of
whom undertake the pilgrimage year after year.
The Committee believe that efforts required to
mitigate the suffering of pilgrims wherever
possible within the available resources did not
39

40
seem to have been made over the years by the
State Government and the Devaswom Board.
Inspire of having enough resources at their
command, the Devaswom Board could not
provide even basic facilities like temporary
toilets, shelters, drinking water and normal
medical facilities to the pilgrims under the pretext
of non-availability of requisite land for
development. The fact that timely steps were
not taken by the Travancore Devaswom Board
and the Government of Kerala despite the
magnitude of the problem is nothing but
regrettable.
3. 67 Ministry of Whatever steps have now been sought to be
Environment and initiated to create the basic facilities at
Forests,  Government Sabarimala were done only after the Public
of Kerala and Accounts Committee took notice Accounts
Travancore Committee took notice  of the genuine problems
Devaswom Board faced by pilgrims and decided to examine to the
issue in all its dimensions. This subject relating
to the problems faced by the devotees for a
pilgrimage to Sabarimala Shrine first came up
before the Public Accounts Committee in
October, 2003, dring the course of a discussion
at Kochi with the officials of the Union  Ministry
of Environment and Forests and the Government
of Kerala regading faunal surveys in the Periyar
Tiger  Sanctuary. It was then brought to the
Committee's notice that the Forest  Department
did not allow the Sabarimala Shrine authorities
to undertake any kind of repairs, maintenance
or development work in the area surrounding
the Shrine due to its location on the peripheral
areas of the Periyar Wild Life  Sanctuary
although there was an urgent need to develop
the area of  mitigate the problems of the pilgrims.
The Committee were given to understand by
the Travancore Devaswom Board that
proposals for creating infrastructure to develop
proper facilities for the pilgrims were rejected
by the Government on the ground of
"conservation of ecology and wild life", despite
the fact that no faunal survey was carried out in
12 3 4

41
the area for several years. The Travancore
Devaswom Board lamented that lack of even
basic amenities for the ever-growing number of
pilgrims around the temple area created serious
problems of spatial and logistical management
resulting in avoidable suffering to the pilgrims,
particularly while trekking their way to the Shrine
on a steep hill track.
4. 68 Ministry of Considering the importance of the subject and
Environment and the magnitude of the problem, the Committee
Forests, Government thought it proper to visit the Sabarimala Shrine
of Kerala and in the peak pilgrim season in January, 2004 to
Travancore see for themselves the nature and extent of the
Devaswom Board problems faced by the pilgrim there. During their
visit, they noticed the plight of pilgrims coming
from different parts of the country, who had
congregated in large numbers to pay their
obeisance to Lord Ayyappa on Makara
Sankranthi day. The Committee during the
journey up the hill saw countless number of
devotees sleeping on hard ground in the forest
at night without any protective roof along hilly
footpath. Further, they noticed total lack of clean
drinking water or hygienic food availabe to
them. The tracks were too narrow to bear the
massive flow of pilgrims. The infrastructure
available in the temple precincts was extremely
spares. In view of the alarming nature of the
problems faced by the pilgrims visiting the holy
Shrine and due to the lackaisical approach
hitherto adopted by the authorities to provide
a viable solution, the Committee had an
apprehension that the prevailing condition at
Sabarimala may lead to a major tragedy similar
to the stampede in the year 2000 in which
52 persons had died. The Committee, therefore,
considered it appropriate the necessary to bring
the matter to the urgent notice of Parliament by
way of a Preliminary Report on the subject.
5. 69 -do- Before finalizing their Preliminary Report on the
subject, the Committee had taken into account
the written notes submitted by the Travancore
Devaswom Board and the Kerala Government
12 3 4

42
apart from their oral submissions made before
the Committee at Sabarimala. In this connection,
the Travancore Davaswom Board had
submitted a note to the Committee stating inter-
alia that prior to promulgation of the Forest
(Conservation) Act of 1980, the Devaswom
Board culd provide adequate facilities to the
lakhs of pilgrims visiting the Shrine. But therefter,
the situation had changed as the State Forest
Department did not even consider the legitimate
rights and privileges of the Devaswom Board
with regard to utilisation of even the area under
their little (13.35 acres), not to mention the area
under lease and possession (168.35 acres) and
the area under permission (60.00 acres). The
Board submitted that since the temple was
situated in the southernmost fringe of the
Periyar Tiger Reserve, it is easy and practicable
to delink 500 hectares of forest land from the
Tiger Reserve. The representatives of the
Government  of Kerala, took the position that
what was needed at Sabarimala was a sensible
and humanitarian approach, which could solve
the problems of both humans and nature. They
informed that the Supreme Court in WPC No.
212/2001 had directed the Central and State
Governments and the Devaswom Board not to
carry out any non-forest activity at Sabarimala.
Which were not permitted by the Central
Government under the Forest ( Conservation )
Act. Taking into account both the submissions
and the ground realities noticed by the
Committee during their on-the-spot visit, a
Preliminary Report on the subject was thus
finalized and presented to Parliament.
6. 70 Ministry of The Committee in their Preliminary Report had
Environment and suggested certain measures which  inter-alia
Forests, Government included de-linking the Sabarimala temple area
of Kerala and from the Preiyar Wildlife Sanctuary and the
Travancore Devaswom subsequent long-term development of the area
Board on the basis of a Master Plan in Consonance
with the Broader considerations of the ecology
of the region. The Committee had opined that
Sabarimala could be developed like Vaishno
12 3 4

43
Devi Temple or other major pilgrim centres in
the country. As the long-term development was
bound to take some time, it was emphasized
that certain short-term measures should be
expeditiously taken to alleviate the sufferings
of the pilgrims.
7. 71 Ministry of Responding  to  the  suggestions  of  the
Environment Committee  in  their  Preliminary  Report,  the
and Forests, Ministry of Environment and Forests  in  their
Government of Kerala Action Take Notes stated that the problems
and Travancore faced by the pilgrims can be addressed by
Devaswom Board evolving a holistic Master Plan for facilitating
Sabarimala pilgrims visitation including
institutional mechanisms for day-to-day
management and crowd regulation as-well-as
by creating a high level coordination mechanism
under the control of the State Government of
Kerala for implementing the Master Plan. The
Ministry also asked the State Government to
take a view vis-a-vis  the environmental
clearance required under the Forest
(Conservation) Act,1980 for transferring forest
land to the Travancore Devaswom Board, the
statutory body for managing the affairs of the
Sabarimala Shrine. The Travancore Devaswom
Board, while explaining their position in this
matter, indicated that Sabarimala area, situated
in the southern most part of the Periyar Tiger
Reserve, was actually in the buffer zone and
therefore it would be very much possible to de-
link the requried area for development works
from the Sanctuary and transfer the same to the
Devaswom Board, while adding sufficient
substitute area from the nearby forest. The
Devaswom Board assured that they would
undertake to protect the entire area that would
be allotted to them in an eco-friendly manner
with the least disturbance to the flora and fauna
existing there.
8. 72 Ministry of The Committee were suprised that the Ministry
Environment of Evironment and Forests in their Action Taken
and Forests, and Replies conveniently avoided the main issue
Government of  Kerala of  de-linking the requisite area from the Periyar
Wild Life Sanctuary to facilitate development
12 3 4

44
works in the area. Neither was there any mention
about the short-term measures to be initiated to
alleviate the suffering of the pilgrims on account
of lack of toilet facilities clean water, food,
medical facilities etc. as had been desired by
the  Committee. Instead the Ministry merely
asked the State Government to examine the
issues and take a view vis-a-vis the clearance
under Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980. There
was also no response from the State
Government in this regard. The committee was
thus inclined to conclude that the response of
the Ministry of Environment and Forests was
unsatisfactory and rather vague and it failed to
address the core concerns expressed by the
Committee in their Preliminary Report. This
strengthened the Committee's  resolve to have
the matter examined further with a view to
making the concerned authorities realize the
urgency and importance of the concrete steps
to be taken in the matter. Accordingly the
Committee decided to discuss the issues in
detail with the representatives of the Union
Ministry of Environment  and Forests, State
Government of Kerala and the Travancore
Devaswom Board.
9. 73 Ministry of During the first oral evidence held in December
Environment and 2004 the Ministry of Environment and Forests
Forests, Government submitted that the situation at Sabarimala
of Kerala and warranted regulation of flow of pilgrims through
Travancore a holistic " Master Plan"drawn by professio-
Devaswom  Board nals, which should also include institutional
mechanism for day-to-day management.The
Committee were given to understand that the
"outline of the Master Plan for Sabarimala", to
take care of the next 50 years, was prepared by
a professional agency, namely. M/s Ecosmart
of India Ltd., Mumbai at the instance of the
State Government of Kerala. It was explained
that the Master Plan outline mainly with the
twin issues of pilgrim-management and crowd-
regulation. As the entire pressure of the
pilgrimage is being felt on two spots only, namely
12 3 4

45
Pampa (the foothill) and the Sannidhanam
(sanctum sanctorum), it was proposed to de-
congest this area under the Master Plan outline
and develop peripheral areas such as Erimeli,
Vandiperiyar and Nilackal as base camps to
accommodate the rush of pilgrims and regulate
their movement towards Pampa and the
Sannidhanam. For this purpose, a rapid shuttle
service was being proposed to transport
pilgrims from the primary base camp at Nilackal
to Pampa and back with the provision for a token
system for 'darshan'.
10. 74 Ministry of Following this oral evidence, the Committee did
Environment and not hear anything on the subject from the
Forests, Government Ministry of Environment & Forests or the
of Kerala and Government of Kerala for about six months. They
Travancore then decided to call them again to apprise
Devaswom Board themselves of progress, if any, made by them in
the matter. On receipt of a communication from
the Committee in this regard, the Ministry of
Environment & Forests furnished a written note
dated 20.06.2005 stating that they have given
in principle approval for 110.524 hectares of
forest land at Nilackal for the base camp and
the Standing Committee of the National Board
for Wildlife had given their constent for using
12.675 hectares of Periyar Tiger Reserve land in
the Pampa - Sannidhanam area. The Committee
were also informed by the Ministry that parallel
processing of the case ( 12.675 hectares ) under
the Forest ( Conservation ) Act, 1980 shall be
taken up them after receipt of proposal from the
State Government. In this connection, it was
informed that as the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
India has imposed a ban on diversion of forest
land in National Parks and Sanctuaries, the user
agency, namely Travancore Devaswom Board
was required to obtain case-specific permission
from the Apex Court for this purpose. Obviously,
the Ministry of Environment & Forests woke
up only after the Committee pursued the matter
further and decided to take stock of the progress
made by them in this regard. Subsequently
12 3 4

46
during the evidence held in June-July, 2005, the
Committee were given to understand that the
‘Outline of the Sabarimala Master Plan' has
since been accorded approval by all concerned
authorities, which in fact implied that the Outline
of the Sabarimala Master Plan had acquired the
necessary status to set the stage for the holistic
development of the Sabarimala region.
11. 75 Ministry of The Committee note that broadly there are two
Environment and stages proposed in the outline of the Master
Forests, Government Plan and its eventual development into a full
of Kerala and fl edged Master Plan, namely, (i) Immediate
Travancore interventions by January, 2006 to upgrade  the
Devaswom Board present level of services i.e. pilgrim
management, parking facilities, solid waste
management, water and sanitation facilities,
health care etc. to improve the current situation
and the setting up of a base camp at Nilackal (ii)
Medium and long term interventions upto the
year 2015 & 2050 respectively to implement
infrastructural proposals including select Pampa
River Action Plan proposals  with required
technical inputs. This includes further
development of main base camp at Nilackal
establishing transit camps along the pilgrimage
route in Uppupara, Erimeli and V andiperiyar,
improvement in trek routes, Shuttle services,
Queue Complex, Jyothi viewing points,
emergency & disaster management and rope
way for transportation of goods.
12. 76 -do- W ith regard to the provision of funds to
undertake construction and other works as
proposed in the outline of the Master Plan, the
Committee note that the Devaswom Board have
stated that they are capable of bearing the
expenditure for short and medium term
interventions. In this connection, the Committee
feel that the cost for short term schemes/
projects, which are required before the pilgrims
season begins in November, may not be much.
However, the Committee believe that the medium
and long term interventions, for which detailing
12 3 4

47
is yet to be done, may require substantial funds.
The Committee therefore, expect that the
Ministry of Environment and Forests and
Government of Kerala may extend all possible
financial  assistance and the cooperation to the
Devaswom Board to mobilize the requisite funds.
Efforts may also be made to examine the
feasibility of building a corpus  out of
sponsorships, donations from pilgrims etc. in
order to ensure that the implementation of the
proposed Sabarimala Master Plan does not
suffer on account of paucity of funds.
13. 77 Ministry of The Committee have been informed that the
Environment and implementation of the outline of the Sabarimala
Forests, Government Master  Plan  during  the   short-term   has
of Kerala and commenced under the aegis of the Travancore
Travancore Devaswom  Board,  which  is  the  designated
Devaswom Board nodal agency for this purpose. The Travancore
Devaswom Board have contended that they
have the wherewithal to implement the
Sabarimala Master Plan. The Committee,
however, feel that since the Master Plan is a
gigantic project involving several works and
schemes, both over the medium-term (upto 2015)
and the long-term (upto 2050), clarity of purpose
coupled with very sound and efficient
organizational capabilities are necessary for its
smooth implementation. Even though the
Travancore Devaswom Board have assured the
Committee that they are capable of
implementing the proposed Sabarimala Master
Plan, the Committee feel that considering this
ambitious project, it would be better if the
Devaswom Board involves professional and
competent agencies for the implementation of
the Master Plan so that the project is completed
timely and successfully.  As the implementation
of the Master Plan may involve different
Departments/Agencies of the State Government
as well as outside agencies, the Committee
apprehend that coordination among them may
pose a problem. They would, therefore, urge
the Government of Kerala to extend all possible
12 3 4

48
technical and material help required by the
Travancore Devaswom Board to meet the
onerous responsibility undertaken by them. The
Committee also desire that the Government
should consider conferring statutory status to
the proposed Sabarimala Master Plan by
enacting a State Act for this purpose with a
view to providing the necessary legal sanction
for its smooth and expeditious implementation,
particularly since the Master Plan covers a wide
time-span of 50 years involving steady
financing and effective inter-departmental
coordination.
14. 78 Ministry of In their Preliminary Report, the Committee had
Environment and recommended that a Committee consisting of
Forests, Government the  Minister  of  Environment  and  Forests,
of Kerala and Government of India, the Minister of Forests
Travancore and the Minister of Devaswom, Government of
Devaswom Board Kerala should be constitued at the apex level to
give necessary impetus to the process of
development of Sabarimala. The Committee,
however, note that instead of constituting a high
level political body suggested by them, only a
coordination Committee comprising of officials
at the state level has been constituted by the
Government of Kerala under the Chairmanship
of the Chief Secretary, with the President,
Travancore Devaswom Board and
representatives from different Departments as
Members. Further they note that at the working
level, another Committee comprising of various
officials under the Chairmanship of the Principal
Secretary, Devaswom Department has been
constituted to monitor the implementation of
the projects/schemes envisaged in the Master
Plan outline. The Committee feel that the two-
tier arrangement presently made at the State
level for monitoring the implementation of the
proposed Master Plan is rather inadequate and
thus, needs to be suitably upgraded. They
desire that at the first level, a Committee under
the Chairmanship of the Minister, Devaswom
to facilitate decision-making may be constituted
12 3 4

49
and another Committee may be formed at the
working level with the Chief Secretary as the
Chairman and the Principal Secretaries of all
concerned Departments as Members for regular
monitoring and control of the implementation.
The Committee believe that such an
arrangement will facilitate necessary political
as well as administrative impetus to the
implementation of the Sabarimala Master Plan.
The Travancore Devaswom Board, the
statutory body responsible for the affairs of
Sabarimala and the implementation of the
Master Plan should work under the guidance
of the two-tier Committees proposed above.
15. 79 Ministry of The Committee  note  that  the  Master  Plan
Environment and outline envisages development of a base camp
Forests, Government at Nilackal, which is about 17 kms from Pampa,
of Kerala and the foothill. The requisite land for this purpose
Travancore (110.524 hectors) was allotted to the Travancore
Devaswom Board Devaswom Board by the State Government. The
Committee are given to understand that the
Government of Kerala have charged a price as
Net Present Value for the land transferred to the
Devaswom Board at Nilackal for the base camp,
as according to them the nature of land
transferred to them at Nilackal was forest land
and that it was done in accordance with the
guidelines of the Ministry of Environment and
Forests. Keeping in view the larger public
interest the Committee would like the Ministry
of Environment & Forests and the State
Government of Kerala to examine the feasibility
of treating the transferred land at Nilackal as
"Revenue land" instead of "Forest land" and
consider waiver of the price charged as "Net
Present V alue".
16. 80 -do- At the instance of the Committee, the
Travancore Devaswom Board had given an
assurance during the oral evidence that they
would be in a position to complete the immediate
interventions envisaged in the Master Plan
outline before the ensuing pilgrim season. As
12 3 4

50
the Sabarimala long-term Master Plan was to be
ready only by July 2006, the Committee were
anxious that atleast the immediate interventions
proposed in the Master Plan outline should be
completed in time before the ensuing pilgrim
season. Consequently the Committee undertook
a study visit to Kochi/Sabarimala from 18-20
October 2005 for an on-the-spot appraisal of
the progress made in the creation of the
proposed facilities by way of immediate
interventions for the pilgrims. The Committee
noticed that the construction of basic facilities
like toilets, drinking water pipelines, parking
space for vehicles, shelters, sanitation has been
initiated by the Travancore Devaswom Board
at Nilackal, where abase camp is being
developed for the pilgrims. According to the
Travancore Devaswom Board the land at
Nilackal was transferred to them only in
September and they are trying their best to
complete these works before the beginning of
the pilgrim season. The Committee would expect
the Travancore Devaswom Board to fulfill the
commitment made by them with regard to the
immediate interventions at the base camp.
Furthermore the Committee would like to
emphasize that no untoward incident should
happen due to the presence of staggering
number of pilgrims expected to congregate in
the shrine this season. They therefore desire
that the Travancore Devaswom Board should
also take immediate disaster-prevention
measures for the ensuing pilgrim season
pending the commencement of pojects over the
medium/long-term.
17. 81 Ministry of Apart from the base camp, the outline of the
Environment and Sabarimala Master Plan also envisages
Forests, Government development of certain facilities on the way from
of Kerala and Pampa (the foothill) enroute the Sannidhanam
Travancore (the temple complex) like the Queue Complex,
Devaswom Board Cardiology Units, drinking water facilities,
widening of trekking paths, sewage treatment
12 3 4

51
plants etc. In this connection, the Committee
note that the Supreme Court vide their order
dated 26th August 2005, in response to the
Special Leave Petition filed by the Devaswom
Board has directed the Union Ministry of
Environment and Forests to grant permission
to the Board to divert 12.675 hectares of land
in the Periyar Tiger  Reserve for the development
of road and for providing infrastructure
facilities for pilgrim visiting the Sabarimala
Shrine.  However during their recent visit to
Sabarimala on 18th October, 2005, the
representative of the Devaswom Board informed
that the final clearance for the transfer of the
aforesaid land had not been given till then by
the Ministry of Environment and Forests and
the Government of Kerala. While taking a
serious view of the delay in effecting the transfer
of the requisites land and the lack of proper
coordination between the Union Ministry and
the State Government the Committee directed
the representatives of both the Union Ministry
and the Forest Department, Government of
Kerala to take immediate action in the matter so
that the proposed works to develop basic
facilities in the Pampa Sannidhanam area can
be executed without further delay. The
Committee understand that on 18th October
2005, the State Government sent the proposal
which was eventually cleared by the Ministry
of Environment and Forests on 24th October
2005.The Committee deprecate the delay on the
part of the Ministry of  Environment and Forests
and the Government of Kerala to give the final
clearance in the matter due to which it would
not be possible to alleviate the problems faced
by the pilgrims in the Pampa-Sannidhanam area
for the ensuing season. As the clearance has
finally been given, the Committee would now
expect the Travancore Devaswom Board to take
up the immediate interventions proposed in the
Master Plan outline at the temple area (Pampa-
Sannidhanam) in right earnest and execute the
12 3 4

52
works on a war footing so that a perceptible
change is visible in the temple area very soon.
The requisite facilities may include widening
the trekking tracks leading to the shrine,
broadening the "darshan" space available for
pilgrims and provision of alternate points for
viewing the auspicious "jyothi" in the distant
horizon on Makara Sankranthi day. As
considerable concern has been expressed by
the environmentalists, the  Committee desire
that the  Travancore Devaswom Board, in
accordance with the Supreme Court directive,
should take utmost care to protect the fragile
ecosystem of the area while carrying out
development works in the allotted land. All the
works to be executed in the allotted area should
be of essential nature only and strictly done in
accordance with the outline of the Master Plan
and the detailed long-term Master Plan to be
formulated in due course, while keeping the flora
and fauna of the area intact. The Committee
would also expect the Travancore Devaswom
Board authorities to ensure that any commercial
exploitation of the allotted land does not take
place in the area at any cost.
18. 82 Ministry of The Committee note that the Outline of the
Environment and Sabarimala Master Plan envisages several
Forests, Government projects and schemes in the Sabarimala region
of Kerala and which inter-alia include schemes for sewage,
Travancore sanitation and drinking water. These projects
Devaswom Board are proposed to be taken up on both the short-
term and medium-term basis and these are linked
to the Pampa River Action Plan, which is
separate centrally sponsored scheme under the
National River Control Directorate of the
Ministry of Environment and Forests entailing
reduction of pollution in the holy river Pampa,
where pilgrims take their  ritualistic holy dip
before visiting the shrine. It is also the only
source of drinking water for the pilgrims. It has
been informed that the Union Ministry of
Environment and Forests is mainly responsible
for funding those elements of the Pampa Action
12 3 4

53
Plan which relate to the Sabarimala Master Plan
and that santions have been issued by the
Ministry for funding those components which
are to be taken up immediately. The Committee
desire that the Pampa Action Plan, which has
significant schematic linkages with the
Sabarimala Master Plan, should be properly
dovetailed with the related components of the
Master Plan so that the development of the
region takes place in an integrated and holistic
manner. Steps should also be taken to promote
and ensure moisture-retention and raising of
water-table in the region so that ground-water
can be developed and utilized as a source for
the use of pilgrims. For this purpose, the
Committee would like representatives from the
Ministry of Environment and Forests (National
River Conservation Directorate) as well as the
Ministry of Water Resources (Central Ground
Water Board) to be included in the empowered
Committees constituted at the State level to
ensure proper coordination with regard to the
schemes under the Pampa Action Plan.
19. 83 Government of Kerala With the staggering number of pilgrims visiting
and Travancore the Sabarimala shrine every day during the
Devaswom Board pilgrims season from November to January,
crowd management and regulation assumes top
priority for the local Administration. In this
connection, the Committee recall the stampede
in the year 2000 in which 52 lives were lost.
Strangely enough, the authorities did not bother
to take requisite steps to improve the situation,
leave alone the measures for disaster
prevention, until the matter came up before this
Committee. According to the Travancore
Devaswom Board, a crisis management team
exists with District Collectors of the concerned
areas as its Members. It has also been informed
now that the outline of the Sabarimala Master
Plan provides for queue complexes as a medium/
long-term intervention for crowd management.
While underlining the seriousness of this issue
12 3 4

54
as well as the fact that the steps taken hitherto
in this regard were grossly insufficient, the
Committee would strongly recommend
enforcement measures including adoption of
modern disaster management techniques in
order to ensure a smooth and incident-free
pilgrimage. They further recommend that a well-
equipped disaster management cell should be
set up in the Travancore Devaswom Board to
oversee the proper implementation of all
disaster-prevention measures.
20. 84 Ministry of The Committee have been seized of this matter
Environment and for almost two years and have been concerned
Forests, Government about the problmes faced by the pilgrims due
of Kerala and to lack of basic amenities in the area. They have
Travancore been urging theconcerned agencies,  namely
Devaswom Board the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests,
the  State Government of Kerala and the
Travancore Devaswom Board to work together
and coordinate among themselves with a view
to making Sabarimala pilgrim-friendly. To begin
with, the Committee presented a Preliminary
Report on the subject so as to bring to the notice
of the Parliament the problems faced by the
Sabarimala Pilgrims and the immediate steps
required to alleviate the same. After this
Preliminary Report and subsequent examination
by the Committee of the various issues
involved, the concerned authorities sprung into
action and the requisite land for the  base camp
at Nilackal and the Pampa-Sannidhanan area
has been cleared and handed over to the
Travancore Devaswom Board. In the meantime,
the Outline of the Sabarimala Master Plan has
been prepared and approved by the Ministry
of Environment and Forests, Government of
Kerala and The Travancore Devaswom Board.
The Travancore Devaswom Board is now in a
position to implement the short-term measures
by way of immediate interventions specified in
the Outline to the Master Plan. Further, a
detailed Master Plan for medium as well as long
12 3 4

55
12 3 4
term measures is being prepared and would be
ready only  by July, 2006. The Committee desire
that they should be apprised about the details
of the Master Plan and the specific steps taken
to operationalise the Plan. The Committee now
vide this Report have stressed the need for timely
completion of immediate interventions as
outlined in the Master Plan. The Committee will
continue to closely watch the execution of these
immediate interventions and the progress made
thereon. The preparation, approval and
commencement of the implementation of the
full-fledged Master Plan will also continue to
be monitored by the Committee until the issues
taken up by them are resolved and taken to
their logical conclusion. The Committee may
like to give a final Report on the subject in due
course after making an on-the-spot appraisal, if
necessary.
MGIPMRND—4745LS—31.01.2006.