68
CONCESSION MEANT FOR
SMALL SCALE INDUSTRIES
A V AILED OF BY LARGE SCALE
MANUFACTURERS
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2007-2008
SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

SIXTY-EIGHTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
CONCESSION MEANT FOR SMALL SCALE
INDUSTRIES A V AILED OF BY LARGE SCALE
MANUFACTURERS
[Action Taken on 41st Report of Public Accounts Committee
(14th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
Presented  to Lok Sabha  on 25-04-2008
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 25-04-2008
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
March, 2008/Chaitra, 1930 (Saka)

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2007-2008) ...................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report............................................................................................... . 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government ................................................................... 9
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not
desire  to   pursue   in   view   of   the   replies   received   from
the Government ......................................................................... 16
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations replies to which have not
been   accepted   by   the   Committee   and   which  require
reiteration .................................................................................. 20
C
HAPTER V  Observations / Recommendations   in   respect   of  which
Government have furnished  interim replies/no  replies .......... 21
PART-II
Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee (2007-08) held on
18.03.2008............................................................................................................... ... 22
APPENDIX
Statement of Observations and Recommendations........................................... 24

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2007 - 2008)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
14. Shri Kharabela Swain
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Prof. P.J. Kurien
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj*
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekhar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A.Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Anju Kukreja — Committee Office
*Resigned from membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9th January, 2008

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Sixty-eighth Report on action taken by the Government on the
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 41st Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on “Concession meant for Small Scale Industries availed of by Large
Scale Manufacturers”.
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 18th March, 2008. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the
Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with
the Committee.
 N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
25 March, 2008 Chairman,
5 Chaitra, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

P.A.C. No. 1869
Price : Rs. 30.00
© 2008 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok  Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and  Printed by the Manager, Government of India
Press, Minto Road, New Delhi — 110 002.

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee in their Forty-
first Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Paragraph 4.3 of the Report of the C&AG of India for
the year ended 31 March, 2004, No. 11 of 2005, Union Government (Indirect Taxes—
Central Excise and Service Tax) relating to “Concession meant for Small Scale
Industries availed of by Large Scale Manufacturers”.
2. The Forty-first Report (14th Lok Sabha) which was presented to Lok Sabha on
27th April, 2007 contained 8 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes
in respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises and Ministry of Finance (Department
of Revenue) and are broadly categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by the Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 and 6
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of Government replies:
Sl. Nos. 7 and 8
(iii) Observations/Recommendations replies to which have not been accepted by
the Committee and which require reiteration:
-NIL-
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
-NIL-
3. In their 41st Report on the subject, the Committee had examined the instance of
misuse of excise duty exemption scheme meant for Small Scale Industry. The scrutiny
of the subject by the Committee had revealed that the concession meant for small-
scale units were availed of by large scale manufacturers by taking advantage of the
clause in the scheme which excluded branded goods manufactured and cleared by
the units on behalf of another person from the value of clearances taken into account
for determining eligibility of the unit for the exemption/concession. Continued
retention of exclusion clause relating to branded and export goods thus enabled 278
large manufacturers to derive unintended benefit of duty exemption/concession which
amounted to Rs. 40.41 crore during the financial years from 1999-2000 to 2003-04.

2
Gist of Committee’s Observations/Recommendations
4. The Committee had made the following important Recommendations in their
41st Report on the subject:—
(i) Any fiscal concession for small-scale units including excise duty exemption
should be clearly focussed and there should not be any hidden provision
which gives benefit to non-small scale units.
(ii) Any fiscal incentive or concession such as the one for small-scale industries
should be followed up with a detailed evaluation to enable the Government to
assess the efficacy of such incentives in terms of growth of the targeted
sector vis-a-vis the revenue loss.
(iii) Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) should undertake a compre-
hensive study/review to ascertain the benefits, pitfalls, shortcomings and
instances of misuse noticed in the working of the excise duty exemption
scheme for small-scale sector in its present form, with a view to ensuring that
the policy of the Government subserves its purpose.
(iv) Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) should appoint an Inter-Minis-
terial Group comprising of representatives from both Ministries of Small Scale
Industries and Finance to monitor the administration of fiscal concessions to
small scale sector and to adopt a more balanced approach in the formulation
of policies for the small scale sector.
(v) Government were asked to have uniform definition of small scale industries
both from revenue and development perspective, based on the criteria of
investment limit in plant and machinery as well as turnover.
(vi) Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) should re-consider the feasi-
bility of making registration of small-scale units compulsory for availing
exemptions under the excise duty regime, as it will obviate the need for any
verification of the status of the unit by Central Excise Authorities. The
process of registration should be made as simple and transparent as possible
with usage of information technology.
5. Apprising the Committee about the various measures initiated to enhance the
productivity, efficiency and competitiveness of the small scale sector, the Ministry of
Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises have informed in their Action Taken Note as
under:—
“To help the Medium and Small Enterprises in meeting the challenges of
globalization, the Government has taken several initiatives and measures in
recent years. First and foremost among them is the enactment of the ‘Micro,
Small and Medium Enterprises Development Act, 2006’, which aims to
facilitate the promotion and development and enhance the competitiveness
of Micro, Small Medium Enterprises. The Act has come into force from
2nd October 2006. Other major initiatives taken by the Government are setting
up of the National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council and the National

3
Commission of Enterprises in the unorganized Sector. Further, in recognition
of the fact that delivery of credit continues to be a serious problem for Micro
and Small Enterprises, a ‘Policy Package for Stepping up Credit to Small and
Medium Enterprises was announced by the Government with the objective
to double the credit flow to the sector within a period of five years. The
Government has also announced a comprehensive package for promotion of
micro and small enterprises, which comprises the proposals/schemes having
direct impact on the promotion and development of the micro and small
enterprises, particularly in view of the fast changing economic environment.
In the Budget 2007-08, the excise exemption limit of Micro and Small Enterprise
Sector has been enhanced from Rs. 1 crore to Rs. 1.5 crore.”
6. While taking note of the efforts made by the Ministry of Micro, Small &
Medium Enterprises for overall growth of this sector, the Committee desire that
these measures should be constantly reviewed and re-formulated by carefully
analyzing their shortcomings and effective procedures set up for making the Small
Scale Industry Duty Exemption scheme more purposeful and focused so as to facilitate
the growth and development of Small Scale Sector and enhance their competitiveness
to meet the challenges of globalization.
Excise Duty concession to Small-Scale Sector
(Sl. No. 5, Para 43)
7. The Committee in their earlier Report on the subject had expressed their
unhappiness that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) had neither done
any evaluation of the revenue implication of their decision to exclude value of dutiable
branded goods from the aggregate value of clearances of goods, nor had they received
any feedback in this regard from revenue field formations on the revenue leakages
occurring due to this decision. They had, therefore, desired that since most of the
units under the small scale sector are actually tiny units, any fiscal concession including
excise duty exemption should be clearly focused and there should not be any hidden
provision which gives benefit to non-small scale units. The Committee had thus
asked the Government to apprise them about the quantum of revenue outgo arising
out of the exclusion clause in the scheme and the extent of its misuse by non-small
scale units.
The Committee had further noticed that the Ministry of Finance had also not
conducted any study or analysis so far to evaluate the impact of the small scale
exemption scheme in achievement of full capacity by the small scale sector or in
development of independent brands by this sector. While emphasizing that extension
of any incentive or concession should be followed up with a detailed evaluation to
enable the Department to assess the efficacy of such incentives in terms of growth of
the targeted sector, the Committee, had recommended that the Department of Revenue
should at least now undertake a comprehensive study/review to ascertain the benefits,
pitfalls, shortcomings and instances of misuse noticed in the working of the exemption
scheme, in its present form, at the ground level with a view to ensuring that the policy
of the Government subserves its purpose.

4
Action Taken by the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
8. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note while accepting the recommendation
of the Committee, have stated as follows:—
“While agreeing with observations of the Committee on the need to check
any misuse of fiscal concessions by the non-Micro and Small Enterprises,
the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises (MSMEs) would like
to emphasise that the provision regarding exclusion of value of  duitable
branded goods from the aggregate value of clearances of excisable goods
has helped in encouraging ancilliarisation by large scale units. The Ministry
of MSME is, therefore, of the view that this provision needs to be continued
to enable Micro and Small Enterprises (MSEs) graduate into medium
enterprises and for the overall growth of the sector. The Department of
Revenue may, however, put in place of fool-proof mechanism to check any
misuse of fiscal cocnessions by the non-MSEs.”
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
9. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) have also agreed to the
suggestion of the Committee and have in their Action Taken Note informed as under:—
(i) “The department has already asked the National Institute of Public Finance
& Policy (NIPFP) to carry out a cost-benefit analysis of the SSI exemption
scheme. The report of NIPFP is awaited.
(ii) However, as desired by the Committee, a Study Group has been constituted
to conduct a review of the exemption for small-scale industries. The Study
Group is headed by the Director General of Central Excise Intelligence (DGCEI),
Delhi, with the Additional Director General of Audit, Customs & Central Ex-
cise, Delhi, and the Additional Director, DGCEI, Delhi, as members. The report
of the Study Group is awaited.”
10. The Committee would like to be apprised about the findings of the Study
Group constituted by Government to review the Exemption Scheme and the corrective
action taken thereafter. The Study Group should also enquire into instances of
misuse of the exemption scheme and the quantum of revenue loss arising therefrom.
Needless to emphasise that Government  would take follow-up steps subsequently
for better enforcement of the exemption scheme and the Committee be apprised
accodingly.
Uniform definition for Small Scale Industries
(Sl. No. 7, Para 45)
11. In their original Report on the subject, the Committee had noted that there is
no difinition prescribed in the Central Excise Act, 1944 or Rules for defining a small
scale industry. The Ministry of Small Scale Industry has a prescribed definition for
small scale industries that the investment in plant and machinery should not be more
than Rs. 1 crore. The Committee had felt that giving a clear-cut definition for small
scale undertaking would actually help to prevent the misuse of the exemptions. They,

5
had therefore, recommended that there should be one uniform definition of small
scale industries both from revenue and development perspective, based on the criteria
of investment limit in plant and machinery as well as turnover.
Action Taken by the Minsitry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
12. In response to the aforesaid recommendation of the Committee the Ministry
of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprsies in their Action Taken Note have expressed
their views as follows:—
“With the passage of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development
(MSMED) Act, 2006, the Government has recognized two different kinds of
enterprises, viz., those involved in the production of goods (manufacturing
enterprises) and the others involved in rendering services (service
enterprises). The MSMED Act, 2006 also defines the micro, small and medium
enterprises, whether manufacturing or service, based on investment in plant
and machinery and equipment respectively, in a precise manner. The MSMED
Act, 2006 does not provide any definition based on turnover. It is, however,
emphasized that the excise exemption made available to the micro and small
enterprises (as defined under the MSMED Act, 2006) is perhaps the most
important incentive and facilitation given by the Government to the micro
and small enterprises. Any dilution of this incentive would have a deleterious
impact on their growth and promotion. The lowering of barriers for import
with the onset of the process of liberalization and globalisation, coupled
with the quick weaning away of the protection offered by measures like
reservation for exclusive manufacture by micro and small enterprise (where
currently the number of reserved items is only 114 as against 873 in 1984),
the micro and small entrepreneurs view the excise exemption as probably the
only important incentive or facilitation available to them. In fact, the Ministry
of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises has been persistently taking up the
issue of enhancing the turnover limit for eligibility, the exemption ceilings as
well as the restoration of the option to pay duty at a concessional rate of
60% of the normal duty in case CENVAT is availed by them.”
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
13. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) have stated their position
in this regard as under:—
“The recommendations of the Committee have been considered carefully. It
is felt that it may not be desirable to adopt a uniform definition of small scale
units both from revenue and development perspective. Two important
parameters for any taxation system are that it should be simple and easy to
understand by the taxpayer, and further, it should be easy to administer by
the tax department.
The SSI exemption scheme has a precise definition of small scale units,
namely, units having a turnover not exceeding Rs. 4 crore in the preceding

6
financial year. The definition is simple, and clearly ascertainable. This
definition is driven by the principle to guard against the availment of the SSI
exempion by units other than small scale units so defined. Adoption of a
uniform definition of small scale units for all purposes may be counter
productive, as the purposes for which such units are defined under various
laws are quite different.
Up to February 1986, SSI exemption was based on the criteria of investment
limit in plant and machinery and value of clearances. However, to carry out
valuation of machinery is difficult, particularly if second hand machinery is
used. It is also difficult to keep track of additional investments in plant and
machinery made from time to time. This definition was found to have given
rise to a number of disputes. As a result, after careful consideration, the
criterion of investment in plant and machinery (which was the same as the
adopted for development perspective) was done away with, in March 1986.
The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED) Act,
2006 defines a small enterprise as a unit having investment between Rs. 25
lakh and Rs. 5 crore. Taking a capital turnover ratio of 4, units having turnover
of Rs. 20 crore would also be classified as small enterprises. In fact, the
capital turnover ratio may also vary from industry to industry.
The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises has recently mooted
a proposal to do away with the restriction in equity participation in micro,
small and medium enterprises (not exceeding 25%) by a non-SSI or foreign
investor. This  effect would allow non-SSI units to have substantial interest
in SI units. Adoption of a uniform definition of SSI units both for revenue
and development perspective would thus allow non-SSI units to have SSI
benefits, and result in substantial negative effect on revenue.”
Registration of Small Scale units
(Sl. No. 8, Para 46)
14. The Committee had suggested in their earlier Report that registration of the
units will seek to ensure the genuineness of the unit availing excise duty exemptions.
They had, therefore, recommended that the Ministry of Finance  (Department of
Revenue) should re-consider the feasibility of making registration compulsory for
availing exemptions under the excise duty regime, as it will obviate the need for any
verification of the status of the unit by Central Excise Authorities. The Committee had
also remphasized that, the process of registration should be made as simple and
transparent as possible with usage of information technology.
Action Taken by the Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
15. The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises in their Action Taken
note stated as follows:—
“The process of registration of small scale industries has been replaced with
the much more friendly procedure of filing of an Entrepreneurs Memorandum
(EM) by a micro or small enterprise with the District Industries Centre (DIC)

7
concerned, under the provisions of the MSMED Act, 2006. There are no
mandatory inspections by DIC officials, nor are any verification required.
The form of EM is easily downloadable from the internet (besides being
available with the DICs) and the facts are only self-certified by the
entrepreneurs, on receipt of which the DIC is obliged to issue and
acknowledgement. The extremely low percentage of registered units in the
small scale industries of yore was a cause of concern. It is felt that in spite of
the simplification of the process, many micro and small enterprises may not
file an EM, since the same is optional for micro and small enterprises. The
Ministry of MSME believes that the Department of Revenue should not
make it mandatory for a micro and small enterprise to file an EM before
availing excise exemption, for the simple reason that such insistence (or
mandatory nature) would lead to coercion and may even add to the dreaded
‘Inspector Raj’ in the field, which may also lead to corruption.”
Action Taken by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
16. Further, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) also stated as
follows:—
“The recommendations of the Committee have been considered carefully. It
is felt that it may not be desirable to re-introduce the requirement of
registration of small scale units for availing exemption under the excise duty
regime.
Prior to 1994, registration with the Directorate of Small Scale Industries was
a pre-condition for availment of SSI exemption. This, however, leads to
procedural hassles and even denial of exemption to eligible units in certain
cases purely on procedural grounds. The requirement was reviewed, and in
view of the aforesaid problems, it was done away with in 1994.
The present system of granting exemption based on the value of clearances
is one which is clearly ascertainable, and there is no requirement of any
certification from any Ministry/Department.
At present, there is a provision for filing of declaration with the Central
Excise Department once the value of clearances crosses the exemption limit
minus Rs. 60 lakh. The declaration is similar to the simplified registration
suggested by the Committee. The requirement of registration as a condition
for availing Small Scale Industry (SSI) exemption may lead to hassles and
difficulties for small scale units and complaints of harassment by officers. It
may also be administratively difficult to keep a watch on tiny and micro
enterprises.
Further, under the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development
(MSMED) Act, 2006, there is a provision for filing of a Memorandum (like
registration application) before the specified authority by persons intending
to establish a micro, small or medium enterprise. However, this requirement
is not mandatory  for micro and small enterprises. When the filing of

8
Memorandum is not mandatory under the said Act, it may not be proper to
prescribe any such mandatory requirement under the Central Excise law for
availing SSI exemption.
It is felt that tax laws should promote voluntary compliance as opposed to
mandatory licensing and registration. If registration is made compulsory for
availing SSI exemption, it may hurt the interests of small and tiny units the
most. Presently, there are about 30 lakh small and tiny units, and many such
units are run by illiterate persons or by one or two entrepreneurs. Making
registration compulsory may discourage such entrepreneurs from starting
new units.”
17. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) have stated in their Action
Taken Notes that the present requirement of declaration to be filed by a small scale
unit on the value of clearances of excisable goods exceeding the exemption limit
minus Rs. 60 lakh is adequate and in congruence with the simplified registration
process suggested by the Committee. Further, both the Ministry of Finance and the
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises have expressed similar view that
a uniform definition of small scale units both from revenue and development
perspective is not desirable. They have furnished cogent reasons for their proposition.
In this regard, the Committee are of the view that while simplification and
liberalization of processes is necessary, it is also expected that the system of granting
exemption to small scale units based on the value of clearances of goods should be
clearly verifiable and the genuineness of claims easily ascertainable, so that it can
prevent any misuse of the scheme by non-small scale units. The Committee would
like the Ministry to constantly monitor the application of the Duty Exemption Scheme
for the small and tiny sector and ensure that the benefits of the scheme reach only
the intended persons/units. The existing provisions and procedures should thus be
reviewed periodically in the light of the feedback received from the field formations
and Audit.

CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Small Scale sector has played a very important role in the socio-economic
development of the Country during the past five decades. It has significantly
contributed to the overall growth in terms of Gross Domestic Product (GDP),
employment generation and exports.The performance of small scale sector has had a
direct impact on the growth of the overall economy. The Committee have been apprised
about the various measures initiated from time-to-time with the purported objective
of enhancing the productivity, efficiency and competitiveness of the small scale
sector. As a part of this policy, the Government has been providing calibrated fiscal
incentives by way of concession in payment of central excise duties on goods
manufactured by the Small Scale Industires.Excise duty concession to the small scale
sector is stated to have been formulated to help them harness their full capacity and
enable their growth in a steady manner.
[Sl. No. 1,Para 39 of 41st Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Ministry of  Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
In India, the micro and small enterprises (MSE) sector play a pivotal role in the
overall industrial economy of the country.It is estimated that in terms of value, the
sector accounts for about 39 per cent of the manufacturing output and around 33 per
cent of the total exports of the country. Further, in recent years the MSE sector has
consistently registered higher growth rate compared to the overall industrial sector.
The major advantage of the sector is its employment potential at low capital cost. As
per available statistics, this sector employs an estimated 3.1 crore persons spread
over 1.28 crore enterprises. Further, the labour intensity in the MSE sector is estimated
to be almost 4 times higher than the large enterprises.
To help the MSEs in meeting the challenges of globalization , the Government
has taken several initiatives and measures in recent years. First and formost among
them is the enactment of the 'Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development
(MSMED) Act, 2006', which aims to facilitate the promotion and development and
enhance the competitiveness of MSMEs. The act has come into force from 2nd
October 2006. Other major initiatives taken by the Government are setting up of the
National Manufacturing Competitiveness Council (NMCC) and the National
Commission of Enterprises in the Unorganised Sector (NCEUS). Further, in recognition
of the fact that delivery of credit continues to be a serious problem for NSEs , a 'Policy
Package for Stepping up Credit to Small and Medium Enterprises (SME)' was
announced by the Government with the objective to double the credit flow to the
sector within a period of five years. The Government has also announced a
9

10
comprehensive package for promotion of micro and small enterprises, which comprises
the proposals/schemes having direct impact on the promotion and development of
the micro and small enterprises, particularly in view of the fast changing economic
environment, wherein to be competitive is the key of success. In the Budget 2007-08,
the excise exemption limit for MSE sector has been enhanced from Rs. 1 crore to
Rs. 1.5 crore.
Sd/-
(Jawhar Sircar)
Additional Secretary & Development
Commissioner (MSME)
[Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, O. M. No. E.3(8)/2007,
dated 16th October 2007]
Recommendation
A general excise duty exemption scheme for small scale units has been made
operational for about last two decades providing concession from excise duty in
respect of  clearances of specifier excisable goods. Presently manufacturers, whose
aggregate value of clearances of goods for consumption within the country in the
preceding financial year do not exceed Rs. 3 crore, are eligible for full exemption from
central excise duty or concessional rate of duty. However, while computing the
aggregate value of clearances of excisable goods for determining the eligibility criteria,
value of clearances relating to the certain categories of goods are to be excluded viz.,
(i) branded goods manufactured and cleared on behalf of another person on payment
of normal rate of duty; (ii) excisable goods which were either exempt or chargeable to
'nil' rate of duty; and (iii) excisable goods exported to countries except Nepal and
Bhutan.
[Sl. No.2, Para 40 of 41st Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
In the Budget 2005-06, the turnover eligibility limit for availing the general excise
exemption scheme has been raised from Rs. 3 crore to Rs. 4 crore.
Sd/-
(Jawhar Sircar)
Additional Secretary & Development
Commissioner (MSME)
[Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, O.M. No. E.3(8)/2007,
dated 16th October 2007]
Recommendation
The Union Budget 2003-04, while recognizing that there was a possibility of
misuse of the duty-exemption facility extended to the small scale sector,deleted the
aforementioned clause relating to the exclusion of exempted goods or those cleared
with 'nil' rate of duty, making it includible in the computation of aggregate value of

11
clearances of goods for determining the eligibility criteria. However, the clauses relating
to exclusion of clearances of the branded and exported goods were not deleted and
consequently, the value of clearances of these goods continued to be excluded for
the purpose of reckoning the eligibility limit of Rs. 3 crore.
The aforesaid decision of the Government to exclude the value of clearances of
branded goods manufactured and cleared on behalf of another person from the
aggregate value of clearances of excisable goods in determining the eligibility criteria
for availing duty exemption became the focal-point of the Audit paragraph, which
has, inter-alia,  highlighted how this decision helped large scale manufacturers to
avail themselves of the duty exemption scheme intended for small scale units. Audit
has pointed out that 278 large manufacturers derived unintended benefit of duty
exemption to the tune of Rs. 40.41 crore during the period covered by audit review,
that is, 1999-2000 to 2003-2004. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue),
while responding to the audit findings, categorically stated that this was a deliberate
policy decision of the Government. Therefore, according to the Ministry, it could not
be construed that unintended benefits were caused to any entity.
[Sl.No. 3, Para 41 of 41st Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises has no comments to offer
Sd/-
(Jawhar Sircar)
Additional Secretary & Development
Commissioner (MSME)
[Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, O.M. No. E.3(8)/2007,
dated 16th October 2007]
Recommendation
While explaining the evolution and background of the duty exemption scheme
for the small scale sector, the Revenue Secretary acknowledged the earlier
Observations of the Public Accounts Committee on this issue, wherein the practice of
the large scale units deriving benefits meant for the small sector was criticized. He
informed that in compliance to the recommendation of the PAC, the general small
scale exemption scheme was modified in 1987, so as to deny the exemption where a
small units affixed the brand name or trade name of a non-small scale unit. However, in
response to representations from the industry, this decision was reversed in 1989 so
as to exclude the clearances of branded goods, on which full duty was paid, while
calculating the eligibility limit. The purported rationale behind this was to encourage
ancilliarization by large scale units utilization of capacity by small scale units.
[Sl.No. 4, Para 42 of 41st Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

12
Action Taken by Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises has no comments to offer.
Sd/-
(Jawhar Sircar)
Additional Secretary & Development
Commissioner (MSME)
[Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, O.M. No. E.3(8)/2007
dated 16th October 2007]
Recommendation
According to the Ministry, the exclusion of value of dutiable branded goods
from the aggregate value of clearances of excisable goods was made on the ground
that: (i) in any case, excise duty at normal rate is paid on such goods, as they are
ineligible for SSI exemption; (ii) inclusion of value of such goods in aggregate value
of clearances would affect capacity utilization of SSI sector; (iii) there was also no
representation from the administrative Ministry that this particular provision gives
benefit to larger units also. The Committee considers this reply of the Ministry rather
tactical and evasive as it tries to circumvent the core issue, that is, by excluding
branded goods from the clearance value eligibility limit for SSI units, the benefit of
duty concession was indirectly allowed to large scale units and to units which were
not genuinly small scale. The Committee are surprised to note that the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) have neither done any evaluation of the revenue
implication of their decision nor have they received any feedback in this regard from
revenue field formations on the revenue leakages occurring due to this decision. In
the opinion of the Committee, such concessions may lead to wrongful/undeserving
availment without a proper mechanism of regular feedback from revenue field
formations. The Committee are of the considered view that since most of the units
under the small scale sector are actually tiny units, any fiscal concession including
excise duty exemption should be clearly focussed and there should not be any hidden
provision which gives benefit to non-small scale units. In this connection, the
Committee desire to be apprised of the quantum of revenue outgo arising out of the
exclusion clause in the scheme and the extent of its misuse by non-small scale units.
The Committee note that the exclusion of the value of branded goods manufactured
and cleared on behalf of another person from the aggregate value of clearances of
excisable goods reckoned for determining the eligibility of a unit for small scale
exemption was made as a deliberate policy decision of the Government with the
intention to facilitate ancilliarization and capacity utilization and growth in the small
scale sector. However, examination of the subject by the Committee has revealed that
the Ministry of Finance have not conducted any study or analysis so far to evaluate
the impact of the small scale exemption scheme in achievement of full capacity by the
small scale sector or in development of independent brands by this sector. Surprisingly,
the Ministry of Finance have sought to shift the onus by stating that the Ministry of
Small Scale Industry, being the administrative Ministry for all matters pertaining to

13
small scale sector, have not commented adversely on the efficacy or otherwise of
fiscal concessions meant for small scale industry. The Committee are not satisfied
with such a stance of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) as, in so far as
the duty exemption scheme for the small scale industry is concerned, it is the
Department of Revenue which is responsible for administering the scheme and evaluate
its impact and efficacy. The Department of Revenue cannot thus shy away from their
primary responsiblity of reviewing the working of sector-specific duty exemption
schemes such as the one for small scale units. The Committee need hardly emphasize
that extension of any incentive or concession should be followed up with a detailed
evaluation to enable the Department to assess the efficacy of such incentives in
terms of growth of the targeted sector. This becomes all the more relevant as fiscal
concessions are the balancing act between the growth of the sector and the likely
revenue loss that is to accrue to the exchequer. The Committee, therefore, desire that
the Department of Revenue should at least now undertake a comprehensive study/
review to ascertain the benefits, pitfalls, shortcomings and instances of misue noticed
in the working of the exemption scheme, in its present form, at the ground level with
a view to ensuring that the policy of the Government subserves its purpose. This
feedback will form a vital input for the Ministry in the formulation of any effective
strategy for programme/policy support to promote the growth of the small scale
sector. The Committee would like to be appraised about the steps taken in this regard
and the corrective measures including statutory changes initiated as a result thereof.
[Sl.No. 5, Para 43 of 41st Report of  PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
While agreeing with observations of the Committee on the need to check any
misuse of fiscal concessions by the non-MSEs, the Ministry of MSME would like to
emphasize that the provision regarding exclusion of value of dutiable branded goods
from the aggregate value of clearances of excisable goods has helped in encouraging
ancilliarisation by large scale units. The Ministry of MSME is, therefore, of the view
that this provision needs to be continued to enable MSEs graduate into medium
enterprises and for the overall growth of the sector. The Department of Revenue may,
however, put in place a fool-proof mechanism ot check any misuse of fiscal concessions
by the non-MSEs.
Sd/-
(Jawhar Sircar)
Additional Secretary & Development
Commissioner (MSME)
[Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, O.M. No. E.3(8)/2007
dated 16th October 2007]
Action Taken by Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Revenue)
(a) The department has already asked the National Institute of Public Finance  &
Policy (NIPFP) to carry out a cost-benefit analysis of the SSI exemption
scheme. The report of NIPFP is awaited.

14
(b) However, as desired by the Committee, a Study Group has been constituted
to conduct a review of the exemption for small-scale industries. The Study
Group is headed by the Director General of Central Excise Intelligence (DGCEI),
Delhi, with the Additional Director General of Audit, Customs & Central
Excise, Delhi, and the Additional Director, DGCEI, Delhi, as members. The
report of the Study Group is awaited.
Approved by Additional Secretary to the Government of India
[F.No. 238/1/2007-CX-7]
Recommendation
The Ministry of Small Scale Industry is the administrative Ministry for all matters
pertaining to small scale sector and it has been stated that there have been requests
from them to the Ministry of Finance for increasing the exemption limit as well as the
eligibility limit for duty concession. The Committee are not surprised that the Ministry
of Small Scale Industry, being the nodal agency for the development of small scale
sector in the country, has been seeking more duty concessions from the Ministry of
Finance. However, the Committee would once again emphasize that formulation of full
proof duty exemption schemes for the small scale sector is the exclusive responsibility
of the Department of Revenue and they have to ensure that no provision/clause
remains in the scheme which causes benefit to non-small scale units, albeit indirectly.
In this context, it may be appropriate to appoint and Inter-Ministerial Group comprising
of representatives from both Ministries of Small Scale Industries and Finance to
monitor the administration of fiscal concessions to small scale sector, identify the
loopholes in their implementation and to adopt a more balanced approach in the
formulation of policies for the small scale sector.
[Sl.No. 6, Para 44 of 41st Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
The Ministry of MSME has been receiving several representations from various
MSE Associations for increasing the exemption limit as well as eligibility limit for duty
concessions, especially after the enactment of MSMED Act, 2006, wherein the
investment limit for small manufacturing and service enterprise has been enhanced
from Rs. 1 crore and Rs. 10 lakh to Rs. 5 crore and Rs. 1 crore respectively. The
Constitution of an Inter-Ministerial Group, comprising of representatives of both
Ministries of MSME and Finance, will not only help in monitoring the administration
of fiscal concessions to MSEs and identification of the loopholes in their
implementation but would also facilitate in addressing the genuine concerns of the
MSEs for making the policy more effective. The Ministry of MSME, therefore, fully
agrees with the suggestion of the Committee.
Sd/-
(Jawhar Sircar)
Additional Secretary & Development
Commissioner (MSME)
[Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, O.M. No. E.3(8)/2007
dated 16th October 2007]

15
Action Taken by Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Revenue)
As desired by the Committee, an Inter-Ministerial Group has been constituted.
The composition of the Group is as follows:—
Member (Budget), CBEC Chairman
Joint Secretary, Ministry of Small Scale Industry Member
Joint Secretary, Tax Research Unit (TRU), CBEC Member
Commissioner (Central Excise), CBEC Member
A representative of National Institute of Public Member
Finance and policy
Director, TRU, CBEC Member Secretary
The terms of reference of the group are:
(a) to suggest a mechanism to monitor the administration of fiscal concessions
to small scale sector;
(b) to identify the loopholes in thier implementation and suggest measures to
ensure that the benefits are available only for the small scale sector;
(c) to suggest guidelines for the formulation of policies for the small scale
sector; and
(d) any other matters relating to fiscal incentives considered relevant for the
functioning of the small scale sector.
The Inter-Ministerial Group will submit its report by 31.12.2007.
Approved by Additional Secretary to the Government of India
[F.No. 238/1/2007-CX-7]

CHAPTER III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
RECEIVED FROM GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Committee note that there is no definition prescribed in the Central Excise
Act, 1944 or Rules for defining a small scale industry. The Ministry of Small Scale
Industry has a prescribed definition for small scale industries that the investment in
plant and machinery should not be more than Rs. 1 crore. The Committee had in their
32nd Report (10th Lok Sabha) recommended that the Central Excises and Salt Act,
1944 or Rules made thereunder should be amended to incorporate the definition of the
term 'Small scale industrial undertaking' on the same lines as in the Industries
(Development and Regulation) Act, 1951. The Ministry of Finance (Department of
Revenue) have not however accepted the receommendation on the plea that if a
definition of small-scale industrial undertaking is incorporated in the Central Excises
and Salt Act, 1944 or rules made thereunder, it was likely to give rise to disputes and
litigation and the objective of having minimum contact with the small sector units
would also get diluted. It was thus felt that it may not be necessary to incorporate the
definition of small scale industry in the Central Excises and Salt Act, 1944 or Rules
made thereunder. This argument of the Ministry does not appear to be convincing.
The Committee feel that giving a clear-cut definition for small scale undertaking would
actually help to prevent the misuse of the exemptions. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that there should be one uniform definition of small scale industries both
from revenue and development perspective, based on the criteria of investment limit
in plant and machinery as well as turnover. The Committee would like to be informed
of the conclusive action taken in the matter.
[Sl.No. 7, Para 45 of 41st Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
With the passage of the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development
(MSMED) Act, 2006, the Government has recognized two different kinds of enterprises,
viz., those involved in the production of goods (manufacturing enterprises) and the
others involved in rendering services (service enterprises). The MSMED Act, 2006
also defines the micro, small and medium enterprises, whether manufactuirng or
service, based on investment in plant and machinery and equipment respectively, in
a precise manner. The MSMED Act, 2006 does not provide any definition based on
turnover. It is, however, emphasized that the excise exemption made available to the
micro and small enterprises (as defined under the MSMED Act, 2006) is perhaps the
most important incentive and facilitation given by the Government to the micro and
small enterprises. Any dilution of this incentive would have a deleterious impact on
their growth and promotion. The lowering of barriers for import with the onset of the
16

17
process of liberalization and globalisation, coupled with the quick weaning away of
the protection offered by measures like reservation for exclusive manufacture by
micro and small enterprise (where currently the number of reserved items is only 114
as against 873 in 1984), the micro and small enterpreneurs view the excise exemption
as probably the only important incentive or facilitation available to them. In fact, the
Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises has been persistently taking up the
issue of enhancing the turnover limit for eligibility, the exemptions ceilings as well as
the restoration of the option to pay duty at a concessional rate of 60% of the normal
duty in case CENVA T is availed by them.
Sd/-
(Jawhar Sircar)
Additional Secretary & Development
Commissioner (MSME)
[Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, O.M. No. E.3(8)/2007
dated 16th October 2007]
Action Taken by Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Revenue)
The recommendations of the Committee have been considered carefully. It is felt
that it may not be desirable to adopt a uniform definition of small scale units both from
revenue and development perspectives.
2. Two important parameters for any taxation system are that it should be simple
and easy to understand by the taxpayer, and further, it should be easy to administer
by the tax department.
3. The SSI exemption scheme has a precise definition of small scale units, namely,
units having a turnover not exceeding Rs. 4 crore in the preceding financial year. The
definition is simple, and clearly ascertainable. This defintion is driven by the principle
to guard against the availment of the SSI exemption by units other than small scale
units so defined. Adoption of a uniform defintion of small scale units for all purposes
may be counterproductive, as the purposes for which such units are defined under
various laws are quite defferent.
4. Up to February 1986, SSI exemption was based on the criteria of investment
limit in plant and machinery and value of clearances. However, to carry out valuation
of machinery is difficult, particularly if second hand machinery is used. It is also
difficult to keep track of additional investments in plant and machinery made from
time to time. This definition was found to have given rise to a number of disputes. As
a result, after careful consideration, the criterion of investment in plant and machinery
(which was the same as that adopted for development perspective) was done away
with, in March 1986.
5. The Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED) Act, 2006
defines a small enterprise as a unit having investment between Rs. 25 lakh and Rs. 5
crore. Taking a capital turnover ratio of 4, units having turnover of Rs. 20 crore would
also be classified as small enterprises. In fact, the capital turnover ratio may also vary
from industry to industry.

18
6. The Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises has recently mooted a
proposal to do away with the restriction in equity participation in micro, small and
medium enterprises (not exceeding 25%) by a non-SSI or foreign investor. This in
effect would allow non-SSI units to have substantial interest in SSI units. Adoption
of a uniform definition of SSI units both for revenue and development perspectives
would thus allow non-SSI units to have SSI benefits, and result in substantial negative
effect on revenue.
Approved by Additional Secretary to the Government of India
[F. No. 238/1/2007-CX-7]
Recommendation
The Committee have been informed that almost 85 percent of the small-scale
units functioning in our country are unregistered and their registration is not
compulsory either for availing duty exemption. Explaning the reasons for non-
registration of small scale industries, the Ministry of Small Scale Industry have stated
that small scale units are basically apprehensive of the hassles that may arise out of
the operation of labour laws etc. and inspectors from different Departments visiting
their premises. The Revenue Secretary also endorsed the view that the very process
of registration was leading to procedural hassles for the units. Thus, while reviewing
the small scale exemption scheme in 1994-1995 Budget, it was decided to do away with
the requirement of registration with the Directorate of Industry for the purpose of
excise duty exemption. The Committee, however, do not share this apprehension that
registration ipso facto will lead to harassment of the small units or create hassles for
them. In fact, registration will seek to ensure the genuineness of the unit availing
excise duty exemptions. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) should reconsider the feasibility of making
registration compulsory for availing exemptions under the excise duty regime, as it
will obviate the need for any verification of the status of the unit by Central Excise
Authorities. Needless to emphasize, the process of registration should be made as
simple and transparent as possible with usage of information technology.
[Sl. No. 8, Para 46 of 41st Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken by Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
The process of registration of small scale industries has been replaced with the
much more friendly procedure of filing of an Entrepreneurs Memorandum (EM) by a
micro or small enterprise with the District Industries Centre (DIC) concerned, under
the provisions of the MSMED Act, 2006. There are no mandatory inspections by DIC
officials, nor are any verification required. The form of EM is easily downloadable
from the internet (besides being available with the DICs) and the facts are only self-
certified by the entrepreneurs, on receipt of which the DIC is obliged to issue an
acknowledgement. The extremely low percentage of registered units in the small scale
industries of yore was a cause of concern. It is felt that in spite of the simplification of
the process, many micro and small enterprises may not file an EM, since the same is
optional for micro and small enterprises. The Ministry of MSME believes that the
Department of Revenue should not make it mandatory for an micro and small enterprise

19
to file an EM before availing excise exemption, for the simple reason that such
insistence (or mandatory nature) would lead to coercion and may even add to the
dreaded 'Inspector Raj' in the field, which may also lead to corruption.
Sd/-
(Jawhar Sircar)
Additional Secretary & Development
Commissioner (MSME)
[Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises, O.M. No. E.3(8)/2007
dated 16th October 2007]
Action Taken by Ministry of Finance (Deptt. of Revenue)
The recommendations of the Committee have been considered carefully. It is felt
that it may not be desirable to re-introduce the requirement of registration of small
scale units for availing exemption under the excise duty regime.
2. Prior to 1994, registration with the Directorate of Small Scale Industries was a
pre-condition for availment of SSI exemption. This, however, leads to procedural
hassles and even denial of exemption to eligible units in certain cases purely on
procedural grounds. The requirement was reviewed, and in view of the aforesaid
problems, it was done away with in 1994.
3. The present system of granting exemption based on the value of clearances is
one which is clearly ascertainable, and there is no requirement of any certification
from any Ministry/Department.
4. At present, there is a provision for filing of declaraton with the Central Excise
Department once the value of clearances crosses the exemption limit minus Rs. 60
lakh. The declaration is similar to the simplified registration suggested by the
Committee. The requirement of registration as a condition for availing SSI exemption
may lead to hassles and difficulties for small scale units and complaints of harassment
by officers. It may also be administratively difficult to keep a watch on tiny and micro
enterprises.
5. Further, under the Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises Development (MSMED)
Act, 2006, there is a provision for filing of a Memorandm (like registration application)
before the specified authority by persons intending to establish a micro, small or
medium enterprise. However, this requirement is not mandatory for micro and small
enterprises. When the filing of Memorandum is not mandatory under the said Act, it
may not be proper to prescribe any such mandatory requirement under the Central
Excise law for availing SSI exemption.
6. It is felt that tax laws should promote voluntary compliance as opposed to
mandatory licensing and registration. If registration is made compulsory for availing
SSI exemption, it may hurt the interests of small and tiny units the most. Presently,
there are about 30 lakh small and tiny units, and many such units are run by illiterate
persons or by one or two entrepreneurs. Making registration compulsory may
discourage such entrepreneurs from starting new units.
Approved by Additional Secretary to the Government of India
[F. No. 238/1/2007-CX-7]

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS REPLIES TO WHICH
HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
—NIL—
20

CHAPTER  V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
 HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
25 March, 2008 Chairman,
5 Chaitra, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
21

PART  II
MINUTES OF THE NINETEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2007-2008) HELD ON 18TH MARCH, 2008
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. on 18th March, 2008 in Room
No. "51" (Chairman's Chamber) Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Prof. M. Ramadass
7. Shri K.S. Rao
8. Shri Kharabela Swain
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
Officers of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Nand Kishore — Pr. Director of Audit (AB)
2. Shri Jayanti Prasad — Pr. Director of Audit (INDT)
22

23
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee. Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the following Draft
Reports:—
(i) Draft Report on C&AG's Report No. 20 of 2006, Union Government (Civil —
Performance Audit) relating to "Tsunami Relief and Rehabilitation"; and
(ii) Draft Action Taken Report on the 41st Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) on
"Concession meant for Small Scale Industries availed of  by Large Scale
Manufacturers".
3. The Chairman invited suggestions of the Members on the Draft Reports. After
discussing the contents of the Draft Reports in detail, the Committee adopted the
same without any amendments/modifications and authorised the Chairman to finalise
and present these Reports in the light of factual verification done by the Audit.
4. Further, it was decided that the Committee would hold their next sitting
on 7th April 2008.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
Statement of Observations and Recommendations
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations/Recommendations
No. No. Department
12 3 4
1. 6 Micro, Small While appreciating the efforts made by the
and Medium Ministry of Micro, Small & Medium
Enterprises Enterprises for overall growth of  this sector,
the Committee desire that these measures
should be constantly reviewed and re-
formulated by carefully analyzing their
shortcomings and an effective procedure set
up for making the SSI scheme more purposeful
to facilitate the promotion and development
of SSI sector and enhance their
competitiveness to meet the challenges of
globalization.
2. 10 Finance The Committee would like to be apprised about
(Department the findings of the Study Group constituted
of Revenue) by Government to review the Exemption
Scheme and the corrective action taken
thereafter. The Study Group should also
enquire into instances of misuse of the
exemption scheme and the quantum of
revenue loss arising therefrom. Needless to
emphasise that Government would take
follow-up steps subsequently for better
enforcement of the exemption scheme and the
Committee be apprised accordingly.
3. 17 Micro, Small The Ministry of Finance (Department of
and Medium Revenue) have stated in their Action Taken
Enterprises Notes that the present requirement of
and Ministry declaration to be filed by a small scale unit on
of Finance the value of clearances of excisable goods
(Department exceeding the exemption limit minus Rs. 60
of Revenue) lakh is adequate and in congruence with the
simplified registration process suggested by
the Committee. Further, both the Ministry of
Finance and the Ministry of Micro, Small and
24

25
12 3 4
Medium Enterprises have expressed similar
view that a uniform definition of small scale
units both from revenue and development
perspective is not desirable. They have
furnished cogent reasons for their
proposition. In this regard, the Committee are
of the view that while simplification and
liberalization of processes is necessary, it is
also expected that the system of granting
exemption to small scale units based on the
value of clearances of goods should be clearly
verifiable and the genuineness of claims easily
ascertainable, so that it can prevent any misuse
of the scheme by non-small scale units. The
Committee would like the Ministry to
constantly monitor the application of the Duty
Exemption Scheme for the Small and tiny sector
and ensure that the benefits of the scheme
reach only the intended persons/units. The
existing provisions and procedures should
thus be reviewed periodically in the light of
the feedback received from the field formations
and Audit.
fffsdsdsdfdfssdsdfsdfsdgg
GMFJJFFF
GMGIPMRND—1999LS—13-6-2008.