57
Undervaluation due to adoption of lower
mutually agreed price
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2007-2008
FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

FIFTY-SEVENTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
‘UNDERVALUATION DUE TO ADOPTION
OF LOWER MUTUALLY AGREED PRICE’
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 22.11.2007
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.11.2007
LOK  SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
November, 2007/Kartika, 1929 (Saka)

PAC No. 1853
Price: Rs. 30/-
© 2007 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2007-2008)....................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION........................................................................................................ (v)
PART-I Report—Background analysis
I. Introductory ............................................................................ 1
II. Audit Paragraph ...................................................................... 1
III. Submissions of the Ministry of Finance ................................. 2
IV . Findings of Task Force ............................................................ 8
V . Subsequent Developments ..................................................... 10
PART-II Observations and Recommendations......................................... 16
ANNEXURE
I. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
held on 17th October, 2006. .................................................... 20
II. Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
held on 2nd November, 2007. .................................................. 22
APPENDIX
Audit Paragraph No. 11.3 of Report No. 7 of the  Comptroller
and Auditor General of India for the year ended  31st  March,
2005  Union   Government  (Indirect  Taxes—Customs,  Central
Excise  and  Service  Tax)  relating  to  ''Undervaluation due to
adoption of lower mutually agreed price'' ............................... 24

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok  Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
14. Shri Kharabela Swain
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Prof. P.J. Kurien
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
5. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Committee Officer

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Fifty-Seventh Report relating to ''Undervaluation due to adoption of lower
mutually agreed price'' which is based on Paragraph No. 11.3 of Report of Comptroller
and Auditor General of India for the year ended 31 March, 2005 (No. 7 of 2006), Union
Government (Indirect Taxes—Customs, Central Excise & Service Tax).
2. The Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended
31 March, 2005 (No. 7 of 2006), Union Government (Indirect Taxes—Customs, Central
Excise & Service Tax) was laid on the Table of the House on 19th May, 2006.
3. The Committee took evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) on the subject at their sitting held on 17th October,
2006. The Committee considered and finalised this Report at their sitting held on
2nd November, 2007. Minutes of the sittings form Annexures to the Report.
4. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the officers of the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) for the cooperation extended by them in
furnishing information and tendering evidence before the Committee.
5. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
6. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the
Committee.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
7  November, 2007 Chairman,
16 Kartika, 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

1
REPORT
PART I
BACKGROUND ANALYSIS
I.  Introductory
Section 4(3)(d) of Central Excise Act, 1944, defines 'transaction value' as the
price actually paid or payable for the goods, when sold, and includes in addition to the
amount charged as price, any amount the buyer is liable to pay to or on behalf of the
assessee, by reason of, or in connection with the sale payable at the time of sale or any
other time. Transaction value, therefore, is the price actually paid for the goods sold
when price is the sole consideration in a sale. The Ministry of Finance vide their
circular dated 30 June 2000 clarified that but for the normal value being replaced by
transaction value, there was no difference in the scheme of valuation of petroleum
products under the old section 4 and new section 4 and that the provisions of the
section 4 when applied to the administered price of petroleum products should not
make any material difference in assessable value.
II.  Audit Paragraph
2. This Report is based on Paragraph No. 11.3 of the Report of C&AG of India
No. 7 of 2006 (Indirect Taxes—Customs, Central Excise & Service Tax) relating to
‘Undervaluation due to adoption of lower mutually agreed price’ examination of relevant
material on record and the deposition made by the representatives of the Ministry of
Finance, Department of Revenue and Central Board of Excise & Customs. The points
arising out of the Audit paras and matters connected thereto are dealt with in the
succeeding paragraphs.
3. According to the Audit para, five terminals of M/s. Indian Oil Corporation Ltd.
(IOCL) at Bhatinda, Jalandhar, Jaipur, Jodhpur and Sangrur engaged in storage and
marketing of various petroleum products received in their bonded warehouse, stock of
Motor Spirit (MS), High Speed Diesel (HSD) and Superior Kerosene Oil (SKO) etc.
from their refineries. The IOCL terminals apart from clearing the products to their own
distribution outlets also cleared MS, HSD and SKO etc. to terminals/depots belonging
to other oil companies like M/s. Bharat Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (BPCL) and
M/s. Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (HPCL) on payment of duty on assessable
value which was much less than that charged from their own outlets/terminals.
4. Audit observed that though the administered price mechanism was dismantled
from April 2002, prices of petroleum products continued to be monitored and regulated
by Oil Coordination Committee (OCC). Basic price structure of the products which
formed the basis for determination of retail outlet prices charged from the ultimate
consumer remained uniform for all the oil companies. As such adoption of lower
assessable value at the stage of clearance of the products by IOCL installations to

2
other oil companies resulted in lower duty realisation. Clearance of products at lower
(agreed) rates resulted in inflow of extra consideration to the other oil companies from
ultimate consumers because the benefit of lower excise duty was not passed on to the
ultimate consumer retail sale price having remained the same. Accordingly, the price
charged did not remain the sole consideration for sale and, hence, could not be
considered as ' transaction value' for the purpose of levy of duty. The differential duty
lost on the clearances of MS and HSD made to M/s. BPCL and M/s. HPCL terminals
and their depots during April 2003 to September 2004 amounted to Rs. 27.76 crore.
5. The Department in their reply to Audit observation stated that two terminals
(Bhatinda and Sangrur) intimated that Show Cause Notices (SCNs) for Rs. 5.90 crore
covering clearance upto 31 March 2004 had been issued and in respect of Jalandhar
and Jodhpur SCNs were being issued. However no reply was furnished in respect of
Jaipur.
6. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), while contending the
Audit observation putforth their view that the transaction had taken place in accordance
with an agreement entered into between IOCL and other oil marketing companies and
the price charged was the sole consideration for sale. It further stated that the
transactions satisfied the conditions laid down in section 4 leaving no ground for
invoking the provisions of Valuation Rules.
7. Audit pointed out that reply of the Ministry is not tenable as the price mutually
agreed upon by the oil companies cannot be considered as 'transaction value' in terms
of section 4(i)(a) as products so cleared were actually sold by other petroleum companies
at the same price at which their own products were sold. The clearance by IOCL to
other oil companies at lower assessable value was thus not based upon purely
commercial considerations and the assessable value was to be determined in terms of
the Valuation Rules.
III. Submissions of the Ministry of Finance
8. Explaining their point of view on Audit paras, in a written submission made to
the Committee, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) stated as under:—
''With effect from 1.4.2002, the Government of India deregulated the petroleum
sector and the Administered Price Mechanism (APM) was dismantled, and
Oil Coordination Committee (OCC), which was the coordinating agency for
production, pricing and distribution of petroleum products, was dissolved. With
this, petroleum companies became free to price their products. Due to sensitive
nature of petroleum products and in view of the infrastructural, operational and
logistic constraints and to ensure regular supply of the petroleum products, the
four major Oil Public Sector Undertakings (PSUs), viz., M/s Indian Oil Corporation
Ltd. (IOCL), M/s Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (HPCL), M/s Bharat
Petroleum Corporation Ltd. (BPCL) and M/s. Indo Burma Petroleum Ltd. (IBPL),
entered into Memoranda of Understanding (MoU), whereby any of these
Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) having a warehouse/refinery at any location
was obliged to exchange the products with other Oil companies as per logistic
plan at mutually agreed price. The Sale Price of products sold to the OMCs was

3
based on the Import Parity Prices (IPP) and it reflected the price that would be
incurred if these products were imported by the OMC.
For valuation of goods for levy of duty of Central Excise, the concept of
transaction value was introduced in the Central Excise Act, 1944, w.e.f. 1.7.2000.
In view of the concept of  transaction value, the petroleum companies started
paying duty on the basis of prices  so determined under the aforesaid MoU. This
resulted in a situation adverse to Revenue, wherein the assessable value for
clearances to such companies' own dealers was different from that of clearances
to other OMCs even though the retail price to the ultimate consumer was same
in the two cases".
9. Contending the Audit's observation, the Ministry have putforth their argument
as under:—
"Objection is not tenable because it has nowhere been shown that the transaction
value adopted by the assessee is a coloured one. It was further explained that
the transaction value has to be determined as per law. In the case taken up by
Audit, study of the agreement would clearly show that the transaction value is
not some "mutually agreed price" but it is the "price determined on strict
commercial basis" and Audit has not shown any evidence by which it may be
concluded that the price was not the genuine price".
10. The Ministry have further added:—
"The transactions of petroleum products between IOCL and other oil companies
involve 'sale' and there is no evidence that this price has been influenced by any
extra-commercial consideration. The said transactions have been made on the
contracted price based on certain formula as per import parity price and there is
nothing on record to conclude that the said transactions of sale of petroleum
products  are not on principal to principal basis and not at arm's length".
11. However, supporting the view of Audit were the observations made by
Commissioner of Central Excise & Customs, Vishakhapatnam Commissionerate while
adjudicating the Show Cause Notice issued in this regard. According to the order
passed by the Commissioner of Central Excise & Customs, Visakhapatnam-1
Commissionerate it was held that:—
"Prior to 01.04.2002, the pricing of petroleum product was as per the Administered
Price Mechanism (APM) and the prices were fixed by the Oil Co-ordination
Committee (OCC). For the purpose of levy of excise duty, the ex-storage sale
price was considered by OCC. The asessable value remained same irrespective
of product sold through depot of a particular oil company which had the product
in its bonded warehouse or the products cleared to the depots of the other
petroleum companies. However, w.e.f. 01.04.2002, the APM has been dismantled
and all the four companies, entered into the aforesaid agreement for product
sharing whereby any oil company having a warehouse/refinery at any given
location is obliged to exchange the products with other oil companies as per the
logistic plan proposed by these  companies under the leadership of M/s IOCL.

4
M/s HPCL are clearing goods to their own depots/dealers as well as to IOCL,
BPCL and IBP as per the  agreement for Oil Exchange. These oil companies sell
all these petroleum products through their depots/dealers network at the same
price as sold by M/s HPCL to its dealers/depots. On examination of the Oil
Exchange  agreement the prices adopted to the depots/dealers appeared to be
more appropriate price to arrive at the transaction values for the Oil Exchange
clearances. There is difference between the prices charged to their own depots/
dealers and  to the other Oil Companies. The price difference is indirectly
recovered/received from other oil companies against the goods lifted by them at
other places from other Oil Companies. All the oil companies are benefited by
doing Oil Exchange.
HPCL(VT) are adopting two different values for the purpose of paying Central
Excise Duty as under:
(a) For their own customers, the assessees are paying duty by   backward
calculation from the retail sale price and then arriving at the assessable
value/transaction value for paying Central Excise duty.
(b) For transfer of petroleum products to Other Oil Companies under OIL Sharing
agreement, the assessees are paying Central  Excise duty on the basis of
Import Parity Price (IPP). This price is lower than the price at (a) above.
In view of the detailed provisions set out in the agreement and the Annexures
attached to the agreement, it appeared that the price at which the goods are
removed to the other oil companies under the Oil Exchange basis is not on sale
in terms of the provisions contained in section 4(1)(a) of the Central Excise Act.
The price agreed as discussed in the agreement is a national   price for product
sharing with a view to ensure smooth supply and distribution of the petroleum
products. As admitted in the agreement itself, the parties to the agreement have
entered the agreement for mutual benefit for using the available product of each
other on terms and conditions contained in the agreement. Further, the parties
agreed to sell and purchase the products to each other for the quantities
determined for month to month based on the principles laid down in the Industry
Logistic Plan (ILP) procedures.  The Import Parity Price based on which the duty
is discharged for Oil Exchange supplies is defined to mean the landed cost price
of the product at particular port. It is, thus, a mutually settled price among the Oil
companies for settling the quantities exchanged under the agreement. It appears
that the sale of these goods actually occurs at the end of depots/dealers of the
receiving oil companies where they discharge sales tax as well. The monetary
transaction amongst them for exchange of petroleum products is only for the
excess/short drawls taking into account their All India Level Oil Exchanges on a
monthly basis through debit notes. The price at which, the duty has been paid
for such supplies under the Oil Exchange, therefore, is not representative of the
transaction value defined in section 4(1)(a) and 4(3)(d) of the Central Excise
Act".

5
12. The Commissioner of Central Excise further stated in his order that:—
"The petroleum products exchanged under the OIL Sharing MOU are actually
sold by the other petroleum companies through their depots/dealers at the same
price at which these petroleum products are sold at the depots by the assesee.
Therefore, the transaction value adopted for payment of duty on goods removed
under Oil Exchange appears to be a facade for sale with a view to evade proper
payment of duty. It further appears that by signing MOU in the manner as
indicated above, all the oil marketing companies have mutually benefited
themselves. The petroleum products shared with other oil companies are not
sold at the time of clearance from the warehouse of HPCL strictly in terms of
Section 4(1)(a). Therefore, it can be considered that for the clearance of petroleum
products under oil exchange agreement there is no transaction value available in
terms of clause (a) Section 4(1) of the Central Excise Act. It also appears that the
assessee gets compensated by receipt of the bartered product from the depots/
outlets of the receiving oil companies at other places and the same are sold by
M/s HPCL at the prevailing price applicable to the place.
As seen from the price pattern, the price charged by M/s HPCL (VT), Malkapuram,
Visakhapatnam to the other oil companies is much lower than what is charged to
their own dealers. As per the agreement, the assessee is getting the product at
the same  price (IPP) for similar quantity  elsewhere in the country from other oil
companies and the same is being sold at higher price. From these transactions
only Oil Companies are benefited throughout the country at the cost of
Government Exchequer.
As per section 4(1) of the Central Excise Act, where, the duty of excise is chargeable
on the goods with reference to value, then on each removal of the goods, such
value shall:—
(a)  in a case where the goods are sold by the assessee for delivery at the time and
place of the removal, the assessee and the buyer of the goods are not related
and the price is the sole consideration for the sale, be the transaction value;
(b) in any other case, including the case where the goods are not sold, be the
value determined in such manner as may be prescribed.
"The Transaction value is defined in Section 4(3)(d) to mean the price actually
paid or payable for the goods, when sold and includes in addition to the amount
charged as price, any amount that the buyer is liable to pay to, or on behalf of the
assessee, by reason of, or in connection with the sale, whether payable at the
time of the sale or at any other time, including, but not limited to, any amount
charged for, or to make provision for, advertising or publicity, marketing and
selling organisation expenses, storage, outward handling, servicing, warranty,
commission or any other matter, but does not include the amount of duty of
excise, sales tax, and other taxes, if any actually paid or actually payable.
 It is, thus, seen that the transaction value as defined in section 4(1)(a) provides
that the value would be the price actually paid for the goods sold when the price

6
is the sole consideration. In this case, the price adopted for payment of duty for
goods removed under Oil Exchange is not the price actually paid or payable for
the goods when sold. It is a notionally determined price in mutual  interest for
sharing/assistance from each other among the Oil Marketing Companies in order
to ensure smooth supply and  distribution of the products and to avoid any kind
of disruption of supply all over India. The Import Parity Price for MS and HSD as
determined in terms of the agreement is not the price for sale of goods. It is the
notional price for exchange of goods and the  monthly settlements among the Oil
Companies is done based on Joint Certificates, based on which, monthly billings
for all the  elements  of price, duty, freight, taxes and other charges is exchanged
and final settlement thereof as made consequently. Therefore, in view of the
detailed provisions made in the agreement including the procedures/provisions
in the various Annexures to the agreement, it appears that the price on which the
duty has been paid for removals under oil exchange does not  represent the
transaction value defined in sections 4(1)(a) and 4(3)(d).
The value of excisable goods cleared under Oil Exchange transactions, therefore,
is to be determined in accordance with the provisions of section 4(1)(b) of the
Central Excise Act read with relevant provisions of Central Excise Valuation
(Determination of Price of Excisable Goods) Rules, 2000.
However, in their case, the transaction price to the dealer under  Section 4(1)(a)
is ascertainable and is available as they sell the same products in the market at a
particular price.Therefore, in accordance with the provisions contained in Rules
7 and 11 of the Central Excise (Valuation) Rules, 2000, the price at which the
assessee sells the goods to its dealers shall be adopted as the transaction value/
price at which the assessee is required to pay the duty on the clearances made
under Oil Exchange to the other oil companies.
The transactions under the agreement cannot be considered as fully commercial
relationship as all the parties to the agreement stood to gain mutually by this
arrangement as they have adopted lower price for the purpose of payment of
duty.  It is, in a way, the  basic acquisition price of the goods for mutual benefit.
The goods acquired under the agreement are sold to their dealers for retail sales
in the commercial sense. The clauses in the agreement show that the price is not
the sole consideration for sale. The consideration of exchange of the same
products in the same manner linked to the import parity price is evident. The
import parity price is the price at which they acquired the imported product. The
price under the Oil Exchange agreement is, therefore, only for exchange parity
and does not represent the  correct and true sale price. The overhead expenses,
the selling expenses, the profit margins etc. are not included in this price arrived
on Import Parity Price. If the price represented the  transaction value as defined
in Section 4, the same would represent the normal elements associated with the
manufacture and sale of the products and thus, would include the overheads
associated with sale. Under the Oil Exchange agreement, the quantities alone are
exchanged on the basis of the import parity price and the monthly settlement
statements are prepared for settlement of the bills under the agreement. The

7
price under the  Oil Exchange agreement, therefore, does not represent the true
intrinsic value of the goods removed. In the case of sale of the same products to
their dealers at the same place, the price is higher and representative of the
transaction value. It is also relevant to note that the goods acquired under the
Oil Exchange agreement are sold to the dealers without any distinction. Thus the
stream of goods manufactured/obtained otherwise than under the Oil Exchange
in their own refinery and those acquired under  the Oil Exchange agreement are
sold in the same manner to the  dealers for retail sales. This factor, should itself
make it clear that the parties to the agreement have been consciously adopting
a  lower price with intent to pay lower excise duties.
The Price would be representative if there was no mutual consideration of sale
and purchase on sharing basis. The price would be acceptable if it included all
the normal elements of costs  and expenses associated with the sale price of the
goods. The sale/purchase under the agreement is only akin to a situation in the
"barter system" where  reciprocal exchange of the commodities took place. Thus,
there was a special relationship among the oil companies. They had adopted a
lower price linked to the Import Parity Price, which is not the correct price for the
purpose of assessment of excise duty. The price adopted for  sale/purchase
under the agreement was a notional price, as the  goods were not sold at this
price to the trade and their dealers. As per the provisions in the agreement, the
price is not the sole consideration for the sale of the goods. The sale price  is
influenced by the consideration of getting the same product for the similar
quantity throughout the country at the same basic price. The parties to the
agreement are oil companies and are Public undertakings and engaged in the
refining or marketing the oil products and with the common objective set out in
the agreement, they have agreed to purchase the products of each other; of the
quantities determined from month to month, based on the principles laid down in
the Industry Logistics Plan set out in the agreement.
The price for the purpose of payment of duty has to meet the parameters set out
in Section 4. While the parties are free to enter into any agreement on sharing
basis for the smooth distribution of the petroleum products yet when normal
price within the meaning of Clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 4 of Central
Excise Act, 1944 is not available under the Oil Exchange agreement, the provisions
of Clause (b) of Section 4(1) read with the Valuation Rules, have to be resorted to
determine the price of the goods for the purpose of payment of duty and it will be
justified to reject the price under the Oil Exchange agreement for the purpose of
payment of duty. When a fully commercial price is available at the factory gate or
the depots of the duty paid stocks for sales to their dealers or retail outlets, the
same price should form the basis for assessment of the quantities sold under the
Exchange agreement. Therefore, in such a situation, action has to be resorted
under the provisions of Rule 11 of the Valuation Rules, 2000. This rule has to be
read with principles enunciated in Rules 1 to 10. The principles of Rule 4 could be
applied since the values as mentioned in Rule 4 i.e. value of goods sold by the
assessee for delivery at any time which applies to valuation of goods sold to an

8
independent buyer, is available in this case. In case of the price available at the
depots, the principles in Rule 7 could be applied.
Therefore, the price available to the dealers at the factory gate or the depot is
adopted for the purpose of payment of duty in respect of products sold under
the Oil Exchange agreement in terms of Rule 11 of the Central Excise Valuation
Rules, 2000".
13. While confirming the differential duty which was proposed in the Show
Cause Notice, the Commissioner enunciated that:—
"It must be seen that the assessee has adopted the price, which they knew, was
lower as compared to the transaction value adopted for the dealers. The goods
sold to the dealers comprised of the stocks acquired under the Oil Exchange
agreement and those manufactured in their own refineries. They were self-
assessing the goods for the purpose of payment of duty by adopting two different
values for the same goods. They knew that sale and purchase of the petroleum
products under the Oil Exchange agreement is on a sharing basis in mutual
interest in order to ensure smooth supply and distribution for the mutual benefit.
They knew that such a price under the agreement, was not the true or correct
transaction price as defined in Section 4. Therefore, they had willfully and
deliberately misdeclared the price for the purpose of payment of duty by
suppressing the agreement and evaded payment of duty in violation of the
provisions of Section 4 and Rules 4 and  6 of the Central Excise Rules. Accordingly,
they are liable for penal action under Section 11AC of the Central Excise Rules.
Accordingly, they are liable for penal action under Section 11AC of the Central
Excise Act. Their contention that they were public sector undertakings and had
no motive to evade duty is not tenable. The provisions of Section 11A do not
create any such immunity. The parties to the show cause notice have been
conscious that the price being adopted for payment of duty did not represent
the true price and yet they adopted the price for payment of duty. The Import
Parity Price was relevant to them for exchange. If it was not true or correct
commercial price to the trade, the same, in no way, could be taken as the
transaction price for payment of duty. The differential duty, therefore, was liable
to be recovered under the proviso to Section 11A(1) of the Central Excise Act,
1944.’’
14. With regard to the steps taken by the Ministry it has been stated that the
Central Board of Excise and Customs in the Ministry of Finance constituted a Task
Force for examination of issues arising with regard to valuation of petroleum products
consequent to dismantling of APM. The Task Force was constituted on 31.12.2003 and
was headed by Director General of Inspection, Customs and Central Excise, New Delhi.
IV.  Findings of  Task Force
15. Enumerating the findings of Task Force, the Ministry stated as under:—
* The Oil companies were paying Central Sales Tax (CST) on sale to each
other and transaction as defined in Article 4 of the MoU falls within the

9
definition of "Sale and Purchase" as defined in Section 2(h) Central Excise
Act. From data, it was proved that the transactions were not in the nature of
barter.
* It was held by field formations that the Government of India holds majority
shares in the PSU oil companies, they need to be considered as inter-
connected undertakings. Task force observed that the fact that two units
are inter-connected undertakings is not in itself sufficient for rejecting the
transaction value. It can be done only if it is established that they are
'related persons' [Section 4(3)(b)] Rule 10 of Valuation Rules refers that we
could treat the parties as related only if they are so associated that they
have interest, directly or indirectly, in the business of each other. Apex
Court has held that the interest has to be financial interest.
* DGCEI stated that there is nothing in the reports of the Chief Commissioners
to suggest that price is not the sole consideration or that there is a flow-
back from one Oil PSU to another in the course of marketing of goods to
each other under the aforesaid Agreement. Thus, related person reasoning
was not found sustainable.
* It was observed that price applicable to sale of products to other OMCs is
bound to be lower for the simple reason that the marketing costs (terminalling
expenses) and the margins of buying OMC have to be part of ex-storage
price.
* It was observed that "Transaction value concept" recognizes the assessment
of goods on the basis of each transaction. There can be different assessable
values for the same product, provided that the goods are sold on commercial
consideration and transaction is made on principal to principal basis, i.e. at
arm's length.
* Task force observed that reduced incidence of excise duty on inter-OMC
transactions has emerged as a natural consequence of application of
transaction value assessment system.
* Task force felt denying the application of Section 4(1) (a) are far too weak, if
not completely extraneous and far-fetched.
* Having arrived at the above said conclusion, Task force opined that there
was a case for equalizing the incidence of duty on both types of transactions,
in order to mop up the differential duty between the two assessable values.
* First option suggested was to introduce separate provision in the Central
Excise law for valuation of petroleum products, taking it out of the ambit of
Transaction Value concept.
* Second suggestion was to fix moving tariff values on the basis of dealer
price.

10
16. With regard to action taken on findings of the Task Force, the Ministry stated
as under:—
"The recommendations made by the Task Force for introducing separate provision
in the Central Excise law for valuation of petroleum products, taking it out of the
ambit of Transaction Value concept or to fix moving tariff values on the basis of
dealer price have, however, not been found acceptable by the Ministry".
V .  Subsequent Developments
17. While furnishing the subsequent developments that had taken place in the
matter, the Ministry stated as under:—
"Firstly the warehousing facility, as per which OMCs were paying the duty from
depots has been withdrawn and the refineries are now paying duty at the time of
clearance from the refinery point. Secondly, in the Finance Bill 2005, the duty
structure with regard to MS and HSD was changed to a combination of specific
and ad valorem rates of duties in lieu of earlier ad valorem rates of duties".
18. Deposing before the Committee about the system of valuation of petroleum
products, the Revenue Secretary stated as under:—
"Prior to 1.7.2000, the date on which Section 4 of the Central Excise Act was
amended, excise duty on petroleum products was paid on price ex-storage point
irrespective of the fact whether the sales were made directly to dealers or to oil
companies. The CBEC, in its Circular No. 223/57/96-CX, dated 21.6.1996 had laid
down detailed instructions on determination of assessable value of petroleum
products. The oil companies were paying tax in accordance with this Circular.
However, Section 4 of the Central Excise Act was amended with effect from
1.7.2000, changing the method of arriving at the value for the purpose of payment
of excise duty. It was through this amendment that the concept of assessable
value based on normal price was changed to transaction value. However, the oil
companies continued to pay excise duty on APM products in accordance with
the practice that prevailed prior to 1.7.2000 until 31.3.2002.
When the Government of India deregulated the petroleum sector on 1.4.2002,
the situation changed. With effect from 1.4.2002, prices of motor spirit and high
speed diesel were to be market determined and prices of superior kerosene oil
(PDS) and LPG (domestic) were to be regulated in accordance with the subsidy
regime.
Since the prices of kerosene oil (PDS) and LPG (domestic) continued to be under
the control of Government, oil companies are paying excise duty at ex-storage
point selling price. For other products, including motor spirit and high speed
diesel, excise duty is paid on the basis of transaction value.
With the change in the Central Excise Act coupled with the change in the regulation
of the petroleum sector, Government decided that there should be economies in
the way in which the oil companies operate. The Ministry of Petroleum and
Natural Gas, therefore, issued a letter dated 10.7.2001, wherein it was decided

11
that the PSUs will immediately conclude MoUs intended to reduce cost and
streamline functioning. These MoUs were to cover not only product sharing
amongst public sector oil companies but also sharing of infrastructure facilities
and hospitality arrangements. I may reiterate once again that the objective of
Government was to bring about efficiency and economy in operation. It was on
the basis of this direction of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas that the
MoUs were concluded between the oil comapnies".
19. While dealing with the issue of transaction value, the Secretary Revenue
quoted the provisions of section 4 of the Central Excise Act which lays down the
following principles of transaction value:—
‘Where under this Act, the duty of excise is chargeable on any excisable goods
with reference to their value, then, on each removal of the goods, such value
shall:
(a) In a case where the goods are sold by the assessee, for delivery at the time
and place of the removal, the assessee and the buyer of the goods are not
related and the price is the sole consideration for the sale, be the transaction
value;
(b) In any other case, including the case where the goods are not sold, be the
value determined in such manner as may be prescribed’.
The explanation to this Section further elaborates the point. It reads,
‘For the removal of doubts, it is hereby declared that the price-cum-duty of the
excisable goods shall be the price actually paid to him for the goods sold and the
money value of the additional consideration, if any, flowing directly or indirectly
from the buyer to the assessee in connection with the sale of such goods, the
such price-cum-duty, excluding sales tax and other taxes, if any, actually paid
shall be deemed to include the duty payable on such goods’.
20. Explaining about the applicability of transaction value for assessment
purposes, the Secretary putforth before the Committee as under:—
"For applicability of transaction value in a given case for assessment purposes,
the following requirements should be satisfied:
(i) The duty shall be on each removal of goods. In other words, there can be
variation in value for duty purposes even from consignment to consignment;
(ii) The goods are sold by the assessee for delivery at the time and place of
removal;
(iii) The assessee and the buyer are not related;
(iv) Price should be the sole consideration for sale; and
(v) The price relevant for payment of excise duty shall be the price actually paid
to the assessee, including any other consideration flowing directly or
indirectly from the buyer to the assessee."

12
21. Dwelling on the subject further, the Revenue Secretary stated as below:—
"The question, therefore, is whether the choice of import parity price for
determining sale by one oil company to another is in any way a deviation from
the principle of transaction value. It may be noted in this connection that the
principle of import parity price was also reached on the basis of a Resolution of
the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas dated 21.11.1997. The Resolution,
which led to the implementation of the de-regulated pricing scheme, reads, inter
alia,
‘The system of retention pricing is abolished for all (existing and new) refineries,
and pricing of petroleum products at refinery gate level will move towards import
parity’.
I may mention that with effect from June 2006, the concept of import parity price
has given way to the concept of trade parity price. Following the
recommendations of the Rangarajan Committee price for company-to-company
sale is now based on trade parity price which is the weighted average of 20 per
cent of export parity price and 80 per cent of import parity price."
22. Explaining the case that was decided by CESTAT as to whether the price
fixed constituted transaction value, the Secretary further stated as:—
"Initially, the Department also had similar doubts-as was expressed by the Audit
and the Commissioner of Central Excise, Vizag-I, in the case of M/s HPCL. While
adjudicating a Show Cause Notice, the Commissioner held that since the aforesaid
agreement was for mutual interest between refinery and oil marketing companies,
price at which goods were cleared to other marketing companies was not true
transaction value, and it was, accordingly, decided that the price at which the
products were sold to the dealers would be the basis for arriving at the Excise
Duty. It was also held that the transaction under the argeement cannot be treated
as based on commercial consideration, since all the parties stood to gain mutually
by the arrangement. Accordingly, the demands of differential duty raised on the
assessee were confirmed. The Commissioner's findings were, however, challenged
by M/s HPCL before the Customs, Excise and Service Tax Tribunal, and the
Tribunal, after considering the rival submissions, held that, with effect from
1.7.2000, the value to be adopted for levy of excise duty is the transaction value,
and that the value at which the transaction is effected can be raised only if there
is a flow back from the buyer to the seller, which is not reflected in the transaction
value declared to the department. Moreover, the Tribunal noted, the price of the
products supplied to the Oil Marketing Companies is based on Import Parity
Prices, and there is nothing in law stipulating that different prices to different
buyers are not permissible. The Tribunal further noted that the agreement among
the oil companies has been entered into on a directive from the Government of
India, and this results in an optimal utilisation of the marketing facilities of the
various companies in the country and also, in reducing the cost of transportation.
The Tribunal also went through the agreement and did not find any ground to
hold that the transactions are not at arm’s length, further observing that even if

13
the agreement between the companies results in mutual benefit, the Revenue
should not feel unhappy so long as duty is paid on the transaction value. With
the above observations and conclusions, the Tribunal allowed the appeal filed
by the assessee".
23. The Ministry while submitting to the Committee about the latest position of
the case, stated as under:—
"Revenue, however, filed an appeal against the Tribunal's ruling, before the
Hon'ble Supreme Court, but the Apex Court also dismissed the Civil Appeal filed
by the Revenue upholding the position taken by the CESTAT".
24. While elaborating the concept of 'transaction value', the Revenue Secretary
apprised the Committee about its merits and advantages as under:—
"(i) The concept of transaction value is in accordance with best international
practice for assessment of goods. The primary basis for customs valuation
under the WTO Agreement on Implementation of Article VII of the General
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, 1994, is transaction value as defined in
Article 1 of the said Agreement. Most countries have adopted the concept
of transaction value in customs and many in respect of excise or V AT. V AT
is on transaction-to-transaction basis.
(ii) Transaction value is a concept that is clear and transparent both to the
assessing authority and the taxpayer. It takes into account the market reality
where different prices can be charged by a seller to different buyers. It cuts
out all elements of arbitrariness in the fixation of assessable value and
eliminates the need for repeated and protracted litigation on normal price. It
applies across the board to all commodities and has sufficient safeguards
built in to ensure that the pricing is at arm's length and that there is no flow
back to the assessee.
(iii) It cannot be said that the principle of import parity price invariably and
uniformly works in favour of the oil companies. There is greater fixity and
stability in using import parity refinery gate price. While import parity refinery
gate price is revised every fortnight, the selling price for consumers remains
more stable.Thus, during the period April, 2002 to June, 2006, refinery gate
price was revised more than 100 times to reflect the increases in the price of
crude, but the selling price to consumers remained more stable and changed
only 30 times. There have been several cases where the import parity price
was higher than the depot sales price. The net effect of the use of transaction
value is therefore not certain and may go in favour of revenue or against it
depending on the change in import price of crude.
(iv) It may be noted that the differential prices charged in the past are now no
longer a matter of such serious concern. In the past, duties were levied on
an ad valorem basis mostly and hence the duty was highly price sensitive.
Following the recommendations of the Lahiri Committee in 2005 and keeping
in view the interests of consumers, the Government has now switched over
to a system in which the greatest component of duty on petroleum products

14
is the specific duty. For instance, in respect of petrol, the rate of duty as on
28.2.2005 was 23 per cent of assessable value plus Rs. 7.50 per litre. As on
1.3.2005, the duty rate became 8 per cent ad valorem plus Rs. 13 per litre.
Thus, the duty today is related more to volume than to price.
(v) It may be noted that the warehousing facility which permitted oil companies
to transfer excisable products from refineries to marketing depots and
installations without payment of duty at the refinery gate has been withdrawn
from September, 2004. As a consequence, the Department gets its revenue
earlier than under the previous system resulting in further gain to the
department and higher cost to the oil companies."
25. The views that have been submitted contesting the Audit observations are
summarised as follows:—
‘‘(i) There exists no extra consideration nor there is any flow-back beyond the
agreed upon price. Therefore, the price at which inter-company transactions
have taken place is the transaction value for the purpose of section 4 of the
Central Excise Act, 1944. The product sharing agreement to sell products at
a different price, does not establish mutuality of interest among the oil
companies. In these cases, the buyer and the sellers are not a Holding
Company or a Subsidiary Company of each other and cannot be treated as
related persons.
(ii) The concept of transaction value applies separately for each transaction for
assessment and there is no concept of a "Normal Price" (as used to be the
case in law prior to adoption of transaction value based assessments under
Central Excise Law). Each transaction being independent in nature, will
have transaction value shown in the respective invoice which will be the
basis of determination of assessable value and has to be accepted as such
in the absence of any evidence of extra consideration—direct or indirect,
which is not the case here.
(iii) The Customs, Excise and Service Tax Appellate Tribunal (CESTAT) vide
Final Order no. 306-307 dated 28.2.2005 in HPCL vs. C.C.E. Vizag {2005 (187)
ELT 479 (Tri. Bang)} had rejected the Government's plea that as agreement
was for mutual interest between refinery and oil companies, price at which
goods were cleared to other marketing companies was not true transaction
value. Civil appeal filed by the Government against the said ruling of CESTA T
has been dismissed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India vide orders
dated 3.1.200’’.
26. Hon'ble Supreme Court of India, while dismissing the Civil Appeal filed by
the Government against the said ruling of CESTAT, inter alia held as under:—
"Transaction value can be assailed, if there is a flow back from the buyer to the
seller, which is not  reflected in the transaction value declared to the department.
In this case Revenue has not established that the other Oil Companies are
siphoning some extra amount to the appellant, which is not reflected in the value

15
on which duty has been paid. Moreover, the price of the products supplied to
OMCs is based on the Import Parity Price. There is nothing in law stipulating
that different prices to different buyers are not permissible. In other words
transaction value can be challenged if conditions stipulated in section 4(1) (a)
are not fulfilled. In this case, the sale is complete at the time and place of removal,
where the products are filled by the appellants in the tank/truck/wagon as
nominated by the other oil companies for onward dispatch to their dealers. It
should be appreciated that the agreement among the oil companies has been
entered  into on a directive from the Government of India. This results in an
optimal utilization of the marketing facilities of the various companies in the
country and reducing the cost of transportation. It is better for a refinery to
market its products at a nearby marketing facility owned by another company
than to send the same goods to its own marketing facility at a far off place.
Alternatively, when the company having a refinery has a marketing outlet at
some other place, nearer to a refinery of a different company, then it would be
better for that marketing outlet to purchase the product from that refinery rather
than receive from their own refinery. This arrangement definitely, reduces the
transportation cost and is only in public interest. On going through the agreement
we do not find any ground to hold that the transactions are not at arm’s length.
It should also be borne in mind that the days of the concept of normal price are
over when the concept of transaction value was introduced in the year 2000. In
fact it would be worthwhile to quote from Board's Circular dated 30.06.2000.
The definition of 'transaction value' needs to be carefully taken note of as there
is fundamental departure from the erstwhile system of valuation that was
essentially based on the concept of 'Normal Wholesale Price', even though sales
were effected at varying prices to different buyers or class of buyers from factory
gate or Depots etc.
The new Section 4 essentially seeks to accept different transaction values, which
may be charged by the assessee to different customers, for assessment purposes
so long as these are based upon purely commercial consideration, where buyer
and the seller have no relationship and price is the sole consideration for sale.
Thus, it enables valuation of goods for excise purposes on value charged as per
commercial practices rather than looking for a notionally determined value".

PART II
OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
27. The concept of 'transaction value' to determine valuation of goods for
computation of central excise duty was brought into effect from 1 July 2000 replacing
the earlier concept of 'normal value', that is determination of assessable value on a
normative basis. Section 4(3)(d) of Central Excise Act, 1944, defines 'transaction
value' as the price actually paid or payable for the goods, when sold, and includes in
addition to the amount charged as price, any amount the buyer is liable to pay to or on
behalf of the assessee, by reason of, or in connection with the sale payable at the time
of sale or any other time. Transaction value, therefore, is the price actually paid for
the goods sold when price is the sole consideration.
[Sl.No. 1]
28. Audit scrutiny has revealed that five terminals of M/s Indian Oil Corporation
Ltd. (IOCL) cleared/sold certain petroleum products to other oil companies on payment
of duty on assessable value which was much less than that charged from their own
outlets/terminals. Two key issues finding have emerged out of the audit findings—
(a) the clearance of products at lower (mutually agreed) rates to other oil companies
not only resulting in revenue loss but also in the inflow of extra consideration to these
companies from ultimate consumers who were not given the benefit of lower excise
dutyand, (b) the price charged, not being the sole consideration for sale, could not be
treated as 'transaction value' for the purpose of levy of duty.
[Sl. No. 2]
29. Even after dismantling of Administered Price Mechanism (APM) in April
2002, prices of petroleum products continued to be monitored  and regulated by Oil
Coordination Committee. Thus the basic price structure of the products which formed
the basis for determination of retail outlet prices charged from the ultimate consumer
remained uniform for  all oil companies. Therefore, adoption of lower assessable value
at the stage of clearance of the products byIOCL installations to other oil marketing
companies resulted in lower duty realization without commensurate  benefit to the
consumers. However, the Committee find that the transactions that had taken place
were in accordance with the agreement  entered into between IOCL and other oil
marketing companies. The genesis of the agreements amongst oil marketing companies
was the  change in the Central Excise Act coupled with the change in the regulation of
the petroleum sector and the decision of the Government to have economies in the way
in which the oil companies operated. The Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) amongst
the oil companies were intended to reduce costs and to streamline their functioning.
These MOUs included not only product sharing but also sharing of infrastructure
facilities and hospitality arrangements. The Committee have been given to understand
that it was on the basis of a direction of the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas that
the MOUs were concluded between the oil companies.
[Sl. No. 3]
16

17
30. From the foregoing, two conflicting view points emerge on the issue. The
first view, which is reflected in the audit  paragraph and endorsed by the Commissioner
of Central Excise, Vishakhapatnam, holds that the price of petroleum products
removed/sold to other oil companies under mutual agreement cannot be considered
as 'sale' in term of the provisions of the  Central Excise Act. This view considers such
a mutually agreed price as only a notional price for product sharing with a view to
ensuring smooth supply and distribution of petroleum products. As per the agreement
itself, the parties to the agreement namely, the oil companies have entered into such
an agreement for mutual benefit for using products of each other on terms and
conditions contained in the  agreement. It was thus concluded that the price at which
the excise duty has been paid for such supplies under the Oil Exchange Agreement
resulted in extra consideration to the Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) and is thus
not representative of transaction value as defined in the Central Excise Act. The
Petroleum Product Exchange under the aforesaid Oil Sharing MOU enabled selling
by the other Oil Companies through their Depots/Dealers at the same price at which
these petroleum products were sold at the Depots by the assessee himself. Therefore,
the view emerged that the transaction value adopted for payment of duty on goods
removed under Oil Exchange appeared to be a mere facade for sale with a view to evade
proper payment of excise duty. It further gave rise to an apprehension that by signing
a MOU, the OMCs have only sought to mutually benefit themselves. It has been
contended that if one considers the transaction value as defined in Central Excise Act
as the value at which the prices were actually paid for the goods, when price is the sole
consideration, the price adopted for payment of duty for goods removed and sold in the
instant case under Oil Exchange cannot be deemed as the price actually paid or
payable for the goods sold.  Citing this argument, the Commissioner of Central
Excise, adjudicating the case, arrived at the conclusion that considering the provisions
of the mutual agreement entered between the oil companies, the price on which the
Central Excise Duty has been paid for clearances of goods under Oil Exchange does
not represent the "transaction value" as defined in the provisions of the Central
Excise Act. Instead, he was of the view that the price at which the assessee sold the
goods to their dealers shall be adopted as the transaction value/price at which the
assessee was required to pay the duty.
[Sl. No. 4]
31. The alternate view on this issue, as adjudicated by the Customs, Excise and
Service Tax Appellate Tribunal (CESTAT) and upheld by the Hon'ble Supreme Court
and now endorsed by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in their
submissions to the Committee, affirms that the mutually agreed price between the oil
companies does not violate the provisions of the Central Excise law. This viewpoint
propounds that the amended provisions [Section (4)] of the Central Excise Act
essentially seeks to accept different transaction values, which may be charged by the
assessee to different  customers, for assessment purpose so long as these are based
upon purely commercial consideration where the buyer and the seller have no

18
relationship and price remains the sole consideration for sale. This enables valuation
of goods for excise purposes on value charged as per commercial practice rather than
looking for a notional value. It has further been stated in support of this view that the
agreement among the Oil Marketing Companies (OMCs) has been entered into on a
directive from the Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas in order to facilitate optimal
utilization of the market facilities of the various oil companies across the country
and for reducing the cost of transportation. It was felt that it would be better for a
refinery to market its product at a nearby marketing facility owned by another company
than to send the same to it own marketing facility at a far-off place. The Tribunal,
which considered this case, was thus of the view that there was no ground to hold that
the mutually agreed price among the oil companies was not transaction value under
the law. It was concluded that such a mutual agreement among the OMCs was only to
ensure smooth distribution of the petroleum products and the formula arrived at by
them for fixing the selling price of the petroleum products was the genuine selling
price.
[Sl. No. 5]
32. In the meantime, the Committee note that the Ministry of Finance have
taken some steps to resolve the issue by stipulating payment of duty by Oil Companies
from the refinery point and by changing the duty structure with regard to HS and
HDS to a combination of specific and ad valorem rates of duty in lieu of earlier ad
valorem rates of duties. Further, the price for the sale from one Oil Company to
another is currently based on trade parity price (weighted average of 20% export
parity price and 80% of import parity price). However, the Committee find that the
Ministry have not accepted the recommendations of the Departmental Task Force
with regard to  equalizing the incidence of duty on inter-OMC transactions by
introducing a separate provision in the Central Excise law for valuation of petroleum
products, taking it out of the ambit of Transaction Value concept and also to fix
moving tariff values on the basis of dealer price. As the Task Force was specially
constituted to resolve the ticklish issue  of valuation of petroleum products, the
Committee would like  the Ministry to re-examine the whole issue in all its
ramifications and arrive at a judicious decision in the matter so that the interest of
Revenue stands well-protected at the same time facilitating smooth transportation
and distribution of petroleum products across the country. Based on this re-
examination if necessary, suitable amendments may be  carried out in the valuation
provisions of central excise law and the tariff  structure so as to remove the existing
ambiguities in the provisions and plug the possible misuse. If required,  an  Inter-
ministerial Group comprising of representatives from the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue)  and Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas and other
concerned agencies may be constituted for this purpose so that the problem of under-
valuation and suppression of price in respect of petroleum products is harmoniously
resolved once and for all.

19
In the light of findings  in the subsequent Audit Reports viz. for the years 2006
and 2007  regarding under-valuation of excisable goods, the Committee would also
like the Ministry to enquire into instances of under-valuation of excisable goods and
initiate corrective measures including incorporation of appropriate riders in the
present provisions. The  Committee would await the Ministry's  response in this
regard.
[Sl. No. 6]
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
7 November, 2007 Chairman,
16 Kartika, 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

ANNEXURE  I
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2006-2007) HELD ON 17TH OCTOBER, 2006
The Committee  sat from 1100 hrs. to 1300 hrs. on 17th October, 2006 in Committee
Room "D", Parliament  House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
     Dr. K. Malaisamy — Chairman (in the  absence of Prof.  V .K. Malhotra)
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2.  Shri  Khagen Das
3.  Shri Brajesh Pathak
4.  Shri Madan Lal Sharma
5.  Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
6.  Shri Kharabela Swain
7.  Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8.  Shri Janardhana Poojary
9.  Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
10.  Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2.  Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Assistant Director
Officers of the office of the C&AG of India
1. Ms. Mohua Chatterjee — ADAI
2. Shri Jayanti Prasad — Pr. Director
Representatives of Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue)
1.  Shri K.M. Chandrasekhar — Secretary (Revenue)
2. Shri P.C. Jha — Member
3. Shri Devender Dutt — Member
20

21
CBEC's Field Formation
1.  Shri Jogendra Singh — Director General, Vigilance
2. Shri B.K. Gupta — Director General (Inspection), Customs
& Central Excise
Representatives of Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
Shri Prabh Dass — Joint Secretary (Petroleum)
2. In the absence of the Chairman due to his unavoidable pre-occupation,
 Dr. K. Malaisamy was requested by the Members present to chair the  sitting. Dr. K. Malaisamy
agreed to their suggestion and chaired the sitting.
3. At the outset, the acting Chairman, welcomed the Members and the Officers of
C&AG to the sitting of the Committee. He informed the Members that the sitting had
been convened to take oral evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue)  and Central Board  of Excise and Customs (CBEC) regarding
"Delay in finalisation of demands"  and "Undervaluation due to  adoption of lower
mutually agreed price". Thereafter, the Officers of the Office of C&AG briefed the
Committee on the specific points arising out  of  Paragraph Nos. 4.5.2, 4.6.1, 4.6.2 and
4.6.3 of C&AG's  Report No. 6  of 2006 (Union Government—Indirect Taxes-Performance
Audit) and Paragraph No. 11.3 of C&AG's  Report No. 7  of 2006 (Indirect Taxes). Then
the representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)  and CBEC
were called in and the Committee commenced the oral evidence. The  Secretary,
Department of Revenue and Member, CBEC explained the various points and queries
raised by the Members. To certain queries, for which the witnesses could  not give
satisfactory reply, the acting Chairman directed  that  Ministry of Finance (Department
of Revenue)  might furnish the requisite information in writing at the earliest.
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

ANNEXURE II
MINUTES OF THE TWELFTH SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-08) HELD ON 2ND NOVEMBER, 2007
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1250 hrs. in Committee Room 'C’
 Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra      — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri Raghunath Jha
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri Brajesh Pathak
6. Shri K.S. Rao
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
9. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
5. Shri N.K. Jha — Under Secretary
Representatives of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri B.K. Chattopadhyay — ADAI (RC)
2. Shri A.N. Chatterji — DG (PA)
3. Shri K.R. Sriram — PD (ESM)
4. Shri Jayanti Prasad — PD (INDT)
5. Shri R.B. Sinha — PD (AF&N)
22
server1 \reportls\4777LSENG . Raw Text /4777ls p65

23
Representatives of the Ministry of Consumer Affairs, Food and Public
Distribution (Deptt. of Food and Public Distribution)
*** *** *** *** *** ***
Representative of the Food Corporation of India (FCI)
*** *** *** *** *** ***
Representative of the Planning Commission
*** *** *** *** *** ***
Representative of the  Ministry of Rural Development (Department of
Rural Development)
*** *** *** *** *** ***
Representative of Ministry of Housing and Poverty Alleviation
*** *** *** *** *** ***
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members  to the sitting of the
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration, the following Draft
Reports:
(a) Draft Report on Para 11.3 of C&AG Report No. 7 of 2006 [Indirect Taxes—
Customs, Central Excise & Service Tax] relating to "Under-valuation due to
adoption of lower mutually agreed price."
(b) Draft Action Taken Report on 28th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) on
"Control Systems in India Security Press, Nashik."
(c) Draft Action Taken Report on 34th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) on
"Delayed purchase and insignificant utilization of equipment procured
under Fast Track Procedure."
After brief discussion, the Committee adopted the draft Reports without any
modifications/amendments and authorized the Chairman to finalise and present the
same  to the Parliament in the light of factual verification done  by the Audit.
3 . *** *** *** *** *** ***
4 . *** *** *** *** *** ***
5 . *** *** *** *** *** ***
6 . *** *** *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.

AUDIT REPORT NO. 7 OF 2006 (INDIRECT TAXES)
11.3 Undervaluation due to adoption of lower mutually agreed price
Section 4 as effective from 1 July 2000 brought the concept of transaction value.
The Ministry in circular dated 30 June 2000 clarified that but for the normal value being
replaced by transaction value, there was no difference in the scheme of valuation of
petroleum products under the old section 4  and new section 4  and that the provisions
of  new section 4  when applied to the administered price of petroleum products should
not  make any material difference in assessable value.
Five terminals of M/s. IOCL at Bhatinda, Jalandhar, Jaipur, Jodhpur and Sangrur
in Jaipur I, II, Ludhiana and Jalandhar commissionerates were engaged in storage
and marketing of various petroleum products received in their  bonded warehouse,
stock of MS, HSD and SKO  etc. from their refinieries. The IOCL terminals apart from
clearing the products  to their own distribution outlets also cleared MS, HSD and
SKO etc.to terminals/depots belonging to other oil companies like M/s.BPCL and
M/s. HPCL on payment of duty on assessable value which was much less than that
charged from their own outlets/terminals.
It was observed that though the administered price mechanism was dismantled
from April 2002, prices of petroleum products continued to be monitored and regulated
by Oil Coordination Committee (OCC). Basic price structure of the products which
formed the basis for determination of retail outlet prices charged from the ultimate
consumer remained uniform for all the oil companies. As such adoption of lower
assessable  value at the stage of clearance of the products by IOCL installation to
other oil companies resulted in lower duty reliaration clearance of products at lower
(agreed) rates resulted in inflow of extra consideration to the other oil companies
from ultimate consumers because the benefit of lower excise duty was not passed on
to the ultimate consumer retail sale price having  remained same. Accordingly, the
price charged did not remain the sole consideration for sale and, hence, could not  be
considered as 'transaction value' for the purpose of levy of duty. The differential
duty lost on the clearances of  MS and HSD made to M/s. BPCL and M/s. HPCL
terminals and their depots during April 2003 to September 2004 amounted to
Rs. 27.76 crore.
On this being pointed out (between July 2003 and August 2004), the department
in respect of two terminals (Bhatinda  and Sangrur) intimated (May 2005) that SCNs for
Rs. 5.90 crore covering clearance upto 31 March 2004 had been issued and in respect
of Jalandhar and Jodhpur that SCNs were being issued. Reply in respect of Jaipur had
not been received.
server1 \reportls\4777LSENG . Raw Text /4777ls p65
24

25
The Ministry stated (November 2005) that the transaction had taken place in
accordance with an agreement entered into between IOCL and other oil marketing
companies and the price charged was  the sole consideration for sale. It further stated
that the transactions satisfied the conditions laid down in section 4 leaving no ground
for invoking the provisions of Valuation Rules.
Reply of the Ministry is not tenable as the price mutually agreed upon by the oil
companies cannot be considered as transaction value in terms of section 4(i)(a) as
products  so cleared  were actually sold by other petroleum companies at the same
price at which their own products were sold. The clearance by IOCL to other oil
companies at lower assessable  value was thus not based upon  purely commercial
considerations and the assessable value was to be determined in terms of rule 11 read
with rule 7 of the Valuation Rules.
MGIPMRND—4777LS—07-12-2007.