17
UNION GOVERNMENT APPROPRIATION
ACCOUNTS (CIVIL) — 1996-97
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2005-2006
SEVENTEENTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

SEVENTEENTH  REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
Presented to Lok Sabha on: 12.8.2005.
Laid in Rajya Sabha on:  12.8.2005.
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
19 July, 2005/28 Asadha, 1927(Saka)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
UNION GOVERNMENT APPROPRIATION
ACCOUNTS (CIVIL) — 1996-97
Action Taken on 16th Report of Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha)

PAC No. 1780
© 2005 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in Lok
Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi.
Price: Rs. 60.00

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF  THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2005-2006) ..................... (iii)
INTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... (v)
PART I
CHAPTER-I Report .................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER-II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by Government .......................................................................... 10
CHAPTER-III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do ..............
not desire to pursue in the light of the replies received
from Government...................................................................... 142
CHAPTER-IV Observations/Recommendations replies to which have not
been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration ... 143
CHAPTER-V Observations/Recommendations  in  respect  of  which
Government have furnished interim replies ............................. 144
APPENDIX
Observations and Recommendations ...................................... 145
PART II
Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee held
on 15th July, 2005 ..................................................................... 149

COMPOSITION  OF  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Dr. R. Senthil
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
13. Kunwar Revati Raman Singh
14. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Dr. K. Malaisamy
19. Shri V. Narayanasamy
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
21. Shri Jairam Ramesh
22. Prof. R.B.S. V arma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Committee Officer
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of Public Accounts Committee having been authorised by the
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this Seventeenth Report
on action taken by Government on the recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee contained in their 16th Report (13th Lok Sabha) on “Union Government
Appropriation Accounts (Civil)—1996-97”.
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee
at their sitting held on 15th July, 2005. Minutes of the sitting form Part-II of the Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and
recommendations of the committee have been printed in thick type in the body of
the Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the
Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter  by the Office of the Comptroller  and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
19 July, 2005 Chairman,
28 Asadha 1927 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER-I
REPORT
1. This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government
on the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their 16th Report
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha) on Union Government— " Appropriation Accounts (1996-
97)-Civil". The 16
th Report contained 21 Observations/Recommendations. Of these,
eight Recommendations related to more than one Ministry/Department.
2. The action taken notes have been received from the concerned Ministries/
Departments in respect of all the 21 Observations/Recommendations and these have
been broadly categorised as follows:—
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by Government:
Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20&21
(Paragraph Nos. 13.1 to 13.21)
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies received from Government:
-Nil-
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
-Nil-
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
-Nil-
3. In their Original Report, the Committee had examined the following issues which
arose during the examination of Union Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil)
for the year 1996-97—
(i) Large scale unspent balances under various Grants/Appropriations,
(ii) Improprieties/irregularities in the surrender of savings,
(iii) Non-utilisation of Supplementary Grants/Appropriations,
(iv) Irregularities/Improprieties regarding reappropriation of funds,
(v) Expenditure on "New Service/New Instrument of Service" without requisite
approval etc.,
(vi) A voidable March-rush of expenditure,
(vii) Pendency of Utilisation Certificates.

2
4. While examining the above issues, the Committee had observed that lack of
sustained and vigorous monitoring, non-observance of prescribed financial rules,
inability to assess the actual requirement of funds, disregard to Codal provisions
and standing instructions and lack of financial discipline and accountability on the
part of concerned Ministries/Departments were the main contributory reasons for
these irregularities.
5. In the light of these shortcomings, the Committee had made certain
recommendations which, inter-alia included, — asking the Ministries/Departments
to make realistic budgetary projections so as to keep "unspent balances" to the barest
minimum, revamping the existing budgetary mechanism so as to ensure proper and
correct estimation of the budgetary requirements, evolving realistic parameters to
avoid wide variations between the sanctioned provisions and actual expenditure,
assessing objectively the procurement of supplementary grants so as to prevent
unwarranted surrender of savings later and reviewing the powers and functions of
the Financial Advisors in order to check wrongful/injudicious re-appropriations, to
ensure even flow of expenditure to avoid March-rush etc.
6. The action taken notes have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this
Report. The Committee will now deal with the action taken by the various Ministries/
Departments in respect of some of their Observations/Recommendations.
A. Unspent provisions in Voted Grants/Charged Appropriations (Paragraph 13.1)
7. The Committee, in paragraph 13.1 of the Original Report, had observed that
the Civil Ministries/Departments failed to make a realistic assessment of their
requirement of funds under a large number of Grants/appropriations during the
year 1996-97. There were large scale provisions that remained unspent during that
period by the Civil Ministries/Departments. During the course of their examination
of Appropriation Accounts (Civil) for the year 1996-97, the Committee had noticed
that there was net unspent provision of Rs. 11266.16   crore under 147 cases in the
V oted portion (both under Revenue and Capital Sections) and Rs. 32965.06 crore
under 57 cases in the charged portion (both under Revenue and Capital Sections)
of the Grants/Appropriations operated by the concerned Ministries/Departments.
While expressing their serious concern over this malady, the Committee had
recommended as follows:
"The Committee observe that out of the whopping savings of Rs. 44231.22 crore
in the grants pertaining to Civil Ministries/Departments for the year 1996-97,
Rs. 29466.03 crore was on account of less drawal of 31 days  Treasury bills.
The Committee had found that the overall saving was a net result of saving in
204 cases and excess expenditure in eight cases. Therefore, the Committee were
of the view that such savings, described as 'unspent balances' could have been
significantly reduced, if realistic budgetary projections were made by the
concerned Ministries/Departments. Since budget proposals were scrutinized by
the Ministry of Finance, the Committee want the Ministry of Finance to ponder
over this recurring malady and find suitable measures so as to keep these
'unspent balances' to the barest minimum."

3
8. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Economic Affairs—Budget Division),
in their Action Taken Note have stated:
"The observations/recommendations of the Committee have been noted and
all the Ministries/Departments have been asked to formulate Budget estimates
on realistic basis and to surrender savings well in time so that available
resources are put to best possible use.
Further they have stated that the pace of expenditure was periodically reviewed
in the Ministry of Finance and the major spending Ministries were instructed
to prepare quarterly cash flow statements and to keep a close watch over
utilization of allocated funds. It has been mentioned that the Fiscal
Responsibility and Budget Management Bill, 2000 also provided for quarterly
review of receipts and expenditure."
Unspent provisions of Rs. 100 crore or more
(Paragraph 13.2)
9. The Committee in paragraph 13.2 of the Original Report had also observed that
there were as many as 27 Voted Grants/Charged Appropriations operated by the Civil
Ministries/Departments under which unspent provisions of Rs. 100 crore or more
had occurred during the year 1996-97. Large unspent provisions were identified in
areas like Agriculture, Chemicals and Fertilizers, Health and Family Welfare, Education,
Industry, Rural Areas and Employment, Urban Affairs and Employment and Water
Resources. These unspent provisions were attributed by the concerned Ministries/
Departments to some of the schemes failing to take off.
10. While examining such cases, the Committee had recommended:
"What has caused serious concern to the Committee is the fact that there
were as many as 27 V oted Grants/Charged Appropriations under which
savings of Rs. 100 crores and more has occurred during the year 1996-97.
The Committee find that such large scale savings had occurred in a number
of developmental areas like Agriculture (Rs. 630.62 crore), Chemicals and
Fertilizers (Rs. 441.41 crore), Health and Family Welfare (Rs. 121.96 crore),
Education (Rs. 792.12 crore), Industry (Rs. 285.29 crore), Rural Areas and
Employment (Rs. 837.24 crore), Urban Affairs and Employment (Rs. 110.85
crore) and Water Resources (Rs. 401.79 crore). This speaks volumes for the
lack of earnestness of the Ministries concerned and reflects on their ability
or otherwise to deliver even in the developmental fields despite availability
of funds. Taking note of the huge unspent balances in key developmental
areas in various Ministries/Departments, the Committee are inclined to believe
that either the schemes and programmes were ill-conceived or there was lack
of sustained and vigorous monitoring. The Committee, therefore, recommend
that before funds are earmarked, the developmental schemes ought to be
tailored having regard to ground realities and the achievability of targets
within stipulated time so that scarce resources are not tied to schemes which
do not take off or do not show progress commensurate with the funds
allocated in a given financial year."

4
11. The Ministry of Finance, in their Action Taken Note, have stated as
follows:
"The Ministry has noted with concern the observations and findings of the
Public Accounts Committee that large scale savings have occurred in a
number of developmental areas. The existing procedure laid down in the
General Financial Rules, 1963, is fairly adequate to take care of occurrence
of both excess and savings in V oted Grants/Charged Appropriations and
the fact that the savings have occurred despite these instructions, shows
that the Ministries/Departments are not scrupulously following these
procedures.
In pursuance of the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee, this
Ministry has issued fresh instructions to all the Ministries/Departments
advising them to gear up the existing mechanism under their budgetary exercise
so as to make careful formulation of developmental plans/schemes and also
to make realistic assessment of funds required for such developmental schemes.
They have also been advised that the monitoring mechanism to oversee flow
of expenditure under such developmental schemes should also be tightened
in such a way as to keep a monthly watch over the implementation and all
procedures prescribed under General Financial Rules should also scrupulously
be followed."
12. However, the scrutiny of Union Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil)
for the succeeding six years i.e. from 1997-98 to 2002-03 has revealed that the unspent
provisions under the Grants/Appropriations operated by the Civil Ministries/
Departments is a recurring phenomenon. The year-wise details in this regard are
tabulated below:—
Y ear No. of cases Amount involved No. of cases of
of unspent (Rs. In crore) unspent provisions
provisions of Rs. 100 crore or
more
1997-1998 216 47179.76 27
1998-1999 167 46845.86 25
1999-2000 215 68017.65 32
2000-2001 206 138165.33 34
2001-2002 206 25169.52 37
2002-03 199 61713.78 42
13. From the above table, it is seen that there has been a continuous increase in
the amount of unspent provisions during the years 1997-98 to 2000-01 [from
Rs. 47179.76 crore during 1997-98 to Rs. 138165.33 crore during 2000-01]. The amount
of unspent balances, which showed a drastic decrease during the year 2001-02

5
(Rs. 25169.52 crore,) again showed an increase during 2002-03 (Rs. 61713.78 crore)
which is nearly 150% of the unspent provisions that had occurred in 2000-2001.
Similarly, the number of cases of unspent provisions of Rs. 100 crores or more has
also shown an increasing trend during the last six years i.e. from 25 cases in
1998 -99 to 42 cases in 2002-2003.
14. Taking into consideration the large scale unspent provisions of Rs. 44231.22
crore under various Grants/Appropriations operated by the Civil Ministries/
Departments during the year 1996-97, the Committee in their Original Report,
had desired the Ministry of Finance to look into this recurring malady and find
suitable measures so that such unspent balances are kept to the barest minimum.
The Committee has observed that unspent provisions was  recurring feature and
the amount involved ran into thousands of crores. The Committee has also observed
that there were as many as 27 voted Grants/Charged Appropriations operated by
the Civil Ministries/Departments under which unspent  provisions of Rs. 100 crore
or more had occurred during the year 1996-97 and large unspent provisions were
identified in areas like Agriculture,   Chemicals and Fertilizers, Health and Family
Welfare, Education, Industry, Rural Areas and Employment, Urban Affairs and
Employment and Water Resources. Consequently, the Committee had recommended
that before funds are earmarked, the developmental schemes should be assessed
realistically in the light of ground realities as well as the achievability of targets
within the stipulated time. The Action Taken Note furnished by the Ministry of
Finance in response to the specific recommendation of the Committee , however,
reveals that the Ministry have once again issued routine instructions to all the
Ministries/Departments urging them to carefully formulate developmental plans/
schemes and also to make realistic assessment of funds required for such
developmental schemes.
The Committee would further like to point out that the scrutiny of Appropriation
Accounts (Civil) for the six years i.e. from 1997-98 to 2002-2003, reveals that large
scale unspent provisions under the Grants/Appropriations operated by the civil
Ministries/Departments has become an almost recurring feature and the position
is still to be improved. The Committee are inclined to conclude that the concerned
Ministries/Departments have not made any serious attempt to apply effective
corrective measures in accordance with the Committee's recommendations. Mere
repeating of instructions by the Ministry of Finance to concerned Ministries/
Departments carry no meaning unless the reasons for extraordinarily large unspent
provisions are investigated and suitable remedial steps taken as  a result thereof to
ensure that the budgetary projections are made on the basis of realistic assessment.
It is also imperative to ensure that available funds are  utilized timely and
appropriately so that unspent funds are kept to the barest minimum. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Finance, being the nodal Ministry, should
impress upon all the concerned Ministries/Departments to make a thorough study
of the cases where large scale unspent provisions have occurred and lay down
appropriate guidelines for being followed by them in the regard. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the efforts made in this direction.

6
B. Other irregularities—Surrender of unspent provisions, unutilisation of
Supplementary provision, Wrongful re-appropriation of funds. Expenditure on
"New Service/New Instrument of Service" without requisite approval and
avoidable March-rush of expenditure.
[Paragraph Nos. 13.16-13.20]
15. Apart from the large scale unspent  balances that had taken place during the
year 1996-97 by the Civil Ministries/Departments, the Committee had also observed
various other irregularities such as irregularities in surrender of unspent balances,
unutilisation of  supplementary grants, injudicious re-appropriation of funds, rush
of expenditure in the month of March etc. Some of them are illustrated below:
(i)  Surrender of unspent provisions
(Paragraph 13.16)
16. The Committee in paragraph 13.16 of their  Original Report had observed that
the  scrutiny of Appropriation Accounts (Civil) for the year 1996-97 had revealed
that against final savings of Rs. 44231.22 crore, the amount surrendered was
Rs. 24787.35 crore. Out of this an amount of Rs. 24783.51 crore, which amounted to
99 per cent, was surrendered on the last day of the  financial year. In 20 Grants and
21 Appropriations, the entire unspent provisions amounting to Rs. 19.55 crore and
Rs. 3.29 crore respectively, were not surrendered. Further, in 55 cases, more than
20 per cent of the unspent provisions of Rs. 1.00 crore was not surrendered to the
Government. While deploring the cases of irregular surrender of unspent provisions,
the Committee had observed that despite  their repeated exhortations for timely
surrender of savings, the Ministries/Departments were yet to show improvements.
The Committee had desired that the Financial Advisors and the Heads of Ministries/
Departments be made jointly accountable for delay in the timely surrender of unspent
provisions.
17. The Ministry of Finance, in their Action Taken Note, have stated as under:—
"The Ministry has noted the observations and findings of the Public Accounts
Committee that various Ministries/Departments  have either considerably
delayed the surrender of savings or have even failed to surrender the savings.
The existing procedure laid down in the General Financial Rules, 1963 is fairly
adequate to take care of both savings and their surrender under V oted Grants/
Charged  Appropriations and the fact that some Ministries/Departments have
been lax in  timely surrender of savings despite these instructions, shows that
the  Ministries/Departments are not scrupulously following these procedures.
In pursuance of the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee, this
Ministry has issued fresh instructions to all the  Ministries/Departments,
advising them to gear up the internal mechanism of budgetary control so as
to ensure timely and realistic assessment of fund requirement/utilization. They
have also been advised that the monitoring mechanism to oversee utilization
of funds and calculation of possible savings should also be tightened to keep
a regular watch over the utilization of funds/surrender of savings and all
procedures prescribed under General Financial Rules  should also be
scrupulously followed."

7
(ii) Unutilisation of Supplementary Provision
(Paragraph 13.17)
18. While examining the utilization of supplementary provisions, the Committee,
in Paragraph 13.17 of their Report, had noted that Rs. 236.20 crores which were
obtained in 15 cases by the concerned Ministries/Departments proved to be
unnecessary as the final expenditure was less than the original grant. It was desired
that the procurement of supplementary grants by the  Ministries/Departments be
assessed objectively so that unwarranted surrender of unspent provisions  could be
avoided. The Committee had felt that if Heads of  Programme Divisions were made
accountable in this behalf then it would go a long way in streamlining the budgetary
process.
19. The Ministry of Finance in their Action Taken Note have stated that:
"The observations made by the Public Accounts Committee have also been
brought to the notice of all the Ministries/Departments for guidance and
compliance.
In regard to the recommendation regarding making Heads of Programme
Divisions accountable for proper assessment of expenditure requirements
before procuring supplementary grants, we have requested the Department
of Expenditure to examine it with a view to incorporating the same in General
Financial Rules."
(iii) Wrongful re-appropriation of funds
(Paragraph 13.18)
20. The  scrutiny of Appropriation Accounts (for the year 1996-97) of Civil
Ministries/Departments had also revealed that in nearly 44 sub-Heads in 27 grants/
appropriation, re-appropriation of Rs. 85.13 crore was found to be injudicious as the
original provisions under the sub-head, to which funds were transferred by
re-appropriation, were more than adequate and consequently the final savings under
the sub-head were more than the amount re-appropriated to these sub-heads. The
Committee were of the opinion that such rampant re-appropriations were in utter
disregard to codal provisions, standing instructions and canons of financial propriety
and thus show inability/inefficiency of the Financial Advisor attached to the
Ministries. The Committee, in Paragraph 13.18 of their Original Report had, thereof,
recommended that the powers and functions of the Financial Advisor be reviewed
appropriately to prevent  wrongful/injudicious re-appropriation of funds.
(iv) Expenditure on "New Service/New Instrument of Service"
without requisite approval
(Paragraph 13.19)
21. The committee had, in paragraph 13.19, noted that in as many as six Grants,
the prescribed limits, which, if crossed, would constitute New Service/New Instrument
of Service requiring approval of Parliament, were exceeded but the Ministries did not

8
obtain prior approval of Parliament. The Committee had viewed this as a blatant
violation of Financial Rules as well as a sad commentary on the efficacy of Financial
Advisors. Hence, the Committee recommended that it may be enjoined upon all the
Financial Advisors that it was their duty to ensure observance of financial propriety
and to  assert their authority and where advice was overlooked/disregarded, the matter
was to  be brought to the notice of Finance Ministry immediately.
22. In response to Paragraphs 13.18 an 13.19, the Ministry of Finance, in their
Action Taken Note, have stated that "Various safeguards are already available.
However, instructions are proposed to be issued to all the Ministries/Departments
and the FAs to follow the instructions on the subject matter scrupulously."
(v) Avoidable March-rush of expenditure
(Paragraph 13.20)
23. The Committee had pointed out in paragraph 13.20 that more than 50% of the
expenditure incurred by the Civil Ministries/Departments during the year 1996-97 was
in the month of March, 1997. The Ministry of Finance were therefore, asked to devise
a procedure to make it mandatory for the Departmental Heads to hold monthly review
meetings to monitor and so far as practicable, to ensure the even flow of expenditure
to avoid March rush for effective fiscal discipline and better results.
24. In the Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Finance have stated as follows:
"This Ministry has noted the observations and recommendations of the Public
Accounts Committee and in order to ensure that flow of expenditure is monitored by
every Ministry/Department on a monthly basis to ensure, as far as possible, even
flow of expenditure and not rush of expenditure during closing month of the financial
year, instructions have been issued to them to devise a mechanism with steps
envisaged therein."
25. The Committee had taken a serious view of the irregularities such as
irregular surrender of long unspent balances, unutilisation of supplementary
grants, injudicious re-appropriation of funds, rush of expenditure in the month of
March etc. made by the Civil Ministries/Departments during 1996-97. The
Government were asked to ensure that the Financial Advisors and the Heads of
Ministries/Departments are made jointly accountable for delay in timely surrender
of unspent provisions, the powers and functions of the Financial Advisors be reviewed
appropriately to prevent wrongful/injudicious re-appropriation of funds and to hold
monthly review meetings to monitor even flow of expenditure to avoid rush of
expenditure in March etc. The Committee are constrained to point out that instead
of taking the action as desired by them, the Ministry of Finance have furnished
routine replies. The replies contain similar details that the Committee's observations
and recommendations have been noted, fresh instructions have been issued to all
the Ministries/Departments and Financial Advisors have been instructed to follow
them scrupulously. Further, it has been contended that the existing procedure laid
down in the General Financial Rules is fairly adequate to take care of both savings
and their surrender under the Voted Grants/Charged Appropriations. If these
measures are considered adequate, the Committee find it difficult to comprehend

9
as to why the irregularities continue to exist. The Committee feel that mere issuing
of instructions is not enough and they would like to know from the Ministry of
Finance whether any concrete measures have been contemplated in this regard so
that the aforesaid irregularities do not recur. The Committee also desire that the
powers and functions of the Financial Advisors of the concerned Ministries may be
reviewed appropriately to prevent wrongful/injudicious re-appropriations. At the
same time it may also be ensured that a procedure is devised so as to  avoid rush of
expenditure in March and thereby bringing about fiscal discipline. The Committee
hope that the Ministry would at least now take cognizance of the Committee's
recommendations with seriousness and  urgency that they deserve. The Committee
would like to be apprised of the concrete steps taken in this regard and the impact
thereof on the existing set up.

CHAPTER-II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
The Committee observe that out of the whopping savings of Rs. 44231.22 crore in
the grants pertaining to Civil Ministries/Departments for the year 1996-97, Rs. 29466.03
crore was on account of less drawal of 31 days Treasury bills. Excluding these
Treasury bills, the effective savings of Rs. 14765.13 crore constituted more than two
times the supplementary grants of Rs. 7326.86 crore and 3.5 percent of total provision
of Rs. 420902.71 crore. The Committee find that the overall saving was a net result of
saving in 204 cases and excess expenditure in eight cases. The Committee have also
noticed that there was aggregate saving of Rs. 11266.16 crore in the Voted portion
(both under Revenue and Capital Sections) and Rs. 32965.06 crore in the Charged
portion (both under Revenue and Capital Sections) The Committee are of the
considered view that such savings, described as "unspent balances" could have
been significantly reduced, if not avoided altogether, by making realistic budgetary
projections by the concerned Ministries/Departments. Since the budget proposals
are scrutinised by the Ministry of Finance, the Committee would like the Ministry of
Finance to ponder over this recurring malady and find suitable measures so that
such "unspent balances' are kept to the barest minimum.
(Para 13.1 of the sixteenth Report of Public Accounts Committee (Thirteenth Lok
Sabha)
Action Taken
The observations/recommendation of the Committee have been noted and all the
Ministries/Departments have been asked vide O.M. No. 7(6)-B(R)/2001 dated 20th July,
2001 (copy enclosed) to formulate Budget estimates on realistic basis and to surrender
savings well in time so that available resources are put to best possible use.
2. Besides issue of the above mentioned instructions, the pace of expenditure is
periodically reviewed in the Ministry of Finance. Instructions have also been issued
to major spending Ministries to prepare quarterly cash flow statements and to keep
a close watch over utilization of allocated funds. The Fiscal Responsibility and Budget
Management Bill, 2000, also provides for quarterly reivew of receipts and expenditure.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. RR/1-32/2000-01/331
dated 27.6.2001.
Sd/-
(D Swarup)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
No. F.7(6)-B(R)/2001.
10

No. F.7(6)-B(R)/2001.
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
...
Dated 20th July, 2001
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Sixteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha) Union
Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil) - 1996-97 — Measures for
minimising "unspent balances".
The  undersigned is directed to invite a reference to the observations and
recommendations made by the Public Accounts Committee in para 13.1 of their    above
mentioned Report and to say that the Public Accounts Committee while taking adverse
note of the whopping saving of Rs. 44231.22 crore in the grants pertaining to civil
Ministries/Departments for the year 1996-97 has noted that out of the above saving.
Rs. 29466.03 crore  was on account of less drawal of 31 days Treasury Bills. Excluding
these Treasury Bills savings, the effective saving of  Rs. 14765.13 crore constituted
more than two times the supplementary grants of Rs. 7326.86 crore and 3.5 per cent of
the total  provision of Rs. 420902.71 crore. The Committee has further observed that
there was aggregate savings (both Revenue and Capital Sections) amounting to Rs.
11266.16 crore in the V oted portion and Rs. 32965.06 crore in the Charged portion.
2. Taking serious view of this state of affairs, the Public Accounts Committee has
observed that this indicates the lack of earnestness on the part of Ministries/
Departments concerned reflecting on the injudicious formulation of budget estimates/
utilisation of funds, where such savings could have been significantly reduced, if
not avoided altogether, by making realistic budgetary projections by the concerned
Ministries/Departments.
3. In order, therefore, to avoid this recurring malady, all Ministries/Departments
are advised that existing mechanism of review, monitoring and control should be so
geared as to make a more careful formulation of plan/schemes having regard to ground
realities and achievable targets and also to make realistic assessment of funds. The
monitoring mechanism to oversee flow of expenditure under various schemes should
also be tightened in such a way as to keep a montly watch over flow of expenditure.
In case there is likelihood of any savings, corrective action should be taken
immediately to surrender the savings well in advance as required under Rule 69 of
General Financial Rules.
Sd/-
(D. Swarup)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
1. All Ministries/Department as per standard mailing list.
2. All Secretaries to the Government of India.
3. All Financial Advisers Ministries/Departments.
11

Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
E. Coord. Branch
Recommendation of the Public Accounts Committee
What has caused serious concern to the Committee is the fact that there were as
many as 27 V oted Grants/Charged Appropriations under which savings of Rs. 100
crore and more had occurred during  the year 1996-97. The Committee find that such
large scale savings had occurred in a number of developmental areas like Agriculture
(Rs. 630.92 crore), Chemicals and Fertilizers (Rs. 441.41 crore), Health and Family
Welfare (Rs. 121.96 crore), Education (Rs.792.12 crore), Industry (Rs. 285.29 crore),
Rural Areas and Employment (Rs. 837.24 crore), Urban Affairs and Employment (Rs.
110.85 crore) and Water Resources (Rs. 401.79 crore). This speaks volumes for the
lack of earnestness of the Ministries concerned and reflects on their ability or
otherwise to deliver even in the developmental fields despite availability of funds.
Taking note of the huge unspent balances in key developmental areas in various
Ministries/Departments, the Committee are inclined to believe that either the schemes
and programmes were illconceived or there was lack of sustained and vigorous
monitoring. The Committee therefore, recommend that before funds are earmarked,
the developmental schemes ought to be tailored having regard to ground realities
and the achievability of targets within stipulated time so that scarce resources are
not tied to schemes which do not take off or do not show progress commensurate
with the funds allocated in a given financial year.
{Sl. No. 2 Para 13.2 Appendix, 16th Report of Public Accounts Committee (13th
Lok Sabha) on action taken on Union Government Appropriations Accounts (Civil)-
1996-97}
Action taken
This Ministry has noted with concern the observations and findings of the Public
Accounts Committee that large scale savings have occurred in a number of
developmental areas. The existing procedure laid down in the General Financial Rules,
1963, is fairly adequate to take care of occurrence of both excess and savings in
voted grants/charges appropriations and the fact that the savings have occurred
despite these instructions, shows that the Ministries/Departments are not
scrupulously following these procedures.
In pursuance of the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee, this
Ministry has issued fresh instructions to all the Ministries/Departments vide O.M.
No. 12(2)/E. Coord./2001 dated 1.6.01 (copy enclosed) advising them to gear up the
existing  mechanism under their budgetary exercise so as to make careful formulation
of developmental plans/schemes, and also to make realistic assessment of funds
required for such developmental schemes. They have also been advised that the
monitoring  mechanism to oversee flow of expenditure under such developmental
schemes should also be tightened in such a way as to keep a monthly watch over
12

13
the implementation and all procedures prescribed under General Financial Rules
should also scrupulously be followed.
This has been  vetted by Audit vide their U.O. Note No. RR/1-33/2000-01/233 dated
16.5.2001.
Sd/-
(USHA MA THUR)
Joint Secretary
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
E.Coord. Branch U.O. No. 12(2) E. Coord./2000 dated: 1.6.2001

No. 12(2)/E.Coord./2001
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
E. Coord. Branch
New Delhi, the 1st June, 2001.
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Sixteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha)—
Union Government Appropriations Accounts (Civil) — (196-97) — Large
Scale Savings.
The undersigned is directed to invite a reference to the observations  and
recommendations made by the Public Accounts Committee in Para 13.2 of their above
mentioned Report and to say that the Public Accounts Committee, while taking
adverse note of occurrence of savings of Rs. 100 crore and more, in as many as 27
voted grants/appropriations under various Ministries/Departments, has noted with
concern that large scale savings occurred during the year 1996-97 in a number of
developmental areas, viz., Agriculture, Chemicals & Fertilizers, Health & Family
Welfare, Education, Industry, Rural Areas and Employment, Urban Affairs &
Employment and Water Resources.
2. Taking serious note  of this state of affairs, the Committee has observed that
this speaks volumes for the lack of earnestness of the Ministries concerned, reflecting
on their ability to deliver even in the developmental fields despite availability of funds
and that either the schemes or programmes were illconceived or there was lack of
sustained and vigorius monitoring.
3. The fact that large scale savings have occurred in voted/charged appropriations
specially in the area of developmental schemes, clearly establishes that the exercise
was not undertaken in a realistic fashion, nor was periodical monitoring performed
as required under the General Financial Rules, specially the Rules from 66 to 69, and
various Government of India decisions thereunder, where detailed procedures have
been outlined to exercise careful watch over flow of expenditure to avoid savings as
well as excess.  This is highly irregular, as occurrence of savings in respect of
development oriented schemes amounts to non-judicious use of scarce resources.
This is because in case a developmental scheme is not implementable within the
financial year, the relevant funds could have been made better use of elsewhere.
4. In order, therefore, that the available resources are put to best possible use, all
Ministries/Departments are advised that the existing mechanism of review, monitoring
and control should be so geared as to make careful formulation of developmental
plans/schemes having  regard to ground realities and achievable targets with the
time stipulated and also to make realistic assessment of funds required for such
developmental schemes. The monitoring mechanism to oversee flow of expenditure
14

15
under such developmental scheme should also be tightened in such a way as to
keep a monthly watch over the implementation. Needless to say procedures prescribed
under General Financial rules should also be scrupulously followed. In case there is
likelihood of any savings, corrective action should be taken immediately to surrender
such funds well in advance and before the end of the concerned financial year, as
prescribed under Rule 69 of the General Financial Rules. It should also be ensured
that flow of expenditure under a developmental scheme should be so organised as
to avoid rush of expenditure particularly in the closing months of the financial year,
as prescribed under Note. 3 below Rules 69 of the General Financial Rules.
 Sd/-
(USHA MA THUR)
Joint Secretary (Per)
1. All Ministries/Departments as per standard mailing list.
2. All Secretaries to the Government of India.
3. All Financial Advisers.

Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(Monitoring Cell)
Recommendation
The Committee find that in respect of savings of 100 crores and above which
occurred in 27 grants/appropriations during the year 1996-97, only Ministry of
Agriculture furnished the requisite notes in time notwithstanding the instructions
dated 19th December, 1994 issued by the Ministry of Finance in pursuance of the
recommendation of PAC (60th Report—10th Lok Sabha) stipulating that such notes
be furnished to the Committee by 31st May of the year or immediately after the
presentation of the relevant Appropriation Accounts to the House whichever is later.
Taking note of such instance of flouting the instructions of the Ministry of Finance
recurring year after year and underlining the need for securing greater financial
propriety and discipline, the Committee recommend that from the financial
year 2000-2001 onwards, the detailed notes in respect of savings of Rs. 100 crores
and above in respect of Grant/Appropriation be prepared by the concerned
Ministries/Departments and forwarded to the Ministry of Finance so that these
explanatory notes are also made simultaneously available to the PAC alongwith the
Appropriation Accounts. The Committee would like the Ministry of Finance to evolve
a proper procedure in this regard and keep the Committee informed.
(S.No. 3— Appendix Para 13.3 of 16th Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)
Action Taken
In pursuance of the recommendation contained in Para 13.3 of the 16th Report of
the Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha), the Office of Controller General of
Accounts has prescribed the procedure for implementation by the Prinicipal  Account
Offices of the departmentalised accounts organisation and Grant controlling
authorities of Civil Ministries for timely submission of Explanatory Notes on Saving
of Rs. 100 crores and above from the Financial Year 2000-2001 and the same has
been circulated to all Ministries/Departments vide O.M.No. G . 25018/CGA-AA/Polcy—
Savings/2000-01/1 dated 9.4.2001 (copy enclosed as Annexure-I). Instructions have
also been issued to Ministries of Railways, Defence, Communications vide O.M. No.
F./1/16/2001-MC dated 10.4.2001 (copy enclosed as Annexure-II) to evolve similar
procedure concerning their Ministries.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. RR/1-34/2000-01/297
dt. 1-6-2001.
Sd/-
(S.R. Shivrain)
Additional Controller General of Accounts
Ministry of Finance (Expenditure) O.M. No. F.1/16/2001-MC Dated 6-6-2001.
16

ANNEXURE-I
F.No.G-25018/CGA-AA/Policy-Saving/2000-01/1
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Controller General Accounts
Lok Nayak Bhawan, New Delhi 110003
Dated 9th April 2001
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Procedure for submission of Explanatory Notes on saving of Rs. 100
crores and above in respect of a Grant/Appropriation simultaneouly with
the Appropriation Accounts.
The undersigned is directed to invite attention to the Deptt. of Expenditure
(Monitoring Cell)'s O.M. No. 1/16/2001/MC dated 4th January 2001 regarding
furnishing of Explanatory Notes on savings of Rs. 100 crores and above. The Public
Accounts Committee (PAC) vide its recommendation No. 13.3 of 16th Report (13th
Lok Sabha) recommended that from the financial year 2000-2001 onwards, detailed
notes in respect of savings of Rs. 100 crores and above in respect of a Grant/
Appropriation be prepared by the concerned Ministries/Deptts. and forwarded to
CGA's office, so that these Explanatory Notes are made available  to the PAC
simultaneously alongwith the Appropriation Accounts.
2. In pursuance of the above recommendation, following procedure is being laid
down for implementation by the Pr. Accounts Offices of departmentalized accounts
organization and Grant controlling authorities for ensuring timely submission of
Explanatory Notes.
(a) Before submission of State-II of the Headwise Appropriation Accounts to audit
and CGA's office, if a segment of a Grant or Appropriation is found to involve savings
of Rs. 100 crores or more, the Pr. Accounts Office will bring it to the notice of the
Grant controlling authority to prepare an Explanatory Note for obtaining approval of
Secretary through Financial Adviser of the Deptt./Ministry.
(b) On receipt of intimation from the Principal Accounts Office, the Grant controlling
authority would take  immediate action to prepare an Explanatory Note and ensure
that it gets finalized within one month, but not later than completion of audit of
Stage-II  of the Headwise Appropriation Accounts of the concerned Grant. After
finalization of Explanatory Notes, five copies duly approved and signed by the
competent authority should be sent to audit for their vetting and two copies sent to
the concerned Pr. CCAs/CCAs/CAs.
(c) The concerned Pr. CCAs/CCAs/CAs will forward one copy of the Explanatory
Note alongwith Headwise Appropriation Accounts (Stage-III) to CGA's office. A
confirmation that Explanatory Notes have been sent to audit for vetting should be
included in the forwarding letter (quoting the letter No. and date through which it
has been forwarded to Audit).
17

18
(d) After submission of Stage-III of Appropriation Accounts, effect of transfer
entries/corrections (if any) in the Headwise Appropriation Accounts due to
reconciliation, issue of corrigendum etc. should also be incorporated in the
Explanatory Notes and revised Explanatory Notes submitted to Audit by the
concerned Ministry, under intimation to CGA's office.
(e) After Audit has vetted the Explanatory Note, one copy will be returned to the
concerned Deptt./Ministry to enable them to furnish adequate number of copies of
the Explanatory Notes (40 copies in English and 25 in Hindi) to the 'Monitoring Cell'
(Deptt. of Expenditure) for onward transmission to Lok Sabha Sectt.
Sd/-
[Sandesh Kumar]
Dy. Controller General of Accounts
To
1. Office of the C&AG of India, New Delhi
2. Office of the DGACR, New Delhi
3. All Administrative Secretaries of the Ministries/Deptts.
4. All FAs of Ministries/Deptts.
5. J.S. (Budget), Budget Division, Ministry of Finance (DEA), New Delhi
6. All Pr. CCAs/CCAs/CAs/Dy. CAs of Ministries/Deptts.
7. U.S., Monitoring Cell, Min. of Finance, Deptt. of Expenditure.

ANNEXURE II
MOST IMMEDIATE
PAC RECOMMENDATION
No. 1/16/2001-MC
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
MONITORING CELL
Room No. 29, B-Wing, Second Floor,
Loknayak Bhavan, Khan Market,
New Delhi-110003 the 10th April, 2001
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report
of the Public Accounts Committee (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) – Furnishing
of Explanatory Notes on Savings of Rs. 100 crores and above in respect
of a Grant/Appropriation – reg.
The undersigned is directed to invite attention to the O.M. of even No. dated
1.4.2001 forwarding therewith a copy of PAC's recommendation No. 13.3 of 16th Report
(13th Lok Sabha) to the effect that from the financial year 2000-2001 onwards, the
detailed notes in respect of savings of Rs. 100 crores and above in respect of Grant/
Appropriation be prepared by the concerned Ministry/Department and forwarded to
the Ministry of Finance so that these Explanatory Notes are also made simultaneously
available to the PAC alongwith the Appropriation Accounts. The Committee also
desired that proper procedure in this regard be evolved and Committee kept informed.
So far as the Civil Ministries are concerned, the office of the Controller General of
Accounts has devised the procedure (copy enclosed). Ministries of Railways, Defence
and Communications are requested to evolve the procedure in conformity with the
recommendation. They are also requested to prepare Action Taken Note (ATN) on
this recommendation and forward the requisite number of copies (40 copies in English
version and 25 copies in Hindi version) of the A TN duly vetted by Audit to
Lok Sabha Secretariat by 20.6.2001 under intimation to the 'Monitoring Cell'.
Sd/-
(T.S. NEGI)
UNDER SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
TELE: 4626829
1. Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) New Delhi
2. Ministry of Defence, New Delhi
3. Ministry of Communications (i) Deptt. of Post (ii) Deptt. of Telecommunications
19

20
Dated 10th April, 2001
O.M.No. 1/16/2001-MC
Copy fowarded for information and necessary action to:—
1. FA (Defence) Shri P.R. Sivasubramanian) South Block, New Delhi.
2. Financial Commissioner (Railway Board) (Shri P. Rajagopalan) Rail Bhavan, New
Delhi.
3. FA (Post) (Shri K.S. Menon) Department of Post, Dak Bhavan, New Delhi.
4. Member (Finance) (Shri A. Prasad).
Department of Telecommunications, Sanchar Bhavan, New Delhi.
5. Shri Devender Singh, DS (PAC) Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi.
6. Office of the C&AG of India, 10, BZ Marg, New Delhi.
Sd/-
(T.S. NEGI)
Under  Secretary (MC)

No. 1/16/2001-MC
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
MONITORING CELL
Room No. 29, B-Wing, Second Floor,
Loknayak Bhavan, Khan Market,
New Delhi-110003 the 29th May, 2001
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Action taken on the recommendation contained in the Sixteenth Report
of the Public Accounts Committee (Thirteenth Lok Sabha) – Furnishing
of Explanatory Notes on Savings of Rs. 100 crores and above in respect
of a Grant/Appropriation – reg.
The undersigned is directed to invite attention to this Department's earlier O.M.
of even No. dated 10.04.2001 advising Ministries of Railways, Defence and
Communications to prepare A TN on recommendation No. 13.3 of the Report in
question and to clarify that since the report in question is on Appropriation Accounts
(Civil), it would not be necessary for these Ministries to Submit ATNs on the aforesaid
recommendation.
(T.S. NEGI)
UNDER SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
TELE: 4626829
1. Ministry of Railways (Railway Board) New Delhi
2. Ministry of Defence, New Delhi
3. Ministry of Communications (i) Deptt. of Post (ii) Deptt. of Telecommunications.
Copy forswarded for information and necessary action to:—
1. FA (Defence) (Shri P.R. Sivasubramanian) South Block, New Delhi
2. Financial Commissioner (Railway Board) (Shri P. Rajagopalan) Rail Bhavan,
New Delhi.
3. FA (Post) (Smt. Rekha Gupta) Department of Post, Dak Bhavan, New Delhi
4. Member (Finance) (Shri A. Prasad) Department of Telecommunications, Sanchar
Bhavan, New Delhi
5. Shri Devender Singh, DS (PAC) Lok Sabha Secretariat, New Delhi
6. Office of the C&AG, 10, BZ Marg, New Delhi
Sd/-
(T.S. NEGI)
Under Secretary (MC)
21

DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE & COOPERATION
Recommendation
"The committee during the course of examination have found that the Revenue
Section (voted) of grant No.1 operated by Ministry of Agriculture during 1996-97
registered total saving of Rs.630.62 crores which were the net effect of saving
registered under 32 sub heads. These savings have occurred for various reasons
such as less demands from implementing agencies, non filling/creation of posts,
unspent balances of previous year etc. The committee's scruntiny has also revealed
that the entire provison under four sub heads remained unutilize during the year
1996-97. The committee observe that such huge unspent balances to the extent of
Rs.630.62 crores indicate not only the faulty estimation of programmes/schemes
which suffered badly. The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of
agriculture should not only revamp their existing budgetary mechanism  to ensure
proper and correct estimation of the budgetary requirments but also to streamline
the procedure for full and timely utilization of the sanctioned provision. "
 (Para13.4 of 16th Report of PAC(13th Lok Sabha)
Action Taken
This department had already submitted the duly vetted Saving Note to PAC for
the period 1996-97. It may not be out of place to mention here that out of the total
savings of Rs.630.62 crores registered under revenue section (V oted), the major saving
of Rs.552.4  crore was under a single Non-Plan scheme viz.  'Payment to Manufacturers/
Agencies for concessional sale of decontrolled fertilizers' due to delay in
announcement of continuance of the concession scheme for 1996-97. However, under
this scheme there was no savings in the years subsequent to 1996-97. This scheme
has since been transferred to the Department of fertilizers.
As for the other schemes it may be mentioned that Agriculture is a State subject.
To address the specific problems of unspent balances, non-receipt of demands from
State Governments in time etc., a Plan scheme on Macro Managment has been
approved during 2000-01 for implementation. The main objective of the scheme is to
impart necessary freedom and flexibility to the state Governments in the
implementation of various programmes which will remove many impediments in the
smooth flow of resources to States/ Impementing agencies. 27 ongoing schemes have
been subsumed under this scheme. The scheme is intended to Supplement/
Complement State Efforts for development of agriculture. Under the scheme,
Workplans tailor made to the requirement of states are formulated by concerned states
themselves according to their priorities. Hence it is expected that this will lead to
maximum and most effective use of central assistance. It is hoped that this experiment
will yield positive results in achieving and full timely utilization of sanctioned
provisions. Further, periodical review of on goings schemes is undertaken at the level
of Divisional/Area Officers in the Department  for removing the impediments in the
smooth flow of funds. In short, the department is keen on avoiding any huge savings
in the grant.
2222

23
Vetted comments of Audit :
'The Ministry has not mentioned any specific measures already taken or proposed
to be taken with reference to the PAC's recommendation that budgetary mechanism
should be revamped in such a manner that there could be proper and correct
estimation of budgetary and timely utilization of the sanctioned provision'. Also state
specification how the plan scheme  in Macro management would change the
budgetary mechanism for proper Assessment and Utilisation of Funds.
Reply of the Department :
From the year 2000-01, 27 Centrally Sponsored Schemes have been subsumed
under Macro Management Mode with an outlay of Rs. 760.50 crore and Rs. 850.00
crore for the year 2000-01 and 2001-02 respectively. Under the Macro Management
Scheme, Ministry of Finance has formulated new guidelines for releasing the funds
to States /UTs which will streamline the procedure and ensure optimum utilization of
funds. The broad features of guidelines are as under:
(i) 50% of annual allocation would be released as first installment of a financial
year;
(ii) Permissible carry over of unspent balance in the first year would be 25% of
the annual allocation which would be reduced by 5% every year and is
brought down to 10% over a period of 4 years;
(iii) The second installment would be made on graded basis depending on the
time of reporting of utilization as also the receipt of complete proposal for
second installment etc.
For schemes other than Macro Management Scheme, concerted efforts will
continued to be made through periodical review of schemes, at the Divisional/Area
Officers' level, Progress Reports, Field Visits etc. to ensure smooth flow of funds
and its speedy utilization.
This has been vetted by audit vide their UO No. RR/2-3/2001-02/346 dt. 2.7.2001
Sd/-
(T.K.DAS)
Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser
Ministry of Agriculture (Department of Agriculture & Cooperation)
F. No. 1-14/2000 Budget Dated 9th July, 2001

PROFORMA
Name of the Ministry: Ministry of Home Affairs
Recommendations
"The Committee's examination of Grant No. 44—Police has revealed that out
of the total budgetary allocations of Rs. 489.20 crore, the Ministry of Home Affairs
spent only Rs. 371.68 crore thus leaving a huge amount of Rs. 117.52 crore as
'unspent balances' during the year 1996-97. The Committee has found that there
were as many as 12 sub-heads under which saving of over Rs. 1 crore had been
registered under each sub-head. The Committee's scrutiny of the explanatory
notes submitted by the Ministry has revealed that the sanctioned amounts for
different scheduled projects could not be spent fully either because of, procedural
delays or because of delay on the part of CPWD in execution of different projects.
While the Committee do acknowledge that the factors such as militancy/disturbed
civic conditions and external factors were beyond the control of the Ministry
which could not have been anticipated, but the Committee are of the firm opinion
that the other reasons like 'delay in sanction of works' in respect of 'BSF-border
out post' resulting in saving of Rs. 6.93 crore; 'non-finalisation of the project for
construction of hospital building' in respect of 'ISF/Office building' resulting in
saving of Rs. 4.82 crore; 'delay on the part of CPWD' in respect of 'Delhi Police-
Office building and residential building' resulting in saving of Rs. 13.80 crore
could have been anticipated well in advance. Similarly, the saving of Rs. 45.56
crore registered under the sub-head 'Indo-Bangladesh Border Works' could have
been avoided if the Ministry had effectively taken up the matter with the State
Governments to release the fund in time. The Committee would, therefore, like
the Ministry of Home Affairs to have the entire requirements of funds under
different heads of the Grant pragmatically assessed taking into account all
relevant and attendant factors after collecting the critical inputs available to them
and anticipating, so that such gap between the demand and actual expenditure
are avoided in future."
[Sl. No. 5 Appendix Para 13.5 of 16th Report of PAC(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The recommendation made is noted for compliance. In respect of Ministry of Home
Affairs, savings of Rs. 117.52 crore occurred in Grant No. 44 — Police.
The major items of savings and reasons thereof are indicated below:—
Sl. Sub-Head Organisation Amount Reasons for Savings
No. (Rs. in crore)
1. 00.203 Border Security Force 6.93 Due to delay in sanction of
works relating to Border Out
Posts located in far-flung
areas of North East owing to
24

25
complications in completing
administrative and codal
formalities.
2. 00.203 Border Security Force 12.00 Ow ing to militancy/disturbed
civic conditions, non-
availability of contractors and
labour, In the North East the
progress of work was also
slow due to heavy rainfall in
that region.
3. 00.204 National Security Guard 6.16 Non-finalisation of the project
for construction of Hospital
Building as MCD delayed
approval of drawings.
4. 00.212 Delhi Police The CPWD is responsible
01 Office Buildings 8.31 for all the Building Projects
Residential Buildings of Delhi Police right from
02 5.49 its inception till its execution
including obtaining of various
approvals from the local
bodies as well as from Delhi
Urban Arts Commission. The
saving was mainly due to delay
in execution of the fifteen
Building Projects of Delhi
Police on account of various
reasons ranging from delay in
obtaining the approval to the
execution of the projects.
5. 00.800.03 Indo-Bangladesh Border 42.40 Due to the delay in acquisition
Works of land in West Bengal Sector
owing to local as well as
bilateral problems as part of
land is in actual possession of
Bangladeshis even though the
land is in the Indian Territory.
The entire expenditure in
respect of the Indo-
Bangladesh Border Works is
being met by the Central
Government. The funds are
Sl. Sub-Head Organisation Amount Reasons for Savings
No. (Rs. in crore)

26
released to the Govt. of Assam
as the State PWD is the
Implementing Agency in the
Assam Sector. However, there
were delays in release of funds
by the Assam PWD, which in
turn resulted in the savings. A
Technical Committee headed
by the Director General,
CPWD and a High Level
Empowered Committee (HLEC)
constituted under the
Chairmanship of Union Home
Secretary, periodically
reviewed the progress of the
works jointly with the
representative of the Govt. of
Assam and consequently the
Govt. of Assam had been
persuaded to release the funds
to the Assam PWD for the
smooth progress of works. As
a result, the Govt. of  Assam
had released all the unspent
balance to the State PWD by
30th June, 98. Further funds to
the Govt. of Assam will be
released on receipt of work-
wise demand from them.
The detailed reasons for savings in the various schemes were furnished to the
PAC in September' 1998. The recommendation of the committee has been noted for
compliance. The same has also been circulated to all concerned for guidance, vide
O.M. No. 28/3/2001-Bgt.-I dated 1st June, 2001.
(N.A. VISWANATHAN)
Joint Secretary & Financial Advisor (Home)
Ministry of Home Affairs O.M. No. 28/3/2001-Bgt.-I Dated: 7th September, 2001.
(This has been vetted by audit vide their U.O.No.RR/6-37/2K-2KI/499 dated 22nd
August, 2001.)
Sl. Sub-Head Organisation Amount Reasons for Savings
No. (Rs. in crore)

MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS & FERTILIZERS
DEPARTMENT OF CHEMICALS & PETROCHEMICALS
Recommendation
The examination of Grant No. 5 (Revenue-Voted) reveals that the Ministry of
Chemicals and Fertilizers registered saving of Rs. 328.61 crore which is 79.98 percent
of the total provision under the grant. The scrutiny of the Explanatory Notes
submitted by the Ministry reveals that the huge amount of saving of Rs. 261.33 crore
occurred in a single sub-head expenditure on account of exchange rate variation for
settlement amount. The Committee observe that saving of over Rs. 1 crore occurred
in as many as 5 sub-heads. From the contributory reasons advanced by the Ministry,
the Commtitee observe that while 'Non-cooperation by the State Government viz.,
West Bengal and Bihar in land allotment and contributing their share' resulted in
saving of Rs. 2.00 crore in 'CIPET', 'Non-investment by the private party and the
State Government in the Project' resulted in saving of Rs. 75.00 crore in "subsidy to
Assam Gas Crackers Complex". The Committee deplore the lack of foresight on the
part of the Ministry leading to large saving amounting to almost 80% of the total
sanctioned provisions under the grant. The Committee recommend that the Ministry
should reorient and revamp their extent budget formulation process so that such
exceptionally high "unspent balances" become a thing of past.
[Para 13.6 of sixteenth Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
(i)  Expenditure on account of Exchange Rate Variation for settlement amount
The recommendation of the Committee has been noted for compliance. The
estimates for the exchange rate variations are made in the beginning of the year based
on the number of claim cases, which are likely to be decided later in the year. However,
due to rejection of some claim cases, additional savings did take place in earlier years.
Now the Department is making more realistic estimates of exchange rate variation in
consultation with the Office of the Welfare Commissioner, which has been set up to
decide the claim cases of Bhopal gas victims.
(ii) Central Institute of Plastic Engineering and Technology (CIPET)
In so far as saving of Rs. 2.00 crore in the Budget of CIPET is concerned the
same could not be utilized by the CIPET, in spite of the best efforts put in by the
Government of India due to non-payment of the matching contribution by the State
Government of West Bengal and Bihar for setting up of extension centres at Haldia
and Patna respectively. The share of the project cost at both the places referred to
above was on 50:50 basis between the Government of India and the concerned State
Governments.
The Government of India could not release its full share as matching contribution
from State Governments was not forthcoming. This resulted in saving of Rs. 2.00 crore
in the budget earmarked for the CIPET by the Government. However, the
27

28
recommendation of the Committee regarding budget formualtion has been noted for
future compliance to ensure making necessary provisions in the budget, as far as
possible. Only after taking into account the likely contribution of Shares of the State
Governments.
(iii) Subsidy to Assam Gas Cracker Complex
Government of India has decided that the one time capital subsidy of Rs. 37700
lakh for the setting up of the Assam Gas Cracker Project would be given to the project
authorities in a phased manner gradually and sequentially with the investment by
the private party and State Government. Keeping in view the estimated year-wise
phasing of expenditure, a provision of Rs. 7500 lakh was made in the BE 1996-97. As
the private party and the State Government could not make any investment during
the year, the entire amount has been surrendered.
Considering the fact that during 1996-97, 1997-98 an amount of Rs. 7500 lakh each
was provided for capital subsidy and the same had to be surrendered, budget
provision for this project was reduced to Rs. 2500 lakh each during 1998-99 and 1999-
2000 and Rs. 1 crore for the year 2000-2001. In pursuance of the Cabinet decision of
1997 regarding payment of Rs. 7200 lakh to Oil India Ltd. as infrastructure subsidy,
a token provision of Rs. 100 lakh under Plan was also kept in the budget for 1999-
2000 and an amount of Rs. 1 lakh has been retained during 2000-2001.
3. With a view to resolve the critical issues relating to the implementation of the
project viz. feedstook and the acquisition of land, a meeting was taken by Secretary
(C&PC) on 8 th January, 2001. In the meeting it has been decided that acquisition
and handing over of land (except shifting/rehabilitation of affected families) be
completed by 31st March, 2001. For Gas Supply Agreement, Ministry of P&NG has
indicated that the signing of the agreement between ONGC and RAPL would be
completed by 15th March, 2001. The Gas Supply Agreement between OIL and RAPL
has already been signed on October 19, 2000.
4. It has been decided that the zero date of project should be April, 2001 and the
actual project implementation should commence by June, 2001.
(iv) Reorientation and revamping the Budget formulation
As may be seen from the position explained in preceeding paras, following specific
steps were taken to reorient and revamp the budget formulation process so that such
exceptionally high "Unspent balances" become a thing of past :—
(a) The Department is now making more realistic estimates on account of
"Exchange Rate Variation" in consultation with the Office of the Welfare
Commissioner. For this purpose the following mechanism has been evolved:
(i) Due to decreasing number of pending cases, now it is easier to assess
the disposal amount of awards and the consequent possibility of
encashment of US dollar for payments for these awards. This gives a
more realistic assessment of requirement of funds under the Exchange
Rate Variation.

29
(ii) A more realistic and achievable target is being given to the Deputy
Commissioner for disposal of the cases. This results into a more realistic
assessment of the Exchange Rate Variation and accordingly the funds
are demanded in the budget.
(iii) On account of lesser outgo of funds for the payment of compensation
to gas victims, earning of interest on the rupee deposits with the RBI
goes up. Thus, making it possible to make more realistic provisions under
the head Exchange Rate Variation.
(b) The budget provision of CIPET is being made, as far as possible after taking
into account the likely contribution of shares of the States Governments.
(c) The Department is constantly monitoring the flow of expenditure and the
budget provisions are made considering the trend of expenditure to avoid
huge savings like "Subsidy to Assam Gas Cracker Complex".
Sd/-
(Suresh Chandra)
Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers
Department of Chemicals and Petrochemicals
O. M. No.16(14)/2000-Fin
Date 24th April, 2002.

MINISTRY OF CHEMICALS AND FERTILIZERS
DEPARTMENT OF FERTILIZERS
Recommendation
The Committee's scrutiny of Grant No. 6 (Capital-Voted) reveals that the
Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers registered savings in this grant also. The
total savings of Rs.112.80 crore would have been much higher but for the excess
expenditure in the various sub-heads of the grant. The examination by the
Committee of the explanatory note submitted by the Ministry reveals that savings
of Rs.116.00 crores occurred under a single sub-head "externally aided projects/
schemes" for which the reasons responsible are stated to be inordinate delay in
the supply of critical equipments from its vendors. Another sub-head where
savings of Rs. 16.00 crore occurred is "Paradeep Phosphates Ltd." for the reasons
that it was re-appropriated to the equity sub-head. The Committee are of the
opinion that the reasons attributed to the savings under the above sub-heads
were not such as could not have been anticipated at the budget formulation stage.
The Committee recommend that the Ministry devise and put in place a suitable
mechanism which could take into account all the inputs having their impact on
the trend of expenditure in various sub-heads of the grant before projecting the
needs of funds under different heads of the grant. The Committee also recommend
that the Ministry introduce the system of individual accountability so that the
budget formulation process is well co-ordinated and receives best of attention
at every stage before it is finalised.
(Sl. No. 7 Appendix-Para 13.7 of 16th Report of PAC)
(13th Lok Sabha)
Action Taken
During 1996-97, a budgetary provision of Rs. 240 crore was made for Fertilizer &
Chemicals Travancore Ltd. (FACT) for the new ammonia project under OECF funding.
This provision was made on the basis of assumption that the new ammonia project
of FACT would be commissioned by March, 1997. Due to delay in supply and
erection of steam boilers by Bharat Heavy Plates & Vessels Ltd. (BHPV) and major
heat exchangers by Bharat Heavy Electricals Ltd. (BHEL), FACT had brought the
provision reduced to Rs. 166.69 crore at the time of finalisation of revised estimates
for the year 1996-97. Against this revised figure, FACT could draw only an amount
of Rs. 124 crore due to delay in other activities, such as piping, chemical cleaning,
insulation, etc. Thus, taking into account the allocation at BE stage, there was a
saving of Rs. 240-Rs. 124=Rs. 116 crore. However, considering the revised estimates
figure of Rs. 166.69 crore, there was actual saving of Rs. 42.69 crore, which was
subsequently surrendered.
30

31
2. As regards savings of Rs. 16.00 crore relating to Paradeep Phosphates Ltd.
(PPL), subsequent to conversion into a joint venture company between Government
of India (GOI)  and Government of Nauru (GON), GOI purchased 5,88,000 equity share
of the company from GON. Against this, GOI was requested to pay to GON in 10 half
yearly instalments starting from June, 1993. After payment of seventh instalment upto
June, 1996, eighth instalment was due for payment by 10.12.1996. As PPL was having
budget constraints, for meeting this obligation, a provision of Rs. 70 crore was made
in favour of PPL as plan funds during 1996-97, which was utilised for making
payments for seventh instalment in June, 1996. Due to non-availability of fund for
meeting requirement of eighth instalment due on 10.12.1996, a request was made to
Planning Commission for provision of additional fund. However, Planning
Commission did not agree to the request due to acute constraints of resources and
advised Department of Fertilizers to manage the funds by re-appropriation. PPL was
also having  a budgetary provision of Rs. 16 crore during 1996-97 for incurring capital
expenditure. Since no request was received from PPL till November, 1996, the amount
of Rs. 16 crore earmarked to PPL for incurring capital expenditure, was reappropriated
from plan loan to investment sub-head for meeting the obligation of paying the eighth
instalment to GON.
3. The budget formulation of this Department is a part of Union Finance Budget
with the involvement of other Ministries/Departments such as Ministry of Finance,
Planning Commission, Department of Agriculture & Cooperation, etc. Before
finalisation of budget, the proposal passes through various stages of discussions
and examination by the Members of these Ministries/Departments. However, the
recommendations of the Committee will be kept in mind before allocating funds to
the PSUs in future.
4. With a view to ensuring that funds/grants earmarked for the particular schemes
of PSUs are utilised by them during the prescribed period, in future, the Department
of Fertilizers has issued instructions to all the Chief Executives of Public Sector
Undertaking/Cooperative Societies under its administrative control vide letter
No. 19056/8/2001-FCA-II dated 16th October, 2002. A copy of these instructions is
enclosed.
Vetting by Audit
It has been vetted by the Office of the Director General of Audit Central Revenues
(DGACR) vide their U.O. No. RR/25-4A/2001-02 dated 9.1.2003.
Sd/-
Signature of Joint Secretary
(Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers (Department of Fertilizers) O.M. No. 8/3/2000-
Fin-II dated 3.2.2003)

No. 19056/8/2001-FCA-II
Government of India
Ministry of Chemicals & Fertilizers
Department of Fertilizers
Shastri Bhawan, New Delhi,
Dated: 16th October, 2002
To
The Chief Executives
of all PSUs/Cooperative Societies
Subject: Implementation of the recommendations contained in Para 13.2 & 13.7
of the 16th Report of the Public Accounts Committee (2000-01) — Union
Government. Appropriation Accounts (Civil) 1996-97—Instructions
regarding.
Sirs,
I am directed to forward herewith the text of the aforesaid recommendations of
the 16th Report of Public Accounts Committee on the subject noted above and to
say that the Committee has expressed its serious concern over the issue of non-
utilization of funds/grants earmarked for the particular schemes of PSUs during the
particular financial year. With a view to ensure strict compliance of the
recommendations of the PAC, you are requested to take following steps to avoid
such recurrence in future:
(i) The development schemes posed for budgetary assistance should be tailored
having regard to ground realities and the achievability of the targets within
stipulated time so that scarce resources are not tied to schemes which do
not take off  or do not show progress commensurate with the funds allocated
in a particular financial year.
(ii) Physical/financial progress of the schemes be monitored/reviewed regularly
at the level of Chief Executive of the PSU on monthly basis with reference to
the set targets.
(iii) A monthly report on the physical/financial progress with regard to the
implementation of such schemes be sent to the Ministry/Department by 10th
of succeeding month.
(iv) Failure on the part of a particular team who has been assigned with the
implementation of the scheme should be dealt with seriously and the head
of the team be held accountable for such failure.
(v) Other internal mechanism may be devised as may be deemed appropriate to
achieve the desired result.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(Hari Pal)
Under Secretary to the Govt of India
Tel. # 3389364
32

MINISTRY OF COMMERCE AND INDUSTRY
DEPARTMENT OF INDUSTRIAL POLICY & PROMOTION
Recommendation
13.8 An examination of Grant No. 51 (Revenue-V oted) of  the Department of
Industrial Development, Ministry of Industry has revealed that under this grant, the
Ministry had obtained Rs. 492.02 crore and had spent only Rs. 308.57 crore thus
registering saving of Rs. 183.45 crore which was 37.28 percent of the total provisions.
The total saving of Rs. 183.45 crore was net effect of savings and excess under
various sub-heads. The scrutiny of explanatory note submitted by the Ministry reveals
that there were as many as 10 sub-heads under which saving of over Rs. 1 crore
occurred under each of the sub-heads. The major areas of the savings are Growth
Centres (Rs. 21.04 crore), Transfer to National Renewal Fund (Rs. 100 crore),
Unallocated Provisions for implementation of VRS (Rs. 25 crore) and Counselling,
Retraining and Area Regeneration Scheme (Rs. 20.52 crore). The reasons for savings
under these sub-heads are stated to be non-release of their shares by Financial
Institutions, non-approval of growth centres as originally envisaged, less transfer of
funds, reduction of allocation at RE stages, non-booking of expenditure due to non-
approval of the scheme for closed textile mills of Ahmedabad, etc. In other sub-heads
also, savings were registered due to procedural problems such as non-approval of
the schemes/projects. In the opinion of the Committee, the reasons stated to be
responsible for occurrence of savings could have been anticipated well in advance:
After giving their consideration to the apparently ill-conceived projects and badly
monitored schemes, the Committee conclude that there  is something wrong with the
functioning of the Ministry. The Committee would like to know that tangible action
is initiated by the Ministry to bring systemic improvements.
[Para 13.8 of 16
th Report of PAC (13 Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Transfer to NRF
The decision to transfer only Rs. 15000 lakhs to the NRF Public Account against
our request for transfer of entire allocated funds of Rs. 25000 lakhs was taken on the
advice of Ministry of Finance. As savings were available, Ministry of Finance advised
to transfer only Rs. 15000 lakhs to the NRF Public Account.
Remedial Action Taken
It was ensured that funds for NRF was properly utilised in 1997-98 and the entire
provision made in the budget was transferred to NRF.
Unallocated provision for Implementation of VRS etc.
This Department, while sending Budget Estimates, kept an unallocated provision
for implementation of V oluntary Retirement Scheme etc., so that at the Revised
Estimate stage this amount could be allocated to various user Ministries on the basis
33

34
of their actual requirements. However, the allocation was reduced at Revised Estimate
1996-97 stage in consultation with the advice of Ministry of Finance.
Remedial Action Taken
In the light of experience of 1996-97, no such provision was provided in 1997-98.
Workers Compensation Packages and Implementation of Voluntary Retirement
Scheme in State PSUs
The scheme of worker compensation packages and implementation of Voluntary
Retirement Scheme in State PSUs was recommended by the Empowered Authority of
NRF but requisite Government approval to the scheme was not available. Against
the demands of Rs. 41386 lakhs, received from different States, this Department made
the provisions of Rs.15005 lakhs and Rs. 15000 lakhs in 1993-94 and 1994-95,
respectively. No provision was made in 1995-96. In 1996-97, a provision of
Rs. 100 lakhs was made in the expectation of approval of the scheme. Saving occurred
as approval of appropriate authority was not available.
Remedial Action Taken
During 1997-98, a token provision was kept due to non finalisation of Workers
Compensation packages and implementation of Voluntary Retirement Schemes in state
Public sector Undertakings and only a token provision was kept in the Revised
Estimates 1997-98. However, in the absence of requisite Govt. approval, no such
provision was made against this Scheme in subsequent years. National Renewal Fund
has since been abolished vide Government of India Gazette Notification dated 12th
July, 2000 (Annexure-I).
Counselling, Retraining and Area Regeneration Schemes
After establishment of the National Renewal Fund in 1992-93, it took one year for
planning and execution of the scheme. The scheme became operational in 1993-94.
Provisions for Area Regeneration scheme were made from 1993-94 in anticipation of
approvals. The Scheme was however not approved. Against the pending demand of
over Rs. 16837 lakhs from Government of Gujarat for Area Regeneration Scheme
(ARS) for closed textile mills of Ahmedabad, this Department made the provisions
for phased funding of the demand in anticipation of approval of the Scheme. During
1993-94, a provision of Rs. 4630 lakhs was made for the aforesaid two schemes, in
1994-95 a provision of Rs. 4790 lakhs  and in 1995-96, a provision of Rs. 2500 lakhs
were made. While the scheme of counselling and retraining accounted for the
expenditure of Rs. 12 lakhs, Rs. 100 lakhs and Rs. 365  lakhs, respectively, during
these years, no expenditure on account of Area Regeneration Scheme was booked
due to  non-approval of the scheme.
In 1996-97, against the total provision of Rs. 2480 lakhs, an expenditure of
Rs. 428 lakhs took place on the scheme of counselling and retraining but no
expenditure could be booked on account of Area Regeneration Scheme due to non-
approval of the Scheme.

35
Remedial Action Taken
Budget provision for counselling, retraining scheme was brought down in
subsequent years in view of the reduced expenditure by the Nodal Agencies. In 1997-
98, the  budget provision for counselling, retraining scheme was made considering
the Annual Action Plans and expenditure incurred in the past by the Nodal Agencies.
In 1997-98, only a token provision of Rs. 1 lakh was kept for Area Regeneration
Scheme.
However, in the absence of requisite Government approvals, no provision was
kept in under the Area Regeneration Scheme. National Renewal Fund has since been
abolished vide Government of India Gazette Notification dated 12th July, 2000
(Annexure-I)
Growth Centre
The budget provision of Rs. 50 crores provided in the year 1996-97 under the
Growth Centre Scheme was reduced to Rs.28.96 crores at RE stage. During 1996-97,
13 Growth Centres were approved. Initially booking of expenditure under the Growth
Centres Scheme was a bit slow as land acquisition etc. is necessarily a time consuming
process.
Since 1996 various corrective measures have been subsequently taken for
expediting progress under this Scheme.
To monitor  the implementation of the Growth Centre Scheme,  an institutionalised
monitoring mechanism has been put in place. A State Level Committee have been
constituted in each state to oversee and reviews the progress of Growth Centres
and furnish quarterly reports to the Ministry on the financial and physical progress
along with utilisation certificate in respect of the Central releases. The  progress of
each Growth Centre is reviewed in the Ministry on the basis of quarterly progress
reports. Interaction with  the state Governments is  organised from time to time and
appropriate guidelines issued to expedite the progress under this Scheme. The field
visits by the officers of the Ministry were made.
Based upon the feed-back received, the following measures have been taken for
expeditious implementation of the Scheme:—
1. The share of Central assistance for Growth Centres in North East State has
been increased from Rs. 10 crore to Rs. 15 crore.
2. The Central funds are being directly placed at the disposals of implementing
agencies in North East States and J&K. This facility is now being extended
to all other States also.
3. On request of state Govts., change of location of Growth Centres to improve
the viability of the project has been permitted. Split locations of Growth
Centres within the same district, has also been allowed.

36
Performance of the Scheme has improved since 1996-97. From 1997-98 to 2000-
2001, the entire budget provision of each year has been fully utilised. The details are
as given below:
Y ear Budget provision Amount released
(Rs. In crore) (Rs. In crore)
1997-98 25.00 25.00
1998-99 20.00 20.00
1999-2000 24.96 24.96
2000-2001 32.05 32.05
Budget provision of Rs. 40 crore has been made for the Annual Plan 2001-2002.
The last review meeting was held on 6.6.2001 under the Chairmanship of Dr. Raman
Singh, MOS (C&I) of review the progress of the Growth Centre Scheme at length, in
the light of the ensuring 10th Five Year Plan.
Sd/-
(K.K. JASWAL)
AS&FA

MINISTRY OF LABOUR
Recommendation
The Committee's examination of Grant No. 57 (Revenue-Voted) Section operated
by the Ministry of Labour during the year 1996-97 reveals that against the total
provisions of Rs. 690.87 crore, the Ministry could actually spend only Rs. 601.83
crore thus registering saving of Rs. 89.04 crore. But for the excess expenditure incurred
under other heads, the savings would have been much more. The Committee's scrutiny
of the explanatory notes furnished by the Ministry reveals that there are as many as
11 sub-heads where savings of over Rs. 1 crore had occurred under the Revenue
(Voted) Section of the Grant. The major areas where substantial savings occurred are
Child Labour Cell (Rs. 22.16 crore) due to non-clearance of the scheme by Expenditure
Finance Committee; World Bank Assisted V ocational Training Project (Rs. 27.12 crore)
due to non-filling up of vacant post in various institutes and dropping of proposals
for procurement of vehicles; World Bank scheme for State (Rs. 21.24 crore) due to
less claims received from State. Savings were also registered in other areas including
Labour Welfare schemes/Projects. In regard to savings under the sub-heads "Child
Labour Cell", the Secretary, Ministry of Labour admitted that justice had not been
done to the work of elimination of Child Labour. The Committee noted that savings
under Revenue  Section of grant No. 57 had been a recurring phenomenon for the
last so many years. Also persistent savings had been noticed under the head "Grant
to State Government for Centrally Sponsored Plan Scheme" relating to Rehabilitation
of Bonded Labour-ranging from 23  percent in 1993-94 to 89 percent in 1996-97;
Employment Services-100 percent; Training of Craftsmen and Supervisor-39 percent
to 66 percent during the last so many years. Similarly, persistent savings ranging
from 10 to 87 percent of the sanctioned budget have been registered in various other
labour welfare schemes during the last so many years. It is disturbing to find that
the sanctioned provisions could not be spent fully on most of the schemes like
rehabilitation of bonded labour and child labour for reasons not acceptable  to the
Committee. Obviously, the Ministry had not learnt any lesson from their past
experiences as some of these socially vital schemes registered savings even upto
100 percent. This is a sad commentary on the flawed budgetary projections to say
the least. The Committee therefore recommend that ministry to review their entire
budgetary process keeping in view the trend of expenditure during the last 5 years,
the actual sector need for the funds, the obstacles in full utilisation of the sanctioned
provisions and devise a new methodology so that labour welfare schemes are not
affected due to procedural embargoes. The Committee also desired that the Ministry
should introduce a system of accountability so that individual responsibility could
be pin-pointed in implementation of the Schemes.
Para 13.9 of 16th Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)
37

38
Action Taken
1. The main reason for low utilisation of fund was the low eligibility ceiling limit
for mine workers due to which large number of mine workers were not eligible to
avail of various welfare benefits. The eligibility ceiling for mine workers has since
been revised upward w.e.f. 17.11.1999 and then again w.e.f. 26.2.2001 from Rs. 3,500/-
to Rs. 10,000/- per month. This will bring the maximum number of mine  workers within
the ambit of eligibility criteria enabling them to get the benefits of various welfare
schemes meant for them. The proposals for introduction of new welfare schemes as
well as enhancement of scales of benefit under the existing schemes has been
considered and approved by the Central Advisory Committee of the concerned Labour
Welfare Funds. Due to certain administrative & procedural reasons, the meetings of
the Central Advisory Committees could not be held for the last few years. As such,
the expenditure didn't show much  increase and savings appeared. The meetings of
the Central Advisory Committees for the concerned welfare Funds have since been
held on 2.5.2000. In these meetings, decisions were taken to introduce a number of
new schemes as well as enhance the benefits under the existing schemes substantially.
It also has already been approved by the Finance Divisions and introduced from
this year. It is expected that a large number of workers will be able to avail of the
enhanced benefits of these schemes which will result in utilisation of large amount
of the Welfare Funds and minimize  the savings.
2. To avoid the procedural delay in releasing subsidy to State Govt. under
Economically Weaker Section Housing Scheme a new housing scheme namely
Integrated Housing Scheme in place of Economically Weaker Section Housing Scheme
for the workers engaged in Beedi Industry has been introduced w.e.f. 14.6.1999.
3. Steps have also been taken to prepare the realistic budget to minimize the
savings of Rs. 1 crore and above in a sub-head under the Revenue Section (voted)
under Labour Welfare Fund. Various corrective measures have been taken to avoid
the shortfall in cess collection and maximize utilisation of funds. Cess receipts viz-a-
viz target is reviewed regularly.
4. In the year 1998-99 a sum of Rs. 1.00 crore was provided in the Budget Estimates
and Revised Estimates for Hamal Schemes. However, Ministry of Finance observed
that since it was pilot scheme, its feasibility may be studied first and its extension to
other States may be considered depending upon the outcome of the study. In view
of this, no financial expenditure could be incurred during 1998-99. During the year
1999-2000, an allocation of Rs. 1.00 crores had been made from Plan outlay of Ministry
of Labour. However this has since been reduced to Rs. 51 lakhs. A feasibility study
on the scheme as advised by Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission has
been got done. The report regarding implementation of the scheme in both the State
of Karnataka and Madhya Pradesh has been received. The Planning Commission, to
whom copies of these were furnished have not yet given their approval for including
this scheme as a regular one in the Ninth Five Year Plan and its extension to other
States. The matter is being pursued with them regularly.

39
5. Thus, various steps have been taken  to utilize the maximum allocated fund for
the workers. Non-utilisation of funds in percentage terms have decreased despite
physical outlay increase over the years. The following statements show the amount
and percentage of savings under some of sub-heads for the last three years:—
(Rs. in crores)
Sl.No. Funds Amount of Saving (% of savings)
1997-98 1998-99 1999-2000
1. Lime Stone Dolomite 2.40 (36%) 2.90 (38%) 2.25 (30.77%)
2. Iron Ore Manganese 4.29 (43.27%) 3.34 (29%) 3.42 (30%)
Chrome Ore
3. Beedi 3.94 (13.09 %) No Saving 0.81 (2.08%)
6. It would be seen that there has been improvement in subsequent years i.e.
lowering down of share of funds utilised in March as a percentage of full years
expenditure. This was despite the increase in physical outlay. The scheme for
providing homes for Hamals is pilot scheme being executed through State Govt. It
required working out modalities and implementation by State Govt. and delay was
on this account. Welfare Commissioners under Labour Welfare Organisations have
been advised to process various proposals for payment of bills, sanction/
authorization for various items, grants-in-aid etc. well in advance right from the very
beginning of the financial year duly completed in all respect to avoid at the eleventh
hour March Rush. The progress of expenditure is monitored very closely at regular
intervals at various levels. Applications for scholarships, stipend, incentives, etc.
are received in lakhs. These applications are now being processed for payment on
computerized basis instead of manual basis, which took a lot of time earlier. All
Welfare Commissioners have been advised to procure more and more computers in
their field offices for expeditious process of the applications. Managements have
been directed to submit the proposals in the beginning of the financial year to avoid
the rush at the fag end of the year.
7. In order to assist the State Government in their task of rehabilitation of released
bonded labourers, the Ministry of Labour launched a Centrally Sponsored Scheme.
The scheme has been reviewed/modified from time to time and has been progressively
liberalized. The expenditure under the scheme is shared by the Central and State
Government on 50:50 basis. The Central contribution under the scheme is released
in advance after knowing the firm requirements of the state concerned for the financial
year. Funds to the State Government under this scheme are released on receipt of
complete proposals along with utilization certificates for the grants released during
the previous years.
8. The Ministry of Labour has issued various guidelines on the methodology of
identification/release of bonded labour and their subsequent rehabilitation. The
implementation of the scheme is periodically reviewed at the highest level as indicated
below:—

40
(a) In August 1996 Union Labour Minister wrote to the Chief Ministers of 12
States stressing upon the needs of implementing the provision of the Bonded
Labour System (Abolition) Act, 1976 and the Centrally Sponsored Scheme
for the rehabilitation of the bonded labour more seriously.
(b) The matter was followed up in a meeting held on 15.1.1996 by the Labour
Minister with the senior officers from the State Governments responsible for
implementation of the scheme.
(c) On 20.02.1997, the Union Labour Minister wrote to the Chief Ministers of all
the States reiterating what he had written to the Chief Ministers of 12 States
in August 1996 requesting that appropriate action may be taken to constitute/
re-constitute the Vigilance Committees, survey on bonded labour in systematic
and methodical manner and to take timely steps for release and rehabilitation
of bonded labour.
(d) The matter was again reviewed in a meeting taken by Secretary (Labour) on
3.5.1997 with the representatives of the State Government.
(e) In the context of changing needs of individual bonded labour and those of
community, certain limitations were observed in the scheme, which necessitated
its modification. After detailed deliberation with the State Governments, the
scheme was modified in May 2000 in order to include the following
components:
(i) Survey of Bonded Labour—It has been proposed to conduct surveys in
each sensitive district once in three years. In order to cover the cost in
conducting such surveys, an amount of Rs. 2 lakh per district may be
provided to the concerned State Government.
(ii) Awareness Generation Activities—In order to bring conceptual clarity
to various issues related to bonded Labour and also to increase the
awareness of general public in this regard, certain time bound
programmes and activities are required at the district and sub-regional
levels. In order to cover the cost on these activities an annual grant of
Rs. 10 lakhs per State Government can be sanctioned for this purpose.
(iii) Evaluatory Studies—Evaluatory studies/surveys may be undertaken at
district and State levels to study the impact of existing land-debt related
issues affecting bonded labourers and the impact of poverty alleviation
programmes and financial assistance provided under various government
programmes. Each State Government is required to conduct five
evaluatory studies every year through institutes of social science
organisation or NGOs having professional experience in conducting
evaluatory studies. An allocation of Rs. 5 lakh to each State Government
can be provided for conducting such evaluatory studies every year.
(iv) Increase in Rehabilitation Grant—Originally the scheme provided for
rehabilitation assistance upto a ceiling of Rs. 4,000/- per bonded labour.
This ceiling has been revised from time to time-Rs. 6250 w.e.f. 1.2.1986

41
and Rs. 10,000/- w.e.f. 1.4.1995. Under the modified scheme (May 2000)
the ceiling of rehabilitation grant has further been increased from
Rs. 10,000/- to Rs. 20,000/- per rehabilitated bonded labour.
9. Five Centrally Sponsored Schemes namely (i) strengthening of EMI programme,
(ii) Scheme to strengthen V ocational Guidance Programme, (iii) Grants to States for
setting up of VRCs for Handicapped (iv) Computerization of Employment Exchanges
and (v) strengthening of Employment Exchanges for promotion of self-employment
are included in the eighth plan for implemenation. These Centrally Sponsored
Schemes could not be implemened earlier due to the following reasons resulting in
100% savings of the amount allocated for these schemes.
(i) In respect of the Scheme for Strengthening of EMI Programme, it may
be, submitted that the funds earmarked for the scheme were surrendered
as the Planning Commission did not approve the Scheme and the State
Government also did not favour the scheme due to possible financial
commitments on their part.
(ii) The Scheme to strengthen Vocational Guidance Programme also did not
find favour from the Planning Commission.
(iii) The third Scheme relating to Grants to State for Setting up of VRCs for
Handicapped was also dropped due to the State Governments inability
to share the expenditure due to their financial constraints.
(iv) The remaining two schemes were transferred from Central Sector to the
State Sector as per the recommendations of the National Development
Council. Hence for these two schemes no allocation of funds was made
beyond 1992-93.
10. Being an externally aided project the major focus had been on availing maximum
possible external assistance before original date of closure of the project i.e. Dec. 96.
With this in view, the Planning Commission enhanced the budget. However, for
reasons explained before the Committee (non-filling up of vacant posts in various
institutes and dropping of proposals for procurement of vehicles and less claims
received from States in respect of World Bank Scheme for States), there had been
savings.
11. The following steps are being taken for maximum utilization of budget
provisions.
(i) The expenditure position is being constantly monitored by Central Project
Implementation Unit (CPIU) and  reviewed regularly at the level of Joint
Secretary.
(ii) As regards State Sector Schemes, no advance funds are being released
to the States. Matching central grant for raw material etc. is released to
the states only after the expenditure has been incurred by the states.
12. The budget provision for the various schemes under child labour during the
1996-97 was of the order of Rs. 56.00 crores. The allocation under the scheme of

42
National Child Labour Project forms the bulk provision. As against budget provision
of Rs. 54.30 crores made under the Scheme, the expenditure was of the order
of Rs. 33.03 crores. Therefore major part of the saving under child labour was
contributed by this scheme where the saving was of the order of Rs. 21.27 crores
(95.98% of the saving under Child labour). The sequence of events resulting in
savings under this sub-head is given in the following paragraphs:—
(i) The Ministry of Labour had prepared a detailed scheme for elimination of
child labour in hazardous occupation  during 1996-97 to 2000-2001 for
approval of the Expenditure Finance Committee (EFC). The proposal was
circulated to all concerned on 14.06.96. In the Scheme it was, inter-alia,
proposed that besides about 1.00 lakh children who were already enrolled
in the special schools through the then on-going 76 projects, additional
5 lakh children would be enrolled in special schools, either by increasing
the coverage in the on-going projects or by sanctioning NCLP in additional
districts. This would have involved an additional expenditure of Rs. 160.00
crores during 1996-97. The scheme was considered in the meeting of the
Expenditure Finance Committee meeting held on 25.6.1996. In the meeting it
was mentioned on behalf of the Planning Commission that since the
contours of the 9th  Five Year Plan were not yet known, it would be difficult
to make firm commitment outlay for the 9th Plan period.
(ii) Subsequently, a meeting was held on 30.7.1996 in Planning Commission
under the Chairmanship of Special Secretary, Planning Commission to
discuss the proposal for the elimination of child labour in hazardous
occupations. The Special Secretary, Planning Commission suggested that
the outlay for the existing scheme for 1996-97 should be frozen at the level
of 1995-96. In view of this, while the Budget Estimates under the scheme
for the year 1995-96 was Rs. 54.30 crores,  the actual availability of fund for
utilization under the scheme was Rs. 33.91 crores.
(iii) As per the suggestion of  Planning Commission a separate proposal was
formulated for consideration of EFC for incurring expenditure in connection
with the continuation of 76 existing projects and opening of additional
schools as per the existing norms of expenditure under NCLP. The proposal
which  was circulated to all concerned on 24.9.96 was considered in the
meeting of the Expenditure Finance Committee on 2.12.96. The Committee,
inter-alia, decided that:—
(a) No new schools should be opened and no new children should be
enrolled until a decision is taken by Cabinet for the continuance of the
scheme during Ninth Plan period.
(b) The on-going project under the scheme should be got evaluated through
independent evaluation agency within a period of three months, and
(c) Ministry of Labour will  seek the approval of Finance Ministry for
funding the on-going schools covering the children already enrolled
through the existing 76 project societies for the current financial year

43
since the total expenditure during the 8th plan period exceeds
Rs. 50 crores.
(iv) It would thus be seen that in case the EFC had approved the scheme in
June, 1996 itself it would have been possible for the Ministry to incur an
expenditure much above the level of Rs. 54.30 crore as provided for in the
Budget estimates for 1996-97. Delay in approval of scheme by EFC, the rider
put by the Planning Commission and the ban of opening of new special
schools resulted in substantially lower availability and utilization of funds
despite higher allocation of funds in the Budget.
(v) Release of funds under child labour scheme are contingent upon the receipt
of some requisite documents. viz. Quarterly Progress Report, Audited
Statement of Accounts containing Income & Expenditure A/c, Receipt and
Payment, Balance Sheet and the Utilization Certificate for the year as a whole
and not installment-wise. Besides this Inspection Report of the Project is
also required to be received from the State Government to monitor the actual
functioning of the project. During the processing of the case for release,
discrepancies noticed such as low/excess expenditure under any particular
head are also brought to the notice of the Project Society for their comments
and for rectification if there is any lapse in the implementation of the Project.
All these result in delay in release of funds. It is observed that various
proposals mature by the end of financial year resulting in comparatively
higher expenditure in the month of March.
  However, persistent efforts are being made to ensure full utilization of the
allocated budget.
Sd/-
(PRAVIN TRIPATHI)
Joint Secretary/Financial Advisor
(Labour)
(Ministry of Labour O.M. No. G-25015/1/2001/B&A dated the 7th Sep., 2001)

MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND POVERTY ALLEVIATION
Recommendation
Para No. 13.10—Ministry of Urban Affairs & Poverty Alleviation
   The examination of Grant No. 82 Revenue (Voted) Section operated by the
Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment during the year 1996-97 has revealed that
against the total sanctioned provision of Rs. 561.76 crore, the Ministry could spend
only Rs. 450.91 crore. The scrutiny of Appropriation Accounts has revealed that there
were large scale savings under various sub-heads under the grant. The saving of
Rs. 110.85 crore was the net effect of savings and excess under various sub-heads.
The analysis of the explanatory notes submitted by the Ministry indicate that there
were as many as 11 sub-heads in each of which the savings of over Rs. 1 crore
occurred. The Committee are pained to note that the Ministry failed to utilise the
sanctioned provisions under some priority areas like "Low Cost Sanitation for
Liberation of Scavengers" (Rs.  27.80 crore) due to some procedural lapse i.e. non
presentation of the bill in time; "Prime Minister's Integrated Urban Poverty Eradication
Programme'' (Rs. 29 crore) due to reduction of BE provision at RE stage; and "Housing
and Shelter Upgradation Scheme" (Rs. 12.24 crore) due to lesser requirement of funds
as a result of economy measures and also due to reduction of provision at RE state.
The representative of the Ministry admitted during evidence that in regard to low
cost sanitation, the concerned bill for the amount could not be prepared and the
amount lapsed. The Committee observe that the reasons advanced by the Ministry
for savings under different sub-heads indicate that savings even in the major areas
occurred due to procedural problems which could, and should, have been sorted
out and resolved but for lack of proper  will. It is very unfortunate that the sanctioned
provisions for a welfare scheme like low cost sanitation for liberation of scavengers
remained 100 percent unutilised during the year and that also admittedly due to a
clerical problem. The Committee would like the Ministry to enquire into the reasons
for such a large scale savings under various sub-heads of the grant so as to avoid
such huge "Unspent balances'" at the end of the year.
Para No. 13.10 of Sixteenth Report (13th Lok Sabha) of PAC (2000-01)
Action Taken
The areas of savings are as under:—
(Rs. in crores)
Sl. Scheme/Activity Savings B.E. R.E.
No.
1. Secretariat General Services 1.19 8.13 8.13
2. Urban Transport Planning 2.00 6.85 4.85
44

45
3. Research in Urban and Regional Planning 1.19 2.70 1.70
4. Low Cost Sanitation for Liberation of Scavengers 27.80 27.80 13.80
5. Mega City Scheme 23.00 83.50 60.50
6. IDSMT 6.08 26.00 19.92
7. Prime Minister's Integrated Urban Poverty 29.00 99.00 70.00
Eradication Programme (PMI UPEP)
8. Nehru Rozgar Yojana-Housing and 12.24 14.20 10.00
Shelter Upgradation Scheme
9. Nehru Rozgar Yojana-Urban Micro 6.49 30.24 20.00
Enterprises Scheme
10. Nehru Rozgar Yojana-Urban Wage 1.11 24.92 18.51
Employment Scheme
11. Maintenance and Repairs 10.25 110.34 110.34
2. As may kindly be seen from the note at Annexure-A, the savings were largely
due to reduction of BE provision at the RE stage.
3. In so far as the Scheme of Low Cost Sanitation for Liberation of Scavengers is
concerned, even the RE provision of Rs. 13.80 crores remained unutilised. The matter
was looked into detail immediately and after taking into account all the facts and
circumstances of the case, the concerned official of the Ministry was issued a
warning.
4. It may be added that in no other case, the savings could be attributed entirely
to any inaction on the part of this Ministry. Every effort will be made to ensure
maximum utilisation of  allocations in future.
5. This has been vetted by Audit vide DGACR's U.O. No. RR/8-5/2000-01/371
dated 6.7.2001.
Sd/-
(R.S. PRASAD)
JS & FA (UD & PA)
File No. G-25017/2/2001-Bt. Ministry of Urban Development & Poverty Alleviation
Dated 20th July, 2001
Sl. Scheme/Activity Savings B.E. R.E.
No.

MINISTRY OF SOCIAL JUSTICE & EMPOWERMENT
Recommendation
The Committee's scrutiny of Grant No. 86 operated by the Ministry of Social
Justice and Empowerment (erstwhile Ministry of Welfare) during the year
1996-97 has revealed that there were substantial variations between the
sanctioned provisions vis-à-vis actual expenditure incurred by the Ministry under
various sub-heads. The Committee find that in the Revenue (Voted) Section of
the Grant, there were gross saving of Rs.144.61 crore under some heads which
were offset by excess expenditure of Rs.135.49 crore under other heads resulting
in net savings of Rs.9.12 crore. The Committee's scrutiny has also revealed that
provision of Rs.99.80 crore remained wholly unutilized under 28 heads. It has
been found that the entire budgetary allocation of Rs.88.00 crore for Liberation
and Rehabilitation of Scavengers remained wholly unutilized. Substantial savings
occurred under the heads "Assistance to V oluntary Organizations for Scheduled
Castes (Rs.7.33 crore); "Scholarship to students of Scheduled Castes, Scheduled
Tribes and other categories" (Rs.3.10 crore); "Aids and Appliances for the
Handicapped" (Rs.6.00 crore); Education work  for prohibition and Drug abuse
(Rs.5.02 crore) etc. The Committee's examination had further revealed that there
have been persistent savings in various welfare schemes viz . Welfare of
Scheduled Castes-Education, Assistance to V oluntary Organizations for
Scheduled Tribes-Education, Scheme for pre-examination coaching for weaker
sections, scheme for street children, Grants in aid to Union Territory Governments
on other Schemes of Scheduled Castes-Education. The Committee observe that
saving in these schemes during the period from 1994-95 onwards ranged from 13
percent to 99 per cent. The Committee are surprised to find that the Ministry
failed to utilize sanctioned provisions even in the schemes meant for imparting
education to Scheduled Castes and Tribes aiming at skill development and
enablement of the weaker sections of the society. In regard to the scheme of
prevention of drug abuse also, the Ministry registered savings to the extent of
34 percent of the sanctioned provision. The Committee are constrained to observe
that in view of the entire budget provision under the "National Rehabilitation
Programme for the Handicapped" and "National Trust for the Mentally Retareded
and Cerebral Palsy" remaining wholly unutilized during the years 1994-95 to 1996-
97, nomenclature of "social justice and empowerment" hardly inspires confidence.
While outright rejecting the reasons adduced by the Ministry for non-utilisation
of funds, the Committee are rather of the firm opinion that had the Ministry made
concerted and well coordinated efforts, the position as to funds utilization would
have been substantially otherwise. What appears all the more surprising is that
the Ministry have been seeking budgetary allocations for certain heads year after
year despite these allocations having remained entirely unutilized in the preceding
years. The Committee cannot but express their anguish over the lackadaisical
approach of the Ministry as very well meaning and laudable schemes aiming at
empowerment of disadvantaged and disabled sections of the society could not
take off or make proper progress and the scarce resources remained idly parked
46

47
year after year which would have been gainfully utilized for other fund-starved
developmental schemes. The Committee would keenly watch at the Action taken
stage as to what lessons have been drawn and improvement effected by the Ministry
in the matter of utilization of funds for such socially vital sectors.
Sl. No. 11 of Appendix
Para No. 13.11 of Report No. 16 of PAC
of 13th Lok Sabha
Action Taken
In pursuance of the recommendation of the Public Accounts Committee the
Ministry has taken various steps to improve utilization of funds under various
programmes/schemes. Some of the steps taken are as under:—
(i) The recommendations of the Committee have been circulated to all
concerned in the Ministry for strict compliance to avoid such recurrence
in future. (Annexure-I).
(ii) The expenditure is being monitored on regular intervals (in the first 3
quarters monthly basis and fortnightly in the last quarter of the financial
year) by Secretary (SJ&E) with all Joint Secretaries of the Programme
Divisions so as to ensure that there is even flow of expenditure under
various schemes and there is no rush at the last quarter of financial year
and also the funds are utilized fully for the purpose for which these are
provided in the budget.
(iii) W ith a view to ensure timely disbursement of grants in aid to the State
Governments and NGOs the Programme Divisions of the Ministry are
reminding State Governments/NGOs for sending proposals in the beginning
of the financial year so that there is sufficient time to process the proposals
and savings are minimized. (Annexure-II).
(iv) At the time of preparation of the budget proposals the Programme
Divisions, are asked to take the note of the past performance/the stage
of formulation/implementation of various schemes, the institutional
capacities of the implementing agencies, the constraints on spending by
the spending agencies etc. with a view to minimizing the scope for
surrender of funds at later stages as advised by the Public Accounts
Committee (Annexure-III).
(v) The Ministry has compiled a Compendium of guidelines for various
programmes/schemes to facilitate NGOs for speedy submission of
proposals.
(vi) The Ministry has also launched a website incorporating information on
release of grants in aid to the NGOs assisted by the Ministry. The website
gives procedure for application for grants along with downloadable
applications forms for grants.

48
(vii) With a view to step up the monitoring of the projects assisted by this
Ministry the officers are undertaking inspections of various projects. An
Inspectorate has been created from the present staff of the Ministry whose
prime task is to carry out inspections of various projects of the assisted
NGOs.
(viii) To interact with the NGOs and State Governments, the Ministry is holding
meetings with the representatives of the State Governments and NGOs for
timely submission of the proposals to the Ministry.
Due to the above action taken the utilization of funds under various schemes
have been improved considerably. The utilization of funds during 2000-01 and 2001-02
was about 96% of the approved R.E.
As per report of the Committee, under 28 sub-heads (involving an amount Rs.99.80
crore during 1996-97) no amount was released. Now the position has improved
considerably and in most of the schemes the expenditure has been improved. In this
connection a statement showing the progress of expenditure in respect of these 28
sub-heads where the entire provision remained unutilized during 1996-97 may kindly
be seen at Annexure-IV.
As per the Committee, substantial savings under some of the schemes had
occurred during 1996-97. The position has now been improved considerably and in
most of the schemes the entire allocation has been utilized during 2000-01 and 2001-02.
In this connection a Statement indicating BE and actual expenditure and savings
during 1996-97 onwards on these schemes may kindly be seen at Annexure-V.
As per the Committee, there had been persistent saving in some schemes. The
position has since been improved considerably in the last two years. A Statement
showing reduction in savings in these schemes where persistent saving occurred in
1995-96 and 1996-97 may kindly be seen at Annexure-VI.
As per the Committee the entire allocation under (i) National Rehabilitation
Programme for the Handicapped and (ii) National Trust for the Mentally Retarded
and Cerebral Palsy remained wholly unutilized during the year 1996-97. In this
connection it is stated that:
The setting up of the National Trust for Mentally Retarded and Cerebral Palsy
was under process of the Government since 1992-93 and after detailed examination
the final shape could be given in 1995. The Ministry, therefore, with the approval of
Cabinet introduced the Bill namely "National Trust for Welfare of Persons with Mental
Retardation and Cerebral Palsy Bill, 1995" in Lok Sabha on 6.12.95. The Bill could
not come up for consideration in the 10th Lok Sabha due to dissolution of the House
and therefore lapsed. The Bill was again introduced on 8.3.99 in the Lok Sabha with
some modifications made after extensive consultation with parents' organizations,
experts and non-Govt. organizations as the National Trust for Welfare of Persons
with Autism, Cerebral Palsy, Mental  Retardation and Multiple disabilities. The Bill
however, could not come up for consideration due to dissolution of the Lok Sabha
and therefore lapsed this time also. The Bill was again introduced in the Lok Sabha

49
on 9.12.99 and was passed by it on 15.12.99. The Rajya Sabha also passed it on
23.12.99. The President gave his assent on 30.12.99. It has now taken up of the shape
of an Act.
After the passes of Bill by the Parliament, there was need for funds for setting up
of the Trust. Thus, an amount of Rs.4.00 crore was released to the Trust in March,
2000. As the Central Government has to make contribution of Rs.100.00 crore in the
Corpus Fund of the Trust, the entire allocation of Rs. 44.00 crore was released to the
Trust during 2000-01. During 2001-02 the allocation of Rs. 37.80 crore was augmented
and funds to the extent of Rs. 51.00 crore was released to the Trust augmenting the
Corpus Fund Rs.99.00 crore.
The scheme of National Programme for the Rehabilitation of Disabled had been
launched with a view to create service delivery structure at districts level for providing
service to the people with disabilities. It was approved by EFC as a Centrally
Sponsored Scheme under which consent of State Govt./UT Admns. was required as
they were supposed to contribute the matching share. The response from State
Governments/UTs was poor and therefore the scheme could not be placed before
the Planning Commission. Subsequently, a new programme viz. National Programme
for Rehabilitation of Persons with Disability (NPRPD) which was very comprehensive
in nature was decided to be implemented as a Centrally Sponsored Scheme with 100%
funding by Central Government. The Planning Commission did not approve the
scheme on various grounds like proliferation of institutions and that it did not favour
launching of it as Centrally Sponsored Scheme. Even a pilot project to test the NPRPD
was not approved by the Planning Commission. Subsequently in January 1999 the
Planning Commission and Min. of SJ&E, decided to transfer NPRPD schemes to State
Governments as a social sector scheme. It was also suggested that models for
implementation of the scheme at various levels i.e. State, District, Block and Gram
Panchayat levels be prepared. Accordingly the models were prepared and sent along
with guidelines to the Planning Commission for circulation to the States.
In view of above it is clear that due to non-approval of the scheme by the Planning
Commission the funds could not be utilised upto 1998-99. However, in 1999-2000
after approval of the Planning Commission of the scheme the entire allocation of
Rs. 5.00 crore was released to the States/UTs. During 2000-2001 against the allocation
of Rs.50.00 crore Rs. 55.99 crore was relased to various State Governments. During
2001-02 against an allocation of Rs. 39.25 crore, Rs. 43.61 crore was released under
the scheme.
Sd/-
(Mrityunjay Sahoo)
Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser
(Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment OM No. 25018/1/97-B&C Dated the
23-5-2003.)

ANNEXURE-I
No. 25012/1/97-B&C
Government of India
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi, 110001
Dated the 13th June, 2001
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Sub: Action Taken Note on the recommendations contained in the 16th Report of
the Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha) on Union Government
Appropriation Accounts (Civil)-1996-97
The undersigned is directed to refer to the Lok Sabha Secretariat O.M. No. 20/5/
2000/PAC dated 14th May, 2001 on the above subject and to enclose copy of the
observations and conclusion/recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee
pertaining to this Ministry for period 1996-97.
2. It is requested that the observations of the Committee may kindly be adhered
to for strict compliance to avoid such recurrence in future and strictures of the Public
Accounts Committee. The recommendations of the PAC pertaining to other Ministries
are also enclosed as these are also indicated below as these are useful for guidance.
(a) The Committee are of the considered view that savings, described as 'un-
spent balances' could have been significanlty reduced if not avoided
altogether by making realistic budgetary projections by the concerned
Ministry/Departments.
(b) The Committee recommended that before funds are earmarked the
developmental schemes ought to be tailored having regard to ground realities
and the achievability of targets within stipulated time so that scarce resources
are not tied to schemes which do not take off or do not show progress
commensurate with the funds allocated in a given financial year.
(c) The Ministry should not only revamp their existing budgetary mechanism
to ensure proper and correct estimations of the budgetary requirements but
also streamline the procedure for full and timely utilisations of the sanctioned
provisions.
(d) The Committee recommended that the Ministry devise and put in place of
suitable mechanism which could take into account all the imputs having their
impact on the trend of expenditure in various sub-heads of the grant before
projecting the need of funds under different heads of grants. The Committee
also recommend that the Ministry introduce the system of individual
accountability so that the budget formulation process is well coordinated
and receives best of attention at every stage, before it is finalised.
(e) The Committee deplore that some of the Departments even did not care to
surrender the unspent provisions at all. Despite the Committee's repeated
exhortations made from time to time in their earlier report for timely surrender
50

51
of saving, the Committee observed that the Ministry/Departments are yet to
show improvement in this regard.
(f) The Committee desired that the Financial Advisers and Head of the Ministries
should be made jointly accountable for un-usual savings and delay in timely
surrender of savings.
(g) The Committee are all the more concerned deeply that some Ministries were
even unable to assess their actual requirements of funds even on the last
day of the financial year. The Committee, therefore recommended that the
procurement of Supplementary Grant by the Ministry be thoroughly assessed
objectively toward off unwarranted savings later. The Committee feel that it
would go a long way in streamlining of budgetary process, if the Heads of
the Programme Divisions are made accountable in this behalf.
(h) The Committee recommend that it may enjoined upon all the Financial
Advisers that it is their duty to ensure observance of financial proprity and
to assert their authority and where advice is overlooked/disregarded, the
matter should immediately be brought by them to the notice of Finance
Ministry, without fail.
(i) Large scale rush of expenditure  in the closing month of financial Year in the
opinion of the Committee smacks of lack of financial discipline and
accountability. The Committee, therefore, consider it desirable that the
Ministry of Finance devise a procedure making it mandatory for the
Departmental Heads to hold monthly meeting to monitor and so far as
practicable, to ensure the even flow of expenditure to avoid March-rush for
effective physical discipline and better results.
Sd-
(Mahendra Sharma)
Under Secretary to Govt. of India.
To,
All Joint Secretaries
All Directors/DSs.
All Under Secretaries/Desk Officers/SOs
Pay & Accounts Office, M/o SJ&E—with a copy of Recommendation of PAC
Para No. 13.21 regarding utilisation certificates. It is requested that the backlog
of the pending Utilization Certificates at least upto 1995-96 may be cleared and
a report may be sent to the DG(Audit).
Copy to PPS to Secretary (SJ&E)/PS to AS(SJ&E)/PS to JS&FA.

ANNEXURE-II
No. 14011/1/2002-SCD-V
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
SCD Division
Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi-110001.
Dated 10/4/2002.
To,
Secretary in charge of Scheduled Caste Development,
All States/UTs.
Subject: Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Post Matric Scholarship for students
belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes—Calling
proposals for seeking due Central assistance for Scheduled Castes
during 2002-03.
Sir,
1. The Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Post Matric Scholarship for students
belonging to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes is perhaps the most
important Scheme of the Government of India to promote educational
development at post-matriculation stages. In order to ensure that this scheme
is implemented as efficiently as possible to reach the benefits to the SC
students, it is requested that your State Govt. may kindly take early action
to accomplish the goal. You may therefore, kindly like to take advance action
regarding the following items:—
1.1 Every financial year this Ministry invities proposals in the prescribed
proforma from States/UTs for release of Central Assistance under the Centrally
Sponsored Scheme of Post Matric Scholarship to SC students. A copy of
prescribed proforma for furnishing proposal for the year 2002-2003 is
enclosed. This may be duly filled as per the instructions contained in this
letter, and returned at the earliest for the year 2001-2002 may please be directly
sent to that Ministry.
1.2 From the year 1997-98, onwards, the State Govt./UT Admn. are required to
furnish separate statistical information pertaining to coverage of disabled
students under the Scheme. This may also be kindly furnished.
1.3 The anticipated expenditure projections for 2002-2003 may, however, be
worked out keeping in view the trend of awards vis-a-vis the expenditure
thereon in the past. Generally the trend is for the expenditure to increase
between 8 to10% over the previous year's figures. If however, any State Govt.
proposes any abnormal growth and in all cases where, more than 20% growth
52

53
in expenditure/coverage is proposed the same should be supported by valid
reasons, otherwise this Ministry will not be able to process the proposal.
1.4 The year 2001-02 was since the last year of the 9th Five year Plan, the total
expenditure incurred (State source+Central assistance) during 2001-02 would
become the Committed Liability of the State/UT for each year of the
10th Five Year Plan, which the States/UTs are required to provide from their
State Budget each year. For determination of committed liability any arrears
arising due to any abnormal reason, for the previous year(s) paid during
2001-02 may be deducted from the expenditure of 2001-02 and such
outstanding claims which are to be paid  during 2002-03 for the year 2001-02
may be added to the expenditure of 2001-02 for the purpose of calculation of
committed liability, while clearly giving specific reasons for the occurrence
of extraordinary arrears. It is also very important and essential to ensure that
while furnishing the proposal, the requried State Budget Provision towards
Committed Liability requirement is fully confirmed failing which it may be
difficult to release the due Central assistance.
1.5 It is experience of the Ministry that when the proposals are furnished by
States/UTs, information with regard to expenditure on beneficiaries is found
to be inconsistent with the information in other parts of the proposal. This
leads to a lot of avoidable correspondence for seeking clarification which
results in delay in release of Central assistance. It is, therefore, requested
that due care be taken while preparing proposals to avoid such
inconsistencies.
1.6 The Ministry is presently confronted with disagreement over figure relating
to unspent balance with States/UTs in this Ministry we take special effort to
ensure that this figure is as accurate as possible and do the exercise of
reconciling the statement in the beginning of the financial year. If this could
be done in the States/UTs also, we may be able to reconcile the difference in
figures was in advance so that the lack of accurate figures of unspent balance
do not delay the release of funds.
1.7 Urgent necessary steps may be taken to update the audit of expenditure
under the scheme. Where audit under the scheme is pending for many years,
special drive needs to be undertaken  in co-ordination with the concerned
Accountant General.
1.8 Timely payment of scholarship to all eligible students under the scheme and
that the availability of application forms freely and in time to all the eligible
students are very important from the point of view of the beneficiaries. In
this regard this Ministry had also issued comprehensive guidelines for
streamlining sanction and disbursement procedures under this scheme vide
this Ministry's circular No.11017/8/93-Sch. Cell, dated 4.4.1995. Timely
payment of scholarship must be ensured to all eligible students covered under
the Scheme.

54
1.19 It is requested that complete proposal in the prescribed format may please
be furnished as early as possible so that due Central assistance may be
provided to your State/UT well in time and timely sanctioned disbursement
of scholarship to poor SC students can be ensured.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(Bipul Pathak)
Deputy Secretary to the Government of India
Telefax: 3387430
Copy forwarded for necessary action to the Directors in Charge of Welfare of SCs.
All States/UTs
Sd/-
(Bipul Pathak)
Deputy Secretary to the Government of India.

Room No. 022A wing.
Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi-110001
Dated the 1st April, 2002
The President/Secretary,
(of all NGOs)
Subject: Assistance to voluntary Organizations under the Scheme to Promote
V oluntary Action for Persons with Disabilities.
Sir/Madam,
I am  directed to request that the proposal(s) for grant in aid under the above
mentioned Scheme for first installment for the year 2002-03 may please be sent to
this Ministry before 30th April, 2002 positively to enable the Ministry to process the
case for grant in aid. The proposal should have the following documents:
1. Budget Estimates (Item-wise/Post-wise) for the year 2002-03.
2. List of staff with qualification, designation and date of appointment.
3. Number and List of beneficiaries for the year 2002-03 with details on age,
address, type and severity of disability, etc.
4. Copy of Registration Certificate.
5. Annual Report for the year 2001-02.
6. Unaudited Accounts for the year 2001-02 comprising income and expenditure
statement of account, receipt and payment account, balance sheet, etc.
7. Item-wise/post-wise expenditure made out of the grant in aid for the year
2001-02.
8. Unaudited Utilization Certificate for the year 2001-02.
9. Copy of the rent agreement.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(B.K. Pandey)
Director.
55

Government of India
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
New Delhi, the 5th April 2002
To
The Secretary
(In charge of Prevention of Alcoholism and Drugs Abuse)
All State Governments/UT Administrations
 Subject: Grant-in-aid to NGOs and States/UTs under the  Scheme for Prevention
of Alcoholism and Substance (Drugs) Abuse.
Sir/Madam,
Social Defence Division in the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment,
Government of India, is dealing with matters relating to neglected, destitute and
abandoned children, juvenile justice system, welfare of elder persons, and programme
relating to treatment and rehabilitation of drug addicts and victims of substance
abuse.
2. A number of NGOs are in receipt of financial assistance under the Scheme for
prevention of Alcoholism and Substance (Drugs) Abuse. A list of the NGOs, which
were funded by this Ministry under the Scheme during the year 2001-02, is enclosed
herewith for your information.
3. As you are aware, financial assistance is released to the grantee NGOs on annual
basis ordinarily in two installments, based on the evaluation of their performance
through the recommendation and inspection report of the State Government/UT
Administration concerned, or the nodal agency of this Ministry. While the first
instalment of grant-in-aid equivalent to 50% of the grant due for the year is released
at the beginning of the financial year, after taking into account the recommendation
of the State Government for the previous year, the second instalment for the year is
released on receipt of the State Government's recommendation and inspection report
for the current financial year. The experience of the Ministry has been that the
recommendations/inspection reports from the State Governments/UT Administrations
are received at the fag end of the financial year. This causes avoidable delay in release
of grants to the organization, and adversely affects performance of the projects. We,
therefore, seek your cooperation in not only monitoring and evaluation of the projects
but also in ensuring that your recommendations along with the inspection reports
reach this Ministry well within time, preferably before 31st December each year.
4. This Ministry is in the process of further revising the inspection proformae to
be used for inspection of various projects. Copies thereof will be sent to you in due
course. Besides, the Ministry has laid down guidelines to be followed by the grantee
NGOs for running the projects. A manual has also been prepared on minimum
standards of services for the projects under the Scheme for Prevention of Alcoholism
and Substance Abuse (copy enclosed).
56

57
5. We expect the State Governments/UT Government's active participation in
effective implementation of the Programme, and would welcome feedback from them
in this regard.
Your faithfully,
Sd/-
(JAYA TI CHANDRA)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India.

Government of India
Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment
New Delhi, the 5th April 2002
To
The President/Secretary
(All grantee NGOs in Drug Abuse Prevention sector)
Subject: Grant-in-aid to NGOs under the Scheme for Prevention of Alcoholism
and Substance (Drugs) Abuse.
Sir/Madam,
Social Defence Division in the Ministry of Social Justice and Empowerment,
Government of India, is dealing with matters relating to neglected, destitute and
abandoned children, juvenile justice system, welfare of elder persons, and programme
relating to treatment and rehabilitation of drug addicts and victims of substance
abuse. The Ministry is providing financial assistance to NGOs under various Schemes
run in this sector. Your organization is one of the recipients of financial assistance
under the Scheme for Prevention of Alcoholism and Substance (Drugs) Abuse.
2. As you are aware all grantee organizations are required to submit their
applications for grant-in-aid in the prescribed proforma for release of first installment
alongwith all the relevant documents as mentioned in the scheme so as to reach this
Ministry by 15th May. Proposals for the first installment must be accompanied by
the  half-yearly progress reports for the period ended on 31st March. The NGOs are
expected to scrupulously follow the guidelines laid down from time to time, like the
manual on minimum standards of services for the projects under the scheme recently
circulated by this Ministry Separately,  the Ministry has also been requesting the
State Governments/UT Administrations to recommend proposals from the
organizations for grant-in-aid in time.
3. However instances have come to the notice of this Ministry where the NGOs
do not submit their proposals along with  the requisite documents in time. This not
only causes delay in release of grant, but at times it is not possible to release the
grant to the organization as it becomes time barred under the provisions of the General
Financial Rules. All grantee NGOs are, therefore requested to please ensure that their
proposals for grant-in-aid are submitted complete in all respects as per the
requirements and time schedule mentioned above so that the grant could be released
to them in time.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(A.K. JOSHI)
Deputy Secretary to the Government of India.
58

No11014/18/97-SCD-II
Government of India
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment
(SCD Division)
Shastri Bhavan,
New Delhi-110001
Dated 9th April, 2002.
To
Secretary
Social Welfare Deptt.
(27 States/UTs)
As per list
Subject: Submission of Annual Progress Report on utilisation of Special Central
Assistance (SCA) for release of SCA during the year 2002-03
Sir,
I am directed to refer to this Ministry's communication dated 6th October, 1998
circulating guidelines on utilisation of Special Central Assistance and subsequent
communications advising formulation of project proposals by dovetailing subsidy
under SCA and balance as loan from NSFDC/Bank. Model Project Proposals prepared
by Government of Andhra Pradesh were circulated in April 2001 and subsequently,
project proposals prepared by Government of Karnataka were circulated in December
2001 for your reference in this regard.
2. In order to process release of 1st installment of SCA during year 2002-03, you
are requested to send Annual Progress Report, Physical and Financial achievements,
and utilisation certificate for the year ending on 31st March 2002 as per proforma
enclosed to this Ministry latest by 20th April, 2002.
Your faithfully,
Sd/-
(R. Radhakrishnan)
Deputy Secretary to the Government of India.
59

ANNEXURE-III
No.g. 21015/1/2000-B&C
Government of India
Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment
(B&C Section)
New Delhi,
Dated the 30th August, 2000
Subject: Pre-budget Discussion of Secretary (Expenditure) with JS&FA
regarding RE 2000-2001 (Plan & Non-Plan) and BE 2001-2002 (Non-
Plan) in respect of Demand No. 89-Min. of SJ&E.
Estimates of expenditure in respect of a Ministry/Department are required to be
finalised after Secretary (Expenditure) has held discussion(s) with the Financial
Adviser of that Ministry/Department.
2. For finalization of RE 2000-2001 (Plan and Non-Plan) and BE 2001-2002 (Non-
Plan) of schemes/programmes being operated in this Ministry, Secretary (Expenditure)
is likely to hold pre-budget discussion(s) with Financial Adviser some time in October,
2000. Exact date and time of discussion(s) will be intimated in due course.
3. For pre-budget discussion, the following aspects may please be kept in view
while formulating proposals for RE 2000-2001 (Plan and Non-Plan) and BE 2001-2002
(Non-Plan):—
(a) the existing expenditure budget is to be reviewed to prioritize the activities
and schemes, both Plan and non-plan side and those activities and schemes
are to be identified which can be eliminated or reduced in size.
(b) Due  note is to be taken of the past performance, the stage of formulation/
implementation of the various schemes, the institutional capacity of the
implementing agencies to implement the schemes as scheduled, the
constraints on spending by the spending agencies, etc. with a view to
minimizing the scope for available surrenders as a later stage.
The Parliamentary Committee has been repeatedly expressing concern
over incidence of large saving in the Grant. The Public Accounts Committee
have repeatedly amount of Rs. 100.00 crores and above of all scheme of
the Ministry has to be explained to the Committee along with Action taken
to avoid savings in future.
(c) The annual budget is prepared and allocation made taking into account
the availability of resources and other relevant factors. An additional
demand at the Supplementary stage only adds to the deficit and is an
indicator of the budget not being framed carefully. Once the budget is
framed, the provision in the budget whether Plan and Non-Plan should be
60

61
regarded as the maximum amount of resources available and accordingly
efforts should be made to manage the affairs with these limits. The
programmes and the contents of their activities are therefore, required to
be examined carefully reordering the priorities to manage within the
allocation rather than come up with proposals for supplementary demands.
Supplementary Demand are to be severely restricted and should only be
for genuine unforeseen expenditure which could not be envisaged at the
time of preparation of annual budget or to meet the requirements of a
decision or development which have taken place after the approval of the
budget i.e. post-budget decision and not for continuing schemes and
programmes.
(d) Economy instructions issued from time to time by the Ministry of Finance,
including the need to bring down subsidies through improvement or
operational efficiency and effective direction of flow of subsidies to targeted
groups are also to be taken into account.
(e) No provision is to be made in the establishment budget for posts, which
are lying vacant for one year or more. Even otherwise provisioning for
vacant post should be made with circumspection so as to avoid changes
of eventual savings due to these not being filled up.
(f) Autonomous bodies should generate their own resources of income to meet
additional expenditure over BE 2000-2001 because it may not be possible
for the Government to go on meeting increases in expenditure every year.
4. In view of position explained above, detailed justification may kindly be given
where additional funds are required. Detailed justification is also needed in cases
where savings are anticipated. In cases where  the amount actually spent is less
than the amount budgeted for during the current year, corresponding savings under
some other scheme/programme may invariably be located so that additional funds
could be provided to them at Revised Estimates 2000-2001 stage.
5. It may also be added here that in accordance with the instructions issued by
the Planning Commission, prior approval of the Commission is necessary in cases
where outlay for any scheme is sought to be changed by more than 10% of the
budget estimate. Also that Zero-based budget analysis is required for all schemes.
6. Due to instructions of the Ministry of Finance, 10% of Central Plan allocation
i.e. Rs. 135.00 crores has been provided in a separate budget head entitled "Lump-
sum Provision for North-east and Sikkim" for releasing funds under various schemes/
programmes of the Ministry. It is, therefore, requested that the requirement of funds
in RE 2000-2001 for Plan schemes for Northeast and Sikkim may also be furnished
separately along with the requirements in the schemes other than Northeast and
Sikkim.
7. The proposal for RE 2000-2001 (Plan & Non-Plan) and 2001-2002 (Non-Plan)
may please be furnished accordingly in consolidated form for the Bureaus latest by
20th September, 2000 positively in the enclosed proforma.

62
8. All the Bureau Heads are requested to kindly ensure that the above information
is given on time as the pre-budget discussion will be the basis for determining the
ceiling for Revised Estimates 2000-2001 (Plan and Non-Plan) and Budget Estimates
2001-2002 (Non-Plan).
Sd/-
(B.C. Pant)
Under Secretary to Govt. of India.
To,
JS(SD)/JS(DD)/JS(NGO)/JS(SCD,M&BC)
Copy to:—
1. All Divisional/Branch Heads/Desks and Sections
2. All Subordinate and attached office
3. JD (PREM)

63
ANNEXURE-IV
Annexure-IV Statement showing progress of expenditure where the entire provision remained unutilised during 96-97.
Name of scheme BE 96-97 Actual BE 97-98 Actual BE 98-99 Actual BE 99-2000 Actual BE 2000-01 Actual BE 2001-02 Actual
Expen. Expen. Expen. Expen. Expen. Expen.
Expen.
2225
01.277.04 Coaching & allied scheme 0.01 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.05 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.10 0.00
01.277.08 Book Banks 0.07 0.00
01.277.02 Boys hostels 0.15 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 1.15 1.10 0.80 0.80 0.35 5.00 4.45
01.277.11 Prematric scholarship for SCs 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00
01.277.12 Liberation & Rehabiln. Of Scavengers 0.20 0.00 The allocation and expenditure has been indicated in
New head of Account
Grants in aid to National Scheme
of Liberation & Rehabilitation of
01.800.25 Scavengers 0/00 90.01 120.00 90.00 90.00 5.90 70.00 70.00 67.50 60.92 74.00 8.21
01.277.14 Girls hotels for SCs 1.00 1.00 0.01 0.00 1.00 1.00 0.02 0.87 0.60 0.60 5.00 4.45
01.800.24 Interest Subsidy for NSPDC 4.25 0.00
02.001.01 National Commission for STs 0.93 0.00 0.65 0.00 0.65 0.00 Scheme transferred to Ministry of Tribal Affairs
02.794 SCA to TSP 1.45 0.00 2.00 1.47 2.00 1.33 Scheme transferred to Ministry of Tribal Affairs
02.277.04 Girls hostels for STs 0.25 0.00 0.40 0.00 0.40 0.00 Scheme transferred to Ministry of Tribal Affairs
02.277.03 Boys hostels STs 0.25 0.00 0.40 0.00 0.40 0.00 Scheme transferred to Ministry of Tribal Affairs
02.300.08 Establishment of Ashtram School 0.20 0.00 0.40 0.00 0.40 0.00 Scheme transferred to Ministry of Tribal Affairs
02.800.11 V ocational training in tribal areas 0.15 0.00 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.20 Scheme transferred to Ministry of Tribal Affairs
80.800.08 Maulana Azad Education Foundation 0.01 0.00 40.00 40.00 30.00 3.75 5.00 3.15 2.85 2.85 21.00 3.00
2235
02.001.06 O/O Chief Commissioner for handi. 0.10 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00 0.12 0.50 0.33 1.00 0.27 0.90 0.73
02.101.10 Employment of handicapped 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.02 0.03 0.10 0.02 0.08 0.05
02.101.10.12 National Trust for Mentally 1.25 0.00 1.25 0.00 1.25 0.00 10.00 4.00 44.00 44.00 37.80 51.00
Retarded and Cerebral Palsy
02.101.10.13 National Rehabilitation Programmes 1.50 0.00 0.05 0.00 15.00 0.00 5.00 5.00 43.00 55.52 39.25 43.61
02.101.10.14 Indian Spinal Injury Centre 0.05 0.00 2.00 1.96 3.00 3.30 7.00 5.43 2.25 2.30 2.02 2.07
02.101.10.15 Scheme for implementation of 0.05 0.00 15.00 0.00 2.98 0.00 3.50 3.50 11.75 4.01 12.37 8.70
Persons with Disability Act

64
02.102.22 Services for Children in Need of Care & 0.05 0.00 The scheme has been dropped
Protection in Assam
02.106.02 Prevention & Control of Juvenile 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.05 0.00 0.05 0.01 0.05 0.01 0.04 0.00
Maladjustment
02.798.03 Contribution to Funds of UN 0.02 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 Scheme dropped
Decade for Disable Persons
02.200.08 Scheme for Beggary Prevention 0.01 0.00 Scheme dropped
02.200.09.01 Indo foreign cultural exch. 0.02 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.01 0.00 Scheme dropped
Programe
3601
04.341.09 Liberation & rehabilitation of
Scavengers
38.00 0.00 Funds released under new head of account to release grants directly  to State Sch. Castes Dev. Corporations
3602
4.341.04 Girls hostels for SCs 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.20 0.00 0.50 0.00
04.359.01 Employment of handicapped 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.02 0.22 0.10 0.09 0.08 0.08
Name of scheme BE 96-97 Actual BE 97-98 Actual BE 98-99 Actual BE 99-2000 Actual BE 2000-01 Actual BE 2001-02 Actual
Expen. Expen. Expen. Expen. Expen. Expen.
Expen.

65
ANNEXURE-V
Statement showing procress of expenditure in schemes where substantial savings occurred in 1996-97
Scheme BE 96-97 Actual Saving BE 97-98 Actual Saving BE 98-99 Actual Saving BE 99-2000 Actual Saving BE Actual Saving BE Actual Saving
Exp. Exp. Exp. Exp. 2000-01 Exp. 2001-02 Exp.
Secretariat 7.60 6.56 1.04 7.61 7.69 -0.08 8.62 9.40 -0.78 9.66 10.29 -0.63 8.38 8.92 -0.54 10.38 10.35 0.03
Girls Hostels
UT Without Legislature 1.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.00 0.02 0.87 -085 0.60 0.60 0.00 5.00 4.96 0.04
Assistance to V oluntary
Organisation for SCs 17.33 10.00 7.33 20.00 10.03 9.97 18.00 18.01 -0.01 21.00 25.61 -4.61 26.00 22.47 3.53 30.00 29.00 1.00
Interest Subsidy for NSFDC 4.25 0.00 425 Scheme dropped from 97-98
Scheme for Pre-exam coaching
for weaker Section 2.00 0.28 1.72 2.50 0.82 1.68 2.00 2.24 -0.24 2.50 2.46 0.04 2.50 2.73 -0.23 2.50 3.04 -0.54
Scholarship to students of SC/
ST & OBCs for studies abroad 4.90 1.90 3.00 4.90 2.33 2.57 3.90 1.23 2.67 1.72 0.80 0.92 1.13 0.53 0.60 1.13 0.47 0.66
Aids & Appliances 12.85 6.85 6.00 15.00 8.94 6.06 25.00 23.99 1.01 30.00 28.42 1.58 28.70 29.01 -0.31 42.41 43.44 -1.03
National Trust for Mentally
Retarded and Cerebral Pasy 1.25 0.00 1.25 1.25 0.00 1.25 1.25 0.00 1.25 10.00 4.00 6.00 44.00 44.00 0.00 37.80 51.00 -13.20
National Rehabilitation
Programme for Handicapped 1.50 0.00 .50 0.05 0.00 0.05 15.00 0.00 15.00 5.00 5.00 0.00 43.00 55.52 -12.52 39.25 43.61 -4.63
Education work for
prohibition & Drug abuse 14.66 9.64 5.02 17.50 11.52 5.98 16.00 15.13 0.87 20.00 19.03 0.97 18.50 20.64 -2.14 20.25 22.50 -2.25
Assistance to V oluntary
Organisation for Old age homes 2.00 12.50 6.14 6.36 15.00 7.75 7.25 15.00 10.80 4.20 9.00 12.36 -3.36 13.50 14.61 -1.11
Book banks 2.93 1.77 1.16 2.60 1.42 1.18 2.60 1.12 1.48 2.35 2.35 0.00 2.35 2.42 -0.07 1.85 2.87 -1.02
Machinery for PCR Act 15.18 12.21 2.97 15.14 16.13 -0.99 15.14 15.14 0.00 -24.20 24.20 0.00 26.00 26.53 -0.53 28.50 29.49 -0.99
Liberation & rehabilitation of
Scavengers 88.00 0.00 88.00 120.00 90.00 30.00 90.00 5.90 84.10 70.00 70.00 0.00 67.50 60.92 6.58 74.00 8.21 65.79

66
Annexure-VI—Statement indicating reduction in saving in some of the schemes
where persistent Saving occurred in 1995-96 and 1996-97
Persistent Savings Y ear Saving %age
(Crores)
1. Welfare of Scheduled Castes—Education 19 95-96 1.24 99%
1996-97 2.07 92%
1997-98 6.39 100%
1998-99 2.77 50%
1999-2000 3.96 62%
2000-2001 2.51 70%
2001-2002 0.63 6%
2. Assistance, to V ol. Orgns. for Sch. Castes 19 95-96 9.49 47%
1996-97 7.33 42%
1997-98 9.97 50%
1998-99 NIL NIL
1999-2000 4.39 14%
2000-2001 3.52 14%
2001-2002 1.00 3.33%
3. Welfare of Scheduled Tribes—Education 19 95-96 0.53 71%
1996-97 0.53 96%
(Transferred to
Mn. Of Tribal
Affairs
4. Scheme for Pre-exam. Coaching for 19 95-96 0.68 34%
Weaker Sections based on Economic Criteria 19 96-97 1.72 96%
1997-98 1.78 71%
1998-99 +0.24 Excess
1999-2000 NIL NIL
2000-2001 +0.23 Excess
2001-2002 0.54 Excess
5. Scheme for Street Children 19 95-96 2.18 44%
1996-97 0.60 13%
1997-98 2.52 42%
1998-99 2.84 47%
1999-2000 1.16 13%
2000-2001 2.26 24%
2001-2002 2.74 5%
6. Grants in aid to UT Govts. for Other 19 95-96 3.38 82%
schemes of Scheduled Castes—Education 19 96-97 3.66 89%
1997-98 3.28 90%
1998-99 2.09 81%
1999-2000 0.10 11%
2000-01 0.96 58%
2001-02 1.35 62%

MINISTRY OF ROAD TRANSPORT & HIGHWAYS
AND MINISTRY OF SHIPPING
Recommendation
The Committee's examination of the reasons for less utilisation of funds under
grant Nos. 78, 79 and 80 operated by the Ministry of Surface Transport during the
years 1996-97 clearly indicate a shortfall in the performance of the Ministry. It also
discloses that budgetary requirements seem to be projected by the Ministry more
on the basis of theoretical anticipation rather than on the trend of expenditure and
actual requirement. The Committee hardly need to emphasise that existing system of
budget formulation, follow-up, monitoring of projects and financial management leave
much to be desired and calls for comprehensive review and reappraisal so that budget
allocations are gainfully utilised for the intended purposes. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the corrective action taken in this behalf by the Ministry for
avoidance of such lapses in future.
(Sl. No. 13.12 Appendix — 16th Report of PAC 13th Lok Sabha)
Action Taken
GENERAL
During the year 1996-97, there were cases of savings of substantial magnitude,
unrealistic assessment of trend of expenditure leading to unnecessary procurement
of supplementary funds, savings not surrendered in certain cases and injudicious
re-appropriations.
GRANT NO. 78 — SURFACE TRANSPORT
OBSERV ATIONS:
A scrutiny of Appropriation Accounts of this Grant has revealed that in the voted
portion of Revenue Section of this Grant, the overall saving of Rs. 20.33 crore
exceeded the supplementary grant of Rs. 2.22 crore obtained in March, 1997 and
constituted 32 per cent of the total sanctioned provision. A detailed scrutiny of
Appropriation Accounts revealed that there were substantial SAVING in the following
heads under Revenue Section (Voted):
(Rs.in crore)
Sl.No. Major Head/Sub-Head Amount of Savings
1. M.H.—3055 10.00
-Research — Grants for implementation of Voluntary
Retirement Schemes for DTC
2. M.H.—3056 5.16
-Assistance to Public Sector and Other Undertakings
-Grants to Island Waterways Authority of India
3. Three Sub-heads where savings exceeded Rs. 50.00 lakh each 2.41
67

68
In the Capital Section (Voted), there have been savings of Rs. 35.55 crore, which
is 39.68 per cent of the total provision. Substantial savings occurred under the
following heads under Capital Section (V oted):
(Rs.in crore)
Sl.No. Major Head/Sub-Head Amount Reasons of saving
of Saving
1. M.H.—5056
-Investment in Public Sector and Non-receipt of approval for
other Undertakings - Investment in 4.28 acquisition of vessels from
Public Central Inland Water Investment Board.
Transport Corporation Limited.
2. M.H.—7055
-Loans to Public Sector and other 28.00 Transfer of Delhi Transport
-Undertakings Corporation to Government
-Delhi Transport Corporation.  of National Capital Territory
 of Delhi.
3. M.H.—7056 3.28 Non-sanctioning of the 7th
-Central Inland Water Tr ansport Plan Vessel acquisition Scheme
Corporation and modernistation of Raja
Bagan Dockyard.
Action Taken
It is a fact that savings of Rs. 10 crores in respect of the scheme pertaining to
DTC were of very high magnitude. This was, however, not due to unrealistic
assessment of trend of expenditure. In fact, the Union Cabinet in its meeting held on
31.7.1996 directed that the DTC be trasferred to Govt. of NCT of Delhi immediately
and the transfer was given effect to on 5.8.1996. This was unforeseen at the time of
budget formulation and hence provision in the budget was made in a regular manner.
However, the unspent balance at the time of transfer was immediately surrendered at
RE stage. No. provision in the budget for DTC was made during 1997-98 and onwards.
Saving of Rs. 5.16 crores under M.H. 3056-00.190.01 — Grants for Inland
Waterways Authority of India was due to delay in conceptualisation, processing
and implementation of the scheme of Capital dredging in West Coast Canal, Training
Scheme and finalisation of the design by Central Public Works Department for Patna
Terminal. The proposal for setting up of National Inland Navigation Institute (NINI)
in Patna could be given final shape only on 18.3.1997. Examination and evaluation of
such big project could not be completed by  31.3.1997. Hence fund could not be
released. Against the provision of Rs. 400.00 lakhs for implementation of this scheme
for Capital Dredging in West Coast Canal, a sum of Rs. 272.60 lakhs was released
during the year. EFC in its meeting held on 27.3.97 directed to revise the scheme by
including land acquisition for capital dredging also. Therefore, this scheme could
not be finalised and as such saving existed in this year.

69
There was a budget provision of Rs. 150.00 lakhs for the construction of terminal
at Gaighat, Patna. Against this allocation, a sum of Rs. 100.00 lakhs were released for
the scheme. This amount could not be utilised due to non-finalisation of the design
for this terminal.
Against the provision of Rs. 75.00 lakhs, an expenditure of Rs. 23.93 lakhs was
incurred resulting in a saving of Rs. 51.07 lakhs. The saving was mainly due to non-
receipt of complete proposals from the State Governments.
Saving of Rs. 100 lakhs under MH 3055.08- National Institute of Road Safety was
due to non-finalisation of proposal for setting up of the National Institute of Road
Safety. Since the proposal was not likely to be finalised during the year 1996-97, it
was decided to keep a token provision of Rs. 1.00 lakh only, and the balance amount
was surrendered at RE stage itself.
Saving of Rs. 100 lakhs under M.H. 3056.00.190.03-Grants for implementation of
V oluntary Retirement Schme of CIWTC was due to poor response from the employees
of corporation seeking voluntary retirement. Application for voluntary retirement
scheme which were received during the period 1996-97 was within  the fund received
in previous financial year 1995-96. There was a budget provision of Rs. 100.00 lakhs
in the financial year 1996-97 on account of voluntary retirement scheme. As the report
of Vth Pay Commission was expected in the year 1996-97, the employees of CIWTC
were not found interested in VRS with the hope to get more benefits after
implementation of Vth Pay Commission Report. Therefore, due to poor response of
employees in the year 1996-97, the budget provision of Rs. 100.00 lakhs made for the
scheme could not be utilised.
Saving of Rs. 2.41 crore against three sub—heads of the Revenue Section of the
Grant No. 78 was under the following heads:—
Sub-head 3055.00.004.03—Publicity on Road Safety
(Rs. in lakh)
Original Grant 150.00
Supplementary Grant —
Total Grant 150.00
Actual Expenditure 86.78
Saving 63.22
Saving of Rs. 63.22 lakhs under this head was due to non approval of certain
publicity programmes and non-receipt of claim/bills from some parties for carrying
out Road Safety Publicity programme during previous year. Moreover, the plan
allocation was reduced by Rs. 25 lakhs by Finance at RE stage.
Sub-Head 3055.00.004.04-Grant-in-aid to Road Safety agencies for administering Road
Safety Programmes  including inspection equipment for physical fitness of vehicles
(Rs. in lakh)
Original Grant 100.00
Supplementary Grant —
Total Grant 100.00
Actual Expenditure 8.07
Savings 91.93

70
Saving of Rs. 91.73 lakhs under this head was due to the reason that a number of
proposals sent by voluntary organisations were not conforming to the prescribed
guidelines and non-recommendation of State Govts.  as required by the Ministry.
Therefore the number of proposals approved for sanction of Grants-in-aid during
the 1996-97 was very limited limited. Moreover, the BE was reduced to Rs. 50. lakhs
by Finance Wing at RE stage.
Sub-Head 3601.02 Pollution Testing Equipment
(Rs. in lakh)
Original Grant 250.00
Supplementary grant —
Total Grant 250.00
Actual Expenditure 164.25
Savings 85.75
Saving of Rs. 85.75 lakhs, under this head was due to non-receipt of proposals
from the State Governments/UT Administrations.
Savings of Rs. 427.50 lakhs under sub-head 5056 Investment in Central Inland
Water Transport Corporation Limited was mainly due to non release of fund for
modernisation of Raja Bagan Dockyard, non-receipt of Public Investment Baord's
approval for the seventh plan vessel acquisition.
Saving of Rs. 2800 lakhs under sub-head 7055 Loans to Delhi Transport
Corporation was due to the reason that the Union Cabinet in its meeting held on
31.7.1996 directed that the DTC be transferred to Govt. of NCT of Delhi immediately
and the transfer was given effect to on 5.8.1996. This was unforeseen at the time of
budget formulation and hence provision in the budget was made in a regular manner.
However, the unspent balance at the time of transfer was immediately surrendered at
RE stage. No provision in the budget for DTC was made during 1997-98 and onwards.
The saving was not due to unrealistic assessment of trend of expenditure.
Saving of Rs. 327.50 lakhs under M.H. 7056—Loans for Inland Water Transport
Corporations was due to non-sanctioning of the 7th Plan vessel acquisition scheme
and modernisation of Raja Bagan Dockyard. Hence the original provision of Rs. 1430
lakhs was reduced to 1150 lakhs at RE stage by the Ministry of Finance keeping in
view the pace of expenditure.
Most of the schemes under Road Transport Sector are implemented either by State
Governments or by the NGOs. Action is initiated right in the month of April/May to
call for proposals from these agencies on the basis of funds allocated. However, by
the time, the proposals are received and these are processed for sanction, there is a
review of budget estimates and the past experience has shown that invariably, there
are considerable cuts in the allocation. This results in a fresh exercise in formulating
the proposals within the revised estimates and hence the delay in implementing the
schemes. The response of the State Governments is also sometimes not prompt and
the proposals are received only at the fag end of the financial year. As regards the
schemes required to be implemented by State Govts.NGOs, it is seen that the saving
was basically due to non receipt of proposals from States Govts./NGOs in time,

71
proposals not conforming to the prescribed guidelines and hence rejected, non-receipt
of claim/bills etc. It may, therefore, be appreciated that savings in respect of the
schemes being pursued in RT Division are due to the very nature of the schemes.
State Governments have been requested to furnish thier proposals at the earliest
possible so that by the time of review of budget estimates, considerable commitments
are made.
Judicious review of budget provision from time to time led to timely surrender of
funds, not likely to be spent during the financial year, at RE stage itself. It is evident
from this fact that while the total savings during 1996-97 with reference to BE was
Rs. 42.52 crores, it was lowered down to Rs. 2 crores only with reference to RE.
However the observations of the Public Accounts Committee have been carefully
noted for strict compliance in future.
GRANT NO. 79 — ROADS
OBSERV ATIONS:
The following statement indicates the position of the Grant during the year
1996-97 under both the Revenue (Voted) and Capital (Voted) Sections:
(Rs. in crore)
Revenue (Voted) Capital (Voted)
Original Grant 756.62 1202.92
Supplementary provision 61.93 58.56
Total Grant 818.55 1261.48
Actual Expenditure 783.96 1238.03
Savings 34.59 23.45
Amount surrendered during the year 5.62 17.13
The overall savings of Rs.34.59 crore in Revenue (Voted) Section constituted
56 per cent of suplementary Grant of Rs. 61.93 crore obtained in March 1997. Similarly,
in the Capital (Voted) Section of the Grant, the overall saving of Rs. 23.45 crore
constituted 40 per cent of the supplementary Grant of Rs. 58.56 crore obtained in
March 1997.
A detailed scrutiny of the Capital Section of the Grant revealed that substantial
savings had occurred under the following heads due to non-receipt of proposals
from State Governments:—
(Rs. in crore)
Sub-Head Amount of saving
(a) Loans-construction of Second Hooghly Bridge 9.36
(b) Road Works-Externally aided Schemes 5.76
(c) National Highways-Permanent Bridges-Works financed 17.36
     from the National Permanent Bridges Fees Fund

72
Action Taken
REVENUE SECTION:
The overall assessment of Revenue Section (Voted) reveals that out of
Rs. 61.93 crore which was taken as supplementary grant, Rs. 50  crore was taken
under MH — 3054 — Maintenance & Repair which was utilised in full during the
year 1996-97. The overall saving of Rs.34.59 crore was mainly due to saving of
Rs.25.55 crore under MH 3606. Assistance from Govt. of Japan was unforeseen at
the time of procurement of supplementary grant.
There was a provision of Rs.53 crore under the Major Head 3606 for assistance
from Govt. of Japan during 1996-97 for construction of 2nd Nizamuddin Bridge across
River Yamuna on NH-24 in New Delhi. However, only Rs.2745.40 lakh were released
resulting in a saving of Rs.2554.60 lakh.
In  this regard, it may be stated that as per contract agreement, the Japanese
contractor was to be paid after completion of various stages. Due to certain problems,
the contractor sought extension of completion time of intermediate stages which was
approved by the Ministry and JICA (Japan International Co-operation Agencey). As
such, the amount provided under this head could not be utilized fully during 96-97.
The amendment to agreement in this regard was signed on 27.3.1997. So there was
no time left to surrender the amount in time.
However, it is relevant to mention that as per Delegation of Financial Power Rules,
(DFPR) funds under Externally Aided Projects (EAPs) cannot be re-appropriated for
non EAPs purpose. As such, it does not seem to be in order to say that procurement
of supplementary funds during 1996-97 was unnecessary.
Savings of Rs.208.18 lakhs under M.H. 3054-80.004.01.01-Development and
Planning was due to less demands/proposals received from the Research
Organisations during 1996-97. It may be stated that a provision of Rs.300 lakhs under
R & D was made during 1996-97 for ongoing Research Schemes as well as new
schemes proposed to be sanctioned during the year. However during year 1996-97,
less research schemes were approved as a result of non receipt of proper proposals
from Research Organisations. Hence there was a saving of Rs.208.18 lakhs.
Saving of Rs.225.20 lakhs under MH 3601.05-Air Lift Charges occurred mainly
due to the fact that the Border Road Organisation is maintaining the forces in ladakh
at various places. As the road is cut off during winters due to snow fall, lot of things
are required to be air lifted. The Indian Air Force is engaged for this purpose. They
lift the provisions from Chandigarh Airport to Leh. After rendering the air lift services,
the Air HQ sends the bills to Director General Border Roads claiming the
expenditure.The Air HQ sent the bills amounting to Rs.280 lakhs only resulting in a
saving of Rs.225 lakhs.
Saving of Rs.186.54 lakhs under M.H. 3601-Sensitive Border Areas was due to
non sanctioning of the revised cost estimates. In this regard, it may be stated that
against the provision of Rs.200 lakhs at BE stage, DG(BR) had requested to release
only 56.54 lakhs. However, while examining the case, a sum of Rs.13.46 lakhs only

73
was released towards arbitration and the balance Rs.43 lakhs was not released by
DG(BR) because of the pending sanction of Revised Cost Estimate.
CAPITAL SECTION:
The overall assessment of Capital Section (V oted) reveals that supplementary grant
of Rs.58.56 crore was taken under MH—5054 — EAP. It may be stated that the entire
amount of Rs.376 crore (including the sum of Rs.58.56 crore taken as supplementary
grant and Rs. 44 lakhs taken by way of re-appropriation) was fully allocated to various
States. The overall saving of Rs.23.45 crore was mainly due to saving of Rs. 17.36
crore under MH—5054—Permanent Bridge Fee Fund which could not be re-
appropriated fully under MH— 5054— Externally Aided Project.
In this regard, it may by stated that provision under this head was made in
anticipation of the recovery of toll fees likely to be received on Permanent Bridges
on National Highways on the basis of last year's collection. During 1995-96, there
was a provision of Rs.72 crore and Rs. 4.2 crore was obtained as supplementary
Grant and the entire money was released to State Govts. On the basis of that, the
Ministry had anticipated high collection and projected the demand of Rs.83 crore at
BE stage during 1996-97. As such it may not be correct to say that the procurement
of supplementary grant was unnecessary and the re-appropriation was injudicious.
As per procedure, funds under MH—5054—Permanent Bridges Fee Fund are
allocated to respective States depending upon and corresponding to the Permanent
Bridge funds collected in the previous year. Collection on this count of various States
during 1995-96 was of the order of Rs. 54 crore and apart from this, there were arrears
of last year also. Taking this into account, the amount of Rs. 83 crore was allocated
to various States and out of that Rs .65.64 crore was actually incurred/booked by
them. Hence, there was a saving of Rs. 17.36 crore.
The saving of Rs.575.93 lakhs under MH—5054—EAP was due to less utilisation
of funds mainly in Kerala, U.P., Punjab and Bihar because of delays encountered in
shifting of utilities, cutting of trees, environmental clearance and delay in issue of
LOC by the State Govts.
GRANT NO. 80 — PORTS, LIGHTHOUSES & SHIPPING
OBSERV ATIONS :
The following statement indicates the position of the Revenue (Voted) and
Capital (Voted) Section of the Grant during 1996-97 :—
(Rs. in crore)
Revenue (Voted) Capital (Voted)
Original Grant 236.61 263.97
Supplementary Provisions 2.70 0.02
Total Grant 239.31 263.99
Actual Expenditure 172.49 196.76
Savings 66.82 67.23
Amount surrendered during the year 74.10 68.40

74
A detailed scrutiny of Appropriation Accounts revealed that there were
substantial savings under the following heads under Revenue (Voted)  Section:—
Sl. Major Head/Sub-Head Amount Reasons for saving
No. of Saving
1. MH—2852—engineering Industries
(a) Cochin Shipyard 8.00 Non-reaching of the stage of
construction eligible for
claiming subsidy.
(b) Basic Design and Research 3.50 Non-sanctioning of the
facilities at Vizag/NSDRC scheme owing to frequent
changes of scheme by
National Ship Design
Research Centre.
(c) Interest subsidy to HSL 2.00 Non-finalising of contract
owing to failure of the
buyer to arrange finance for
ship acquisition.
(d) Hindustan Shipyard 1.62 Release of subsidy only for
one vessel owing to non-
achieving of construction
stage in other vessels linked
with subsidy.
2. MH — 3051 — Major Ports — 43.20 Less expenditure incurred
Assistance to Port Trusts — than anticipated. owing  to
Maintenance and Dredging non-finalisation of contract
in Haldia Channel by for dredging.
Calcutta Port Trust
3. MH—3052—Coastal Shipping — 10.45 Non-receipt of commodity
Other Expenditure — Other items assistance intended for up-
dating maritime training
facilities owing to non-
4. MH—3606—Assistance from 10.45 approval of projects
Government of Japan by the Government of Japan.
Further scrutiny of Appropriation Accounts revealed that there were also
substantial savings under the following heads under Capital (Voted)  Section :—
Sl. Major Head/Sub-Head Amount Reasons for saving
No. of Saving
1. MH—4858—Ship—Building Industries 7.50 Non-receipt of proposals of
—Investment in Public Sector and Investment by the Company
}

75
other Undertakings — Hindustan
Shipyard Limited .
2. MH—6858—Transport equipment 7.50 Non-location of another
Industry — Loans to Public Sector floating dock for which
and other Undertakings — funds were provisioned.
Hindustan Shiyard Limited —
Plan Schemes
3. MH-5051 3.61 Less expenditure incurred on
construction work facing
(a) Minor Ports—Other small Ports — working season owing to
Construction of landing facilities prolonged monsoon and
and jetties—Major Works non-availability of sand
owing to ban by Andaman &
Nicobar Administration.
(b) Lighthouses and Lightships
(i) Construction and
Development of Lighthouses 3.90 Non-receipt of equipment
and environment clearance
certificate and land for
project.
(ii) Construction and
Development of other 8.55 Slow progress of construc-
 Navigational Aids tion work at Sagardeep.
4. MH—5052—General—Other 3.22 Less expenditure incurred
expenditure—Training and Welfare- on the scheme owing to less
Schemes to the benefit of seamen proposal accepted by the
Merchant Navy Training Ministry
5. MH—6858—Bombay Port Trust— 1.37 Delay in sanction of Revised
Externally Aided Scheme C ost Estimates by the
Expenditure Finance
Committee.
6. MH—7051—Major Ports-Paradeep 52.21 Less claims received than
Por—Externally Aided Schemes anticipated under the scheme.
Sl.. Major Head/Sub-Head Amount Reasons for saving
No. of Saving

76
Major Head-wise/Sub-Headwise reasons for saving and remedial action taken
Sub Head—2852—Industries 06—Engineering Industries
06.102—Transport Equipment Industries
10—Ship Building Subsidy
02—Cochin Shipyard
As per the pricing policy for ocean going ships built at Indian Public Sector Yards,
total subsidy admissible to Cochin Shipyard Limited on account of ship 009 is
Rs. 29.73 crores i.e. 20% of the basic price of Rs. 148.63 crores. Release of subsidy
is linked to the achievement of the following events:—
(i) On the contract becoming effective : 15% (Rs. 4.459 crores)
(ii) On keel laying (Already released) : 35% (Rs. 10.41 crore)
(iii) On launching (Expected to be in March, 1998) : 35% (Rs. 10.41 crores)
(iv) On delivery (Expected to be in March, 1999) : 15% (Rs. 4.459 crores)
------------------------------
Total : Rs. 29.728 crores
-------------------------------
The third installment of Rs. 10.41 crores was to be released to Cochin Shipyard
Limited on the launching of the Ship 009. Since, launching was not expected to be
done in 1996-97, the earmarked amount of Rs. 8 crores provided in the demands for
grants was not utilised. In the year  1997-98 it was ensured that Rs. 10.41 crores
required for release to CSL were asked for and the same amount was released.
05—Basic Design and Reasearch facilities
at Vizag/NSDRC
The saving of Rs. 3.50 crore under this head  was due to frequent changes in
schemes by National Ship Design Research Centre. Hence the saving.
13—Interest Subsidy to Hindustran Shipyard Ltd.
In terms of pricing policy enunciated in this Ministry's Letter No. SY-17017/2/89-
HSL dated 8.9.93 (copy enclosed), interest differential subsidy is payable by the
Government to Shipping companies placing order on Indian Shipyards on raising
loan above the rate of interest of 9% to the extent of 80% of the cost of the ship.
Interest differential subsidy is to be reimbursed on quarterly basis. M/s Mid East
Steel (India) Company Ltd. (MESCO) placed order for construction of a 42,750 DWT
Bulk Carrier (Hull No. 1135) with HSL in 1994. The contract  was signed on 16.5.94
and the contractual price of the vessel  was fixed at US $ 22.0 million. While Hindustan
Shipyard Ltd. had been progressing with the construction of the said vessel and M/s
MESCO had also made payments for two stages of construction i.e. 10% on
effectiveness of the contract on 14.12.94 and 10% on ordering for main engine on
6.4.95, further construction was hampered due to inability of the Owner (M/s MESCO)
to release the further stage payments as they  could not finalise the funding
arrangements with their financers i.e. Shipping Credit &  Investment Company of

77
India Ltd. (SCICI) and Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI). M/s MESCO
had defaulted in repayment of loan extended to it by SIDBI i.e. Subsidiary of SCICI.
Thus, the financial arrangements of M/s MESCO with SCICI as also IDBI did not
materialise. A provision of Rs. 2.00 cr. was kept in the year 1996-97 towards interest
differential subsidy in respect of said vessel but the said amount could not be released
due to non-finalisation  of contract  for  financing Ship's acquisition i.e. financial
arrangements by M/s MESCO with their financers i.e. SCICI and IDBI and, therefore,
the event qualifying for interest subsidy did not reach. Hence no release of interest
subsidy was made in the year 1996-97 and the amount Rs. 2.00 crore had to be
surrendered. It may not be out of place to mention that contract for acquisition of
the said vessels was later on entered into between Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. and
Shipping  Corporation of India on 21.10.97 and there was total change in the schedule
of the events. The vessel was constructed by Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. and finally
delivered to Shipping Corporation of India  on  15.9.2000.
01—Hindustan Shipyard
(Rs. in lakh)
Original Grant : 300.00
Supplementary Grant : --
Total Grant : 300.00
Actual Expenditure : 137.60
Savings : 162.40
Reasons for savings
In terms of pricing policy enunciated in this Ministry's letter No. SY-17017/2/98-
HSL dated 8.9.93, Shipbuilding subsidy @ 20% extra price over the  determined price
of the ocean  going vessel is payable by the Government along with the payments
received by the Shipyards as per stages of construction and as per prevailing market
determined rate  of exchange. It is released in the following manners:
Sl. No. Event description % of Ship-building subsidy
(i) Contract becoming effective 10%
(ii) On ordering of main engine 10%
(iii) On receipt of steel 10%
(iv) On 50% steel block completion 10%
(v) On Floating 20%
(vi) On Generator  Starting 15%
(vii) On Dock trials 15%
(viii) Upon D elivery 10%
During the year 1996-97, there was a provision of Rs. 3.00 crore for shipbuilding
subsidy to Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. Out of Rs. 3.00 cr., Rs. 1.38 cr. was released
for achieving the fourth stage of construction of Hull No. 1135.  Another vessel

78
viz. 1200 Passenger-cum-Cargo Vessel for Andaman & Nicobar Administration was
also under construction  during 1996-97. It has been observed that subsidy was
provisioned for release in 1996-97 in respect of the said vessel for achieving  the
event viz. "satisfactory completion of dock trial stage", fixed for 30.11.96 but subsidy
could not be released during that year as Hindustan Shipyard Ltd. failed to achieve
the said event. Subsequently, that event i.e. "completion of dock trial" was  achieved
by HSL on 26.9.98 (instead of scheduled date of 30.11.96) and subsidy was
accordingly released on 14.10.98. There has been delay in achieving the said event
due to delays in receipt of critical  components from vendors aboard, substantial
delays in receipt of design and documentation, steel, unfinished stern castings and
AC system etc. These delays   were on account of force majeure clauses, which
could not be foreseen  and were beyond the control of Hindustan Shipyard Ltd.
Andaman & Nicobar Administration had taken into consideration these delays and
had waived off the LD Clause in respect of the said vessel. The vessel which was
scheduled to be delivered on 10.1.97 as per contract, was finally delivered on 9.12.99
to Andaman & Nicobar Administration.
There was a saving of Rs. 43.20 crores under Major head '3051-Ports and
Lighthouses 01-Maintenance and Dredging in Haldia Channel by Calcutta Port Trust
during the year 1996-97.  The main reason  for the saving of Rs. 43.20 crore during
1996-97 was that the Ministry of Finance had directed Calcutta Port Trust to explore
the possibility of entrusting the work of dredging on the basis of competitive bidding
by breaking the monoploy of the Dredging Corporation  of India. The Calcutta Port
Trust accordingly initiated necessary action in the matter but could not finalise  Global
Tender in time. Dredging Corporation  of India also could not provide adequate
dredgers as their dredgers were engaged elsewhere.  Consequently the actual
expenditure in the activity was less and hence the saving.
There was a saving of Rs. 10.45 crore under M.H. 3052—Shipping—800—Other
expenditure—other  item. It is submitted that a budget provision of Rs. 11.00 crores
was kept under this head for  acquisition of Simulators (Phase-III) under grant-in-aid
Govt. of Japan. Since the agreement could not materialize with the Govt. of Japan, no
expenditure could be incurred. However, an amount of Rs. 00.55 crores was spent
towards the annual maintenance of simulators already  procured during the 8th Plan
period and installed in LBS College of Advanced Maritime Studies & Research
Mumbai.
There was a saving of Rs. 10.45 crores under Major Head 3606—Aid Material
and Equipment 217—Assistance from Govt. of Japan also. The saving was due to
the reason this is receipt head for receipt of the Grant-in-aid from Govt.  of  Japan to
acquire simulators. As necessary agreement could not be  materialized with Govt. of
Japan, no recoveries have been made under this head except Rs. 54.80 lakhs which
has been spent towards annual maintenance of the simulators already procured from
Govt.  of Japan during 8th Plan period and installed in LBS College af Advance
Maritime Studies & Research, Mumbai, hence the saving.
However, keeping in view that no progress could be made in finalizing the
agreement with Govt. of Japan to acquire the simulators under grant-in-aid no

79
provision was made in BE 2000-01 and also no provision has been sought in BE
2001-02 under this head.
There was a saving of Rs. 15 crore—Rs. 7.50 crore under M.H. 4858 Investment
and Rs. 7.50 crore under M.H. 6858—Loans in respect of payments to Hindustan
shipyard Ltd.
In 1996-97 (8th Plan), as per HSL's request, a provision of  Rs. 15.00 cr. was made
under Plan Head for proposed acquisition of second-hand Floating dock by HSL for
ship repair Division at a cost of Rs. 15.00 crore approximately. The said amount was
proposed to be released as  equity and loan to HSL in the ratio 50:50. On opening
the bids, it was found by HSL that no suitable offer from the parties for out-right
sale met the requirement of HSL. There were also offers for new construction of
floating dock at HSL but the time frame quoted was between 12-21 months and the
price ranged between Rs. 19.40 cr., which was much above the  estimated price of
Rs. 15.00 crore. In March 1997, HSL proposed to this Ministry to  permit them to
construct the floating dock in their yard. The request of HSL was duly examind in
the Ministry. As that proposal was considered to be a new proposal  in place of a
second hand floating dock which required fresh approval of EFC, it was decided on
18th March, 1997 not to go through the proposal at that stage and the provisioned
amount (i.e. Rs. 15.00 cr.) was surrendered.
There was a saving of Rs. 3.61 crores under M.H. 5051—Capital Outlay on Ports
& Lighthouses—02—Minor Ports 02-200-01 Construction of landing facilities and
jetties. The saving was due to less expenditure incurred on construction work facing
working season due to prolonged monsoon and non-availability of sand due to ban
by Andaman and Nicobar Administration.
A saving of Rs. 3.91 crore occurred under sub-head construction and Development
of  Lighthouses under M.H. 5051—Minor Ports. The saving was due to the reason
that out of the total outlay of Rs. 5.83 crore, a provision of Rs. 4.00 crore was for the
scheme of Differential Global Positioning System (DGPS) and the entire saving is in
respect of DGPS. Out of the budget allocation of Rs. 5.83 crore, an expenditure of
only Rs. 1.92 crore was incurred on other schemes under this sub-head such as
lighthouses of Kodikkarai Mungra Reef, Tilangchang, Kabra, South Sentinel and other
minor miscellaneous works, hence the saving occurred due to slow progress of
construction works at Sagardeep due to the non-receipt of equipment and non-receipt
of environmental clearance certificate and land for project and also due to procedural
delays.
A saving of Rs. 8.55 crore occurred under the Minor Head 03—103—Construction
and Development of other Navigational Aids. Under this head, the scheme covered
is replacement of Lighthouse Tender Vessel. Only an expenditure  of Rs.12,000 was
incurred on account of payment of consultancy charges to SCI. Earlier it was
anticipated that the Revised Cost Estimate (RCE) would be approved by the
Expenditure Finance Committee [under the Chairmanship of Secretary (Expdr.)] in its
meeting held on 18.10.1996. The EFC, however, directed to constitute a Committee to
review the R.C.E.

80
On 11.11.1996, the minutes of the Expenditure  Finance Committee meeting were
issued. The Secretary (Expdr.) had directed that an expert committee might include a
Cost Accountant from the Cost Accounts Branch, Ministry of Finance. This
Committee was to look into 6 aspects.
On 14.11.1996, orders were issued constituting a Committee under the Chairmanship
of the Development Adviser (SBR), MOST. On 9.12.1996, extension of time up to
23.12.1996 was granted to the above Committee. The specially constituted Committee
submitted its report on 24.12.1996.
Thereafter, a fresh Note for the EFC was processed  and circulated on 23.4.1997.
The proposal for the Revised Cost Estimate of Rs. 49.95 crore was finally approved
by the EFC in its meeting  held on 6.5.1997. The Government sanction was issued on
9.9.1997 with the approval of the Finance Minister.
It would be seen that at the time of finalising Revised Estimates in September/
early October, 1996, the EFC meeting was yet to be held to consider the proposal. In
the circumstances, it could not be anticipated at that stage that the EFC approval/
Govt. sanction would not be available, before the end of the financial year. Thus, the
unanticipated saving was attributable to the delay  in the proceedings of the EFC for
approving the Revised Cost Estimate.
A saving of Rs. 3.22 crore occurred under Sub-Head 5052-General Other
Expenditure-06-Training & Welfare Schemes to the benefit of seamen of Merchant
Navy Training.
In order to keep pace with advancement of technology and engineering and also
to meet the requirement of International Maritime Organisation (IMO) and Standard
of Training for Certification and Watchkeeping-95 (STCW), it was felt essential that
the Government run Maritime Training Institution may be upgraded with modern
teaching aids on a regular basis so that trainees of the Maritime Institutes can become
competitive in the international shipping. Hence, a budget provision of Rs. 6.00 crore
for the year 1996-97 was made under this Head.
Against the budget provision of Rs. 6.00 crore, Directorate General of Shipping,
Mumbai had forwarded a proposal on 31st October, 1996 amounting to Rs. 5.96 crores
for purchase of various training equipments for the training institutes like LBS College
of Advanced Maritime Studies & Research, Mumbai, T.S. Chanakya, New Mumbai
and Marine Engineering and Research Institute, Mumbai/Calcutta which was examined
and recommended to Internal Finance Wing of the Ministry for their concurrence on
14th November, 1996. Ministry had agreed to for Rs. 3.77 crore only  for certain
equipment on 26th March, 1997. Accordingly, necessary sanction for  Rs. 3.77 crore
was issued by the Ministry on 27th March, 1997. Against this sanction,  an
expenditure for Rs. 2.78 crore only was incurred as certain equipment for Marine
Engineering & Research Institute (MERI), Calcutta could not be purchased due to
shortage of time availability for processing the purchase.
To avoid the above situtation and to take early action by the ministry for approval
on the proposal. Directorate General  of Shipping, Mumbai forwards only one

81
consolidated proposal. During the period 1997-98, 1998-99 and 1999-2000, the Director
General of Shipping had forwarded the consolidated proposal which were received
in the ministry as per following details.
Y ear Date of receipt of the proposal in Ministry
1997-98 20.05.1997
1998-99 22.05.1998
1999-2000 17.06.1999
A saving of Rs. 1.37 crore occurred under Sub-Head 6858-Bombay Port Trust—
Externally Aided Scheme due to delay in sanctioning of revised cost estimates by
Expenditure Finance Committee.
A saving of Rs. 52.21 crore occurred under Sub—Head 7051-Major Ports—
Paradeep Port Externally Aided Scheme due to receipt of less claims then anticipated.
Remedial Measures:
To obviate recurrence of such savings and specific failure of individuals/systems,
following remedial measures are being taken:—
A consolidated proposal is now sent by the Directorate General of Shiping,
Mumbai in the month of May-June for early action to be taken by the Ministry for
approval so that sufficient time could be available for completing procedural
formalities for purchase.
All the concerned authorities are being specially told to monitor the flow of
expenditure with utmost prudence and keeping in view the progress of work of each
projects/schemes and taking up the matter with various authorities associated with
the job and Ministry of Finance so that optimum use of budget provision is made.
In order to ensure more realistic provision in budget, it is proposed to include
only those new schemes, which are sanctioned and contract awarded by the first
quarter of the financial year for which budget provisions are being made. In respect
of ongoing projects, the provisions will be related to stage payments as per Contract
Agreement and pre-set milestones.
Authorities have been advised to send complete proposals to the Ministry in
order to avoid savings in future. The authorities have also been advised to keep a
close watch on the physical and financial performance of the schemes included in
the Annual Budget Plan.
A close monitoring of physical and financial progress of the schemes is being
done so that the situation of funds remaining unutilised does not arise. Additionally
Senior Officers of the Ministry as also the State Govts. have started making on the
spot review of improtant projects. The accounting and reimbursement procedure has
also been strengthened to work within the time frames.
Physical check of financial  progress of various schemes projected  in the annual
budget is monitored by holding review meetings thereon.

82
Steps for more realistic assessment have been taken/will be taken in future. The
ministry has vide their letter No. RW/G-25011/5/2000-IWA dt.13.09.2000 (copy
enclosed) requested all chief engineers of State PWDs/NHAI to furnish the estimated
toll collection on permanent bridge. The budget provision under above head will be
made based  on this information to be received from the State PWDs/NHAI in future.
It may also be stated that a close look will be taken at RE stage and provision
restricted to the realistic figures corresponding to the actual collection.
In order to avoid such savings, the Port authorities have been advised to project
their fund requirements in the budget strictly keeping in view the progess that is
likely to be made in execution of the project and take all necessary steps to avoid
delays by close monitoring of the project and taking timely advance action in the
areas, where problems are anticipated and having close interaction with all agencies
concerned with the project execution.
Care is taken in all further demands for NSDRC to examine them fully accommodate
their projections keeping in view their justifications etc. After 1996-97 Budgetary
proposals for NSDRC were examined after fully satisfying that there are full
justification before making the provisions therefor.
During 1997-98, non-plan support  was provided to the NSDRC for meeting their
recurring expenditure as approved by the Planning Commission, M/o Finance as
NSDRC was unable to meet the expenditure on salary, wages etc. During 1998-99,
one time plan assistance of Rs. 2.35 crore was provided to NSDRC for upgradation
of their computer system  which was urgently required by them as their computer
system installed in 1989 had become obsolete and they had many urgent projects
under execution.
Now since NSDRC has become self reliant and no further funds are required by
them  from Govt. However, steps  would be taken to avoid such savings in future.
All the concerned authorities viz. Major Ports. Dredging Corporation of India,
Chief Engineer & Administrator Port Blair and MPSO have vide letter No. PD/11013/
1/2001-US(I) dt. 24.01.2001 (copy enclosed) issued by the Ministry of Shipping have
been instructed that in future budgetary requirement may be accurately estimated to
the extent possible and the projects should be closely monitored in such a way that
the progress is as per schedule so as to utilise the budget kept for the project/scheme.
They have been told that henceforth substantial savings in the budgetary support
sought would be viewed seriously.
Keeping in view that no progress could be made in finalising the agreement with
Govt. of Japan to acquire the simulators under grant-in-aid, no provision was made
in BE-2000-01 and also no provision has been sought in BE 2001-02 under M.H. 3606-
Air Material and equipment-Assistance from Govt. of Japan.
This has been vetted by Audit  vide  their U.O. No. RR/22-10/2001-02/335
dt. 27.6.2001.
Sd-
CHIEF CONTROLLER OF ACCOUNTS

DEPARTMENT OF ROAD TRANSPORT & HIGHWAYS
No. RW/G-25011/5/2000-INA Dated 13th September, 2000
To,
1. The Chief Engineers (NH),
State/UTs PWD (as per list attached).
2. The Chairman,
NHAI,
1, Eastern Avenue, Maharani Bagh,
New Delhi.
Sub: Estimated Toll Collection on Permanent Bridges on National Highways during
2000-2001.
Sir,
I am directed to say that as you are aware toll is collected on the Permanent Bridges
in accordance with the existing rules issued by the Central Government. According
to the rules, amount can be collected either departmentally or on contract basis. The
amount  so collected is to be deposited at regular intervals with the Pay & Accounts
Officers, Office of Chief Controller of Accounts, Ministery of Surface Transport, New
Delhi.
2. The question of preparing 
receipt budget for the financial year 2001-2002 and
making corresponding provision for allocation to the States as Permanent Bridge
Fee Fund is under consideration. It is requested that estimated collection during the
year 2000-2001 (which constitutes base for the next year i.e. 2001) may be furnished
in the following format:—
(i) Total amount likely to be collected as toll/fee on permanent bridges during
2000-2001.
(ii) Likely expenditure towards the cost of collection of above fee/toll.
The above information may kindly be furnished immediately and in any case 30th
September, 2000. It may be specifically noted that information should be furnished in
repect of the State as a whole and not on division/circle-wise.
Yours faithfully,
Sd-
(Devki Nandan Gupta)
Deputy Secretary to the Govt. of India.
Tel. 3710450
83

84
Copy to:—
 (P-1 to 10), Since the time available for making provision for the receipt budget
2001- 2002 is limited, it will be appreciated if counter part Chief Engineers of the  states
are impressed upon to furnish the above information within the time frame i.e. 30th
September, 2000.
Sd-
(Devki Nandan Gupta)
Deputy Secretary to the Govt. of India.

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
RECOMMENDATION
13. 13 The examination of the 11 Grants and 2 Appropriations operated by the
Ministry of Finance (Departments of Expenditure, Economic Affairs and Revenue)
has revealed that there was savings of over Rs. 100 crore in nine Grants/
Appropriations. The Scrutiny of Grant No. 25 (Currency, Coinage and Stamps—Capital
(Voted) Section-Department of Economic Affairs) reveals that against the budgetary
allocation of Rs. 385.32 crore, actual expenditure incurred was Rs. 259.56 crores
resulting in net saving of 
Rs. 125.76 crore.  There were as many as 13 sub-heads in
which savings of over Rs. 1 crore were recorded. Large scale savings were recorded
under the heads "Mints (Rs. 54.93 crore) due to non-finalisation of tenders, non-
receipt of equipments, non-commencement or slow progress of work. Other areas
where savings were recorded under this Section of the Grant are Currency Note Press
(Rs. 13.26 crore), Bank Note Press (Rs. 14.32 crore),  Security Paper Mill (Rs. 4.81
crore), Purchase of Metal (Rs. 9.90 crore), India Security Press, Nasik (Rs. 11.91 crore)
and Security Printing Press, Hyderbad (8.97 crore). The reasons adduced by the
Ministry for such large scale savings are delay in start of the work, non-supply of
materials, less or non-receipt of materials etc. The Committee has also found that
Revenue (Voted) Section of this Grant also registered a saving of Rs. 22.87 crore.
While deploring the inability of the Ministry to spend the budget sought under the
Capital Section, the Committee desire that the Ministry of Finance should examine
critically the reasons responsible therefor and evolve realistic parameters to avoid
such wide variations between the sanctioned provisions and actual expenditure in
future.
Para 13.13 of 16th Report  of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)
Action Taken
The reasons resulting in savings have been examined again by Mints and Presses
as well as in Deptt. of Economic Affairs and it is found that the savings were due to
factors beyond the control of Mints and Presses. The procurement process is a
complex multiple level task and involves  comprehensive technical/commercial
scrutiny. Invariably several clarifications are required from the tenderer before
finalisation and therefore the proposals take a lot of time to fructify. Moreover,
proposals initiated during the middle of the year could not be finalised during the
financial year resulting in stated savings. The specific reasons which caused savings
are described below:—
Revenue Section (Voted): Savings of Rs. 22.87 crore
Savings of Rs. 17.72 crore in SPM, Hoshangabad, resulted because certain
modifications had to be carried out in the Paper Making Machines for incorporating
additional security features needed for New Family Notes. This consumed  a lot of
time, and as a result the targeted production of 4000 MTs could not be achieved.
The actual finished production achieved was 3170 MTs resulting in corresponding
85

86
savings on material procurement. Consequent to the shortfall  in production, the
despatches also fell by 1070 MTs which  resulted in corresponding savings on Excise
Duty and Freight payments.
Further, savings of Rs. 7.12 crore in CNP was on account of (a) lowere expenditure
on electricity and water charges and (b) receipt of less than originally planned
quantity of imported water marked paper from M/s Portals Ltd. Thus, the net saving
of Rs. 71.2 crore was due to factors beyond the control of CNP.
Capital Section (Voted): Savings of Rs. 125.76 crore
Sub-head: Bulidings
 Saving of Rs. 7.44 crore in CNP under the sub-head was due to delay in
Commencement of modernisation works owing to non-finalisation of agreement with
M/s NBCC Ltd.
Saving of Rs. 6.38 crore in BNP under the sub-head was due to the fact that CPWD
could not complete construction of quarters, extension of Printing Section etc. during
1996-97. In additon savings were caused as Govt. of M.P. did not approve the Project
for augmentation of Water Supply in time.
Saving of Rs. 1.57 crores in SPM, Rs. 1.93 crores in ISP and Rs. 1.86 crores in
Mints was due to the fact that CPWD could not undertake and complete construction
works as per requirements projected by them. The matter regarding under utilisation
was taken up with the Chief Engg. of CPWD and he, in turn, has issued suitable
instructions to the concerned authorities for effective remedial measures in future.
Sub-head: Plant & Machinery
Procurement orders for 30 Treasury Wagons had been placed on M/s Bharat Earth
Motors Ltd., Bangalore. There was delay in supply of these wagons on account of
extensive testing trails as this was a special type of wagon manufactured for the first
time for the transportation of Bank Note Consignments. This led to a saving of
Rs. 5.82 crore in CNP and Rs. 7.95 crores in BNP. A part of the savings in BNP was also
due to non approval of the proposal for replacement of two lines of printing machines.
Saving of Rs. 3.25 crore in SPM under the sub-head was on account of factors
such as lack of response to the tender notice leading to re-tendering; non receipt of
despatch documents in time for arranging payment, prolonged correspondence with
manufacturers for supply of turn-key items etc.
Saving of Rs. 8.97 crore in SPP, Hyderabad under the sub-head was due to the
fact that budget provision of Rs. 9 crore which was made for the procurement of Six
Colour off set Printing Machine could not be utilised as the Global Tenders for the
same had to be scrapped.
As regards savings of Rs. 9.99 crore in ISP, Nasik under the sub-head, it is stated
that budget provision was made for procurement of an Automated Passport
Manufacturing Machine. As the machine had to be custom made in view of high
security product requirement, its manufacturer took an unexpectedly long time and
the machine could not be delivered during the year resulting in savings.
MINTS:—Saving of Rs. 53.09 crore under the sub-head resulted largely due to
non-finalisation of tenders and non-receipt of equipments in time though the purchase

87
order had been placed in time. Further, some of the tenders were required to be re-
floated for one reason or the other which caused delays resulting in savings.
Sub-head: Purchase of Metal
MINTS:—As regards savings of Rs. 9.91 crore under the sub-head it is stated
that the provisions for purchase for major metals like Nickle and Copper are made on
the basis of prices at LME and some extra provision is also kept for fluctuations.
Actual expenditure varies according to supply, shipment schedule, LME prices ruling
at the time of despatch, etc. Factors such as time taken to finalise contracts, delays
in inspection etc. also contributed to savings.
Sub-head: Metal value of uncurrent and confiscated coins destroyed
MINTS:—As regards savings of Rs. 6.87 crore under the sub-head it is stated
that this was largely due to less receipt of withdrawn coins from the various
Commercial Banks/RBI.
In order to avoid recurrence of a huge savings, the following steps have been
taken:
(i) For timely and expeditious disposal of the proposal from Mints and Presses, a
Committee has been constituted in the Ministry to regularly monitor the Progress of
procurement, Progress of production in each unit vis-a-vis targets and the Stock
position of various raw materials and spares.
(ii) Efforts are being made to initiate well in time the procurement process of all
items pertaining to current financial year for which provisions have been made.
Sections under Mints/Presses have been advised to provide the indent at a time.
Purchase sections have been directed to expedite the procurement proposals.
(iii) Mints have started regular meetings with CPWD officials to monitor the progress
of civil work. CPWD has also been requested to submit realistic estimates after taking
into account the time limit and utilisation of funds before authorising the funds.
(iv) All out efforts are being made to minimise the savings at BE/RE stage. The
Heads of Departments of all Mints and Presses under Currency & Coinage Division
have been cautioned vide D.O. Letter No. C&C/Bgt. & Acctts/18/2000-01 dt. 17.8.2000
(Copy enclosed) to ensure realistic projection of the budget. This will ensure full
utilisation of allocated funds well in time.
3. The recommendations and observations made by the Hon'ble Public Accounts
Committee have been brought to the notice of all Mints and Presses for strict
compliance. These have been noted and steps are being taken to speed up the
procurement by reviewing the position at various levels to avoid savings in future,
as stated above.
Sd/-
(NAVIN KUMAR)
JOINT SECRETARY (C&C)
F.No.C&C/Bgt.&Acctts/37/2000-01
Dated 13-7-2001.
This has been vetted by Audit vide U.O. No. RR/1-35/2000-01/365
dt. 05-7-2001.

M.P. SINGH Hkkjr ljdkj/Government of India
UNDER SECRETARY COIN  foÙk ea=ky;/Ministry of Finance
TELE: 3015100. vkfFkZd dk;Z foHkkx/Department of Economic Affairs
17-08-2000.
ubZ fnYyh/New Delhi.
Dear Shri (By Name)
You are requested to prepare immediately and send us by 3-10-2000 your budgetary
requirement in RE 2000-2001 and BE-2002 in the following proforma:—
1. Actual for 1999-2000 (2) BE for 2000-2001 (3) Actuals upto Sept. 2000 (4) RE
for 2000-2001 (5) Estimated Expenditure upto March 2001 (6) BE for 2001-2002 (7) reasons
for variations between Col. 2 & 4, 2 & 6 and 4 & 6. This exercise should include the
receipts/Recoveries budget and Loans & Advances to Govt. servants also.
2. The write up relevant to expenditure vol. I and vol. II may also be updated
and all statements as appended in the Detailed Demands for Grants 2000-2001 be
sent uptodate with the RE & BE proposals.
3. For better appreciation it would be advisable to have each detailed head on
a separate sheet of paper. You should be ready alongwith your FA & CAO/AO for
discussions in Ministry.
4. While working out the requirements, you are requested to keep in mind the
economy instructions issued by the Govt. from time to time. 10% mandatory cut on
non-salary expenditure be applied please.
5. The expenditure budget is examined and approved keeping in view the
realisation of receipts and recoveries and hence you must make all efforts for recovery
of all outstanding dues.
6. Please ensure that no funds are surrendered in any case at the end of
financial year."
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(M.P. SINGH)
1. Sh. S.D. Swamy Rao, GM, IGM, Mumbai.
2. Sh. L.R. Prasada Rao, GM, IGM, Calcutta.
3. Sh. K.K. Parakalan, GM, IGM, Hyderabad.
4. Sh. S.D. Dadheech, GM, IGM, Noida.
5.-6. Sh. V .K. Jain, GM, ISP/CNP, Nasik.
7. Sh. B.V. Rastogi, GM, SPP, Hyderabad.
8. Sh. M.D. Singh, GM, BNP, Dewas.
9. Sh. Gurmit Singh, DGM/HOD, SPM, Hoshangabad.
88

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
Recommendation:
The Committee's scrutiny of Grant No. 26 (Payments of Financial Institutions-
Department of Economic Affairs) has revealed that net saving of Rs. 230.35 crore
was registered under Capital (Voted) Section of the Grant. There were seven sub-
heads under which saving of over Rs. 1 Crore had occurred.  The Committee's analysis
of the contributory reasons furnished by the Ministry of Finance indicate that  these
savings occurred due to less actual requirement raised by IBRD, less actual
requirement by IMF due to less exchange rate variation, non-receipt of any demand
from IDA,  less requirement in respect of ADB, less actual demand raised by ADF,
non-receipt of any demand from Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA),
less disbursal of funds in respect of NABARD—external aided component, and non-
disposal of the case pending in Supreme Court in respect of loans to RRB.  The
Committee note with disbelief the recurring savings of more than Rs.  100 crore under
this Grant since 1992-93.  The Committee, therefore, concludes that the entire system
of assessment of requirement of funds under various sub-heads of this Grant needs
to be critically reviewed to find out systematic defects and to devise suitable measure
to remedy the situation.
Sl.No.  14 of Appendix Para 13.14
of 16th  Reprt of PAC 13th Lok
Sabha
Action Taken
Out of the  total net saving of Rs. 230.35 crore registered under Capital Section
(Voted) in Grant No. 26—Payments of Financial Institutions,  saving of Rs. 187.86
crore occurred only in the case of subscription to International Monetary Fund ( in
securities ) on account of exchange rate variation,  and in the case of International
Development Association and Multinational Investment Guarantee Agency, no
demand was received from these institutions for payment of contribution (Rs 3.80
crore+ Rs. 10 crore). The provision could not be surrendered at RE stage because it
was not anticipated that these international financial institutions would not be raising
their demands for obligatory contributions.  It may be observed that savings were
largely due to reasons beyond the control of the Government and the exact
requirement of funds could not be assessed.  Still,  the concerned Divisional Heads
in the Department have already been requested to ensure that such large scale savings
do not recur vide our reference F.No. 2/2/96- IFA dated 24 th April, 1997 (copy
enclosed).
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O.No. RR/1-36/2000-01/361 dated 5th
July, 2001.
Sd/-
(N. R. RAYALU)
Financial Adviser (Finance)
(MOF/DEA's F.No.2/30/2000-IFA dated 11th July, 2001)
89

Immediate
F.No. 2/2/96—IFA
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
Sub: Need to curb large scale savings/excess expenditure.
The undersigned is directed to enclose a copy of Secretary (Exp.)'s D.O. letter
No. 12(1)E-Coord/97, dt. April 01,1997, regarding the comments of PAC on large scale
savings/excess expenditure, for information/strict compliance.
2. It may be pointed out that the Finance Division have already requested all Heads
of Divisions vide note F.No. 2/2/95-IFA, dt. 18th/30th December, 1996, that the budget
estimates be prepared in a realistic manner so that instances of large scale savings
do not occur in any Grant. It has, however, been brought to our notice by the CGA
that savings of over Rs. 100 crore or more have occurred in atleast six Grants of the
Finance Ministry for the year 1995-96. A copy of the statement furnished by them is
enclosed herewith.
3. The continued recurrence of such large scale savings is not in consonance
with the existing rules under the GFR and, indeed, serves to reinforce the contention
of the PAC that the estimates are not being prepared realistically. All Heads of
Divisions are, therefore, requested to periodically monitor the progress of expenditure
on items falling under their charge and to see that expenditure is not only incurred
within the authorised limits but large scale savings are also avoided. Any slackness
in following the prescribed financial rules may please be sternly dealt with.
Sd/-
(N.R. Rayalu)
Financial Adviser (Fin.)
24.4.97
All Heads of Divisions in DEA
90

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
Recommendation
The scrutiny of Appropriation No.27 [Interest Payments—Department of Economic
Affairs] has revealed that Revenue Section of this Appropriation registered a saving
of Rs.521.59 crore during the year 1996-97. There were as many as 18 sub-heads
under which savings registered over Rs.1 crore. The Committee also find that savings
of more than Rs.100 crore under this Appropriation has been a recurring feature since
1992-93. Similarly, under Grant No.28—Transfer to State and Union Territory
Governments, the savings of more than Rs.100 crore were recorded in both the
Revenue (V oted and Charged) and Capital (Voted and Charged) Sections of this Grant.
Savings of Rs .415.93 crore, Rs.109.51 crore, Rs.378.71 crore and Rs.371.47 crore were
recorded under Revenue (V oted), Revenue (Charged), Capital (Voted) and Capital
(Charged) Sections respectively. There were as many as 10 sub-heads under Grant
No.28 in which savings of over Rs.1 crore had occurred. Further, under Grant No.29—
Loans to Government Servants etc., savings of Rs.133.97 crore were registered. Under
Appropriation No.30—Repayment of Debts, savings of substantial magnitude of
Rs.31465.62 crore were recorded. Savings of significantly high magnitude under
Appropriation No.30 have become a recurring phenomenon since 1990-91. The
revelations arising out of examination of Grant Nos. 35 and 36 operated by the
Department of Revenue are no more happier either. The contributory reasons adduced
by the Department for savings do not stand up to scrutiny as the Committee feel
that these savings are culmination of defective budgetary assumptions and ineffectual
monitoring. The Committee are deeply concerned to note that despite huge savings
recurring under these Grants/Appropriations year after year, the Ministry of Finance
have, apparently not done any thoughtful cleansing to correct their budgetary
assumptions. The Ministry have little to commend if they cannot keep their own
budgetary projections to the realistic level.
[Para 13.15 of Sixteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha)
on "Union Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil)—1996-97]".
Action Taken
Appropriation No. 27 [Interest Payment—Department of Economic Affairs]
The saving of Rs. 521.59 crore in the Appropriation 27—Interest Payments during
the year was mainly on account of 'interest on market loans', 'discount on Treasury
Bills', 'interest on external debt', 'interest on saving deposit' and 'interest on special
deposit and accounts'.
2. The expenditure of the Government of India on account of payment of interest
is mainly dependent on the amount of borrowings it undertakes (both internal and
external) for financing its expenditure. Government has to take recourse to market
91

92
borrowing during the year to bridge the gap between non-debt receipts and
expenditure. Among the factors responsible for the fluctuations between the estimated
and actual interest payments of the Government, the most significant one is the
interest on market borrowing. From the year 1992-93, the Government has been
borrowing from the market at the market related rates. These rates are determined by
the auctions conducted by the Reserve Bank of India. Since these interest rates
depend on the liquidity in the market and other related factors, it is very difficult to
precisely estimate interest payments on the internal borrowing of the Government
during the year.
3. The second factor, which is responsible for variation between the estimates
and the actual expenditure, is the exchange rate fluctuation of Rupee vis-a-vis foreign
currencies. While payment of interest on foreign loans raised is made in respective
currencies, it is accounted for in rupee terms. Since it is difficult to precisely estimate
the exchange rate fluctuations, it becomes difficult to estimate the quantum of interest
required to be paid during the year on external debt. Saving was largely due to
favourable fluctuation in the exchange rate.
4. As regards interest payment on small savings, it was difficult to estimate
accurately the incremental investment in various small saving instruments and
withdrawals therefrom. Similarly, savings under 'interest on special deposits and
accounts' was mainly due to a post-budget decision to reduce the percentage of
fresh accretion from 30% to 20% with effect from 1.10.1996.
5. The observations of the Committee have been noted and steps are being taken
to ensure that the variations between interest estimate and actual payments of the
Government in the year are kept to the minimum.
Grant No. 28—Transfer to State and Union Territory Government
"Savings Note" explaining the reasons for savings in respect of individual sub
heads where savings of more than Rs.1 crore occurred has been sent to Public
Accounts Committee, vide this Ministry's letter No.2(59)-B(S)/97 dated 31st August,
1998, a copy of which is annexed at Annexure-II.
The matter of timely submission of anticipated expenditure for the year,
departmental actuals for the previous year(s) and audited figures of expenditure for
earlier years for State Plans are taken up with the State Governments whenever they
are not received on time. Besides, with a view to encouraging the State Governments
to submit audited figures of expenditure, a system of withholding 1% of the central
assistance (Normal) to be released on receipt of audited figures of expenditure has
been started from the year 1994-95.
A number of steps have been initiated for bringing accuracy in budgetary proposals
and utilization of available funds by the States. States are advised to send expenditure
details in time. Meetings with concerned Ministries/States to assess the requirements
more accurately are being held. In spite of close monitoring, some States fail to utilize
funds, thus resulting in savings".

93
Grant No.29—Loans to Government Servants etc. for 1996-97
Capital Section (Voted) (Rs. in crore)
Original/Total grant 296.50
Actual Expenditure 162.53
Saving 133.97
2. Under Capital Section (Voted) of Grant No. 29—Loans to Government Servants
etc. for 1996-97, the original as well as the total provision was Rs. 296,50,00,000. Against
this, the actual expenditure was Rs. 162,53,00,000 resulting in saving of
Rs. 133,97,00,000. This saving was the net result of total savings of Rs. 136,04,26,000
and excess of Rs. 2,07,49,000 under Capital Section (Voted) of the Grant. The sub-
head under which savings of Rs. one crore and above occurred and reasons therefor
are as under:—
Sl.No. (Rs. in Thousands)
(i) 00.201—House Building Advances
01.00.55—Loans and Advances Union  Territory Administrations
Original/Total Grant:— 179,00
Actual Expenditure:— 100,32
Savings:— 78,68
Saving was due to less receipt of applications than anticipated.
(ii) 02—Ministries etc.
Original/Total Grant:— 223,21,00
Actual Expenditure:— 104,04,53
Saving:— 119,16,47
Saving was due to less receipt of applications than anticipated.
(iii) 01.00.55—Loans and Advances
 00.202—Advances for purchase of Motor Conveyances
01—Advance for purchase of Motor cars
Original/Total Grant:— 26,78,00
Actual Expenditure:—
19,35,13
Saving:— 7,42,87
Saving was due to less receipt of applications than anticipated.

94
(iv) Advances for purchase of Motor Conveyances
01.00.55—Advances for purchase of other Motor Conveyances
Original/Total Grant:— 30,17,00
Actual Expenditure:— 27,90,90
Saving:— 2,26,10
Saving was due to less receipt of applications than anticipated.
(v) 02.00.55—Loans and Advances
00.203—Advances for purchase of other
Conveyances
Original/Total Grant:— 13,05,00
Actual Expenditure:—
6,64,86
Saving:— 6,40,14
Saving was due to less receipt of applications than anticipated.
(vi) 00.800—Other Advances
Original/Total Grant:— 1,50,00
Actual Expenditure:— 3,57,49
Excess:— (-)2,07,49
3. Loans to Government Servants etc. is a composite Grant in which provisions
are made for all Central Ministries/Departments, Offices under them and Union
Territory Administrations for disbursement of loans and advances to their employees
for house building advance, conveyance advance, advances for purchase of
computers, fans and warm clothing. It also includes provision for advances to
Members of Parliament for purchase of motor conveyances.
4. The saving had occurred mainly under House Building Advance. This item in
the Grant was centrally monitored and controlled by Ministry of Urban Affairs and
Employment. The main reason for under-utilization of the various advances is less
receipt of applications for loans than anticipated.
5. The following steps have been initiated in compliance with the comments of
audit and PAC to work out a more effective mechanism to monitor expenditure under
the grant:—
(i) All Ministries/Departments have been requested to review the requirement
of loans to Government servants on periodic basis so that savings, if any,
are negligible and excesses do not occur under any circumstances.
(ii) Ministries/Departments have also been asked to intimate well in advance the
anticipated savings so that this could be re-allocated to certain Ministries/
Departments, which are in need of additional funds for this purpose.
(iii) Further a format has been devised in consultation with CGA through which
Department-wise expenditure is monitored month-wise so as to avoid
repetition of large savings/excesses as have occurred in the past.
Copies of the two letters dated 6.7.2001 are enclosed (Annexure-III &
Annexure-IV)

95
Grant No. 30—Repayment of Debt—1996-97
There was a saving of Rs. 31465.62 crore under Appropriation No. 30—Repayment
of Debt during 1996-97 under Capital Section (Charged) under Appropriation
No. 30—Repayment of Debt during 1996-97. The position with regard to original
appropriation, actual expenditure and saving are as under:—
(Rs. in Crore)
Original Appropriation 201913.74
Supplementary Appropriation NIL
Total Appropriation 201913.74
Actual Expenditure 170448.12
Saving 31465.62
A saving note explaining the reasons for savings was forwarded to Lok Sabha
Secretariat (PAC Branch) on 28.8.1998. The Saving Note was vetted by O/o the
Director General of Audit, Central Revenues vide their U.O. No. RR/1-28/97-98/585
dated 27.8.1998. A copy thereof is enclosed for ready reference. (Annexure-I)
It may be appreciated that the estimates under this Appropriation is made on the
basis of maturity profile of various loans (internal and external). The provisions are
necessitated owing to the fact that the Government should not be defaulter at any
point of time. In several cases although the Government made estimates on the basis
of maturity profile, the savings occurred mainly due to non-preference/non-settlement
of claims by the holders and variation in the exchange rates.
It may be explained that the net expenditure in respect of Appropriation ‘Repayment
of Debt’ is nil in as much as repayment is made only by borrowing. As such the
savings under this Appropriation should not  be treated as saving in normal sense,
which would have been available for other areas of expenditure.
Grant No. 35 (Direct Taxes)
Explanatory Note for Public Accounts Committee in respect of saving under Capital
Section (Voted) of Grant No. 35-Direct Taxes as disclosed in the Union Government
Appropriation Accounts (Civil) for 1996-97.
Capital Section (Voted) (Rupees in thousands)
Original Grant 176,00,000
Actual Expenditure 70,4262
Saving 105,57,36

96
The savings can be explained under two broad categories, i.e. (A) under Capital
outlay for acquisition of Office and Residential buildings and (B) under Acquisition
of Immovable Property (Section XX-C):
(A) Savings under Capital outlay on public works (office buildings and
residential buildings)
The allocation of funds under these heads is shown in the table below:—
(Rupees in thousands)
4059, Capital 4216, Capital T otal
outlay outlay on
on Public Housing.
Works G ovt.
Office Residential
Buildings Buildings
Original 160,00,00 40,00,00 200,00,00
Grant
Actual Exp. 28,07,16 29,37,78 57,44,94
Savings 131,92,81 10,62,22 142,55,03
The savings under the above heads was on account of non-finalization of
proposals for purchase of ready built accommodation (office & residential). The
purchase of ready built accommodation is long lead in nature and involves the
followings steps:
(i) Justification of proposal in terms of the prescribed norms
(ii) Administrative approval to the proposal
(iii) Calling of tenders
(iv) Scrutiny of tenders including adherence to the CVC guidelines.
(v) CPWD certification of cost reasonableness and other statutory Certifications
like structural soundness etc.
(vi) Formation of price negotiation committee.
(vii) Obtaining approval of competent authority, namely, CNE/Finance Minister/
Cabinet depending upon the value of proposal.
At the time of framing of Budget Estimates for the following year the proposals
on hand at that stage are taken into consideration. However, numbers of such
proposals fail on account of one or more procedural requirements resulting in under-
utilisation of funds. It may also be mentioned that  majority of such proposals that

97
have fructified are in the metro and big cities as the number for bids available from
smaller places is quite limited. This also contributes to non-utilisation  of funds
included for such smaller places in the Budget.
(B) Saving in respect of acquisition of immovable property under chapter XXC:
The position of utilization of funds  under this head is under:
(Rupees in thousands)
4075, Capital outlay on Misc.
Outstanding.
Original Grant 120,00,00
Actual Exp. 12,97,65
Saving 107,02,35
At the outset, it may be mentioned that the number of properties that may be
required to be purchased under  this head is difficult to predict. Moreover, the entire
process involved in the pre-emptive purchase of property is complex. The number of
properties purchased during the year under consideration was less than expected in
view of the sluggishness in the real estate market. Another contributory fact was
enhancement of threshold limits in Aug. 1995 because of which the number of cases
got reduced substantially. All these factors combine together resulted in the savings
of Rs. 107.02 crores.
Grant No. 36 (Indirect Taxes)
The saving of Rs. 104.72 crores occurred in the Capital Section of Grant No. 36 –
Indirect Taxes, Department of Revenue for the year 1996-97. The break-up of which
is as follows:
Coast Guard Organisation - 75.17 crores;
Custom and Central Excise Department - Rs. 29.55 crores.
The savings of provisions made for Coast Guard Organisation  were mainly on
account of non-acquisition of ships and aircrafts within the year due to various un-
avoidable reasons. The Coast Guard Organisation have completed the formalities
and purchases were effected in 1998-99. Since the purchase/procurement by the Coast
Guard Organisation have to depend on international markets/supplies, it is sometimes
not possible to adhere to time schedules with the inevitable result that provisions
made in the budget  cannot be utilized.
In so far as the savings under the provision for purchase of ready built
accommodation is concerned, in order to avoid repeated downward utilisation of the
budgetary allocation, the Department has decided to bring in an objective assessment
in the whole exercise by ensuring that the estimates are reviewed thoroughly before
the BE and RE stages every year. Besides, as recommended by the Standing
Committee on Finance on Demand for Grants, the Deptt. has also decided to explore
the possibility of attaining ready built non-residential buildings for office purpose.
In order to prepare realistic  estimates as well as to avoid  hiring of premises, the
Department has taken steps in liaison with the field formations.

98
This note has been vetted by DGACR, New Delhi vide their UO No. RR/1-37/01-
02/86 Dated 24.4.2002 and the following comments have been made by them:
“The audit is of the opinion that the Ministry is unwilling to initiate concrete
steps to correct their budgetary assumptions. Ministry’s statements such as
observations of the PAC have been noted, steps are being taken or number of steps
have been initiated for bringing accuracy in budgetary proposals, are enough
indicators of their half hearted action. In fact Ministry of Finance have not done any
thing concrete except under the Grant No. 29. Loans to Government Servants etc. &
which would go on to improve their system of budgeting.”
The DGACR has also suggested that Ministry may insert the above comments as
“vetted comments of Audit” in the ATN and also give their reply to these comments,
if they consider so.
Accordingly, this Ministry furnish the following reply on the Audit comments:
Appropriation No. 27 [Interest Payment-Department of Economic Affairs]
The Appropriation relating to Interest Payments is worked out mainly on the basis
of anticipated interest rates/coupon on borrowings from the market through auction
conducted by the Reserve Bank of India. The results of these auctions depend on
the market forces which vary from time to time and cannot be estimated with precision.
With the liberalization and opening up  of the market including financial markets, it
is imperative that Government provides the milieu for unfettered operations of the
market forces, which in the instant case was to the benefit of the Government.
Similarly, interest  on foreign loans were affected by exchange rate fluctuations, which
were not within the control of the Government.
It may be mentioned that savings of Rs. 521.59 crore in the Appropriation were
only 0.87% of Budget Estimates  viz. Rs. 60,000 crores. It may also be added that
Ministry while making estimates has been careful to ensure that the estimates have
not resulted in any excess over the Appropriations.
Grant No. 28-Transfer to State and Union Territory Government
The fact of savings in the Demand – Transfer to  States and Union Territory
Government has arisen in view of the fact that actual expenditure figures/utilization
certificates of expenditure are not made available in time by the State Governments.
It is with a view to conforming  with the General Financial Rules that the Ministry of
Finance does not make releases to State Governments without the receipt of
particulars of utilization etc. States have been advised to send expenditure details in
time. In fact, non-release of funds by the Centre is an indication of budgetary control
being exercised rather than the contrary.
Grant No. 30-Repayment of Debt
While there were savings in the Appropriation, the net expenditure was ‘nil’ in so
far as appropriation – Repayment of Debt is concerned. It is, therefore, reiterated
that savings under the Appropriation should not be  treated as savings in the normal
sense.

99
Grant No. 35 (Direct Taxes)
The position has already been explained. The steps involved in purchase of Ready
Built Accommodation have already been outlined in the earlier reply to the ATN.
Since the outcome of various steps outlined earlier involved in purchase of Ready
Built Accommodation, is difficult to predict, savings may take place. As regards
acquisition of properties under chapter XXC of the Income Tax Act 1961, the number
of properties that  are likely to be acquired is in somewhat  indeterminate at the time
of preparation of budget. Therefore, the saving may occur. In view of the foregoing,
the reply furnished earlier is reiterated.
Grant No. 36 (Indirect Taxes)
It is not correct to say that the action taken by the Ministry on the observations
of the PAC is half hearted action. Although all the field formations have been directed
to form realistic estimates for Budget Estimates and Revised Estimates for the year,
some deviation is unavoidable. The proposals for ready built accommodation have
to be scrutinized before they are finally approved, especially so in cases where the
proposal is for purchase from private parties. Sometimes the entire procedure takes
a very long time. The field formations have to be in the continuous process of
acquiring accommodation with the expansion of the Department. The projections are
made keeping in view the anticipated acquisition of buildings. The actual acquisition
is sometimes delayed due to reasons not directly under the control of the department.
Since the cost of each project is large, huge deviation is observed  even when one
or two projects do not get through. The field formations are from time to time directed
to review their requirements and projections of Budget provisions in order to avoid
variations from actual allocations.
The Ministry of Defence have submitted that the savings in the Capital provisions
of the Coast Guard Organisation cannot be attributed to any delay on the part of the
Ministry. Acquisition/procurement of Capital items is governed by a set procedure
prescribed by the Ministry. Although provision is made for procurement, procedural
delays occur. It is however  assured that all out efforts are made to utilize the funds
and to avoid savings.
Sd/-
(P.J. Vincent)
Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser

ANNEXURE-I
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
SAVING NOTE
Note for Public Accounts Committee in respect of savings occurred under Capital
Section (Charged) of Appropriation No. 30-Repayment of Debt, as disclosed in the
Union Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil) for 1996-97.
(Rupees in thousands)
CAPITAL SECTION (CHARGED)
Original Appropriation 2019137400
Supplementary Appropriation —
Total Appropriation 2019137400
Actual Expenditure 1704481158
Saving 314656242
2. Under Capital Section (Charged) of Appropriation No. 30-Repayment of Debt,
the original as well as the total provision was Rs. 201913,74,00 thousands. Against
this, the actual expenditure was Rs. 170448,11,58 thousands resulting in saving of
Rs. 31465,62,42 thousands.
This saving was net result of total savings of Rs. 31509,08,31 thousands and total
excess of Rs. 43,45,89 thousands under various sub-heads within the Appropriation.
The sub-heads under which savings of Rs. one crore and above occurred and reasons
therefor are as under:—
(Rupees in lakhs)
(i) 00-101-Market Loans
Original Provision 792131.00
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 792131.00
Actual Expenditure 790463.19
Saving 1667.81
Saving could be attributed to non-preference/non-settlement of claims for
repayment. There could be many reasons for non-preference of claims by holder of
Government securities, like death of the holder, etc. In any case, the repayment is
made in subsequent years as and when claims are received. Non-settlement of claims
could be due to faulty nomination, disputes with regard to the successor, etc. No
interest is payable on market loans after the date of maturity. The saving works out
to 0.2% of the Original Provision.
100

101
(Rupees in lakhs)
(ii) 00.103-01-91 Days Treasury Bills
Original Provision 18000000.00
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 18000000.00
Actual Expenditure 15053397.00
Saving 2946603.00
Saving was due to lesser discharge and cancellation of Treasury Bills than
anticipated. The estimate for discharge of 91 day Treasury Bills was framed in
consultation with the Reserve Bank of India. There can be no one to one
correspondence between Central Government receipts and expenditure at any point
of time during the course of the year. Because of this mismatch, Government borrowed
through issue of 91 day Treasury Bills for meeting day-to-day expenditure as and
when the daily cash balance position warranted it. However, when receipts flowed
in, the 91 day Treasury Bills were cancelled/discharged. Thus the utilisation of amount
provided against 91 day Treasury Bills was directly dependent on the flow of receipts
to Government account.
A gross budget provision of Rs. 1,80,00,000 lakhs for discharge of 91 day Treasury
Bills in BE 1996-97 was provided. On the receipts side, the provision for issue of 91
day Treasury Bills was kept at Rs. 1,86,57,787 lakhs taking into account a budget
deficit of Rs. 6,57,800 lakhs. The actual amount for which 91 day Treasury Bills were
issued was only Rs. 1,63,26,223 lakhs resulting in a shortfall of Rs. 23,31,564 lakhs.
Further, the 91 day Treasury Bills, specially the auctioned treasury bills, issued in
the last quarter become liable for discharge only in the first quarter of the next financial
year. These were the main factors leading to less discharge of 91 day Treasury Bills
in 1996-97.
(iii) 00.110—364 Day Treasury Bills
Original Provision 260000.00
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 260000.00
Actual Expenditure 187474.00
Saving 72526.00
The Budget provision for the discharge of 364 day Treasury Bills was kept at
Rs. 2600 crore assuming that the borrowing in 1995-96 would be of that order. The
actuals, however, turned out to be only Rs. 187474 lakhs. The provision in RE
1996-97 was in fact kept at Rs. 187493 lakhs. Thus the saving was due to less discharge
of Treasury Bills than anticipated.
(iv) 00.105.01—International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Original Provision 5000.00
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 5000.00
Actual Expenditure 2433.48
Saving 2566.52
Saving was due to lesser demand for encashment of securities than anticipated.

102
(Rupees in lakhs)
(v) 00.105.06—African Development Fund
Original Provision 931.00
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 931.00
Actual Expenditure 515.62
Saving 415.38
Saving was due to revision of the encashment schedule by the Fund in
March 1996 much after finalisation of the Budget Estimates for 1996-97.
(vi) 00.105.02—International Monetary Fund
Original Provision 352708.00
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 352708.00
Actual Expenditure 318800.00
Saving 33908.00
Saving was due to variation in Rupee SDR exchange rate at the time of encashment.
The Rupee SDR exchange rate at the time of framing the budget estimate for 1996-97
was Re. 1=SDR 0.0202522 whereas at the time of encashment in June 1996 it was
Re. 1=SDR 0.0199777.
(vii) 00.201—Loans from Abu Dhabi
Original Provision 448.31
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 448.31
Actual Expenditure Nil
Saving 448.31
Saving was due to repayment due on 1.4.96 was made in March, 1996 itself.
(viii) 00.203—Loans from the Government of Belgium
Original Provision 2704.47
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 2704.47
Actual Expenditure 2493.12
Saving 211.35
Saving was due to variation in exchange rate.

103
(Rupees in lakhs)
(ix) 00.206—Loans from the Government of Denmark
Original Provision 2604.41
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 2604.41
Actual Expenditure 2459.92
Saving 144.49
Saving was due to variation in exchange rate.
(x) 00.209—Loans from the Government of Germany
Original Provision 55799.47
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 55799.47
Actual Expenditure 54914.46
Saving 885.01
Saving was due to variation in exchange rate.
(xi) 00.208—Loans from the Government of France
Original Provision 30742.25
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 30742.25
Actual Expenditure 29062.53
Saving 1679.72
Saving was due to variation in exchange rate.
(xii) 00.217—Loans from the Government of Japan
Original Provision 78840.83
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 78840.83
Actual Expenditure 73123.81
Saving 5717.02
Saving was due to variation in exchange rate.
(xiii) 00.218—Loans from Kuwait
Original Provision 5262.86
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 5262.86
Actual Expenditure 5139.72
Saving 123.14
Saving was due to variation in exchange rate.

104
(Rupees in lakhs)
(xiv) 00.220—Loans from the Government of Netherlands
Original Provision 20003.10
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 20003.10
Actual Expenditure 19360.15
Saving 642.95
Saving was due to variation in exchange rate.
(xv) 00.223—Loans from the Government of Switzerland and Swiss Banks
Original Provision 3258.86
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 3258.86
Actual Expenditure 2718.06
Saving 540.80
Saving was due to variation in exchange rate and revised amortisation schedule.
(xvi) 00.228—Other Miscellaneous Loans from the Government of USA
Original Provision 1592.23
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 1592.23
Actual Expenditure 1046.44
Saving 545.79
Saving was due to variation in exchange rate.
(xvii) 00.216—Loans from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development
Original Provision 344753.67
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 344753.67
Actual Expenditure 264876.97
Saving 79876.70
Saving was due to variation in exchange rate.
(xviii) 00.213—Loans from the International Development Association
Original Provision 84446.60
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 84446.60
Actual Expenditure 83404.06
Saving 1042.54
Saving was due to variation in exchange rate and revised amortisation schedule.

105
(Rupees in lakhs)
(xix) 00.221—Loans from OPEC Special Fund
Original Provision 4483.04
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 4483.04
Actual Expenditure 4351.21
Saving 131.83
Saving was due to variation in exchange rate.
(xx) 00.214—Loans from IFAD
Original Provision 1905.06
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 1905.06
Actual Expenditure 1680.43
Saving 224.63
Saving was due to variation in exchange rate.
(xxi) 00.250—Loans from ADB
Original Provision 21436.00
Supplementary Provision Nil
Total Provision 21436.00
Actual Expenditure 20934.00
Saving 502.00
Saving was due to variation in exchange rate and revised repayment schedule on
account of cancellation of certain loans.
3. The net expenditure in respect of the Appropriation "Repayment of Debt" is
nil. As such, the savings under this appropriation should not be treated as savings
in the normal sense which would otherwise have been available for other areas of
real expenditure.
4. This has been vetted by the Audit vide their U.O. No. RR/1-28/97-98/585 dated
27.8.1998.
Sd/-
(J. S. MATHUR)
Additional Secretary (Budget)
Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch)
P H Annexe,
New Delhi.
Dt. 28.8.1998
F.No. 7(1)-W&M/96.

ANNEXURE-II
NO.-F.2 (59)-B(S)/97
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
New Delhi, the 31st August, 1998
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Action Taken Note on saving of Rs. 100 crore or more under Revenue
Section (Voted and Charged) and Capital Section (Voted and Charged)
under Grant No. 28- Transfers to State and Union Territory Governments
as disclosed in the Union Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil)
for 1996-97.
The undersigned is directed to forward herewith Action Taken Note on saving of
Rs. 100 crores or more under Revenue Section (Voted and Charged) and Capital
Section  (Voted and Charged) under Grand No. 28-Transfers to Staet and Union
Territory Governments as disclosed in the Union Government Appropriation Accounts
(Civil) for 1996-97 in Hindi and English (40 copies each) duly vetted by Audit for
placing the same before PAC.
Sd/-
(L.R. Shahdadpuri)
Under Secretary to the Government of India.
Lok Sabha Secretariat,
(PAC) Branch
Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.
Copy alongwith a copy of Action Taken Note on saving of Rs. 100 crore or more
under Revenue Section (Voted and Charged) and Capital Section (V oted and Charged)
under Grant No. 28-Transfers to State and Union  Territory Government as disclosed
in the Union Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil) for 1996-97, to:—
(i) The C&AG of India, 10-Bahadur Shah Zafar Marg, New Delhi.
(ii) The Sr. Audit Officer, O/o The Director General of Audit Central Revenue
DGACR Building New Delhi, w.r.t. their U.O. No. RR/1-35/97-98/583 dated
27.8.98.
(iii) Shri S.D. Paul, Under Secretary, Report Section, Budget
(iv) Monitoring Cell Department of Expenditure, Lok Nayak Bhawan New Delhi.
Sd/-
(L.R. Shahdadpuri)
Under Secretary to the Government of India.
106

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(BUDGET DIVISION)
SAVING NOTE
Note for the Public Accounts Committee in respect of savings occurred under
Revenue Section (Voted and Charged) and Capital Section (Voted and Charged) of
Grant No. 28—Transfers to State and Union Territory Governments as disclosed in
the Union Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil) for 1996-97.
(Rupees in lakhs)
Revenue Section (Voted)
Original Grant 9824,68.00
Supplementary Grant 1033,55.00
Total Grant 10858,23.00
Actual Expenditure 10442,30.46
Savings 415,92.54
2. Under Revenue Section (Voted) of Grant No. 28—Transfers to State and Union
Territory Governments for 1996-97, the original grant was Rs. 9824,68.00 lakhs which
was augmented to Rs. 10858,23.00 lakhs by obtaining a supplementary grant of
Rs. 1033,55.00 lakhs. Against this the actual expenditure was Rs. 10442,30.46 lakhs
resulting in saving of Rs. 415,92.54 lakhs.
3. The sub-heads under which the savings of Rs. one crore and above occurred
and reasons therefor are as under:—
(i) M.H. 2075:
109. Loans to State Governments written
off in terms of the recommedations of
the Tenth Finance Commission:
Sub-head:00.00.64-write off/losses:
(Rupees in lakhs)
Original Grant 330,00.00
Actual Expenditure 200,79.84
Savings 129,20.16
Saving is based on the actual loans written-off on the basis of recommendations
of the Tenth Finance Commission and is mainly due to loans of Rs. 10000 lakhs to
Arunachal Pradesh for purchase of Helicopters not written-off during 1996-97 as
anticipated and also due to fiscal improvement in States. Hence, formalities of write-
off of loan could not be completed during the financial year.
107

108
(ii) M.H. 3601
Sub-head 01.822. General (Roads & Bridges)
Railway Safety Works
(Rupees in Lakhs)
Original Grant 6,00.00
Actual Expenditure 1,06.23
Savings 4,93.77
The savings was due to non-preferment of claims by State Governments than
anticipated and is based on the information furnished by the Ministry of Railways
on the basis of the requirements as furnished by the Zonal Railways. As indicated
by Ministry of Railways "The extant instructions envisage the State Governments
giving estimate of likely reimbursement for the safety works by 31st October of every
year to the  co-ordinating FA&CAO of the nominated Railway for compiling  and
forwarding to this Ministry for onward transmision to the Ministry of Finance.
Unfortunately, these estimates never come from most of the State Governments. In
the absence of the estimates from the State Governments, the Zonal Railway assess
the requirements based on the claims on hand for reimbursement. However, often
the State Governments do not come forward to claim reimbursements in time which
leads to surrender. " However, the Ministry of Railways is being requested to issue
necessary instructions guidelines to the State Governments for submitting the claims
for reimbursement well  in time in future so as to avoid savings.
(iii) M.H. 3601:
sub-head:C.2(1)-Block Grants:
(Rupees in Lakhs)
Original Grant 9106,21.00
Supplementary Grant 1033,55.00
Total Grant 10139,76.00
Actual Expenditure 9855,18.37
Savings 284,57.63
The saving of Rs. 284,57.63 lakhs was due to (i) cuts in Central Assistance on
account of shortfall in achievement of the plan by the State Governments, cut of 1%
Central Asistance for 1996-97 withheld for non-submission of audited figures of
expenditure by the State Governments for the period ending 1991-92 (iii) amounts
withheld for non-submission of anticipated expenditure for 1996-97/ actual expenditure
for the previous year, (iv) non-receipt of expenditure details of transferred Centrally
Sponsored Schemes from 19 States and (v) lesser claims for Sardar Sarovar Project.
The provision for Central Assistance to States for their State Plans is made by
this Ministry on the basis of approved plan Outlay and the releases are made on the
basis of anticipated/acutal expenditure reported by the States against their approved
Plan Outlays. If there is any shortfall in Plan expenditure against earmarked outlays,
Minimum Needs Programme Scheme or total approved outlays, a proportionate cut
in central assistance is imposed. The normal Central Assistance is also withheld due

109
to non-supply of departmental actuals for previous years, anticipated expenditure
for the current year etc. The saving was mainly due to shortfall in performance of
the State Governments in their Annual Plans and due to withholding of 1% Normal
Central Assistance for want of audited figures of expenditure for Annual Plans for
the period ending 1991-92.
The anticipated expenditure for the year, departmental actuals for the previous
year(s) and audited figures of expenditure for the earlier years for State Plans are
furnished by the State Governments upto 31st March of the year and as such it is
not possible to anticipate shortfall in performance and consequent cut in central
assistance. As the central assistance is a commitment to the States, it is also not
possible to under provide for it.
Revenue Section (Charged)
(Rupees in lakhs)
Original Appropriation 26776,02.00
Acutal Expenditure 26666,51.13
Savings 109,50.87
4. Under Revenue Section (Charged) of Grant No. 28-Transfers to State and Union
Territory Governments for 1996-97, the original grant was Rs. 26776,02.00 lakhs Against
this, the actual expenditure was Rs. 26666,51.13 lakhs resulting in savings of
Rs. 109,50.87 lakhs.
5. The sub-heads under which the savings of Rs. one crore and above occurred
and reasons therefor are as under:—
(i) M.H. 3601
C:1. Grants  for upgradation of services and special problems:
C1.00.31-Grants-in-aid
(Rupees in lakhs)
Original Appropriation 521,70.00
Actual Expenditure 225,82.13
Savings 295,87.87
The Tenth Finance Commission recommended grants amounting to Rs. 260850
lakhs during 1996-2000 to States for upgradation of services and special problems.
For 1996- 97 the grant recommended is Rs. 52170 lakhs. Accordingly, Budget provision
was made for Rs. 52170 lakhs.
As recommended by the Tenth Finance Commission as Inter-Ministerial
Empowered Committee has been constituted under the chairmanship of Additional
Secretary (Expenditure) with Joint Secretaries of the concerned Central Ministries as
Members and Joint Secretary (FCD) as Member Secretary for monitoring the progress
of utilisation of these grants.
The guidelines on utilisation of the provisions recommended by the Tenth Finance
Commission for upgradations of standards of administration and tackling the special
problems, as approved by Inter-Ministerial Empowered Committee, been forwarded
to all the State Governments.

110
As stipulated in the guidelines, the State Governments are required to submit the
plans of action, duly approved by their State level Empowered Committee, for
utilisation of these grants for approval of Inter-Ministerial Empowered Committee.
The plans of action received from the States are forwarded to the concerned Central
Ministries for their comments and thereafter, these are placed in the Meeting of the
Inter-Ministerial Empowered Committee for approval. After the action plans are
approved by the Inter-Ministerial Empowered  Committee, the approval is conveyed
and 'on account' grant released to the States. Further grant is released on receipt of
utilisation certificates from the States.
During 1996-97 against the recommended amount of Rs. 260850 lakhs action plan
for Rs. 143900 lakhs were approved by Inter-Ministerial Empowered Committee. In
view of the fact that action plans for all the schemes were not received from the
States during the year as such the budgeted provision could not be utilised. Hence,
there was a saving of Rs. 29588 lakh.
(ii) M.H. 3601
03. Contribution to Calamity Relief Fund:
03.00.32 Contributions
(Rupees in lakhs)
Original Appropriation 865,67.00
Actual Expenditure 844,90.00
Savings 20,77.00
Subsequent to the finalisation of Budget Estimates 1996-97, two instalments of
Calamity Relief Fund for 1996-97 amounting to Rs. 2077 lakhs was released to the
Government of Kerala in advance during 1995-96.
Capital Section (Voted)
(Rupees in lakhs)
Original Grant 1175,00.00
Actual Expenditure 796,29.00
Savings 378,71.00
6. Under Capital Section (V oted) of Grant No. 28-Transfers to State and Union
Territory Governments for 1996-97, the original grant was Rs. 1175,00.00 lakhs Against
this, the actual expenditure was Rs. 796,29.00 lakhs resulting in savings of Rs.
378,71.00 lakhs.
7. The sub-heads under which the savings of Rs. one crore and above occurred
and reasons therefor are as under:—
(i) M.H. 6801:
04.01-Loans to Rural Electrification Corporation
for State Plan Schemes:

111
Sub-head: 04.01.55 Loans and Advances
(Rupees in lakhs)
Original Grant 175,00.00
Actual Expenditure 120,00.00
Savings 55,00.00
The loan portion equivalent to the Minimum Need Programme outlay for Rural
Electrification, out of the total loan assistance releasable to States for annual Plans
is being routed through Rural Electrification Corporation on the basis of States'
achievements. Since the achievement of the State Governments was less than the
approved outlay (Minimum Need Programme), the Rural Electrification Corporation
could not claim the entire outlay and hence the saving.
(ii) M.H. 7602
01.102. Share of Small Savings Collections
(Rupees in lakhs)
Original Grant 1000,00.00
Actual Expenditure 676,29.00
Savings 323,71.00
The collections under small savings scheme of the Government of India are
mobilised through 1,52,783 Post Offices and a large number of branches of Public
Sector Banks all over the country. Over fifty million small investors deposit and
withdraw money in various schemes every year. 75% of the net collections (i.e. gross
deposits less withdrawals) in the Union Territory are disbursed as loans to that Union
Territory. It can be seen, therefore, that the amount of loan is not an allocation fixed
on the basis of other criteria but directly depends on the resources mobilised in that
Union Territory in that period. There is a time lag between the collections and loans
of three months—the loan against January collections is disbursed in April that year.
The Budget Estimates 1996-97 for loans to Union Territories was formulated in
October, 1995 based on the trends of the collections. The actual collections in the
period corresponding to releases in 1996-97 was slightly lower, therefore, resulting
in lower loans.
Capital Section (Charged)
(Rupees in lakhs)
Original Appropriation 21085,90.00
Supplementary Appropriation 1696,60.00
Total Appropriation 22782,50.00
Actual Expenditure 22411,02.51
Savings 371,47.49
8. Under Capital Section (Charged) of Grant No. 28-Transfers to State and Union
Territory Governments for 1996-97, the original appropriation was Rs. 21085,90.00

112
lakhs which was augmented to Rs. 22782,50.00 lakhs by obtaining a supplementary
grant of Rs. 1696,60.00 lakhs. Against this, the actual expenditure was Rs. 22411,02.51
lakhs resulting in savings of Rs. 371,47.49 lakhs.
9. The sub-heads under which the savings of Rs. one crore and above occurred
and reasons therefor are as under:—
(ii) M.H. 7601
01.102. Share of Small Savings Collections
(Rupees in lakhs)
Original Appropriation 10000,00.00
Actual Expenditure 9994,76.00
Savings 5,24.00
The collections under small savings scheme of the Government of India are
mobilised through 1,52,783 Post Offices and a large number of branches of Public
Sector Banks all over the country. Over fifty million small investors deposits and
withdraw money in various schemes every year. 75% of the net collections (i.e. gross
deposits less withdrawals) in a State are disbursed as loans to that State. It can be
seen, therefore, that the amount of loan is not an allocation fixed on the basis of
other criteria but directly depends on the resources mobilised in that State in that
period. There is a time lag between the collections and loans of three months—the
loan against January collections is disbursed in April that year.
The Budget Estimates 1996-97 for loans to States was formulated in October, 1995
based on the trends of the collection. The actual collections in the period corresponding
to releases in 1996-97 was slightly lower, therefore, resulting in lower loans.
(ii) M.H. 7601
02.101. Block Loans
Original Appropriation 10085,90.00
Supplementary Appropriation 1696,60.00
Total Appropriation 11782,50.00
Actual Expenditure 11585,60.01
Savings 196,89.99
The saving of Rs. 19690 lakh was due to (i) cuts in Central Assistance on account
of shortfall in achievement of the plan by the State Governments, cut of 1% Central
Assistance for 1996-97 withheld for non-submission of audited figures of expenditure
by the State Governments for the period ending 1991-92 (iii) amounts withheld for
non-submission of anticipated expenditure for 1996-97 actual expenditure for the
previous year, (iv) non-receipt of expenditure details of transferred Centrally
Sponsored Schemes from 19 States and (v) lesser claims for Sardar Sarovar Project.
The provision for Central Assistance to States for their State Plans is made by
this Ministry on the basis of approved Plan Outlay and the releases are made on the
basis of anticipated/actual expenditure reported by the States against their approved
Plan Outlays. If there is any shortfall in Plan expenditure against earmarked outlays,
Minimum Needs Programme Scheme or total approved outlays, a proportionate cut

113
in Central Assistance is imposed. The Normal Central Assistance is also withheld
due to non-supply of departmental actuals for previous years, anticipated expenditure
for the current year etc. The saving was mainly due to shortfall in performance of
the State Governments in their Annual Plans and due to withholding of 1% Normal
Central Assistance for want of audited figures of expenditure for Annual Plans for
the period ending 1991-92.
The anticipated expenditure for the year, departmental actuals for the previous
year(s) and audited figures of expenditure for the earlier years for State Plans are
furnished by the State Governments upto 31st March of the year and as such it is
not possible to anticipate shortfall in performance and consequent cut in Central
Assistance. As the Central Assistance is a commitment to the States, it is also not
possible to under provide for it.
(iii) M.H. 7601:
06.299. Other Ways & Means Advances
Original Appropriation 1000,00.00
Actual Expenditure 830,66.50
Savings 169,33.50
The saving was due to less Ways & Means Advances to the States than
anticipated. The Ways & Means Advances are short term Loans given to States on
the basis of requests made by them to tide over their financial problems. These Ways
& Means Advances are generally recoverable within the same financial year. The
saving was due to lesser requirement and consequent lesser release of Ways &
Means Advances to States than anticipated at the time of Budget.
As is evident, none of the reasons stated above could have been anticipated earlier.
Remedial steps taken/proposed to be taken by Government
The matter of timely submission of anticipated expenditure for the year,
departmental actuals for the previous year(s) and audited figures of expenditure for
earlier years for State Plans has been taken up with the State Governments whenever
they are not received on time. Besides with a view to encouraging the State Govts.
to submit audited figures of expenditure, a system of with-holding 1% of the Central
Assistance (Normal) to be released on receipt of audited figures of expenditure has
been started from the year 1994-95.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. RR/1-35/97-98/583 dated 27.8.98.
Sd/-
(J.S. Mathur)
Additional Secretary (Budget)
F.No. 2(59)-B(S)/97 dated 27.8.98.
To
The Chairman and the Members of the Public Accounts

ANNEXURE-III
D. Swarup D.O. No. F.2(32)-(CDN)/2001
Joint Secretary (Budget) Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
Tel: Off.: 301-2804 North Block
Res.: 614 0164
Fax: 301 7052
E-mail: asb@finance.delhi.nic.in New Delhi the, July 6, 2001
Dear
As you may be aware, the demand "Loans to Government Servants etc." is dealt
with in the Ministry of Finance. Allocation for HBA and other advances for the year
2001-02 has already been conveyed to all Ministries/Departments in April, 2001.
2. On a review of allocations and actual expenditure, it has been observed that
there is wide variation between the actuals and even the revised estimates. The
consequential savings and excesses has been attracting adverse comments from audit
and the Public Accounts Committee. The table below gives a quantum of excess/
savings over a four years period:
(Rs. in crores)
Y ear B E R E Actuals Excess(+)/
Savings(-)#
1996-97 296.50 266.50 162.53 (-) 103.97
1997-98 298.65 298.65 267.50 (-) 31.15
1998-99 332-49 432.49 489.30 (+) 56.81
1999-2000 500.00 700.00 684.65 (-) 15.35
(provisional)
# Excess/Savings vis-a-vis RE.
As is evident, there have been large saving in this demand. During the year
1998-99 there has been a substantial excess.
3. With a view to monitor loans to Government servants department-wise, I would
suggest that management information in the format enclosed may kindly be provided
to Budget division so that we can avoid repetition of large savings/excesses as have
occurred in the past. It will be appreciated if these monthly abstracts are furnished
to Budget Division for and upto the month of June 2001 and onwards. The actual
allocation made is indicated for all Departments and we shall intimate to you changes
in allocation, mid-stream, as they occur.
With regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(D. Swarup)
114
Shri A.M. Sehgal,
Controller General of Accounts,
Lok Nayak Bhawan,
New Delhi.

ANNEXURE-IV
D. Swarup D.O. No. F.2(32)-(CDN)/2001
Joint Secretary (Budget) Ministry of Finance
Tel.: Off.:-301 2804 D epartment of Economic Affairs
Res.: 614 0164 North Block
Fax: 301 7052
E-mail: asb@finance.delhi.nic.in New Delhi the, July 6, 2001
As you may be aware, the demand "Loans to Government Servants etc." is dealt
with in the Ministry of Finance. Allocation for HBA and other advances for the year
2001-02 has already been conveyed to all Ministries/Departments in April, 2001.
2. On a review of allocations and actual expenditure, it has been observed that
there is wide variation between the actuals and even the revised estimates. The
consequential savings and excesses has been attracting adverse comments from audit
and the Public Accounts Committee. The table below gives a quantum of excess/
savings over a four years period:
(Rs. in crores)
Y ear BE RE Actuals Excess(+)/
savings (-)#
1996-97 296.50 266.50 162.53 (-)103.97
1997-98 298.65 298.65 267.50 (-)31.15
1998-99 332.49 432.49 489.30 (+)56.81
1999-2000 500.00 700.00 684.65 (-)15.35
(provisional)
#Excess/Savings vis-a-vis RE.
As is evident there have been large saving in this demand. During the year
1998-99 there has been a substantial excess.
3. With a view to ensuring that such large savings/excesses do not recur, it is
requested that you may at your level review the requirement of loans to Government
servants on periodic basis so that savings, if any, are negligible and excesses do not
occur under any circumstances. Further, in case of anticipated savings, these should
be intimated well in advance so that the Departments which may require these funds
can benefit from re-allocation.
4. I am separately writing to Controller General of Accounts also so that monthly
expenditure trends are available with regard to Loans to Government Servants
department-wise. I am sure, with your cooperation, savings/excesses of the magnitude
that has been occurring in the past will not recur.
With kind regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(D. Swarup)
115

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(BUDGET DIVISION)
Recommendation
The Committee are astonished to note that against final savings of Rs. 44231.22
crore in the Appropriation Accounts (Civil), the amount surrendered was
Rs. 24787.35 crore out of which 99 percent (Rs. 24783.51 crore) was surrendered
on the last day of the financial year. What is more disturbing is the fact that in
20 V oted Grants and 21 Appropriations, the entire savings amounting to Rs. 19.55
crore and Rs. 3.27 crore respectively were not surrendered at all. To the
astonishment of the Committee, in 55 cases, the amounts greater than 20 percent
of the savings of Rs. 1 crore were not surrendered at all. The percentage of
savings available under a grant/appropriation not surrendered varied between
21 and 100 percent. The Grant-wise analysis by the Committee has revealed that
the Ministry of Surface Transport did not surrender 29.91 percent and 83.75
percent of the savings available under the Grant No. 78 and 79 respectively. The
Ministry of Home Affairs did not surrender at all the entire savings of Rs. 7.02
crore under Revenue(V oted) section of Grant No. 42. Similarly, under Grant No.
44—Police, the Ministry did not surrender 96.41 percent of the available savings.
The Committee also noticed that the Ministry of Labour did not surrender 26.60
percent of the available savings under Grant No. 57. The Committee take a serious
view of the perfunctory manner in which the surrenders were made by the
concerned Ministries/Departments at the close of the financial year. The
Committee deplore that some of the Departments even did not care to surrender
the unspent provisions at all. Despite the Committee's repeated exhortations made
from time to time in their earlier Reports for timely surrender of savings, the
Committee observe that the Ministries/Departments are yet to show improvements
in this regard. The Committee desire that the Financial Advisors and the Heads
of Ministries/Departments be made jointly accountable for unusual savings and
delay in the timely surrender of savings.
[Para 13.16 of the Sixteenth Report of Public Accounts Committee (Thirteenth Lok
Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry has noted the observations and findings of the Public Accounts
Committee that various Ministries/Departments have either considerably delayed the
surrender of savings or have even failed to surrender the savings. The existing
procedure laid down in the General Financial Rules, 1963 is fairly adequate to take
care of both savings and their surrender under the voted grants/charged
appropriations and the fact that some Ministries/Departments have been lax in timely
surrender of savings despite these instructions, shows that the Ministries/
Departments are not scrupulously following these procedures. In pursuance of the
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee, this Ministry has issued fresh
instructions to all the Ministries/Departments vide O.M. No. 7(6)-B(R)/2001
116

117
dated 20th July, 2001 (copy enclosed) advising them to gear up the internal mechanism
of budgetary control so as to ensure timely and realistic assessment of fund
requirement/utilisation. They have also been advised that the monitoring mechanism
to oversee utilisation of funds and calculation of possible savings should also be
tightened to keep a regular watch over the utilisation of funds/surrender of savings
and all procedures prescribed under General Financial Rules should also be
scrupulously followed.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O.No. RR/1-38/2000-01/367 dated
6.7.2001.
Sd/-
(D. Swarup)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India
No. F.7(6)-B(R)/2001.

No. F.7(6)-B(R)/2001
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
Dated 20th July, 2001
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
Subject: Sixteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok
Sabha) — Union Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil) —
(1996-97) — Surrender of savings on the last day.
The undersigned is directed to invite a reference on the observations and
recommendations made by the Public Accounts Committee in para 13.16 of their
above mentioned Report and to say that the Committee while showing their serious
concern on the large scale surrender of savings on the last day of the financial year,
has noted that in 20 V oted Grants and 21 Appropriations, the entire savings amounting
to Rs. 19.55 crore and Rs. 3.27 crore respectively were not surrendered at all. In 55
cases the amounts greater than 20 per cent of the savings of Rs. 1 crore were not
surrendered at all. The percentage of savings available under a grant/appropriation
were not surrendered varied from 21 per cent to 100 per cent. The Committee has
noted with distress that some of the Ministries/Departments have not surrendered
the unspent provision at all. The Committee has desired that the Financial Advisers
and the Heads of Ministries/Departments be made jointly accountable for unusual
savings and delay in the timely surrender of these savings.
2. Taking a serious view of the perfunctory manner in which the surrenders were
made, at the very close of the financial year despite Committee's repeated exhortations
made from time to time in their earlier Reports for timely surrender of savings, the
Public Accounts Committee has observed that the Ministries/Departments have not
yet been able to show any improvement in this regard. The fact that the savings
were not surrendered in time indicates that the review, monitoring and control of
expenditure, as required under General Financial Rules and various Government of
India decisions thereunder, was largely ineffective.
3. In order, therefore, to ensure that such delayed surrenders/failure to make
surrender of savings do not occur in future, all Ministries/Departments are advised
that savings which are likely to occur may be surrendered well in time so that available
resources are put to best possible use. Careful formulation of budget estimates on a
realistic basis will avoid large scale saving/surrender. Formulation of Budget Estimates
should be made having regard to absorptive capacity and achievable targets.
Needless to say procedures prescribed under General Financial Rules should also
be scrupulously followed. In case there is any likelihood of savings, action should
118

119
be taken immediately to surrender such funds well in advance and before the end of
the financial year, as prescribed in the General Financial Rules.
Sd/-
(D. Swarup)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India
1. All Ministries/Departments as per standard mailing list.
2. All Secretaries to the Government of India.
3. All Financial Advisers.

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AFFAIRS
(BUDGET DIVISION)
Recommendation
"The Committee's examination has revealed that supplementary provision of
Rs. 236.20 crore obtained in 15 cases by the concerned Ministries/Departments proved
unnecessary as the final expenditure was less than the original grant. The Committee
also observed that in most of these cases, the supplementary provisions were
obtained in March, 1997, i.e. at the fag end of the year. The Committee are all the
more concerned deeply that some Ministries/Departments were even unable to assess
their actual requirement of funds even on the last day of the financial year. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that the procurement of supplementary grants by
the Ministries/Departments be thoroughly assessed objectively to ward off
unwarranted surrender of savings later. The Committee feel that it would go a long
way in streamlining of budgetary process if the Heads of Programme Divisions are
made accountable in this behalf."
[Para 13.17 of Sixteenth Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Responses in this regard were elicited from all the Ministries/Departments
mentioned in the para.
It may be seen from details below that the supplementary grants were utilised by
most of the Ministries. In seven cases, the token supplementary grants of Rs. 0.01
crore each were necessitated as the proposed expenditure attracted New Service and
New Instrument of Service and the Ministries could not reappropriate the sums
required from the existing provisions in the approved grants, inspite of the savings
available, without obtaining Parliament's prior approval. Nine cases, involving an
amount of Rs.112.68 crore, were similarly of technical nature, in which also the re-
appropriation was not permissible under the existing rules. In these cases,
supplementary grants were obtained against the equal amount of saving/receipts to
be surrendered (Annex-A).
It is, however, seen that even when the above was true, in view of available
savings in the other approved provisions within either the Revenue Section or the
Capital Section of the grant, token or technical supplementary grants not involving
additional allocation, could have been sought so as to absorb the savings available
within the grant. This aspect has now specifically been emphasised while processing
the supplementary grants in the final batch this year, vide the D.O. letter No. 4(1)-
B(SD)/2002 dated 25.01.2002, a copy of which is enclosed. The observations made
by the Public Acconts Committee have also been brought to the notice of all the
Ministries/Departments in para 5 of the said D.O. letter dated 25.1.2002 ( Annex-B)
for guidance and compliance.
While regretting the savings that occurred inspite of obtaining a supplementary
grant, almost all the Ministries have indicated that remedial action was being taken
to ensure a more realistic estimate. Many Ministries have independently sent Action
120

121
Taken Notes in this regard.  The Budget Division, Department of Economic Affairs,
Ministry of Finance has issued instructions to all Ministries to note the directions
of the Public Accounts Committee for strict compliance vide OM No. F4(36)B(SD)/
2000 dated 13th July, 2001 (Annex-C). This is also being underlined in the circular
issued by the Budget Division for inviting proposals for supplementary grants, as
would be clear from the letter dated 25.01.2002 (Annex-B) referred to above. According
to the provisions of Rule 66, read with Rule 69 of the General Financial Rules, the
Heads of the Departments and Controlling Officers are required to keep strict watch
over the expenditure against the grants, and report the savings if any, without waiting
for the close of the financial year.
In regard to the recommendation regarding making Heads of Programme Divisions
accountable for proper assessment of expenditure requirements before procuring
supplementary grants, we have requested the Department of Expenditure to examine
with a view to incorporating the same in General Financial Rules.
The delay in submission of this Action Taken Note is deeply regretted. Responses
had to be obtained from different Ministries and took some time. The same was
examined and in some cases further details had to be sought.
Revenue Section
1. Demand No. 4 — Department of Animal Husbandry and Dairying, Ministry
of Agriculture
The Department has stated that Supplementary Grant of Rs. 7.39 crore was obtained
for augmentation of gross revenue expenditure of the Delhi Milk Scheme for meeting
establishment-related expenditure and the amount was fully utilised.
However, savings of Rs. 20.80 crore in other schemes was due to a number of
reasons, inter alia, non finalisation of proposals for setting up of an apex body under
the scheme of National Poultry Development Agency, less adjustment of foreign aid
owing to delay in fulfilment of global tender requirements, non-receipt of foreign aid,
less demand from State Governments owing to availability of unspent balance of
previous years with them, and less demands for funds owing to slow progress of work.
The Department has stated that it is taking care that such lapse does not recur in
future and Heads of Programme divisions are being made accountable in this behalf.
2. Demand No. 9 — Ministry of Civil Supplies, Consumer Affairs & Public
Distribution
The Department has stated that a supplementary grant of Rs. 30 crore was obtained
for providing one time assistance to State Governments and Union Territory
Governments for building infrastructural facilities in the District Fora. An amount of
Rs. 23.23 crore was released to the State Governments/Union Territory Governments
who fulfilled the eligibility criteria based on achievement of targets by the State
Commissions/District Fora. However, as some State/District Fora could not achieve
the desired targets, Rs. 6.77 crore was not released to the concerned State
Governments/Union Territory Governments.
Due to poor response to the VRS schemes in Hindustan Vegetable Oil Corporation,
a supplementary grant of Rs. 1.30 crore had to be surrendered.

122
Of the total saving in the grant of Rs. 48.72 crore, Rs. 37.51 crore were surrendered
at the time of formulation of the Revised Estimates (RE) in November, 1996.
The Department proposes to bring about improvement in the internal controls by
reviewing the savings available within the sanctioned grant before seeking
supplementary grants. Monthly review of expenditure has been introduced to have
stringent controls.
3. Demand No. 26 — Payments to Financial Institutions, Ministry of Finance
The Department has stated that the supplementary grants of Rs. 18.94 crore
obtained in the first batch was utilised for the purpose for which it was taken.
It is further stated that savings occurred mainly due to variation in SDR interest
rate while making payment to International Monetary Fund (IMF), non-raising of
demand for contribution by the International Fund for Agricultural Development
(IFAD) and non-submission of claims by Industrial Development Bank of India (IDBI)
for reimbursement of external aid, which could not be anticipated at the time of framing
the budget estimates.
4. Demand No. 34 — Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance
The Department has stated that the savings under the supplementary grant
obtained was of Rs. 1.91 crore, mainly on account of delayed constitution of new
Regional units of other Narcotics Control Bureau.
Savings in the total grant occurred mainly due to an anticipated quantity of
Codeine Phosphate not being received (Rs. 7.15 crore) and less procurement of Opium.
5. Demand No. 39—Department of Health, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
The Department has stated that savings against the supplementary grant occurred
mainly due to non-filling up of vacant posts, economy measures adopted, review of
schemes resulting in weeding out of schemes and grant of exemption in Customs
Duty on imported machinery, equipment and construction material (Rs. 4.48 crore).
6. Demand No. 41 — Family Welfare, Department of Family Welfare, Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare
The Department has stated that the savings identified under the grant could not
be reappropriated for other schemes due to restrictions under Delegation of Financial
Power rules and other technical reasons.
The Department has also stated that all concerned have been instructed to
thoroughly scrutinise proposals for supplementary grants and that Divisional Heads
would be responsible for any lapses in future.
7. Demand No. 43 — Cabinet, Ministry of Home Affairs
The Ministry has stated that the supplementary grant of Rs. 2.19 crore was utilised.
However, savings occurred in the total grant mainly due to rationalisation of the
foreign travel plans by the Ministers in the light of directions from Prime Minister.

123
The recommendation of the Public Accounts Committee has been noted for
compliance in future.
8. Demand No. 49 — Department of Culture — Ministry of Human Resource
Development
The Department has stated that the supplementary grant was obtained, inter alia,
for creating the National Culture Fund and for providing grants to the Centre for
Cultural Resources and training. The same was fully utilised.
However, savings occurred due to non-payment of some bills owing to non-receipt
of pre-stamped receipts.
9. Demand No. 62 — Ministry of Mines
The Ministry has stated that the supplementary grant of Rs. 8.73 crore was fully
utilised.
The savings in the total grant occurred mainly due to non-receipt of invoices
from Controller and Aid against external aid received from France.
10. Demand No. 63 — Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources
The Ministry has stated that the entire supplementary grant of Rs. 34.12 crore
obtained for Wind Power Generation was fully utilised.
However, savings occurred, inter alia, due to economy measures and this was
reflected in the Revised Estimates (RE). Savings of Rs. 87. 04 crore occurred under
other Heads of Accounts.
11. Demand No. 66 — Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas
The Ministry has stated that savings occurred mainly due to non-filling of vacant
posts, reduced travel expenses and economy measures adopted by the Ministry.
The Ministry has stated that the recommendation of the Committee would be kept
in view to avoid such a situation in future to the extent possible.
12. Demand No. 78 — Surface Transport, Ministry of Surface Transport
12.1 Most of the supplementary grant of Rs. 2.22 crore was utilised.
12.2 The Ministry has stated that savings in the total grant occurred mainly due
to the transfer of Delhi Transport Corporation (DTC) to Government of NCT
of Delhi in August, 1996 resulting in non-utilisation of VRS provision
(Rs. 10 crore); delay in implementation of scheme of Capital Dredging in West
Coast Canal, delay in finalisation of design by CPWD for Patna Terminal, delay
in setting up of National Institute of Road Safety and non-implementation of
voluntary retirement scheme of CIWTC.
12.3 The Ministry has stated that improvement in system and procedures including
controls have been taken as remedial measures.
13. Demand No. 80 — Ports, Lighthouses and Shipping, Ministry of Surface
Transport
The supplementary grant of Rs. 2.22 crore was fully utilised for the purpose for
which it was obtained.

124
The Ministry has stated that savings occurred mainly due to non-finalisation of
contract for dredging for Haldia channel by Calcutta Port Trust, non-receipt of
commodity assistance from Japan for updating maritime training facilities owing to
non-approval of projects by Government of Japan and less subsidy claimed by Cochin
Shipyard.
The Ministry has further stated that, as remedial measure, all the concerned
authorities have been specially told to monitor the flow of expenditure with utmost
prudence keeping in view the progress of work of each project/scheme and taking
up the matter with various authorities associated with the job and Ministry of Finance
so that optimum use of budget provision was made. Steps for more realistic
assessment would be taken. A closer look would be taken at RE stage and provision
restricted to the realistic figures.
14. Demand No. 101 — Lakshadeep, Ministry of Home Affairs
The Ministry has stated that the Supplementary Grant was fully utilised for the
purpose for which it was obtained.
However, savings occurred in the total grant mainly due to non-acquisition of
land due to litigation, less procurement of High Speed Diesel oil owing to rough sea
conditions, non-receipt of bills from DGS&D and lower operational cost due to non-
delivery of a barge.
Capital Section
15. Demand No.  56—Broadcasting Services, Ministry of Information and
Broadcasting
The Ministry has stated that the Supplementary Grant  of Rs. 11.73 crore was
fully utilised for the purpose for which it was obtained.
However, savings occurred in the total grant mainly due to non-receipt or delay
in receipt of equipment, slow progress of construction and electrical works, non-
reception of Microwave links and play back equipment for DD3 channel, dis-
continuation of scheme for linking all Vividh Bharti Centres on computer, rejection of
proposal for purchasing a hard disc base system and cancellation of tender for
purchase of Console Tape Recorder.
This note has been vetted by Audit, vide their U.O.  No. DGACR-RR-1-39/2000-
01 dated 17.04.2002.
Sd/-
(D. Swarup)
Additional Secretary (Budget)
[Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs (Budget Division)
O.M.  No. F. 4 (36) - B(SD)/2000 dated 17.04.2002.]

ANNEXURE-A
Statement showing the details of the Supplementary Demands for Grants as
shown in para 13.17 of the 16th P.A.C. Report of 13th Lok Sabha
(Rupees in crore)
Demand  Name of Ministry/Department Amount of Supplementary Amount of Saving
No. Demand for Grants Surrendered as per
Total Cash Tech T oken the P.A.C. Report
Outgo N ical
REVENUE SECTION
4. Department of Animal Husbandry 7.39 - 7.39 - 20.80
and Dairying
9 Ministry of Civil Supplies Consumer 31.30 30.00 1.30 -- 48.72
Affairs and Public Distribution
26 Payments to Financial Institutions 18.94 18.93 -- 0.01 48.79
34 Department of Revenue 11.36 -- 11.36 -- 13.00
39 Department of Health 31.00 19.99 10.99 0.02 121.96
41 Department of Family Welfare 71.10* 31.99 39.10 0.01 77.82
43 Cabinet 2.19 2.19 -- -- 22.10
49 Department of Culture 3.02 3.00 -- 0.02 4.72
62 Ministry of Mines 8.73 3.23 5.50 -- 17.32
63 Ministry of Non Conventional 34.12 -- 34.12 -- 87.04
Energy Sources
66 Ministry of Petroleum and Natural Gas 0.17 0.17 -- -- 0.26
78 Surface Transport 2.22 2.21 -- 0.01 20.33
80 Ports, Light Houses and Shipping 2.70 -- 2.70 -- 66.82
101 Lakshdweep 0.22 -- 0.22 -- 1.26
CAPITAL SECTION
56 Broadcasting Services 11.73 11.73 -- -- 13.63
TOTAL 236.19 123.44 112.68 0.07
*Rs. 71.10 crore as per the Supplementary Demand for Grants.
Rs. 71.11 crore as per the PAC Report.
125

ANNEXURE-B
D. Swarup
Additional Secretary (Budget)
D.O. No. F. 4(1)-B (SD)/2002
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
North Block
New Delhi-110 001
January 25, 2002
Dear Shri
The third and final batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants for 2001-2002 is
proposed to be presented to Parliament in the forthcoming Budget Session. The
Supplementary Demands proposed to be included in this batch may be decided taking
into account the provisions for both plan and Non-Plan expenditure in the relevant
Grant.
2. The Supplementary Demands may be proposed in the following cases:
(a) For authorisation of the expenditure out of the advances sanctioned from the
Contingency Fund of India, which have not yet been recouped.
(b) In cases where the approved Revised Estimates would result in excess over
the sanctioned provision in the Grant. The excess must be separately assessed for
the Revenue expenditure, the Capital expenditure, the V oted expenditure and the
Charged expenditure included in the grant. Thus, the Supplementary Demands will
be required in cases where the additional provision is required over and above the
original budget provision plus the additional provisions granted in the first and second
batches of Supplementary Grants plus the advances sanctioned from the Contingency
Fund of India, if any.
(c) In cases where savings are available within the Grant to meet any excess
requirement but the savings cannot be re-appropriated such as from the Revenue
Section to the Capital Section and vice versa or from 'Voted expenditure' to 'Charged
expenditure' and vice versa. The items already included as per (a) above need not be
included again.
(d) In cases where the expenditure is to be incurred on a New Service or New
Instrument of Service and hence prior approval of Parliament is necessary even
though the expenditure can be met from the savings available within the Grant. In
such cases, a Supplementary Demand of a token amount will be required. The items
already included as per (a) above need not be included again.
126

127
(e) In cases where payment is to be made in satisfaction of court decrees or upon
invocation of a Government guarantee etc., which are not covered under category (a)
above and, which, if left uncovered, may result in ' Charged' provision in the Grant,
if any, being exceeded.
(f) In cases where we have specifically agreed to the inclusion of the item in the
final batch of Supplementary Demands for Grants.
3. In cases where savings are available within the Grant, which can be re-
appropriated, it may please be noted that no Supplementary Grant (even for a token
amount) is required for additional establishment related expenditure of existing
Government offices. This may be met by re-appropriation of savings after obtaining
the approval of the competent authority.
4. As recommended by the Public Accounts Committee, any order for re-
appropriation, issued during a financial year, which has the effect of increasing the
budget provision under a sub-head or standard object head by more than 25% of
Budget Estimates or Rs. one crore. whichever is more, is required to be reported to
Parliament along with the last batch of the Supplementary Demands of the financial
year. The information in respect of such cases may also be furnished for being
appended to this batch of Supplementary Demands (para 7 below) and may also be
promptly sent to us for possible inclusion in the Supplementary Demands booklet.
5. While processing proposals for Supplementary Grants, the Grant controlling
authority must invariably identify savings available within the Grant so that the
infructuous or inflated Supplementary Demands are weeded out and the eventuality
of a surrender after obtaining Supplementary Grant is avoided. The Public Accounts
Committee has been very critical of cases where Ministries/Departments procured
Supplementary Grants in earlier years but the  final expenditure was less than the
approved grant. The proposal for Supplementary Demand for Grants may be projected
after a thorough and objective assessment of additional requirement of funds. The
Supplementary Demand should be sought for the minimum necessary amount after
a thorough review of savings (both under plan and Non-Plan) within the Grant.
6. Recurrence of excess expenditure over sanctioned provision in certain Grants
has also been viewed very seriously by the Public Accounts Committee. Needless
to say, such expenditure is unauthorised expenditure and must be avoided at any
cost, Therefore, not only the Supplementary Demand should be sought for the
minimum necessary amount after a thorough review of savings (both under plan
and  Non-Plan) within the Grant but it should be sufficient to cover any foreseeable
excess. In order to ensure that this fine balance is met, I would urge you to keep the
expenditure under close watch on a daily basis after sending the proposals for
Supplementary Grants and promptly inform us if there is a significant variation
requiring correction in the proposals. We will try our best to accommodate requests
for changes keeping in view the tight schedule of printing of Supplementary Demands,
which happens to overlap with the work of preparation of annual Budget documents.
I seek your kind cooperation in this regard.

128
7. I, therefore, request you to send us the proposals for Supplementary Demands
conforming to the above guidelines along with  8 copies of detailed brief thereon
(for use of the Finance Minister) latest by February 15, 2002. In case there is no
proposal for Supplementary Demands, you are requested to send an intimation to
this effect by the due date.
With warm regards,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(D. Swarup)

Most Immediate
No. F. 4(36) B (SD)/2000
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
(Budget Division)
New Delhi, the 13th July, 2001
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
Subject : Action taken note (ATN) on r ecommendations contained in the
sixteenth Report of the Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha)
on Union Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil)-1996-97,
paragraph 13.17 thereof.
The undersigned is directed to inform that Public Accounts Committee (PAC) vide
paragraph 13.17 of its sixteenth Report (13th Lok Sabha) commented that
supplementary Provision of Rs. 236.20 crore obtained in 15 cases by the concerned
Ministries/Departments proved unnecessary as the final expenditure was less than
the original grant (copy enclosed). In most of the cases, the supplementary provisions
were obtained in March, 1997 i.e. at the fag end of the year. The Committee was
deeply concerned that some Ministries/Departments were unable to assess their actual
requirement of funds even on the last day of the financial year. The Committee,
therefore, recommended that the procurement of supplementary grants by the
Ministries/Departments be thoroughly assessed objectively to ward off unwarranted
surrender of savings later. The Committee felt that it would go a long way in
streamlining of budgetary process if the Heads of Programme Divisions are made
accountable in this behalf.
2. All the Ministries/Departments are requested to note the directions of PAC for
strict compliance. While obtaining Supplementary Demands for Grants in future, the
Ministries/Departments should thoroughly assess objectively their requirement of
funds to ward off unwarranted surrender of savings later.
3. Receipt of this O.M. may please be acknowledged.
Encl. As above
Sd/-
(M.P. SINGH)
Under Secretary to the Govt. of India
Tel : 3015100To
1. Financial Advisors/Joint Secretaries (Finance) of all the Mnistries/Departments
of the Government of India.
2. All the Ministries/Departments of the Government of India.
3. Shri Devender Singh, Deputy Secretary (PAC Branch), Lok Sabha Secretariat,
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi-110001.
4. Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India, 10 Bahadurshah Zafar
Marg, New Delhi-110002.
5. Financial Commissioner, Ministry of Railways (Railway Board).
6. All Sections and Officers in Budget Division.
129

130
Recommendation
Wrongful re-appropriation of funds has been a matter of constant concern to the
Committee. The scrutiny of Audit Report has revealed that during test check, in as
many as 44 sub-heads in 27 grants/appropriations, re-appropriation aggregating to
Rs. 85.13 crores was found to be injudicious as the original provisions under the
sub-head to which funds were transferred by re-appropriation were more than
adequate and consequently the final savings under the sub-head were more than
the amount re-appropriated to these sub-heads. The Committee also found that there
was injudicious re-appropriation aggregating to Rs. 8.09 crores in 11 sub-heads in 8
Grants/Appropriations wherein final expenditure under each of them were more than
the original provisions before re-appropriation from them. The Committee also noticed
that the Department of Culture in 2 heads under Grant No. 49 and the Ministry of
Home Affairs under Grant No. 44, resorted to irregular re-appropriation of funds by
violating the instructions on the subject. Further, the Ministry of Commerce under
Grant No. 11 and the Ministry of Steel under Grant No. 77 re-appropriated funds
without obtaining prior approval of the Ministry of Finance. Obviously, such rampant
re-appropriations in utter disregard to codal provision, standing instructions and
Cannons of financial propriety only betray inability/inefficacy of the Financial
Advisers attached to the Ministries. The Committee therefore, recommend that the
powers and functions of the Financial Advisers may be reviewed appropriately to
prevent wrongful/injudicious re-appropriations.
(para 13.18 of 16th Report of PAC, 13th Lok Sabha)
Action Taken
The re-appropriation of Rs. 1.00 crore was issued from the Sub-head "Critical
Infrastructure Balance" below the Major Head "3453" to the sub-head "Critical
Infrastructure Balance" below the Major Head "3601" on the grounds that the re-
appropriation is from the same scheme for the same scheme. However, when it was
noticed that it was wrong to re-appropriate vide Government of India's decision No.
3(ii) below Rule 10 of the Delegation of Financial power Rules, the ex-post-facto
approval of the Ministry of Finance was obtained (Copy of the approval enclosed).
The instructions issued by the Finance Ministry vide O.M. No. 12(2)/E.Coord/
2001 dated 29.8.2001 (copy enclosed) on the powers/functions of Financial Advisers
will be kept in view and will be followed strictly.
The budget division of the Department has also been strengthened by providing
trained manpower.
It has been vetted by D.G.A.C.R.U.O. No. RQ/26-7/2001-021579 dated 22/2/2002.
Sd/-
(S.N. MENON)
Additional Secretary & Financial Adviser

No. 12(2)E-Coord./2001
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
New Delhi the 29th August, 2001
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
Subject: Action taken on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report
of the Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha) on Union
Government Accounts (Civil) (1996-97).
The Public Accounts Committee has adversely commented in para 13.18 and 13.19
of the Sixteenth report, regarding injudicious re-appropriations and expenditure on
New Service/New Instruments of Service. Necessary extracts of the observations
made by the Public Accounts Committee in para 13.18 and 13.19 are enclosed.
2. In this regard it may be mentioned that under the IFA scheme, the Financial
Advisers are required to assist in the budget formulations, scrutiny of projects and
programmes for approval by the Ministry of Finance and post budget vigilance to
ensure that there are neither considerable shortfalls in the expenditure, nor unforeseen
excesses for which Budget provision has been made either in the original Budget or
in the revised Budget Estimates. FAs are also responsible for preparation of the
Ministry's performance Budget and the monitoring of the programmes and schemes
against the Budget.
Rule 10 of Delegation of Financial Power Rules and Govt. of India decisions
thereunder define general instructions of appropriation and reappropriation. Under
Govt. of India decision (6) under Rule 10 of DFPR, any order of reappropriation issued
during the financial year which has the effect of increasing the Budget provision
under a sub head or standard object by more than 25% of the Budget estimates or
to Rs. 1 crore or more is required to be reported to the Parliament, alongwith the last
batch of Supplementary Demands for the financial year. However, if such an order is
issued after the last batch of Supplementary Demands, prior approval of the Addl.
Secretary/Secretary of the Department of Expenditure shall be obtained by the FA
concerned. All proposals for augmentation of funds for establishment related
expenditure (Salaries, Office Expenses, Travel Expenses, OTA etc.) would require
approval of the Ministry of Finance. All other cases which have the effect of
increasing the Budget provision under the sub-Head by Rs. 1 crore or more continue
to be referred to the Budget Division. Instructions have also been issued that funds
from 'Salaries not to be reappropriated to other heads.
Under GOI decision No. (1) under Rule 10 of DFPR, limits have been laid down
for deciding whether a case relate to New Service/New Instrument of Service and for
determining whether prior approval of Parliament is required or it is to be reported to
Parliament, alongwith the Supplementary Demands.
131

132
3. The Public Accounts Committee has observed that these instructions are being
flouted by various Ministries/Departments.
4. FAs are requested to see that the instructions in regard to reappropriation of
funds and expenditure on New Service/New Instrument of Service are scrupulously
followed.
Sd/-
(Usha Mathur)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
All Ministries/Deptts. of the Government of India All FAs.

[Extracts of Para 13.18 and 13.19 of the 16th Report of the PAC
(13th Lok Sabha)]
Para 13.18
Wrongful re-appropriation of funds has been a matter of constant concern to the
Committee. The Scrutiny of Audit Report has revealed that during test check, in as
many as 44 sub-heads in 27 grants/appropriations, re-appropriation aggregating to
Rs. 85.13 crore was found to be injudicious as the original provisions under the sub-
head to which funds were tranferred by re-appropriation were more than adequate
and consequently the final savings under the sub-head were more than the amount
re-appropriated to these sub-heads. The Committee also found that there was
injudicious re-appropriation aggregating to Rs. 8.09 crore in 11 sub-heads in 8 Grants/
Appropriations wherein final expenditure under each of them were more than the
original provisions before re-appropriation from them. The Committee also noticed
that the Department of Culture in 2 heads under Grant No. 49 and the Ministry of
Home Affairs under Grant No. 44, resorted to irregular re-appropriation of funds by
violating the instructions on the subject. Further, the Ministry of Commerce under
Grant No. 11 and the Ministry of Steel under Grant No. 77 re-appropriated funds
without obtaining prior approval of the Ministry of Finance. Obviously, such rampant
re-appropriations in utter disregard to codal provision, standing instructions and
canons of financial propriety only betray inability/inefficacy of the Financial Advisers
attached to the Ministries. The Committee therefore, recommend that the powers and
functions of the Financial Advisors may be reviewed appropriately to prevent
wrongful/injudicious re-appropriations.
Para 13.19
Another disquieting aspect of Committee's scrutiny of Audit Report No. 1 of 1998
shows that in as many as six Grants, the prescribed limits, which if crossed would
constitute New Service/New Instrument of Service requiring approval of Parliament,
were exceeded but the Ministries did not obtain prior approval of Parliament. The
Ministry of Finance in 3 cases under Grant No. 26, the Department of Education in
1 case under Grant No. 47, the Department of Culture in 1 case under Grant No. 49,
the Ministry of Home Affairs in 1 case under Grant No. 46, the Ministry of Labour in
one case under Grant No. 57 and Ministry of Urban Affairs and Employment in 2
cases under Grant No. 82 incurred expenditure attracting the limitation of "New
Service/New Instrument of Service" but the requisite prior approval of Parliament
was not obtained. The Committee find it as yet another blatant instance of violation
of financial rules and a sad commontary on the efficacy of Financial Advisers. The
Committee therefore recommend that it may be enjoined upon all the Financial
Advisers that it is the duty to ensure observance of financial propriety and to assert
their authority and where advice is overlooked/disregarded, the matter should
immediately be brought by them to the notice of Finance Ministry without fail.
133

PRINCIPAL ACCOUNTS OFFICE
MINISTRY OF COMMERCE
UDYOG BHAWAN
NEW DELHI
During the year 1996-97, Ministry of commerce had issued a re-appropriation order
for Rs. 1.00 crore from the Major Head "3453"-Foreign Trade and Export Promotion
Critical Infrastructure Balance (PLAN) to the Major Head "3601" - Grant-in-aid to
State Grants-Critical Infrastructure Balance (PLAN).
The Office of the Director General of Audit, Central Revenue, New Delhi had
objected the above order in terms of Govt. of India's order No. 3(ii) below Rule of
Delegation of financial Power Rules. As per the orders the Ministries/Deptts have
no powers to re-appropriate without the prior approval of Finance Ministry as regards
the re-appropriation of funds between direct expenditure in the Revenue Section to
grant-in-aid to States in the same section and vice versa are concerned.
We may refer the matter to Ministry of Finance for the ex-post-facto approval.
Sd/-
(RAMESH CHANDER)
Asstt. Accounts Officer
Ministry of Finance
Budget Division
This is one more instance in which basic ground rule in regard to re-appropriation
of sanctioned provision in a Grant, as laid down in the DFP Rules, has not been
observed by the Ministry.
2. It is an unfortunate reality in our system that it is left to Audit to point out
such omissions. This may be because the role and responsibility of the integrated
accounting unit in a Ministry in this matter are not very well defined.
3. We have already written to CGA in the matter in early July; CGA's comments are
awaited. The present case has been routed through the CCA who has, however, not
indicated as to why the requirement specified in the GFR in this regard could not be
complied with. This should have been done to prevent its recurrence in future. We
may await the corrective action which CGA may suggest so that it is not always for
Audit to fork out such acts of omission and commission after the close of the year.
4. In the meanwhile, ex post facto approval may be accorded for the re-
appropriation of Rs. 1 crore effected in 1996-97 vide 'A' pre-page.
Sd/-
(P.N. BHATTACHARYYA)
ABO/26.9.97
134

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
E. COORD. BRANCH
Recommendation
Rule 69 of General Financial Rules provides that rush of expenditure particularly
in the closing month of a financial year is to be regarded as a breach of financial
propriety and therefore, it should be avoided. The Committee observe that the test
check by Audit has revealed that more than 50% of the expenditure during the year
1996-97 was incurred in the month of March, 1997 in a number of cases. The cases
detected during test check indicate that the expenditure incurred in March, 1997 in
respect of 19 major heads pertaining to 11 Grants/Appropriations constituted 61.22
percent of the total expenditure in these grants/appropriations. The Committee observe
that there were as many as 7 cases under the Grants controlled by the Ministry of
Home Affairs where expenditure in the last month of the financial year was between
33 and 99 per cent. The Secretary, Ministry of Home Affairs admitted during evidence
that the March rush of expenditure was totally an unacceptable position and there
should be an effort to dismantle this approach. The Secretary, Ministry of Finance
taking note of the concern of the Committee, assured to issue new instructions to
follow the procedure for improved monitoring. Such large scale rush of expenditure
in the closing month of the financial year, in the opinion of the Committee smacks of
lack of financial discipline and accountability. The Committee, therefore consider it
desirable that the Ministry of Finance devise a procedure making it mandatory for
the Departmental Heads to hold monthly review meetings to monitor and so far as
practicable, to ensure the even flow of expenditure to avoid March rush for effective
fiscal discipline and better results.
[Sl. No. 20, para 13.20 Appendix, 16th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(13th Lok Sabha) on action taken on Union Government Approrpations Accounts
(Civil)-1996-97]
Action Taken
This Ministry has noted the observations and recommendations of the Public
Account Committee and in order to ensure that flow of expenditure is monitored by
every Ministry/Department on a monthly basis to ensure, as far as possible, even
flow of expenditure and not rush of expenditure during closing month of the financial
year, instructions have been issued to them to devise a mechanism with steps
envisaged therein. A copy of these instructions vide O.M. No. 12(2)/E.Coord./2001
dated 11.06.2001 is enclosed.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. Note No. RR/1-42/2000-01/363
dated 5.7.2001
Sd/-
(USHA MA THUR)
Joint Secretary
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
E.Coord. Branch U.O. No. 12(2)/E.Coord./2000 dated: 12.07.2001
135

No. 12(2)/E. Coord./2001
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
New Delhi, 11th June, 2001
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
Subject: Action on the recommendations contained in the Sixteenth Report of
the Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha) on "Union
Government Appropriations Accounts (Civil) —1996-97"—
recommendations contained in Para 13.20
The undersigned is directed to invite a reference to the observations made by the
Public Accounts Committee in Para 13.20 of the above mentioned Report where the
Public Accounts Committee has taken adverse note of rush of expenditure in the
month of March and has drawn attention to the provisions contained in Rule 69 of
the General Financial Rules, 1963, which under Note 3 thereof, provides that rush of
expenditure particularly in the closing months of the financial year shall be regarded
as a breach of financial regularity and should be avoided. The Public Accounts
Committee has desired that a procedure may be devised whereby the Departmental
Heads would hold monthly review meetings to monitor and, as far as practicable, to
ensure the even flow of expenditure to avoid March rush for effective fiscal discipline
and better result.
2. Instructions have already been issued vide Secretary (E)'s D.O. letter No. 12(1)/
E.Coord./99 dated 17.2.2000 in the context of the recommendations made by the Public
Accounts Committee in Para 48 of their First Report (12th Lok Sabha), advising all
Ministries/Departments to put in place a mechanism in consultation with the
concerned Financial Advisers to exercise a monthly check on the flow of expenditure
in every grant. The necessary follow up action would no doubt have been taken by
all the Ministries/Departments by now.
3. The occurrence of rush of expenditure during the closing month of the financial
year reflects badly on the overall financial management, implying lack of effective
monitoring to ensure regular flow of expenditure under a particular grant. The
occurence of this phenomenon, therefore, needs to be avoided and to ensure that a
monthly monitoring on flow of expenditure is exercised so that, as far as possible,
even flow of expenditure takes place, all the Ministries/Departments need to
strengthen the existing mechanism by way of following measures:
(i) All Controlling Officers in respect of a Demand for grant would have a
monthly statement furnished to them from the concerned PAO showing
details of expenditure under each head and periodic meetings will also be
taken by the Controlling Officers with subordinate Controlling Officers and
DDO's (including Cheque drawing DDOs) to whom budgetary allocations
may have been distributed, with a view to monitoring flow of expenditure
and to gauge the trend of expenditure so that even flow of expenditure is
ensured.
136

137
(ii) All Controlling Officers/Chief Controller of Accounts/Principal Chief
Controller of Accounts should also furnish monthly statement of
expenditure-object-head-wise to the concerned Financial Advisers so that
even flow of expenditure is ensured, monitored on a continuing basis and
corrective action taken concurrently.
4. All the Ministries/Departments are advised that necessary mechanism containing
the points mentioned above is put in place immediately and is also followed properly.
Sd/-
(USHA MA THUR)
Joint Secretary to the Government of India.
1. All Ministries/Departments of the Government of India, as far standard mailing
list.
2. All Secretaries to the Government of India.
3. All Financial Advisers.

MINISTRY OF FINANCE
DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE
MONITORING CELL
Recommendation
In order to ensure that grants were utilised for the purpose for which they were
sanctioned and where the grants released were conditional, the prescribed conditions
had been fulfilled, the certificate of utilisation of grants are required to be submitted
by the sanctioning authorities in the respective Ministry/Department to the Controller
of Accounts. The Committee's Scrutiny has revealed that 300072 utilisation certificates
relating to Rs. 3605.35 crores in respect of grants released upto September 1995 from
28 Ministries/Departments were outstanding at the end of March 1997. The Committee
also observe that utilisation certificates were outstanding even for upto 20 years in
some cases. Surprisingly the Ministries/Departments of Information and Broadcasting,
Chemicals and Petrochemicals, Social Justice & Empowerment, Law & Justice, the
Supreme Court of India, Science and Technology, Civil Aviation and Tourism, Civil
Supplies and Union Territory (Chandigarh) did not furnish the information to the
Audit on outstanding utilisation certifcates. While expressing their serious concern
over such  a huge pendency of utilisation certificates and non-submission of
information by the Ministries/Departments to the Audit, the Committee recommend
that all the Ministries/Department Wings of Government furnish invariably correct
and full figures to the Audit in time about the pending utilisation certificates and
that sincere efforts be made to clear within a year the backlog of the pendency atleast
upto 1995-96. The Committee would also like the Ministry of Finance to devise a
suitable policy of procuring utilisation certificates within a time bound frame from
the Ministries/Departments and to keep the Committee apprised.
[(Sl. No. 21 Appendix Para 13.21 of 16th Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken Note
Pursuant thereto, the observations/recommendations of the Public Accounts
Committee have been communicated to all Ministries/Departments for ensuring strict
compliance vide O.M. No. 1/16/2001-MC dated 5.1.2001. The pendency of Utilisation
Certificates is being monitored on regular basis. A number of communications have
been issued at the level of Secretary (Expenditure) and Controller General of Accounts
emphasizing on the need to devise a time bound action plan to obtain outstanding
Utilisation Certificates from the recipient institutions. Instructions have also been
issued to Ministries/Departments vide Department of Expenditure O.M. No. 5/35/
2000-MC dated 19.3.2001 not to release fresh grants unless Utilisation Certificates
for the previous grant/grants are furnished. A copy of these instructions is enclosed
as Annexure. As a result of these efforts towards greater emphasis on compliance of
provisions of GFR 151(1) in letter and spirit, 12025 Utilisation Certificates have since
been obtained. With the issue of these clear directions prohibiting release of fresh
138

139
grants in the event of Utilisation Certificates for the previous grant/grants not being
received, a sharp reduction in the pendency of Utilisation certificates is expected to
be achieved in the near future.
This has been vetted by Audit vide their U.O. No. RR/1-42/2000-01/319
dt. 20.06.2001
Sd/-
(S.R. SHIVRAIN)
Additional Controller General of Accounts.
Min. Finance (Expenditure) O.M. No. 1/16/2001-MC dated 20.06.2001

ANNEXURE
NO. 5/35/2000-MC
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Monitoring Cell
Room No. 29, Second Floor, B-Wing,
Loknayak Bhavan, Khan Market,
New Delhi-10003 the 19th March, 2001
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subject: Non-furnishing of Utilisation Certificates by sanctioning authorities
in the Ministries/Departments to Controller of Accounts in
respect of grants released upto September 1997 becoming due upto
March 1999.
Attention of Ministries/Departments is invited to Para 4.8 of C&AG's Report
No. 1 of 2000 for the year ended 31.3.1999 wherein C&AG had adversely commented
upon the tendency of Ministries/Departments releasing fresh grants to statutory
bodies, NGOs, etc. without ensuring that previous grants were utilised for the purpose
for which they were sanctioned. A number of communications have been issued at
the level of Secretary (Expenditure), Controller General of Accounts emphasising on
the need for devising a time bound action plan to obtain outstanding UCs, from the
recipient institutions. In those communications it had also been pointed out that
non-recipient of UCs before releasing fresh grants was now a subject matter of PIL
(CWP No. 6413 of 2000) before the Hon'ble High Court Delhi. Interim directions of
the Hon'ble High Court in the aforesaid PIL have also been conveyed demi-officially.
these interim directions dated 24.10.2000 and 18.12.2000 respectively are being
reiterated, as under:
"Considering the submission made we feel it would be appropriate if no fresh
grants are released unless Utilisation Certificates for the previous grant/grants are
furnished."
"It is stated by learned Additional Solicitor General that our direction regarding
non-release of grants without utilisation certificates is being given effect to. We feel
that considering the quantum of funds involved and the possibility of non-utilisation
of funds for the purposes they are granted, it would be appropriate if the concerned
Ministries make periodical checks to be satisfied about genuineness of the
organisations to whom such grants are being made. That would be in addition to the
utilisation certificates to be submitted by the organisations. The concerned Ministries
shall also examine if further checks could be made in this regard and the modalities
to be adopted for such purpose. This would ensure that the funds are utilised for
the purpose for which they are released."
The Audit para coupled with the PIL makes it imperative that concerted effiorts
are made to obtain UCs and no fresh grant is released unless UCs in respect of the
140

141
earlier grants released have been obtained. Since the matter is now before the Hon'ble
High Court Delhi it is expedient to have the latest position of outstanding UCs so
that Hon'ble Court could be apprised of the progress made in that regard. Accordingly
Ministries/Departments are requested to furnish the information in the following
proforma as on 1st of every month beginning from 1.4.2001 so as to reach the
undersigned by 7th of the month positively.
No. of UCs Amount No. of UCs Amount No. of UCs Amount
Outstanding involved Received involved Outstanding involved in
at the end of (Rs. in (out of in respect as on respect of
March 1999 crores) those of Col. 3 1st---2001 Col. 5
(In respect of in Col. 1) (Rs. in (Rs. in
grants crores) crores)
released upto
Sept. 1997)
12 34 56
Name of officer/Section with telephone number, to be contacted for any clarification
be intimated while sending the information.
Sd/-
(T.S. NEGI)
UNDER SECRETARY TO THE GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
To
1. Financial Advisers/Joint Secretaries (Finance) of all the Ministries/Departments of
the GOI.
2. CCA, Atomic Energy, Mumbai
3. CCA, Department of Space, Bangalore
4. Director General of Audit, AGCR Building, New Delhi
5. Financial Commissioner, Ministry of Railways (Railway Board), New Delhi
6. Member (Finance) Deptt. of Post/Telecom, Dak.Sanchar Bhavan, New Delhi
Copy forwarded for similar action to all the Ministries/Departments of the GOI.

CHAPTER—III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM GOVERNMENT
-NIL-
142

CHAPTER—IV
OBSERVA TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH
REQUIRE REITERATION.
-NIL-
143

CHAPTER—V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
-NIL-
NEW D ELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
19 July, 2005 Chairman,
28 Asadha 1927(Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
144

APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/ Conclusions & Recommendations/
No. No. Department Observations
1. 14 Finance T aking into consideration the large scale
unspent provisions of Rs. 44231.22 crore
under various Grants/Appropriations
operated by the Civil Ministries/Departments
during the year 1996-97, the Committee in their
Original Report, had desired the Ministry of
Finance to look into this recurring malady and
find suitable measures so that such unspent
balances are kept to the barest minimum. The
Committee had observed that unspent
provisions was a recurring feature and the
amount involved ran into thousands of crores.
The Committee had also observed that there
were as many as 27 voted Grants/Charged
Appropriations operated by the Civil
Ministries/Departments under which unspent
provisions of Rs. 100 crore or more had
occurred during the year 1996-97 and large
unspent provisions were identified in areas
like Agriculture, Chemicals and Fertilizers,
Health and Family Welfare, Education,
Industry, Rural Areas and Employment, Urban
Affairs and Employment and Water
Resources. Consequently, the Committee had
recommended that before funds are
earmarked, the developmental schemes
should be assessed realistically in the light
of ground realities as well as the achievability
of targets within the stipulated time. The
Action Taken Note furnished by the Ministry
of Finance in response to the specific
recommendation of the Committee however,
reveals that the Ministry have once again
issued routine instructions to all the
Ministries/Departments urging them to
carefully formulate developmental plans/
schemes and also to make realistic assessment
of funds required for such developmental
schemes.
145

146
The Committee would further like to
point out that the scrutiny of Appropriation
Accounts (Civil) for the six years i.e.  from
1997-98 to 2002-2003, reveals that large scale
unspent provisions under the Grants/
Appropriations operated by the Civil
Ministries/Departments has become an
almost recurring feature and the position is
still to be improved. The Committe are inclined
to conclude that the concerned Ministries/
Departments have not made any serious
attempt to apply effective corrective measures
in accordance with the Committee's
recommendations. Mere repeating of
instructions by the Ministry of Finance to
concerned Ministries/Departments carry no
meaning unless the reasons for extraordinarily
large unspent provisions are investigated and
suitable remedial steps taken as a result
thereof to ensure that the budgetary
projections are made on the basis of realistic
assessment. It is also imperative to ensure
that available funds are utilised timely and
appropriately so that unspent funds are kept
to the barest minimum. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that the Ministry of
Finance, being the nodal Ministry, should
impress upon all the concerned Ministries/
Departments to make a thorough study of the
cases where large scale unspent provisions
have occurred and lay down appropriate
guidelines for being followed by them in this
regard. The Committee would like to be
apprised of the efforts made in this direction.
2. 25 Finance The Committee had taken a serious view of
the irregularities such as irregular surrender
of long unspent balances, unutilisation of
supplementary grants, injudicious re-
appropriation of funds, rush of expenditure in
the month of March etc. made by the Civil
Ministries/Departments during 1996-97. The
Government were asked to ensure that the
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations & Recommendations/
No. No. Department Observations

147
Financial Advisors and the Heads of
Ministries/Departments are made jointly
accountable for delay in timely surrender of
unspent provisions, the powers and functions
of the Financial Advisors be reviewed
appropriately to prevent wrongful/injudicious
re-appropriation of  funds and to hold
monthly review meetings to monitor even flow
of expenditure to avoid rush of expenditure
in March etc. The Committee are constrained
to point out that instead of taking the action
as desired by them, the Ministry of Finance
have furnished routine replies. The replies
contain similar details that the Committee's
observations and recommendations have
been noted, fresh instructions have been
issued to all the Ministries/Departments and
Financial Advisors have been instructed to
follow them scrupulously. Further, it has been
contended that the existing procedure laid
down in the General Financial Rules is fairly
adequate to take care of both savings and
their surrender under the V oted Grants/
Charged Appropriations. If these measures
are considered adequate, the Committee find
it difficult to comprehend as to why the
irregularities continue to exist. The Committee
feel that mere issuing of instructions is not
enough and they would like to know from the
Ministry of Finance whether any concrete
measures have been contemplated in this
regard so that the aforesaid irregularities do
not recur. The Committee also desire that the
powers and functions of the Financial
Advisors of the concerned Ministries may be
reviewed appropriately to prevent wrongful/
injudicious re-appropriations. At the same time
it may also be ensured that a procedure is
devised so as to avoid rush of expenditure in
March and thereby bringing about fiscal
discipline. The Committee hope that the
Ministry would at least now take cognizance
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations & Recommendations/
No. No. Department Observations

148
of the Committee's recommendations with
seriousness and urgency that they deserve.
The Committee would like to be apprised of
the concrete steps taken in this regard and
the impact thereof on the existing set up.
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations & Recommendations/
No. No. Department Observations

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2005-2006) HELD ON 15 JULY , 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1250 hrs. on 15 July, 2005 in Room
No. "139", Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Dr. M. Jagannath
4. Shri Brajesh Pathak
5. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
6. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
7. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
8. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
9. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
10. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
11. Shri R.K. Dhawan
12. Dr. K. Malaisamy
13. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
14. Prof. R.B.S. V erma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
2. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Officers of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri V .N. Kaul — Comptroller and Auditor-General
2. Ms. Mohua Chatterjee — ADAI
3. Smt. Sudha Krishnan — Pr. Director (Direct Taxes)
4. Shri P. Sesh Kumar — Pr. Director (RC)
149

150
Representatives of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
1. Shri K.M. Chandrasekhar — Secretary (Revenue)
2. Shri Berjinder Singh — C hairman (CBDT)
3. Shri Sudhakar Mishra — Member (A&J)
4. Shri M.S. Darda — Member (P)
5. Shri J.G. Pendse — Member (Investigation)
6. Shri K. Rangabhashyam — Member (R)
7. Shri Shibaji Dash — Member (IT)
8. Smt. M.H. Kherawala — Member (L)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee welcomed the members
of the Committee and Audit Officials. The Committee then took up for consideration
the following two draft reports:—
(i) ***
(ii) Draft Report on Action taken on the recommendations contained in
16th Report of Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha) relating to "Union
Government Appropriation Accounts (Civil)—1996-97".
3. The Committee adopted the draft reports without any modifications/amendments.
4. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise the draft reports in the light
of changes, if any arising out of the factual verification by Audit and present the
same to Parliament.
5. ***
6. ***
The Committee then adjourned.
MGIPMRND—1694LS—30.8.2005

Annexure-IV
Annexure-IV Statement showing progress of expenditure where the entire provision remained unutilised during 96-97.
Name of schemeBE 96-97Actual BE 97-98Actual BE 98-99Actual BE 99-2000Actual BE 2000-01Actual BE 2001-02Actual
Expen. Expen. Expen. Expen. Expen. Expen. Expen.
2225
01.277.04Coaching & allied scheme0.01 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.10 0.00 0.05 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.10 0.00
01.277.08Book Banks0.07 0.00
01.277.02 Boys hostels 0.15 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 1.15 1.10 0.80 0.80 0.35 5.00 4.45
01.277.11Prematric scholarship for SCs0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00
01.277.12Liberatin & Rehabiln. Of Scavengers0.20 0.00The allocation and expenditure has been indicated in
New headl of Account
Grants in aid to National Scheme
of Liberatin & Rehabilitation of
01.800.25scavengers0/0090.01 120.00 90.00 90.00 5.90 70.00 70.00 67.50 60.92 74.00 8.21
01.277.14Girls hotels for SCs1.00 1.00 0.01 0.00 1.00 1.00 0.02 0.87 0.60 0.60 5.00 4.45
01.800.24Interest Subsidy for NSPDC4.25 0.00
02.001.01National Commission for STs0.93 0.00 0.65 0.00 0.65 0.00Scheme transferred to Ministry of Tribal Affairs
02.794SCA to TSP1.45 0.00 2.00 1.47 2.00 1.33Scheme transferred to Ministry of Tribal Affairs
02.277.04Girls hostels for STs0.25 0.00 0.40 0.00 0.40 0.00Scheme transferred to Ministry of Tribal Affairs
02.277.03Boys hostels STs0.25 0.00 0.40 0.00 0.40 0.00Scheme transferred to Ministry of Tribal Affairs
02.300.08Establishment of Ashtram School0.20 0.00 0.40 0.00 0.40 0.00Scheme transferred to Ministry of Tribal Affairs
02.800.11 Vocational training in tribal areas0.15 0.00 0.25 0.00 0.25 0.20Scheme transferred to Ministry of Tribal Affairs
80.800.08Maulana Azad education Foundation0.01 0.00 40.00 40.00 30.00 3.75 5.00 3.15 2.85 2.85 21.00 3.00
2235
02.001.06O/O Chief Commissioner for handi0.10 0.00 1.00 0.000.00 0.120.50 0.33 1.00 0.27 0.90 0.73
02.101.10Employment of handicapped0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.02 0.03 0.10 0.02 0.08 0.05
02.101.10.12 National Trust for Mentally1.25 0.00 1.25 0.00 1.25 0.00 10.00 4.00 44.00 44.00 37.80 51.00
Retarded and Cerebral Paisy
02.101.10.13 National Rehabilitation Programmes1.50 0.00 0.05 0.00 15.00 0.00 5.00 5.00 43.00 55.52 39.25 43.61
02.101.10.14 Indian Spinal Injury Centre0.05 0.00 2.00 1.96 3.00 3.30 7.00 5.43 2.25 2.30 2.02 2.07
02.101.10.15 Scheme for implementation of0.05 0.00 15.00 0.00 2.98 0.00 3.50 3.50 11.75 4.01 12.37 8.70
Persons with Disability Act

02.102.22Services for Children in Need of Care &0.05 0.00The scheme has been dropped
Protection in Assam
02.106.02Prevention & Control of Juvenile0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.05 0.00 0.05 0.01 0.05 0.01 0.04 0.00
Maladjustment
02.798.03Contribution to Funds of UN0.02 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00Scheme dropped
Decade for Disable Persons
02.200.08Scheme for Beggary Prevention0.01 0.00Scheme dropped
02.200.09.01 Indo forein cultural exch.0.02 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.01 0.00Scheme dropped
Programe
3601
Liberation & rehabilitation of
Scavengers
04.341.09Scavengers38.00 0.00Funds released under new head of account to release grants to State Sch. Castes Dev. Corporations
3602
4.341.04Girls hostels for SCs1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.20 0.00 0.50 0.00
04.359.01Employment of handicapped0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.02 0.22 0.10 0.09 0.08 0.08
Name of schemeBE 96-97Actual BE 97-98Actual BE 98-99Actual BE 99-2000Actual BE 2000-01Actual BE 2001-02Actual
Expen. Expen. Expen. Expen. Expen. Expen. Expen.

Annexure-V
Statement showing proress of expenditure in schemes where substantial savings occurred in 1996-97
SchemeBE96-97 ActualSaving BE 97-98ActualSaving BE 98-99ActualSaving BE 99-2000ActualSaving BEActualSaving BEActualSaving
Exp. Exp. Exp. Exp. 2000-01 Exp. 2000-02 Exp.
Secretarat7.60 6.56 -34 7.61 7.69-0.088.62 9.40-0.789.66 10.29-0.638.38 8.92-0.5410.38 10.35 0.03
Girls Hostels
UT Without Legislature1.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 0.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 0.00 0.02 0.87 -085 0.60 0.60 0.00 5.00 4.96 0.04
Assistance to V oluntary
Organisation for SCs17.33 10.00 7.33 20.00 10.03 9.97 18.00 18.01-0.0121.00 25.61-4.6126.00 22.47 3.53 30.00 29.00 1.00
Interest Subsidy for NSFDC4.25 0.00 425Scheme dropped from 97-98
Scheme for Pre-exam coaching
for weaker Section2.00 0.23 .72 2.50 0.82 1.68 2.00 2.24-0.242.50 2.46 0.04 2.50 2.73-0.232.50 3.04-0.54
Scholarship to students of SC/
ST & OBCs for studies abroad4.90 1.90 3.00 4.90 2.33 2.57 3.90 1.23 2.67 1.72 0.80 0.92 1.13 0.53 0.60 1.13 0.47 0.66
Aids & Appliances12.85 6.85 5.001 15.00 8.94 6.06 25.00 23.99 1.01 30.00 28.42 1.58 28.70 29.01-0.3142.41 43.44-1.03
National Trust for Mentally
Retarded and Cerebral Paisy1.25 0.00 225 1.25 0.00 1.25 1.25 0.00 1.25 10.00 4.00 6.00 44.00 44.00 0.00 37.80 51.00-13.20
National Rehabilitation
Programme for Handicapped1.50 0.00 .50 0.05 0.00 0.05 15.00 0.00 15.00 5.00 5.00 0.00 43.00 55.52-12.5239.25 43.61-4.63
Education work for
prohibition & Drug abuse14.66 9.64 5.02 17.50 11.52 5.98 16.00 15.13 0.87 20.00 19.03 0.97 18.50 20.64-2.1420.25 22.50-2.25
Assistance to V oluntary
Organisation for Old age homes2.00 12.50 6.14 6.36 15.00 7.75 7.25 15.00 10.80 4.20 9.00 12.36-3.3613.50 14.61-1.11
Book banks2.93 1.77 161 2.60 1.42 1.18 2.60 1.12 1.48 2.35 2.35 0.00 2.35 2.42-0.071.85 2.87-1.02
Machinery for PCR Act15.16 12.21 2.97 15.14 16.13-0.9915.14 15.14 0.00-24.2024.20 0.00 26.00 26.53-0.5328.50 29.49-0.99
Liberation & rehabilitation of
Scavengers88.00 0.00 53.00 120.00 30.00 90.00 5.90 84.10 70.00 0.00 67.50 60.92 6.58 74.00 8.21 65.79