36
ASSESSMENT OF PRIV ATE
SCHOOLS, COLLEGES AND
COACHING CENTRES
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2006-2007
THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
Server5\3311ls\3311ls1.P65

THIRTY-SIXTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
ASSESSMENT OF PRIVATE SCHOOLS,
COLLEGES AND COACHING CENTRES
[Action Taken on 14th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(14th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(Department of Revenue)
Presented  to Lok Sabha  on.............
Laid in Rajya Sabha on......................
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
December, 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1821
Price : Rs. 37.00
© 2006 B Y LOK S ABHA S ECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India
Press, Minto Road, New Delhi - 110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2006-2007) .................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report...........................................................................................    1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations that have been accepted
by Government.......................................................................... 6
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government................................................................................ 20
C
HAPTER IV Observations / Recommendations  replies  to which have
not  been  accepted  by the Committee and which require
reiteration .............................................................................. 21
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of  which
Government have furnished interim replies/no replies....... 26
PART - II
      Minutes of  the  Fifteenth Sitting  of Public  Accounts
      Committee (2006-07) held on 16.11.2006................................. 27
APPENDIX
      Statement of Observations and Recommendations............. 29
Server5\3311ls\3311ls.P65

(iii)
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006 - 2007)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra —Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
  4. Shri R.L. Jalappa
 5. Shri Raghunath Jha
 6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Prof. M. Ramadass
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Mohan Singh
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri K.V. Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
SECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Assistant Director

(v)
INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee,
do present this 36th  Report on action taken by Government on the recommendations
of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 14th Report (14th Lok Sabha)
on “Assessment of Private Schools, Colleges and Coaching Centres ”.
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee
at their sitting held on 16th November, 2006. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of
the Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of
the Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the
Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
 N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA
17 November, 2006 Chairman,
26 Kartika, 1928 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

CHAPTER I
REPORT `
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by Government on
the Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in their Fourteenth
Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Chapter-III of the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India for the year ended 31 March, 2003 (No. 13 of 2004), Union
Government (Direct Taxes-System Appraisal) relating to “Assessment of Private
Schools, Colleges and Coaching Centres”.
2. The Fourteenth Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 13 August,
2005 contained 20 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes in
respect of all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) and are broadly categorized as
follows:—
(i) Recommendations and Observations which have been accepted by the
Government;
Paragraph Nos. 92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 99, 101, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106, 107,
109, 110 and 111.
(ii) Recommendations and Observations which the Committee do not desire
to pursue in the light of replies received from Government;
-Nil-
(iii) Recommendations and Observations replies to which have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration;
Paragraph Nos. 98, 100 and 108
(iv) Recommendations and Observations in respect of which the Government
have furnished interim replies.
-Nil-
3. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry on the various
Observations/Recommendations of the Committee contained in the Report have been
reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. In the succeeding paragraphs,
the Committee deals with the action taken by Government on some of their
recommendations.
Assessment of Private Schools, Colleges and Coaching Centres
4. The Original Report on the subject was based on the Audit review of the
taxation policy in respect of private educational institutions, schools, colleges and
coaching centres run by charitable trusts or by private management, in order to
assess the effectiveness of implementation of the taxation policy effective from

2
1st April, 1999 which laid down that exemption of income of private educational
institutions should be granted only after ensuring genuineness of their activities
and compliance with the conditions specified in the relevant Income Tax Provisions.
5. The Committee’s examination of the subject had revealed a number of
irregularities in the assessment of the private educational institutions as well as
deficiencies in the proper implementation of tax laws which resulted in substantial
revenue loss to the Government.
Non-availability of database of Educational Institutions (Paragraph 98)
6. In their Original Report, the Committee had observed that a large number of
private schools, colleges and coaching centres have come up whose income is not
so exempt from levy of income tax. There is also no systematic and organised
approach in the Department to ensure that all private educational institutions, which
are required to fulfil certain obligations under the Act to claim the exemptions are,
in fact, doing so before claiming the tax benefit.  For this there was not any centralized
arrangement in the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance to have an up-to-
date database in respect of private educational institutions and coaching centres.
The Committee had expressed their anguish that the Ministry of Finance, with large
resources at their command, had not made any effort to identify the total assesses
in the country by having effective co-ordination with the State Governments/
Universities/other regulatory authorities which had resulted in substantial revenue
loss to the exchequer. The Committee had consequently asked the Ministry to create
a reliable database within four months of the presentation of this Report.
7. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), in their Action Taken Note
have stated that inserting the names of the approved/exempted institutions in the
database will involve the Board, the field authorities and the DIT (Exemption) and
DGIT (Systems). Necessary steps in this regard are underway. According to the
Ministry, necessary directions to the field formations have been issued, the CsIT
(CIB) have been directed to prepare a database in respect of educational institutions,
update the same periodically and furnish the database to the jurisdictional Chief
Commissioner of Income Tax and DGIT (Exemption).
8. Considering the fact that there was no systematic and organised approach
in the Department to ensure that all private educational institutions, which were
required to fulfil certain obligations under the Act to claim exemptions, were in
fact doing so, the Committee had observed that this was possible only when there
was reliable statistics of such institutions with them. They had therefore, desired
that the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) to create an appropriate
database within four months of the presentation of their Report. In their reply, the
Ministry have merely stated that necessary steps in this regard are underway and
necessary directions to the field formations have been issued without indicating
when such directions were issued and what has been the outcome thereof. Evidently,
the Ministry have not made any substantial headway in this regard, which is
regrettable. The Committee emphasise that the Ministry should ensure that
directions issued in this regard result in creation of desired database without any
further delay. They would like to be apprised of the latest position in this regard.

3
Survey Operations (Paragraph 100)
9. In their earlier Report, the Committee had observed that adequate steps had
not been taken by the concerned authorities to bring all the private schools, colleges
and coaching centres into the tax net through adequate and focused use of the
powers to conduct surveys. Expressing their deep concern over the inefficient
utilization of the power of survey given to the assessing officers under sections
133A and 133B of the Act to survey the business premises of the taxpayers to locate
assesses and unearth unaccounted income, the Committee had desired to be apprised
of the details of the cases, which were brought under the tax net during the preceding
two years, as a result of the efforts initiated by them alongwith the number of new
assessees that have been brought to tax net and the amount of additional revenue
realized from them.
10. In their Action Taken Note furnished to the Committee on the aforesaid
recommendation of the Committee, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
stated as follows:—
“The result of surveys conducted on educational institutions by the field
formations is as under:—
Financial Year No. of Surveys No. of new assesses Additional revenue
conducted identified realized (in Rs. Lac)
2002-03 24 1 77.29*
2003-04 27 5 256.13*
2004-05 37 4 25.61*
* Figures are provisional as assessments in all the cases are not yet complete”
11. The Committee are dismayed that even after nine months of the presentation
of the original Report to Parliament, the Ministry have not been able to compile
and provide figures of actual revenue realized as a result of surveys conducted
from 2002-03 to 2004-05. They have given only provisional figures in this regard.
The Ministry have conceded that assessments have not been completed in all the
cases. The Committee regret to observe that the Ministry have been lax on this
count and requisite urgency has not been shown by them. The Committee are of
the view that by now, the Ministry should have been in a position to furnish complete
and conclusive such information. The Committee would therefore desire that
assessment in all the cases should be completed at the earliest and they be informed
of the actual additional revenue realized from the new assessees that have been
brought to tax net as a result of survey operations.
Further, as regards the figures submitted by the Ministry, the Committee
regret to note that only four new assessees have been identified out of 37 surveys
conducted during the Financial year 2004-05 and the additional revenue realized
during the same Financial year is only Rs. 25.61 lakh from 37 surveys conducted
as against the total amount of Rs. 256.13 lakh from 27 surveys conducted during

4
the Financial Y ear 2003-04. Evidently, no progress has been made by the income–
tax authorities in identifying the new assessees and in collection of additional
revenue from the surveys conducted during the year 2004-05. Surprisingly, the
surveys conducted by the Income Tax Department of late have not been yielding the
desired results. Such a below-par performance is more glaring, considering the
fact that the private schools, colleges and other educational institutions have
consistently been collecting huge fees and other charges from the students. The
Committee cannot but take a serious view of the inaction of the Income Tax
Department  to unearth undisclosed income of private educational institutions. The
Committee would now like the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue), to
closely monitor these operations at the highest level, with a view to realising the
potential tax from these institutions. At the same time, the Committee would like
to emphasise the need for effective tax deterrence against the rampant commercial
exploitation of education in the country by various institutions.
Inadequacies in Law (Paragraph 108)
12. In Paragraph 108 of the Original Report, the Committee had observed that
the laws providing tax exemption to educational institutions suffer from various
inadequacies, for instance:
(i) the new provisions enacted under Section 10(23C)(iiiab)/ (iiiad) do not yet
provide any monitoring mechanism for checking the genuineness of
activities of institutions claiming exemptions;
(ii) there is no mechanism to ensure that the institutions could claim exemption
only under section 11 and 12 or 10 (23C) (vi) of the Act;
(iii) there is no time limit for granting approvals under clause 10(23C) (vi) and
nothing has been specified as to how in the absence of approval, exemption
of income during that period is to be regulated;
(iv) there is no provision in the case of exemption under Section 10(23C) (vi)
to furnish the audited accounts with audit certificate along with returns of
income;
(v) no monitoring mechanism currently is available to monitor the investment
of unutilised surplus of the institutions u/s 11(5) of the Act.
13. While observing that the existing tax laws are already very complex, the
Committee had urged the Department of Revenue to make them simpler and clearer
in consultation with the Ministry of Law and to plug the lacunae, if any, in the law.
 14. In their Action Taken Note submitted to the Committee, the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) have stated as follows:
“Several changes have been proposed through the Taxation Laws
(Amendment) Bill, 2005 to remove inadequacies in the laws providing tax
exemptions to educational institutions. Entities covered under section 10
(23C)(iiiad) and (iiiae) will be mandatorily required to file their returns of
income. This will enable the department to monitor the genuineness of

5
activities of the institutions claiming exemptions. A time limit of one year
has been proposed for disposal of applications for approvals/notifications
for entities referred to in sections 10(23C)(iv)(v)(vi) and (via). Further it is
proposed these entities will have to get their accounts audited by an
Accountant and file the report of such audit along with their returns of
income. The Bill was referred to the Standing Committee on Finance which
presented its report to the Lok Sabha on 12/12/2005. The Bill is yet to be
passed by the Parliament.
The exercise to simplify the Income Tax Act is currently under way and the
suggestions/recommendations of the Committee regarding simplification
including the suggestion regarding merging the two streams of exemptions,
have been forwarded to the Expert Group for their consideration.
In respect of the Committee’s observation that there is no time limit for
granting approvals under clause 10(23C)(vi) and nothing has been specified
as to how in the absence of approval, exemption of income during that
period is to be regulated, it is stated that an assessee can claim exemption
either u/s 10(23C)(vi) of the Act for an assessment year, then it may claim
exemption u/s 11 to 13 of the Act, subject to fulfilment of conditions
prescribed therein. Otherwise, its income shall be taxable.
In respect of the Committee’s observation that no monitoring mechanism
currently is available to monitor the investment of unutilized surplus of
the institutions u/s 11(5) of the Act, it is stated that, as per the provisions
of the Act, this surplus is to be utilized for educational purposes only. The
assessee is supposed to file its tax return every year with the copy of
audited balance sheet. This return is subject to scrutiny and in case of
any violation, the assessee may not be allowed exemption and even the
registration granted may be cancelled”.
15. While observing that separate yet overlapping clauses in the Income Tax
Act providing exemption under section 10(23C) and Sections 11 and 12 of the Act
are being misused by private educational institutions, the Committee in their earlier
Report, had recommended that the existing tax laws should be made simpler and
clearer in consultation with the Ministry of Law and the lacunae in the law, if any,
should be plugged suitably. In this regard, the Ministry vide their Action Taken
Note have informed that necessary enabling changes have been brought in the
statute through the Taxation Laws Amendment Act, 2005.  With regard to the
simplification of the existing tax laws, the Ministry have stated that the exercise
to simplify the Income Tax Act is currently underway and the suggestions of the
Committee to merge the provisions [Sections 11, 12 and 10 (23C) (vi)] governing
tax exemptions for educational institutions have been forwarded for consideration
to the Expert Group constituted for this purpose. The Committee desire that the
Expert Group should be impressed upon to consider the matter expeditiously and
submit its findings at the earliest. They would also like to be apprised about the
findings of the Expert Group and the consequential action taken by the Government
thereon.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS AND OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee note that the bulk of assessments of private schools, colleges
and charitable trusts are by and large completed in a summary manner, which is not
desirable. The Committee would like to point out that unless cases involving
assessments of educational institutions are identified and adequate number are
selected for scrutiny, the department will have no means to ensure effective
compliance of tax laws in such cases. The Chairperson, CBDT conceded during
evidence that 98 per cent of cases are completed on the basis of returns filed by
assessee and about two percent of the cases are picked up for scrutiny. The
Committee have now been informed that guidelines have been issued on 20.9.2004
to pick up all the cases where exemption is claimed under section 11 of the Income
Tax Act and the gross receipt exceeds Rs. 5 crore for scrutiny assessment. Besides,
a residual clause has been inserted to enable the field officers to select any other
case for scrutiny with the prior approval of the Chief Commissioner of Income Tax
(CCIT) concerned. The Committee would like to point out that the Ministry should
have considered these steps prior to being pointed out by Audit. Considering the
very fact that large revenue potential exist in assessment of all eligible private
educational institutions, the Committee recommend that not only the guidelines
issued by the Department in this regard should be followed scrupulously but
discretion should also be allowed to the assessing/supervisory officers to randomly
pick up cases for scrutiny so as to prevent these institutions from evading the
payment of their legitimate dues to the Government.
[Sl. No. 8 of Appendix II, Para 99 of the 14th Report of PAC (2005-2006)—
14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
 The latest guidelines for F.Y . 2005-06 for selection of cases for scrutiny issued
by the CBDT specifically provide for selection of cases of universities and other
educational institutions where the aggregate annual receipts is more than Rs. 10
crore in Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Pune, Hyderabad, Bangalore and
Ahmedabad (Rs. 5 crore in other places) in respect of institutions approved
u/s 10 (23C) of the I.T. Act, 1961.
A clause providing for scrutiny of cases falling under Section 11 having gross
receipts exceeding Rs. 5 crores already exists in the scrutiny guidelines for non-
corporate assesses for F.Y . 2005-06.
6

7
The guidelines also include a residuary clause which provides for selection of
cases not otherwise covered by various selection criteria, with the approval of the
CCIT/DGIT concerned on the basis of specific reasons to be recorded in writing. A
copy of these guidelines is enclosed.
[Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
O.M. No. F.No. 241/2/2005-A & PAC.II dt. 01-5-2006]
PROCEDURE FOR SELECTION OF CASES FOR ''SCRUTINY'' FOR
NON-CORPORATE ASSESSEES
In supersession of earlier Instructions on the above subject, the Board hereby
lays down the following procedure for selection of returns/cases of Non-Corporate
Assessees for Scrutiny during the current financial year, i.e. 2005-06.
2. The following categories of cases shall be compulsorily scrutinized:—
(a) All assessments pertaining to Search & Seizure cases.
(b) All assessments pertaining to Surveys conducted u/s 133A of the I.T. Act.
(c)* All returns where deduction claimed under Chapter VIA of the I.T. Act is
Rs. 10 lakh or above in Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Pune, Hyderabad,
Bangalore and Ahmedabad; and Rs. 5 lakh or above in other places.
(d)* (i) All returns where refund claimed is Rs. 10 lakh or above in Delhi,
Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Puna, Hyderabad, Bangalore and
Ahmedabad and Rs. 5 lakh or above in other places.
(ii) In cases of non-residents, the refund limit for selecting a case for
scrutiny shall be decided by the DGIT (International Taxation).
(e) All cases wherein addition/disallowance sustained by the CIT (Appeal)
in the appeals decided during the financial year 2004-05 amounts to
Rs. 5 lakh or above in Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Puna,
Hyderabad, Bangalore and Ahmedabad and Rs. 1 lakh or above in other
places.
(f)* All returns filed by local authorities assessable to income tax.
(g) All cases of banks and Non-banking financial institutions with deposits
of Rs. 5 crore and above.
(h) Cases of universities, educational institutions, hospitals, nursing homes
and other institutions for rehabilitation of patients (other than those,
which are substantially financed by the Government), the aggregate
annual receipts of which exceed Rs. 10 crore in  Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai,
Kolkata, Puna, Hyderabad, Bangalore and Ahmedabad and Rs. 5 crore
in other places. [Ref. S. 10 (23C) & Rule 2BC].
* Selection of cases under these criteria {para 2(c), (d) and (f)} shall not be done manually in
60 cities on computer network but through Computer Assisted Scrutiny System (CASS), for
which, necessary provisions have been made in the CASS software being issued by Directorate
of Income Tax (Systems).

8
(i) All cases where exemption is claimed under section 11 of I.T. Act and
the gross receipts exceed Rs. 5 crore.
(j) All cases where total value of International Transactions (as defined
u/s 92B of the I.T. Act) exceeds Rs. 5 crore.
(k) All cases of stockbrokers (including sub-brokers) where brokerage
received is disclosed at Rs. 50 lakh or above and income declared is
less than 10% of such brokerage.
(l) All cases of stockbrokers (including sub-brokers) where there are claims
of bad debts of Rs. 5 lakh or more.
(m) All cases of professionals with gross receipts of Rs. 50 lakh or more
and income declared is less than 20% of gross professional receipts.
(n) All cases of deduction under sections 10A and/or 10B of the I.T. Act
with export turnover exceeding Rs. 5 crore.
(o) All cases of contractors whose gross contractual receipts exceed
Rs. 2 crore and net income declared is less than 5% of gross contractual
receipts.
3. Where a case does not fall in the categories specified at para 2 above but
the CCIT/DGIT (International Taxation)/DGIT (Exemptions), of his own motion or
on the matter having been brought to his notice by an authority below, is satisfied
that the case needs to be taken up for scrutiny, the CCIT/DGIT (International
Taxation)/DGIT (Exemptions), for reasons to be recorded in writing, may direct the
Assessing Officer to take up the case for scrutiny.
4. The CCIT/DGIT (International Taxation)/DGIT (Exemptions), may issue
suitable guidelines for reducing/increasing the number of cases selected under
specific clauses of para 2, for proper management of the workload as well as to
avoid large scale transter of cases from one jurisdiction to another.
5. All returns filed in response to notice issued u/s 148, of the I.T. Act shall be
selected for scrutiny.
6. In addition to above, selection of cases out of returns processed on AST
will be made through a Computer Assisted Scrutiny System (CASS). The selection
will be made centrally at RCCs on the basis of selection criteria determined by the
Board. Separate instructions in this regard will be issued by the DIT (Systems).
7. Lists of cases picked up for scrutiny during each month shall be submitted
by the Assessing Officer to the CIT and Addl. CIT, Range by 15th of the following
month.
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee note that an educational institution existing solely for
educational purposes and not for the purpose of profit and whose aggregate annual
receipts exceed Rs. One crore is required to obtain an approval from the prescribed

9
authority for claiming exemption of income. With effect from 1 April, 1997, every
trust needed to obtain registration to become eligible to claim exemption of income
under sections 11 & 12. The assessee has to make an application for registration to
the CIT either before 1st July, 1973 or within one year from the date of creation of
trust. If application is made after expiry of the aforesaid period, the Commissioner
on reasonable grounds may condone the delay. Every order granting or refusing
registration shall be passed before the expiry of six months from the end of the
month in which the application is received. These provisions indicate that
educational institutions run either by non trusts or trusts could claim exemption of
their income under both the sections 10(23C)(vi) and 11 & 12 according to their
convenience as these sections are not mutually exclusive in operation.
The Committee are constrained to point out that there is no system in the
Department at present to ensure that exemption of income is granted only to those
educational institutions which have obtained approval/registration from prescribed
authority. In support of this inadequacy a number of instances have been cited by
the Audit in the Paragraphs under review. The Committee are, therefore, not
convinced by the plea of the Department that the system of giving approvals is
rigid and meticulous and that every effort is made so that only genuine and non-
profit making institutions get approval.  The Committee have also been given to
understand that a number of suggestions under consideration of the Ministry in
this regard are that : (i) a clause may be inserted in Section 10(23) so as to provide
for mandatory audit of accounts and enclosing the audit report with the return of
income every year; (ii) Penalty u/s 271B may be made applicable to audit u/s 10(23C)
and 12A; and (iii) Institutions should apply to the Assessing Officer in the specified
form and specify the purpose for accumulation irrespective of the fact whether the
accumulation is 15% of more. According to the Ministry, Form No. 3A should also
be modified so as to include the nature of activity in the Return, if this information
is not given, the return may be treated as defective u/s 139(9); and include a column
for number & date for approval u/s 10(23C). Needless to say that these measures
now proposed by the Ministry should have been taken much earlier. The Committee
expect the Ministry to finalise these proposals and implement the same expeditiously.
[Sl. No. 10 of Appendix II, Para 101 of the 14th Report of PAC
(2005-2006)-14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
In the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005, it is proposed to make it mandatory
for funds and institutions of national importance or importance throughout State or
States referred to in Section 10 (23C)(iv), wholly public religious and charitable trusts
referred to in Section 10(23C)(v), universities and other educational institutions
referred to in Section 10(23C)(vi) and hospitals and other medical institutions referred
to in Section 10(23C)(via)  to get their accounts audited by an Accountant as defined
in the Explanation below sub-section 2 of section 288 of the Income Tax and file a
report of such audit along with their returns of income. The Bill was referred to the
Standing Committee on Finance which presented its report to the Lok Sabha
on 13/12/2005. The Bill is yet to be passed by the Parliament.

10
During the course of the budgetary exercise several suggestions relating to
the Taxation regime of the Charitable Trusts/institutions were examined with a view
to tightening this monitoring mechanism and preventing misuse of the relevant
provisions and the following decisions taken:
(1) With respect to the suggestion that Penalty u/s 271B may be made
applicable to audit u/s 10(23C) and 12A; it is decided that audited accounts are
required to be filed along with the return in terms of Section 12A and 139 (9) of the
Income Tax Act, 1961. If the Audit Report is not attached, the return is treated as
defective. If the defect is not rectified within the specified time, the return may be
treated as an invalid return and the provisions of the Act apply as if the assessee
failed to furnish the return. This provides for adequate deterrence and separate
penalty is not necessary.
(2) With respect to the suggestion 1 that Institutions should apply to the
Assessing Officer in the specified form and specify the purpose for accumulation
irrespective of the fact whether the accumulation is 15% or more, it is decided that
certain flexibility  is necessary to enable charitable trusts and institutions to
accumulate funds and apply the same according to the objectives.
(3) With respect to the proposal that Form No. 3A should also be modified so
as to include the nature of activity in the Return, if this information is not given,
the return may be treated as defective u/s 139(9), and include a column for number
and date for approval u/s 10(23C), it is stated that this suggestion is being examined.
After examination of all the suggestions, an amendment has been made vide
the Finance Bill, 2006 whereby anonymous donations made to wholly charitable
trusts and institutions other than religious trusts and religious Institutions shall be
charged to tax @ 30%, plus surcharge and education cess. Such donations made to
mixed purpose trusts or institutions i.e., both charitable as well as religious, will be
taxed only if such donations are for any educational or medical institution run by
the trusts or institutions.
[Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
O.M. No. F.No., 241/2/2005-A&PAC.II dt. 01-05-2006]
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee note that prior approval of prescribed authority is required for
claiming exemption of income by an educational institution existing solely for
educational purposes and not for the purpose of profit and whose aggregate annual
receipts exceed Rs. one crore. However, there is no time limit for granting such
approval or rejection under Section 10(23C) (vi) and there is no specific provision
for dealing with cases where applications are pending for approval for some reason.
The assessing officer is not competent to grant exemption of income in such cases
without approval of prescribed authority. Citing the examples of delay in grant or
rejection of approvals, the Audit noticed in Maharashtra charge, that as on 31 March,
2003, 103 cases were pending approval for exemption. Out of 103 cases, 88 were

11
pending with DIT (Exemption) Mumbai alone. Out of 88 pending cases, 24 were
pending for more than two years, 33 were pending for more than one year and
institutions were claiming exemption under section 10(23 C) (vi) without approval
of prescribed authority. Thus the objective of introducing the new provision 10(23C)
(vi) for grant of approval after examination of the genuineness of the activities of
such institutions has not been served. Keeping in view these shortcomings, the
Committee feel that there is no reason as to why appropriate legal provisions could
not be incorporated in the Act so as to specify a fixed time limit for disposal of
such applications. The proposal to fix the time limit is now stated to be under active
considereation of the Ministry. The Ministry have also assured to put the names of
the institutions, that have been granted registration/approvals, on their website.
The Committee would like to be informed of the precise steps taken in this regard.
They cannot but over emphasised that there should be an inbuilt system in the
Department to review these shortcomings noticed from time to time so as to
suo moto take suitable remedial measures without any delay.
[Sl. No 11 of Appendix II Para 102 of the 14th Report of
PAC(2005-2006)-14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
Vide the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005, a time limit of one year is
proposed to be provided for disposal of applications for notification under sections
10(23C)(iv) and (v) of the Act. A similar time limit will also be provided in Rule 2 CA
for disposal of applications for approval under Sections 10(23C) (vi) and (via) of
the Act once the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill is enacted. The Bill was referred
to the Standing Committee on Finance which presented its report to the Lok Sabha
on 13/12/2005. The Bill is yet to be passed by the Parliament.
In respect of putting the names of the approved/registered institutions on the
website, since tax exemption under section 11 and 10(23C) (vi) are not mutually
exclusive, the educational institutions can claim exemption in either section. Putting
the names of the approved/exempted institutions will involve the Board, the field
authorities and the DIT (Systems). Necessary steps in this regard are underway.
[Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
O.M. No. 241/2/2005-A & PAC.II dt. 01-05-2006]
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
Recommendation of the Committee
Chapter-III of the Audit Report on Assessment of Private Schools, Colleges
and Coaching Centers has highlighted the cases relating to exemption of income
without approval of prescribed authority in paras 3.17.1, 3.17.2 & 3.17.3; exemption
granted without registration in para 3.19; and exemptions granted without audited
accounts and audit reports in Para 3.24.1. In para nos. 3.17.1 to 3.17.3 two cases in
Karnataka region, thirteen cases in Tamil Nadu and three cases in Delhi region have
been reported which attracted non-levy of tax and interest of Rs. 36.79 crore. Similarly
in para 3.19, 37 cases in Assam, Bihar, Kerala, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa,

12
Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal charges have been identified where the
exemption of income without registration resulted in non-levy of tax of Rs. 3.54 crore.
In case of para 3.24.1, exemptions were reportedly granted without audited accounts
in 24 cases in Gujarat, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Orissa and Rajasthan, that led to
non-levy of tax of Rs.1.26 crore.
In respect of Para 3.17.1, the Committee note that failure on the part of the
Department to disallow exemption in the case of two assessees in Karnataka,
Bangalore Charge, viz. Desheeya Vidyashala Samithi, Shimoga and Education Society
of Sisters of St. Joseph of Cluny, Bangalore resulted in under assessment of income
totalling Rs. 81.32 lakh with consequent non-levy of total tax and interest of
Rs. 30.51 lakh. Although the annual aggregate receipts of the institutions crossed
Rs. one crore, they did not get themselves approved by the prescribed authority
under section 10(23C) (vi) or get recognized under Section 12A of the Act. Moreover,
the assessing officer exempted the income though he was not competent to do so.
The Committee feel that mere application u/s 10(23C)(vi) does not entitle an assessee
to exemption which can be allowed only on receipt of approval from competent
authority. The Ministry have explained that in these cases, the procedure for granting
of approvals could not be followed as the cases were summarily assessed u/s 143(1).
Regarding remedial steps taken to withdraw the exemption of income granted to
those institutions and to recover tax due from them, the Committee have been
informed that the proceedings u/s 148/147 have been initiated in both cases which
are likely to be completed by 31.03.2005. The tax demand and the interest thereon
according to the Ministry will be covered expeditiously thereafter. The Committee
regret to point out that the proceedings were made to wait till 31st March, 2005 for
completion, when the cases were already more than 3 year old. The Committee
recommended that the Ministry should put in place a suitable mechanism for
completion of remedial action on priority basis in similar cases, instead of waiting
till the last day of the Financial Year, so that the revenue could be realised faster.
[Sl. No 12 of Appendix II Para 103 of the 14th Report of
PAC(2005-2006)-14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
The recommendation has been considered and suitable instructions in this
regard have been incorporated in the New Instruction on Receipt Audit to be issued
shortly.
[Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue O.M.No.
F.No. 241/2/2005-A&PAC.II dt. 01-05-2006]
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
Recommendation of the Committee
In Tamil Nadu charge, seven  cases of educational Institutions run by trusts
were noticed, where no evidence was available  in the records regarding submission
of application by the assessees for approval under section 10(23C)(vi). In six other
cases, the concerned institutions had submitted applications, but the approvals of
the prescribed authority granting exemption was allowed by the assessing officer

13
in these cases without approval from prescribed authority. These cases attracted
levy of tax of Rs. 6.73 crore. Further, annual receipts of the institutions exceeded
the prescribed limit of Rs. one crore and they were required  to get approval
u/s 10(23C)(vi). Out of 13 cases, six assessees had applied for approval
u/s 10(23C)(vi), which were pending and assessing officers  were granting exemption
u/s 11 & 12. The Ministry have now informed  the Committee that the approval
u/s 10(23C)(vi) has since been granted in the case of Hindu Educational Organisation
in November, 2003. According to the Ministry  the notification u/s 10(23C)(vi) was
issued in the aforesaid case, though the income  was exempted u/s  11 of the Act.
The Committee would like to point out that the principle issue here  is availability
of alternate provisions, namely section 11/12 and Section 10(23C)(vi), in the statute
to the  assessees and the resultant redundancy of Section   10(23C)(vi), when
assessee could end up avoiding the rigours of detailed examination and prolonged
procedure  contemplated under Section  10(23) (vi) of the Act. The Committee feel
that since two separate  Clauses providing  exemption under section 10(23C), 11
and 12 overlap each other, these are being misused  by educational institutions,
apart from creating  flaws in their tax assessments. They,  therefore, recommend
that this deficiency should  be suitably resolved by necessary amendments in the
provisions or by introducing a single section/clause for exemption educational
institutions, whether run by trust or other than trusts. They further urge the
Ministry to strive in order to ensure that institutions flouting the legal requirement
with impunity should  be dealt sternly.
[Sl. No.  13 of Appendix II Para 104 of the 14th Report of
PAC (2005-2006)-14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
Amendment of the provisions of the Income-tax Act  to provide for a single
section/clause for exemptions of educational  institutions  whether run by trusts or
other than trusts  had been examined by the Ministry and  not found to be feasible.
The two streams of exemptions  have a very different  history  and evolution and
contain separate  conditions and regulations. Educational institutions covered under
section 10(23C) have traditionally enjoyed blanket exemptions whereas trusts  under
section 11 to 13 have had stringent conditions attached to them. Over the years,
several amendments  have been made  whereby some of the conditions relating
application and accumulation of income, investment of surplus auditing of accounts
and filling  of returns existing for trusts and institutions covered under sections 11
to 13 have been made applicable to educational institutions  covered by section
10(23C) 1. Since reform  in this area is an ongoing process, the recommendation of
the Committee will be kept in mind during this process.
[Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
O.M. No. F.No. 241/2/2005-A & PAC.II dt. 01-05-2006]
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
Recommendation of  the Committee
The Committee are distressed to find that irregular grant of exemption without
approval of DGIT/DIT in case of three educational institutions Oberoi Educational

14
Society, St. Joseph Academy and M/s DAV College Trust and Management Society,
run by trusts in Delhi DIT (Exemption) charge, resulted in non-levy of tax of
Rs. 23.35 lakh, Rs. 16.35 lakh and Rs. 29.36 crore respectively for the assessment
years 2000-2001 to 2002-03. In case of Oberoi Education Society, the Department
took almost three years to process the application under section 10(23C)(vi), which
was utlimately not approved. It was also found that the approval u/s 10(23C)(vi) in
all the cases has not yet been given and in the first two cases the matter is still
being investigated. The Committee are surprised that the Department took three
years to decide for grant of exemption  under section  10(23C)(vi) and rejection by
DG(IT), Kolkata in the case of Oberoi Education Society. Oberoi  Education Society
is a peculiar  case when the department took almost three years  to process the
application under section 10(23C)(vi) which has  ultimately not approved . Whereas,
there is no compulsion on the assessee to avail the exemption as it is free to invoke
section 11/12, being  a trust, there is no compulsion on the department  to finally
decide applicability  of section  10(23C)(vi), a provision that was specifically
introduced to ensure rigorous application of provisions for exemptions. What has
surprised the Committee is fact there is no mechanism available  within the
department to identify or link the cases of trusts  and those seeking exemption of
section 10(23C)(vi). The combined  effect of all these shortcomings is that a significant
provision of the Act, introduced with specific purpose, is not enforced. The
Committee feel that this needs to be seriously examined and suitable time limit
fixed for deciding cases of application u/s 10(23C)(vi) and penalizing such
institutions which do not follow the requirement instead of routinely allowing
exemption  u/s 11/12A.  From the foregoing, the  Committee are  constrained  to
observe that  loopholes  in enforcement of significant  provisions of the Act need
to be seriously examined and suitable  time limit fixed for deciding cases of application
u/s 10(23C)(vi). They feel that the very purpose of having a law is defeated, if it is
not implemented  earnestly. The Committee, therefore, desire that as and when such
cases  of illegal or irregular  exemptions come to the notice of the Department,
suitable punitive action should be taken expeditiously against the erring officials
without fear or favour, in order to prevent consequential loss to the exchequer.
[Sl. No. 14 of Appendix II Para 105 of the 14th Report
of the PAC (2005-2006)-14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Vide the Taxation  Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005, a time limit of one year is
proposed to be provided for disposal of  applications  for notification under sections
10(23C)(iv) and (v) of the Act. A similar  time limit will also be provided in Rule 2 CA
for disposal of applications for approval under  Sections 10(23C)(vi) and (via) of
the Act once the Taxation  Laws (Amendment) Bill is enacted. The Bill was referred
to the Standing Committee on Finance which presented  its report to the Lok Sabha
on 13/12/2005. The Bill is yet to be passed by the Parliament.
As regards  mechanism available  within the department to identify or link the
cases of trusts and those seeking exemption  of section 10(23C)(vi), there is automatic
linking as the Proforma report of the CIT/DIT(E) (prescribed by the CBDT vide
Instruction No. 1981 dated 5/4/2000) contains information about assessment history

15
u/s 11 of the Act in respect of the applicant which has applied for approval u/s
10(23C)(vi).
The Hon'ble  Committee's observation regarding action against erring  officials
have been noted for guidance & necessary action.
[Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue O.M.
No. F.No. 241/2/2005-A & PAC.II dt. 01-05-2006]
Ministry of Finance /Department  of Revenue
Recommendation of the Committee
With effect from 1st April, 1997, every trust is required to obtain registration to
become eligible to claim   exemption of income u/s 11 and 12. The test checks by
Audit has revealed  that in 37 cases falling in Assam, Bihar, Kerala, Maharashtra,
Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan, Tamil Nadu and West Bengal charges, where
educational institutions run by trusts had not obtained registration u/s 12A of the
Act; the assessing officers allowed exemption  under section 11 and 12 without
registration resulting in non-levy of tax of Rs. 3.54 crore. In their response, the
Ministry have stated that most of the cases were completed u/s 143(1) , wherein the
Assessing Officer could not have disturbed the declared income. Moreover, in  few
cases, the institutions had approvals under the  relevant clauses of section 10(23C)
and, thus there was no requirement to be  registered u/s 12A. The Ministry have
taken the stand that these sections are not mutually exclusive and are applicable to
educational institutions at the option of the assessee applicant. While  the Committee
desire that the Assessing Officers must ensure that eligible  assessees get registered
before claiming any exemption, they also feel that cases of trusts must be processed
u/s 11 & 12 that exclusively  deal with exemption   in respect of educational
institution run by Charitable Trusts and not under 10(23C) or 143(1) which do
not  bind them to get themselves registered before claiming exemptions.  The
Committee are also not impressed by the  assertion of the Ministry that the existing
system of granting registrations is a rigorous one and registration is granted only
after complete satisfaction of the statutory authorities, as the Ministry themselves
have  admitted that they have reopened the cases where the audit has objected
that the educational institutions run by trusts were allowed exemptions without
registration. The Committee, therefore, recommend that it should be ensured that
trusts that claim tax exemptions for running educational institutions invariably
get themselves registered.  Besides, they desire that all cases where exemptions
have been granted wrongly or illegally must be  proved with a view  to fixing
responsibility. The Committee would like to be  intimated about precise steps taken
in this direction.
[Sl. No. 15 of Appendix II Para 106 of the 14th Report
of PAC (2005-2006) — 14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
Under the present tax law, tax exemption under sections 11 and 10(23C) (vi) are
not mutually exclusive, the educational   institutions can claim exemption in either
section. While registration u/s 12A is a prerequisite for grant  of exemption u/s 11,
the same is not required for exemption u/s 10(23C)(vi). The authority for granting
registration under section  12A is DIT (Exemption)/CIT whereas the prescribed

16
authority  for approving the application under section 10(23C)(vi) is a higher
authority namely CCIT/DGIT. The purpose of granting registration under section
12A is to verify the genuineness of the activities of the institution and even for
approving the application  under section 10(23C)(vi) such verification is done.
Therefore, the observation of the Committee that exemption under section  10(23C)(vi)
is being claimed by the educational institutions without verification is incorrect.
Further, it is provided  under proviso to  section 143(3) that if, during the course of
assessment proceedings the Assessing Officer finds any contravention of the
provisions of section 10(23C)(vi), he may intimate  such contravention to the
prescribed authority and the prescribed authority can withdraw the approval granted.
Vide the Taxation Law (Amendment) Bill, 2005, it has been proposed to make
filing of returns mandatory by universities and other educational institutions having
aggregate annual  receipts below Rs. 1 crore referred to in Section  10(23C)(iiiad).
This will enable the Department to verify the activities of such entities as well. The
Bill was referred to the Standing Committee  on Finance which presented its report
to the Lok Sabha on 13/12/2005. The Bill is yet to be passed by the Parliament.
[Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
O.M. No. F.No. 241/2/2005-A & PAC.II dt. 01-05-2006]
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
Recommendation of the Committee
Where the total income of the turst  or institutions as computed under the Act
without giving effect to the provisions of Sections 11 and 12 exceeded Rs. 50
thousand in any previous year, the accounts of such trusts or institutions should
be audited for such accounting year and audit report filed in form 10B alongwith
the return of income for the relevant assessment year. The Committee note that
in 25 cases falling in Gujarat, Jharkhand, Maharashtra, Orissa and Rajasthan charges
the educational institutions run by the trusts for the assessment years 1999-2000 to
2001-2002 claimed exemption without furnishing audited accounts and audit reports.
According to the Committee non-compliance of the above provision required
withdrawal of exemptions in these cases and levy of tax of Rs. 1.26 crore. In
most of the cases according to the Ministry, the returns were processed under
Section 143(1) of the Income Tax Act and the assessing officers have no powers to
make adjustments in the income declared by the assessees. The Ministry have
admitted that there is no special mechanism to identify such errant edcuational
institutions, the existing system of scrutinizing returns is deterrent enough for
unscrupulous assesses to make such unlawful claims. The role of internal audit is
limited in these cases as the internal audit wing is required to see only 0.5% of all
the cases processed u/s 143(1). As such, 99.5% of such cases do not pass through
the audit scrutiny of the internal audit wing of the Department. The Committee  are
n ot aware whether the aforesaid cases have been selected for scrutiny by the
concerned authorities subsequent to the issue of audit observation. As the Ministry
have themselves admitted that there is no special mechanism in place. The
Committee need to be satisfied as to how the Ministry consider the existing system

17
of scrutinizing returns as adequate. The Committee would like to be informed, if
any, measures are contemplated to strengthen the system in this regard.
[Sl. No. 16 of Appendix II Para 107 of the 14th Report of
PAC (2005-2006)-14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
The scrutiny mechanism has been suitably modified by framing comprehensive
guidelines for selection of cases of diverse entities on the basis of specific  criteria,
selection of cases processed on the computer network through the Computer
Assisted Scrutiny System (CASS). Besides, discretion has been provided for
selection of any other case concerned where, on the basis of certain facts, it is
concerned necessary to select such case for scrutiny.
[Ministry of Finance/ Department of Revenue
O.M. No. F. No. 241/2/2005-A & PAC. II dt. 01-05-2006]
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee are  of the view that apart from earning income from educational
activities, several private institutions earn income by asking for donations/
contributions from their wards in the name of building fund, swimming pool
charges, calamity fund, poor fund etc. although it has been judicially held one case
of Unnikrishnan J.P. & Others Vs State of Andhra Pradesh & others, 1993 AIR 217B.
SCR(1) 594 that the educational institutions cannot charge more than the fees fixed
by the Government in any form, either as donation or capitation fees. The Committee
are convinced that there is no dearth of cases where big amount as donations are
taken before allowing admission of children in various schools. During evidence
the Committee had, therefore, desired that these funds should form a part of the
income of such institutions and be taxed and exemption should not be allowed on
such funds. The Ministry have subsequently agreed to consider the proposal and
take necessary suitable measures. The Committee would like to be intimated of the
precise steps taken in this regard.
[Sl. No. 18 of Appendix II Para 109 of the 14th Report of
PAC (2005-2006)-14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Unnikrishnan J.P . &  other  Vs State
of  Andhra Pradesh & others, 1993 AIR 217B, SCR (1) 594, has held that an
educational institution aided by the Government cannot charge more than the fees
fixed by the Government. However, in the same judgement the Hon'ble Supreme
Court has also held that in the case unaided private educational institution it may
not be insisted that they shall charge only that fee as is charged for similar courses
in the government institutions. Moreover the basic concept of granting exemption
to these institutions is that there should not be any private gain to any trustee/
member of the trust or society running the educational institution. Under the existing
provisions the private educational institution is allowed to generate surplus/profit
but the same should be used for educational purposes alone. Further, in the case of

18
section 10(23C), all donations are included in the income of the university or other
educational institution and in the case of trusts or institutions claiming exemption
under section 11, all donations other than donations to the corpus are included in
the total income.
Further, an amendment has been made vide the Finance Bill, 2006 whereby
anonymous donations made to wholly charitable trusts  and institutions other than
religious trusts and Institutions shall be charged to tax @ 30% plus surcharge and
education  cess. Such donations made to mixed purpose trusts or institutions i.e.
both charitable as well as  religious, will be taxed only if such donations are for any
educational or medical institution run by the trusts or institutions.
[Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
O.M. No. F.No. 241/2/2005-A & PAC. II dt. 01-05-2006]
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee further find that certain educational institutions are earning
substantial income by lending their premises for commercial activities and that there
is no restriction made by the Ministry on conducting such unspecified/Commercial
activities in the premises of educational institutions. In response to be Committee's
desire that educational institutions should be discourged to use its premises for
this purpose, the Ministry had also promised to consider the propsoal and take
necessary suitable measures. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
outcome of steps taken in this regard in due course of time.
[Sl. No. 19 of Appendix II, Para 110 of the 14th Report of
PAC (2005-2006)—14the Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
Under the existing tax law, carrying on business by an educational institution
claiming exemption either u/s 10(23C)(vi) [refer seventh proviso to section 10(23C)]
or u/s 11[refer sub-section (4A)] is permissible only if the business is incidental to
the attainment of the objectives of the institution and separate books of accounts
are maintained for such business. The Honourable Supreme Court in the case of
Assistant Commissioner of Income-Tax Vs. Thanthi Trust  reported in 247 ITR 785
(2001) have held that a business whose income is utilized by the trust or the
institution for the purposes of achieving the objectives of the trust or the institution
is a business which is incidential to the attainment of the objectives of the trust.
While granting approval u/s  10 (23C)(vi) as  well as while alongwith exemption
u/s 11 this stipulation is taken into account. Further, if the Assessing Officer, during
the course of assessment proceedings, finds any contravention of the provisions
of section 10(23C) (vi) or Section 11, he may inform the prescribed authority who
may then withdraw the approval/registration under the relevant section. To ensure
regular scrutiny of such cases, the Department in its scrutiny guidelines provides
for compulsory scrutiny in the case of bigger institutions.
[Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue O.M.
No. F.No. 241/2/2005-A & PAC. II dt. 01-05-2006]

19
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
Recommendation of the Committee
During their study visit to Kerala region on the subject in November, 2004, the
Committee were given to understand by the concerned Income-Tax Officials that
the performance of the region was not up to the mark in respect of the completion
of assessments, appeals etc. The main reason attributed by them was the shortage
of staff. Out of 243 posts of Income-Tax Inspectors, 192 posts were stated to be
lying vacant. It may just be possible that other  regions might also be experiencing
similar problems. The Committee, therefore, recommend that urgent steps are needed
to assess the stafff requirements in all the regions so as to take prompt steps to fill
up the requisite vacancies wherever needed, expeditiously so that the work, at least
on this account, does not suffer. The Committee also desire that the Department of
Revenue should explore the feasibility of delegating some powers to
Chief Commissioners/Commissions  of Income-Tax to recruit officials in Group"C"
and "D" cadres to facilitate speedy recruitment and early filling up of vacancies. As
a long time measure, the Ministry/CBDT should undertake a detailed exercise of the
overall manpower requirement in all the regions so as to ensure optimum number of
persons at all levels with a view to ensuring smooth functioning.
[Sl.No. 20 of Appendix II, Para 111 of the 14th Report of
PAC (2005-2006)—14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
The matter of shortage of staff in Income-Tax Department and filling up of all
vacant posts is under consideration of Government. It has been decided to fill up
3300 vacancies out of 8000 (approx.) vacant posts. The Government is considering
the long term requirement of staff in Income-Tax Department. Filling up of 3300 vacant
posts would ease the situation. Besides, a Committee has already been set up under
the Member (Personnel & Vig.), CBDT to look into the issues relating to shortage
of staff and heavy workload.
As regard delegation of power to CCs for making recruitment in Group C and D
Cadres, the powers to fill Gr. D Posts at their level is already with Cadre Controlling
CCsIT. The Cadre Controlling CCsIT recruit Group D officials through Employment
Exchanges. CBDT has no power to delegate the power of recruiting Group C officials
to CCsIT. Group C posts are filled up through Staff Selection Commission and
Department abides by the guidelines/rules of DOP&T in this regard. Any such
delegation is in the competence of Department of Personnel & Training.
[Ministry of Finance/Department  of  Revenue
O.M. No. F.No. 241/2/2005-A & PAC.II dt. 01-05-2006]

CHAPTER III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
GOVERNMENT
—NIL—
20

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS AND OBSERV ATIONS REPLIES TO WHICH HAVE
NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee note that a large number of private schools, colleges and
coaching centers have come up whose income is not so exempt from levy of
income-tax. The Committee are concerned to note that there exists no database
in the Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance, in respect of such private
educational institutions and coaching centers. The Committee regret to observe
that there is no systematic and organized approach in the Department to ensure
that all educational institutions, which are required to fulfil certain obligations under
the Act to claim the exemptions are, in fact, doing so before claiming the tax
benefit. The Secretary (Department of Revenue) conceded during evidence that at
present they do not have activity-wise databases. The Committee are constrained
to point out that the Ministry of Finance, with large resources at their command
have not made any effort to identify the total assessees in the country by having
effective co-ordination with the State Governments/Universities/other regulatory
authorities which has resulted in substantial revenue loss to the exchequer. The
Committee understand that various projects are underway in the Directorate
General of Income-tax (Systems), which would help in building up a scientific
database and for this the expertise of professional agencies is proposed to be
utilised by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue). The CIB Section of
Income-Tax Department is also stated to be engaged in collection of information
and preparing a database of schools, colleges and coaching centers as obtained
from various sources. The Committee would like the Ministry to undertake
these proposed measures expeditiously with a view to creating a reliable
database within four months of the presentation of this Report. The database,
once prepared, should be updated periodically so that none of the potential
assessees escape the scrutiny of Income-Tax Department.
[Sl. No. 7 of Appendix I, Para 98 of the 14th Report of
PAC (2005-2006)—14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
Tax exemption under sections 11 and 10(23C) (vi) are not mutually exclusive.
Hence educational institutions can claim exemption in either section. Putting the
names of the approved/exempted institutions will involve the Board, the field
authorities and the DIT (Exemption) and DGIT (Systems). Necessary steps in this
regard are underway.
21

22
Further, in view of the recommendations contained above, necessary directions
to the field formations have been issued. The CsIT (CIB) have been directed to
prepare a database in respect of educational institutions, update the same
periodically and furnish the database to the jurisdictional Chief Commissioner of
Income-Tax and DGIT (Exemption).
[Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
O.M. F.No. 241/2/2005-A & PAC.II dt 01-05-2006 ]
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
Recommendation of the Committee
The Committee's examination of the subject reveals that so far the Department
has not been able to widen the tax base by identifying such private educational
institutions run by trusts which earn huge sums of money by functioning in a not-
so charitable manner. The Committee feel that in order to discourage the practice
of claiming exemption by ineligible institutions under the existing provisions of
the Income-Tax, it is high time that the Department applies the provisions of tax
exemptions with utmost care and only to genuine and eligible institutions. For this,
it is essential that the Department should prepare and monitor a
comprehensive database of all such institutions and make it mandatory for
them to file their annual income-tax returns . The Committee have already
emphasized the need for creating a reliable database earlier in this Report.
The Committee note that Section 139(4C)(e) makes its mandatory for educational
institutions that exist solely for the purpose of education and not running with the
profits motive, to file their returns in case their income exceeds Rs. 50,000. The
Committee, however, understand that there is no central agency in the Department
to monitor the filing of income-tax returns by educational institutions. Consequently,
the Department is not in a position to ensure that all private schools, colleges and
coaching centers file their returns of income. It is, therefore, not clear to the
Committee as to how the income of educational institutions could be assessed
correctly in the absence of complete information about potential assessees. In
response to the Committee's view that every educational institution should be
mandatory required to file returns, it has been informed by the Ministry that this
has been taken care of by inserting Sub-section (4C) to Section 139 w.e.f. 1st April,
2003 in respect of educational institutions with aggregate receipts above Rs. 1 crore.
The Committee have also been informed that the proposal to make filing of returns
compulsory for educational institutions is under active consideration of the
Department. The Committee hope that an early decision will be taken in the matter.
They recommend that a foolproof mechanism may be evolved to ensure that all the
private educational institutions (as per the databases to be created) which have
assessable income file their returns regularly and the defaulters are brought to
book.
The Committee note that another tool for unearthing undisclosed income
available with the Department is Sections 133A and 133B of the Income-Tax Act
that empower the assessing officers to survey the business premises of taxpayers
to locate new assessees. However, they feel that adequate steps have not been taken

23
by the concerned authorities to bring all the private schools, colleges and coaching
centers into the tax net through adequate and focussed use of the said power to
conduct surveys. The Committee note that no surveys were conducted in Bombay,
Thane, Pune, Aurangabad, Kolhapur and Nagpur during the period 1999-2000 to
2001-2002. In Delhi, only one CIT confirmed to Audit that no survey was
conducted and the other 13 CITs did not furnish a reply. In Tamil Nadu charge,
DIT (Exemption) and CIT-VIII, Chennai confirmed that no surveys were conducted.
In Andhra Pradesh, only one private educational institution in Visakhapatnam charge
and 7 in Vijayawada charge were brought into tax net. In Rajasthan, the Department
had conducted 1138 surveys and only one educational institution was brought into
tax net. In other charges, no surveys were reported to be conducted. The Ministry
have asserted that a large number of surveys are conducted every year and that
various field formations have reported about surveys being conducted on such
institutions.
The Committee find it incomprehensible as to how in the absence of any
reliable database (as commented earlier), it is possible for the assessing
officer to use the power of survey efficiently. Moreover, the aforesaid
argument does not seem to carry weight as the Ministry have not supported
their contention by furnishing exact figures of the number of surveys
conducted by them during last 2-3 years and the number of new assessees
identified as a result thereof. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the details of the cases which were brought under the tax net during the
preceding two years, as a result of the efforts initiated by them alongwith
the number of new assessee that have been brought to tax net and the amount
of additional revenue realised from them. The Committee hope that with
creation of a reliable database of private educational institutions, the
Department would instruct the assessing officers to use the powers available
with them under relevant provisions of the Act judiciously to identify
potential taxpayers and progressively wipe out the widening gap between
taxpaying and tax-evading educational institutions.
[Sl. No. 9 of Appendix II, Para 100 of the 14th Report of
PAC (2005-2006)—14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
The necessary directions to the field formations have been issued. In particular
the CsIT(CIB) have been directed to prepare a database in respect of educational
institutions, update the same periodically and furnish the database to the
jurisdictional Chief Commissioner of Income-Tax and DGIT (Exemption), and the
process is almost complete.
In the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill, 2005 introduced in the Lok Sabha on
12/5/2005, it is proposed to provide that any university or other educational
institutions having aggregate annual recepits below Rs. 1 crore, which is hitherto
exempt as per Section 10 (23C)(iiiad), and was not required to file returns, will
now furnish their returns of income compulsorily from the assessment year 2006-
07 onwards. The Bill was referred to the Standing Committee on Finance which
presented its report to the Lok Sabha on 13/12/2005. The Bill is yet to be passed
by the Parliament.

24
The results of surveys conducted on educational institutions by the field
formations is as under:
Financial year No. of surveys No. of new Additional revenue
conducted assessees identified realized (in Rs. lac)
2002-03 24 1 77.29*
2003-04 27 5 256.13*
2004-05 37 4 25.61*
*figures are provisional as assessments in all the cases are not yet complete.
(Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
O.M. NO. F.No. 241/2/2005-A & PAC.II dt 01-05-2006 )
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
Recommendation of the Committee
From the foregoing it is evident that the laws providing tax exemption to
educational institutions suffer from various inadequacies, for example, the new
provisions enacted under Section 10(23C) (iiiab) (iiiad) do not yet provide any
monitoring mechanism for checking the geniuneness of activities of institutions
claiming exemptions. There is no mechanism to ensure that the institutions could
claim exemption only under section 11 and 12 or 10(23C) (vi) of the Act. Also,
there is no time limit for granting approvals under clause 10(23C)(vi) and nothing
has been specified as to how in the absence of approval, exemption of income during
that period is to be regulated. Besides there is no provision in the case of exemption
under Section 10(23C)(vi) to furnish the audited accounts with audit certificate
alongwith returns of income and finally, no monitoring mechanism currently is
available to monitor the investment of unutilized surplus of the institutions u/s 11(5)
of the Act. While conceding that there exists a loophole, the Secretary (Revenue)
informed the Committee during evidence that they will have to study a little more to
see if they can make use of both the provisions [(Sections 11, 12 and 10(23C)(vi)] or
synchronize it by merging the two and have a single revision. The Committee are
also of the view that the purpose of insertion of new Clause under Section (23C)
may not have been yielded the desired results and had rather created more
complications and infructuous work. While observing that the existing tax laws are
already very complex, the Committee feel that it is imperative that the law is made
simpler and clearer to avoid any misinterpretation/misuse of the same. They, therefore,
desire that the Department of Revenue should undertake such an exercise
expeditiously in consultation with the Ministry of Law as well as the Audit and the
lacunae, if any, in the law be plugged suitably.
[Sl. No. 17 of Appendix II Para 108 of the 14th Report
of PAC (2005-2006)-14th Lok Sabha].

25
Action Taken
The reply to the observations of the Hon'ble Committee at paras 101, 102, 104
& 106 may kindly be pursued.
Several changes are proposed through the Taxation Laws (Amendment) Bill,
2005 to remove inadequacies in the laws providing tax exemptions to educational
institutions. Entities covered under section 10 (23C)(iiiad) and (iiiae) will be
mandatorily required to file their returns of income. This will enable the department
to monitor the genuineness of activities of the institutions claiming exemptions. A
time limit of one year has been proposed for disposal of applications for approvals/
notifications for entities referred to in sections 10(23C)(iv)(v)(vi) and (via). Further
it is proposed these entities will have to get their accounts audited by an Accountant
and file the report of such audit along with their returns of income. The Bill was
referred to the Standing Committee on Finance which presented its report to the
Lok Sabha on 13/12/2005. The Bill is yet to be passed by the Parliament.
The exercise to simplify the Income Tax Act is currently under way and the
suggestions/recommendations of the Committee regarding simplification including
the suggestion regarding merging the two streams of exemptions, have been
forwarded to the Expert Group for their consideration.
In respect of the Committee's observation that there is no time limit for granting
approvals under clause 10(23C)(vi) and nothing has been specified as to how in the
absence of approval, exemption of income during that period is to be regulated, it is
stated that an assessee can claim exemption either u/s 10(23C) (vi) of the Act or
section 11 to 13 of the Act. If an assessee is not apporoved u/s 10(23C)(vi) of  the
Act for an assessment year, then it may claim exemption u/s 11 to 13 of the Act,
subjected to fulfillment of conditions prescribed therein. Otherwise, its income shall
be taxable.
In respect of the Committee's observation that no monitoring mechanism
currently is available to monitor that investment of unutilized surplus of the
institutions u/s 11(5) of the Act, it is stated that, as per the provisions of the Act,
this surplus is to be utilized for educational purposes only. The assessee is supposed
to file its tax return every year with the copy of audited balance sheet. This return
is subject to scrutiny and in case of any violation, the assessee may not be allowed
exemption and even the registration granted may be cancelled.
[Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue
O.M. No. 241/2/2005-A & PAC.II dt.01-05-2006]

CHAPTER V
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES
—NIL—
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
17 November, 2006 Chairman,
26 Kartika, 1928 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
26

PART II
MINUTES OF THE FIFTEENTH SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITEE
(2006-2007) HELD ON 16TH NOVEMBER, 2006
The Committee sat from 1100hrs. to 1200 hrs. in Committee Room 'D' , Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Brajesh Pathak
7. Shri Mohan Singh
8. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
9. Shri Kharabela Swain
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
11. Shri R.K. Dhawan
12. Shri Janardhana Poojary
13. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
14. Dr. K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
2. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri B.K. Chattopadhyay — ADAI(RC)
2. Shri Nand Kishore — Principal Director (AB)
3. Shri Sanjay Kumar — Director
27

28
Representatives of the Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport & Highways
(Department of Shipping)
xxx xxx xxx
Representatives of Chennai Port Trust
xxx xxx xxx
Representatives of Dredging Corporation of India Limited
xxx xxx xxx
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members and the officers of
C&AG of India  to the sitting. Thereafter, the Committee then took up for
consideration and adoption of the following draft Reports:—
(i) Action taken on 14th Report of the Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok
Sabha) relating to "Assessment of Private Schools, Colleges and Coaching
Centres", and
(ii) Action taken on 23rd Report of Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha)
relating to "Review of Norms for Re-appropriation of Funds".
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted these draft Reports without
any amendments/modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalise and present
the same to Parliament in the light of factual verification  by Audit.
3. xxx xxx xxx
4. xxx xxx xxx
5. xxx xxx xxx
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
STATEMENT OF OBSERVA TIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/Department Observations/Recommendations
No. No.
12 3 4
1. 8 Finance (Deptt. of Considering the fact that there was no systematic
Revenue) and organised approach in the Department to
ensure that all private educational institutions,
which were required to fulfil certain obligations
under the Act to claim exemptions, were in fact
doing so, the Committee had observed that this
was possible only when there was reliable
statistics of such institutions with them. They
had therefore, desired that the Ministry of
Finance (Department of Revenue) to create an
appropriate database within four months of the
presentation of their Report. In their reply, the
Ministry have merely stated that necessary steps
in this regard are underway and necessary
directions to the field formations have been
issued without indicating when such directions
were issued and what has been the outcome
thereof. Evidently, the Ministry have not made
any substantial headway in this regard, which is
regrettable. The Committee emphasise that the
Ministry should ensure that directions issued in
this regard result in creation of desired database
without any further delay. They would like to be
apprised of the latest position in this regard.
2. 11 -do- The Committee are dismayed that even after nine
months of the presentation of the original Report
to Parliament, the Ministry have not been able
to compile and provide figures of actual revenue
realized as a result of surveys conducted from
2002-03 to 2004-05. They have given only
provisional figures in this regard. The Ministry
have conceded that assessments have not been
completed in all the cases. The Committee regret
to observe that the Ministry have been lax on
29

30
this count and requisite urgency has not been
shown by them. The Committee are of the view
that by now, the Ministry should have been in a
position to furnish complete and conclusive
such information. The Committee would therefore
desire that assessment in all the cases should
be completed at the earliest and they be informed
of the actual additional revenue realized from the
new assessees that have been brought to tax net
as a result of survey operations.
Further, as regards the figures submitted by the
Ministry, the Committee regret to note that only
four new assessees have been identified out of
37 surveys conducted during the Financial year
2004-05 and the additional revenue realized
during the same Financial year is only Rs. 25.61
lakh from 37 surveys conducted as against the
total amount of Rs. 256.13 lakh from 27 surveys
conducted during the Financial Year 2003-04.
Evidently, no progress has been made by the
income–tax authorities in identifying the new
assessees and in collection of additional revenue
from the surveys conducted during the year
2004-05. Surprisingly, the surveys conducted by
the Income Tax Department of late have not been
yielding the desired results. Such a below-par
performance is more glaring, considering the fact
that the private schools, colleges and other
educational institutions have consistently been
collecting huge fees and other charges from the
students. The Committee cannot but take a
serious view of the inaction of the Income Tax
Department  to unearth undisclosed income of
private educational institutions. The Committee
would now like the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue), to closely monitor
these operations at the highest level, with a view
to realising the potential tax from these
institutions. At the same time, the Committee
would like to emphasise the need for effective
tax deterrence against the rampant commercial
exploitation of education in the country by
various institutions.
12 3 4

31
3. 15 Finance (Deptt. of While observing that separate yet overlapping
Revenue) clauses in the Income Tax Act providing
exemption under section 10(23C) and Sections
11 and 12 of the Act are being misused by
private educational institutions, the Committee
in their earlier Report, had recommended that
the existing tax laws should be made simpler and
clearer in consultation with the Ministry of Law
and the lacunae in the law, if any, should be
plugged suitably. In this regard, the Ministry
vide their Action Taken Note have informed that
necessary enabling changes have been brought
in the statute through the Taxation Laws
Amendment Act, 2005.  With regard to the
simplification of the existing tax laws, the
Ministry have stated that the exercise to simplify
the Income Tax Act is currently underway and
the suggestions of the Committee to merge the
provisions [Sections 11, 12 and 10 (23C) (vi)]
governing tax exemptions for educational
institutions have been forwarded for
consideration to the Expert Group constituted
for this purpose. The Committee desire that the
Expert Group should be impressed upon to
consider the matter expeditiously and submit its
findings at the earliest. They would also like to
be apprised about the findings of the Expert
Group and the consequential action taken by the
Government thereon.
12 3 4
MMMMF
fgfggMGIPMRND—3311LS—4-12-2006.dgggg
mmmmfmmmmmgjjjgjjjgjjgjkkkkkkkkkkghjhjghgggggggghhj