34
DELAYED PURCHASE AND
INSIGNIFICANT UTILIZATION OF
EQUIPMENT PROCURED UNDER
FAST TRACK PROCEDURE
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2006-2007
THIRTY-FOURTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

THIRTY-FOURTH  REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
DELAYED PURCHASE AND INSIGNIFICANT
UTILIZATION OF EQUIPMENT PROCURED
UNDER FAST TRACK PROCEDURE
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Presented to Lok Sabha on: _________________
Laid in Rajya Sabha on :____________________
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December 2006/Agrahayana, 1928 ( Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1819
Price:  Rs. 37.00
© 2006 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE  NO.
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2006-2007)  . . . . . . . . . (iii)
INTRODUCTION  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (v)
REPORT . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
APPENDIX  I Para 2.2 of the Report of the Comptroller and  Auditor
General of India for the year ended 31 March, 2004
(No. 6 of  2005), Union Government (Defence Services –
Army and Ordnance Factories) relating to “Delayed
purchase and insignificant utilization of equipment
procured under Fast Track Procedure"  . . . . . . . . . . .
A
PPENDIX  II Observations and Recommendations  . . . . . . . . . . . . .
PART  II
Minutes of the Sittings of the Public Accounts
Committee held on 6 January, 2006 and  31 October,
2006  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
19
21
28
(
I)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2006-2007)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri R.L. Jalappa
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
6. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Prof. M. Ramadass
9. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Mohan Singh
12. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri K.V. Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Assistant Director
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee,
do present this Thirty-Fourth Report relating to “Delayed purchase and insignificant
utilization of equipment procured under Fast Track Procedure”   on  Para 2.2 of  Report
of C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March, 2004 (No. 6 of 2005), Union
Government (Defence Services — Army and Ordnance Factories).
2. The Report of the C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March, 2004
(No. 6 of 2005), Union Government (Defence Services — Army and Ordnance
Factories) was laid on the Table of the House on 6th May, 2005.
3. The Committee took the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry
of  Defence on the subject at their sitting held on 6th January, 2006. The Committee
considered and finalised this Report at their sitting held on  31st  October, 2006.
Minutes of the sittings form Part – II of the Report.
4 . For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of
the Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the
Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the officers of the
Ministry of Defence for the cooperation extended by them in furnishing information
and tendering evidence before the Committee.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General
of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
2 November, 2006 Chairman,
11 Kartika, 1928 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

1
REPORT
DELAYED PURCHASE AND INSIGNIFICANT UTILIZATION OF EQUIPMENT
PROCURED UNDER FAST TRACK PROCEDURE
This Report is based on the Audit Review contained in Para 2.2 of the Report
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended 31 March, 2004,
No. 6 of 2005, Union Government (Defence Services—Army and Ordnance Factories)
relating to “Delayed purchase and insignificant utilization of equipment procured
under Fast Track Procedure”. The evaluation, selection, procurement, delivery and
utilisation of the equipment were reviewed in Audit. The Audit Paragraph is appended
to this Report as Appendix-I
Introductory
2. The Indian Army launched Operation Parakaram on 16 December, 2001.
During this operation, approximately 16.69 lakh mines were laid along the borders.
Agricultural land on which minefields were laid was required to be returned to the
owners after the termination of the operation in a usable condition. Army Headquarters
proposed in August, 2002 procurement of 40 De-mining Equipment under Fast Track
Procedure (FTP) through an Empowered Committee for de-mining. They wanted the
equipment urgently by October, 2002 in order to minimize the risk of casualty involved
in manual de-mining and to free the mined land for cultivation. The Defence
Procurement Board approved the proposal on October 1, 2002.
3. A contract was concluded with the firm in March, 2003, five months after
the stipulated supply date, for the supply of 24 mining equipment alongwith
accessories at a total cost of Euro 19.05 million equivalent to Rs. 103.91 crore.
Equipment were received at Engineer Stores Depots, Delhi between June, 2003 and
March, 2004, eight to 16 months beyond the date indicated by Army Headquarters.
The actual utilisation of the equipment purchased due to operational urgency to
demine 10 lakh mines revealed that most of the minefields had already been demined
manually without the help of de-mining equipment due to delay in procurement of
the equipment.
Salient features of Fast Track Procedure
4. The projected requirements, under the Fast Track Procedure (FTP) as
contained in instructions issued in 2001, must be related to an operational situation
foreseen as imminent or for a situation where a crisis has emerged without prior
warning. The salient features of FTP are as follows:
(a) The adoption of an emergency Fast Track Procedure for urgent
operational requirements has to be under appropriate authorization.
That there is need for adoption of this process must emanate from
1

2
the Chief of the concerned Service for consideration of Raksha
Mantri through the Defence Procurement Board (DPB).
(b) The projected requirement must be related to an operational situation
foreseen as imminent or for a situation where a crisis has emerged
without prior warning.  The requirement, as projected, must identify
the items required, their numbers, and the time-frame within which
they need to be inducted.
(c) On receipt of such requirement, the DPB will be convened at a short
notice or consider cases by circulation, and present the case for
consideration of Raksha Mantri (RM) with the recommendation to
adopt emergency procedure or otherwise.  The procurement process
would start after RM’s approval.  The Fast Track Procedure would
be used only for such specific items, their numbers, and for the time-
frames as approved by RM.
(d) Given the limited time-frame, the Fast Track Procedure would
necessarily have to be confined to such items as would be available
within the specified time-frame and, therefore, long lead items should
be avoided.  The items involved should preferably be such as are
already in service or have been tried or evaluated so that the time
required for evaluation is avoided.
(e) However, in exceptional cases, a trial team could be sent to the
vendors’ premises for a quick evaluation.
Mine clearance philosophy
5. Mine clearance should be resorted to as early as the operational situation
permits.  Mine clearance process involves the following actions:—
(a) ‘Recovery’ by manual means.
(b) De-mining by the use of mechanical means.
(a) Recovery by manual means
6. Physical removal and disposal of mines from the mined area  enable
accounting of the mines to the extent possible.  This process is called ‘recovery’ of
mines.  Though recovery of 100% mines is desirable, various factors do not permit
the same.
(b) De-mining by the use of mechanical means
7. When 100% recovery of mines cannot be manually done, further processes
need to be undertaken to ensure to the extent possible, that mines, which could not
be recovered, are destroyed in situ by the use of mechanical means such as the de-
mining equipment or trawl tanks.  This process, when repeated over the same area,
results in rendering the area safe.  This is termed as proving of an area i.e. rendering
the area safe.

3
Audit findings
8. Audit scrutiny of the subject has revealed the following lapses in the
procurement of de-mining equipment through “Fast Track Procedure” (FTP):—
1. Delay in FTP.
2. Benefit of competitive bidding lost by adopting FTP.
3. Delivery  period of nine months in the contract though firm had
offered a schedule of four months to Technical Evaluation Committee
(TEC).
4. Most mine fields already de-mined manually due to delay in
procurement.
5. Only 0.42% (1182 Nos.) mines recovered by use of equipment.
The Committee’s examination of the subject and the issues involved therein
have been discussed in the succeeding paragraphs:
Need for having de-mining equipment
9. The Committee desired to know as to how the urgent need to have
de-mining equipment arose in the first place.  In their written reply, the Ministry stated
that during the process of manual recovery of minefields it may not be possible to
trace all the mines which could have drifted or got further buried due to vagaries of
nature i.e. flooding of area, shifting of soil/sand, wind etc. or dislocation due to animal/
human interference.  De-mining equipment was thus required to physically destroy
these unaccounted mines and render the area 100% safe for further usage.  After
manual recovery of visible and accessible mines, de-mining is done by repeated run
of tank trawls or by use of specialised de-mining equipment to get a high assurance
level and complete sanitation of land which is achieved by detonating and destroying
defective and old vintage of mines which are very dangerous to recover manually.
10. Elaborating on this aspect, the Secretary (Defence) deposed during
evidence that:—
“The mechanical method ensures that certain mines which have not been
found in the process of manual recovery are taken out. Even in the
mechanical de-mining, there is a mine burst and it is taken as a confirmation
that the mine has been taken out. The aim is that we must have absolutely
100 per cent mines taken out. That is why, along with the manual recovery,
specialized equipment for mechanized de-mining was bought”.
11. The Committee sought to know as to why manual methods were employed
for de-mining. In response, the Secretary (Defence)  replied that:—
“Manual methods are absolutely necessary because there is a requirement
of 100 per cent taking out of these mines. The persons who are employed
are basically the Corps of Engineers. They were the same persons who
laid the mines. They go point by point on the map and on the ground
and de-mine them”.

4
Process adopted for acquisition of equipment
12. It has been noticed that the Defence Procurement Board (DPB)
recommended for acquisition of de-mining equipment on 01.10.2002 and final contract
was signed on 5.03.2003. The acquisition process involved the following steps:—
(i) Approval of RM;
(ii) V isit of TEC abroad to three Countries;
(iii) Evaluation of the equipment;
(iv) Receipt of T echno Commercial offers;
(v) Negotiations and CFA approval; and
(vi) Signing of Contract and opening of Letter of Credit ( LC ).
Chronology of important events
13. The chronology of important events as submitted by the Ministry of
Defence from initiation of case for procurement of de-mining equipment to signing
of contract is as under:—
Sl. Date Action Activities
No.
12 3 4
1. 08.08.2002 Initiation of case Equipment identified and
validated by military operation.
2. 08.08.2002 Case for visit of Technical Confirmation from firm and
Delegation finalisation of schedule.
3. 01.10.2002 DPB approval for FTP Agenda point approval by
Army Headquarters and
circulation to members and
consideration by DPB.
Formulation of Techno- Vetting of RFP by all agencies
commercial RFP approval of SS (ACQN) and
issue of RFP.
4. 19.10.2002 V isit of Tech Delegation Approval by RM.
w.e.f.
23 October, 2002 to
04 November, 2002
5. 23.10.2002 -do- Approval by External Screening
Committee.
6. 24.10.2002 Issue of RFP to vendors Issued to the three short listed
vendors.

5
7. 29.11.2002 TEC Report submitted to Preparation of TEC Report and
Ministry of Defence approval by VCOAS.
8. 13.01.2003 App roval of RM to TEC Movement of case file for
Report and waivers approval of RM.
9. 21.01.2003 CNC composed for On file approval and CNC
commercial negotiations composition.
10. 27.01.2003 Negotiations by CNC CNC held on consecutive days
to and concluded on
06.02.2002 06 February, 2003.
11. 05.03.2003 Contract signed with Actions involved for
M/s Hydrema, concluding contract.
Denmark
Delay in deciding on the procurement of de-mining equipment
14. The chronology of events revealed that Operation Parakram was thought
of in 2001 and the Army sent the proposal for procurement of de-mining equipment
only in 2002. The Committee, therefore, desired to know  as to why the Army did not
think of having the de-mining equipment in 2001 itself when Operation Parakram
ended. Explaining the reasons for the delay in deciding on the procurement of
de-mining equipment, the Ministry in their note stated as follows:—
‘‘As a policy, the Army plans to ‘recover’, minefields to account for each
mine and also hand over land to its owners in a safe condition. This is
possible if the laid minefields are ordered to be recovered within a reasonably
short period after laying, say 4-6 months, without the effects of weather
having adversely affected the area.
Recovery can be carried out using records of minefields with standard mine
laying and breaching equipment held with Army units. Hence, no  additional
equipment is necessary for recovery.
In the instant case, Op. PARAKRAM commenced in mid-December, 2001
and mine laying orders were issued. However, when Op. PARAKRAM could
not be terminated early, it was apparent that minefields would remain exposed
to more seasons, which would lead to the following effects:—
(a) growth of vegetation and crops.
(b) Burial of mines due to flowing water, sand storms and rodent action.
(c) Drifting of mines away from original locations due to rainwater,
shifting sand and rodents.
Therefore, E-in-C’s Branch initiated a case to procure de-mining equipment”.
12 3 4

6
15. In this regard, while replying to a pointed query as to why the procurement
of de-mining equipment could not be thought of earlier, the representative of Ministry
of Defence conceded during evidence that  “it could have been thought of.”
Failure to adopt normal procedure
16. It has been noticed from the Audit Paragraph that the decision for
de-mining the mines was taken 18 months after the Operation Parakram was over,
which was sufficient to go through the normal procedure.  Explaining the reasons
for adopting the Fast Track Procedure (FTP) instead of the normal procurement
procedure, the Ministry stated that FTP was adopted instead of normal procurement
procedure in order to expeditiously release land for cultivation and troops from
operational deployment.
17. The Committee desired to know as to whether it was proper and judicious
to resort to Fast Track Procedure in the instant case, the Ministry replied as under:—
“The projected requirements, under the Fast Track Procedure as contained
in instructions issued in 2001, must be related to an operational situation
foreseen as imminent or for a situation where a crisis has emerged without
prior warning. All proposals under FTP are processed only after approval
of the Chief of the concerned staff.
In the instant case, FTP was resorted in order to return land to cultivators
in a safe condition.  The decision to adopt FTP was taken as per
recommendations of Defence Procurement Board (DPB)”.
Cost of the equipment
18. In view of the operational urgency, the Price Negotiation Committee (PNC)
accepted the unit price of Euro 730000/724000 (Rs. 3.98 crore/3.95 crore) offered by
the firm.  Accordingly, a contract was concluded with a firm in March 2003,
five months after the stipulated supply dates for the supply of 24 de-mining equipment
alongwith accessories at a total cost of Euro 19.05 million equivalent to Rs. 103.91
crore.
19. The Committee, desired to know the difference in the price if the Ministry
had gone for normal procedure instead of Fast Track Procedure. The representative
of the Ministry of Defence informed during evidence “that there is a marginal
difference in the price”.
20. The Committee further desired to know as to  whether  any of the short
listed firms were ready to offer its equipment for trials in India on “no cost-no
commitment basis” and how did the price of this equipment compare with the price
of the equipment purchased. The Ministry in their written information submitted to
the Committee as under:—
“Though one of the technically non-compliant firms offered their equipment
for ‘no cost-no commitment’ basis trials on 21st Nov. 2002, there was no
scope for considering the same as time was at a premium and the same

7
equipment had been adequately evaluated by the TEC and not found
meeting the requirements of the Indian Army.
Since, the equipment was technically not acceptable, the commercial offers
of the non-compliant Vendors were never opened and there was no
requirement to compare the prices. Hence the claim of a non-compliant
vendor that his equipment was much cheaper at Rs. 0.96 Crs. a piece hold
no ground as, firstly, he was technically non-compliant and his commercial
offer hence had not been opened and secondly, he had stated this price in
a letter written by him to MoD after completion of the technical evaluation
in November, 2002 which has no locus standi as such”.
Identification of de-mining equipment
21. Elucidating the process for identification of de-mining equipment, the
representative of Ministry of Defence stated as follows during the evidence that:—
“It was visualized in the month of May or June that there would be a need
that besides doing manual de-mining, to have some equipment also for it.
And, then the processing of finding what was the equipment available in
the world had been started in the E-in-C Branch. The DA’s abroad and the
Jame’s Equipment Manual and other literature that were available were all
scanned, and certain equipment was short listed. May be many more studied
and six were arrived at”.
22. Based on technical literature and delivery schedule offered by the firms,
three equipments were shortlisted for evaluation by the Technical delegation. A
Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) visited the three short listed firms, located
abroad from 25 October, 2002 to 4 November, 2002.
23. The Committee, desired to know as to whether any notice inviting tender
or its equivalent for procurement of de-mining equipment was issued. The Ministry
replied that a Techno Commercial Request For Proposal (RFP) was issued to three
short listed vendors in October 2002.
24. The Committee, further desired to know that on what basis the equipment
was short listed and finally selected and as to whether the Ministry was satisfied
with the process adopted and the final selection made in this regard.  The Ministry
in their Post-evidence note submitted to the Committee informed as under:—
“A Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) comprising of experts in the field
was constituted.  This committee carried out a detailed technical scan of
the demining equipment available in the world.  Three firms were finally short
listed for visit by the TEC.  Based on their visit, the TEC recommended that
the equipment of two firms did not sufficiently meet the Operational
Requirement (OR).
De-mining equipment of the third firm was recommended after due evaluation
of the technical parameters against Operational Requirement (OR) and based
on the performance of the equipment during the demonstration organized
by the OEM for the TEC.’’

8
25. The Committee further desired to know as to whether the best available
firm was selected for the supply of the equipment. The Ministry replied as under:—
“The TEC opined that de-mining equipment of the recommended firm was
technically superior to the other short listed de-mining equipment and was
found most suitable for employment in our operational scenario”.
26. In response to the Committee’s query as to whether any of the short listed
equipment was in use in other countries, the Ministry in their note replied:—
“One of the firms had claimed that their equipment was in use world-over.
But the touch stone of any technical evaluation by the Army is suitability
to our operational requirements and not merely a vendor’s claim”.
Comparative life-span analysis of the equipment
27. Regarding life-span of equipment, the Ministry stated:—
“The equipment of the selected firm has been assessed by CQA(EE) to have
Service Life of 7 years and Storage Life of 10 years.  This Service Life is
subject to review/extension during its life cycle and by resorting to overhaul.
The equipment has performed its designated function in de-mining post OP
PARAKRAM.  Moreover, the equipment will continue to serve in future for
de-mining operations as well as in offensive operations as per policy for its
employment already issued by the Army Headquarters, for augmenting the
mine breaching resources in depth areas where breaching tasks are
undertaken without major constraints of time.
A proposal to deploy the equipment for humanitarian de-mining tasks with
our Army Engineer contingents in United Nations missions is also under
consideration”.
28. Replying to another related query, the representative of the Ministry of
Defence stated during evidence:
“All capital equipment  that we procure, we work on a principle of initial life
of 10 years and we extend the life by mid-overhauls.  So, we work on a
principle of 25 to 30 years serviceable life of equipment”.
29. To a query about the period of life of this equipment, the representative
of the Ministry of Defence stated during evidence that it has not been laid down.
Procurement of Lesser Number of Equipments than Originally Estimated.
30. Audit scrutiny has revealed that Army Headquarters proposed in August
2002 procurement of 40 de-mining equipment under FTP through an Empowered
Committee for de-mining of mines laid during OP PARAKRAM.  The Technical
Evaluation Committee (TEC) recommended to procure only a part of the sanctioned
quantity, considering the limited exploitation of the equipment, lack of sufficient data
and the need for further examining its employability in Indian terrain.

9
31. The Committee desired to know that on what basis, the TEC recommended
procurement of lesser number of equipment than originally estimated and finally
stipulated in market enquiries.  The Ministry replied that:—
“Initially 40 No. of the equipment were proposed to be procured.  However,
TEC recommended procurement of only a part quantity initially due to :
(a) Limited exploitation of equipment.
(b) Lack of sufficient data.
(c) Further examining the employability of equipment in Indian terrain.
Based on review of progress, the quantity was reduced to 30 Nos. in
November 2002, and thereafter to the barest minimum 24 Nos. in December,
2002”.
32. In response to a specific query as to whether the Ministry was satisfied
that the number of equipment recommended by the TEC would suffice and fulfill the
requirement, the  Ministry explained that:—
“TEC had  recommended that it would be prudent to procure only a part of
the sanctioned quantity initially, but did not mention any specific quantities
as such.  TEC added that based on the feedback obtained after initial
exploitation, the balance quantity be procured through an option clause
suitably incorporated in the contract itself.
After deliberations on proposed employment, in the light of the policy on
recovery of mine fields and the time schedule for completion of the de-
mining operations, 30 Nos. were proposed for initial procurement in
November 2002.
Based on review of progress made in recovery of mine fields, this quantity
was further reduced to a barest minimum essential quantity of 24 Nos. in
December 2002, to de-mine the high risk mine fields”.
33. The Ministry further added:—
“The quantity  of 24 Nos. was minimum inescapable to meet our requirement
and was worked out strictly as per the Military Operations Policy on
Recovery of Mines.  Notably a quantity of 30 as sought by VCOAS was
further reduced to 24 so that the task could be suitably done, yet not buying
more equipment than required”.
Acceptance of longer delivery schedule
34. The purchase of de-mining equipment was made through FTP keeping in
view the urgency of the equipment. Audit noticed that though the firm had offered
a delivery schedule of four months to TEC for the supply of 32 equipment during
technical evaluation, it was allowed a delivery period of nine months in the contract.
35. Explaining the reasons for this, the Ministry informed:—
“The Technical Evaluation Committee had visited the firm premises between
23 October 2002 and 04 November 2002 i.e. during winter months.  Being

10
unaware of the procurement procedures of Ministry of Defence, the vendor
verbally intimated a delivery schedule of four months assuming that the
orders would be placed on them immediately by the Technical Evaluation
Committee itself.  This was due to higher production capacity of the firm
during winter as compared to summer, which was so clarified by the vendor
during the  Price Negotiation Committee (PNC).
Initially during the PNC meeting the vendor handed over a chart giving
delivery schedule for 24 Nos. in place of the schedule given in the offer for
40 Nos.  After scrutiny, the PNC observed that the last consignment was
proposed to be delivered in 41 weeks.  The vendor was then asked to clarify,
as this was at variance with what was proposed to the Technical Evaluation
Committee (TEC) at the time of evaluation (four months for 32 Nos).
The vendor intimated that the schedule mentioned to the TEC was based
on winter production capacity of the firm, which will be more than summer
production capacity.  The Committee impressed upon the Vendor to reduce
overall delivery time and the Vendor was asked to compress the delivery
schedule.
The V endor thereafter proposed a revised delivery schedule of
39 weeks along with spare parts package within 39 weeks.  He also informed
the Commercial Negotiation Committee (CNC) that the schedule cannot be
further compressed without compromising quality as large number of checks
on various components and their integration are required to be carried out
in the factory premises.
The Request for Proposal (RFP) did not specify a fixed delivery schedule to
be adhered to but stated that the goods must be delivered at the earliest.  It
may be noted that the agreed delivery schedule was lesser (39 weeks) than
what was proposed by the vendor in his initial offer (41 weeks) to the CNC
for the delivery of 24 Nos.”
36. Elaborating further on this aspect, the representative of the Ministry of
Defence stated during evidence:—
“The TEC was told that  if you place an order now, 32 pieces of equipment
would be made available in four months time.  AT the C-in-C stage, thereafter
the C-in-C asked the vendors representatives that we are now looking for
24 pieces of equipment and the time frame given was 41 weeks.  So, he was
reminded that we were told four months. So, he indicated two things.  Firstly,
the work schedule of the winter and the summer are different and he says
now it is possible only for us to supply in 41 weeks.  Possibly, it is because
he had one or two pieces of equipment ready.  It was not confirmed.  But
when it came to 41 weeks, the C-in-C told them that we will not buy in this
time period.  You reduce it.  He reduced it to 39 weeks and he said that he
cannot reduce it more otherwise the quality of the equipment would be
compromised.  Thereafter, C-in-C  accepted 39 weeks”.

11
Trial Report of the equipment
37. On being asked as to whether there were any trial Reports of the equipment
considered by the TEC, the Ministry replied that the TEC evaluated the equipment
based on only live dynamic demonstrations against the Operational Requirement at
the Vendors’ premises.
38. The Committee were further informed during evidence that the first piece
of equipment was taken for carrying out certain tests to see the performance against
anti-personnel mines which was not done in that country. Furnishing details of the
trial evaluation of the equipment in India, the Ministry stated:
“There was no trial evaluation as such carried out on the equipment in India.
However, Blast Tests were carried out as part of the Joint Receipt Inspection
(JRI) of the first consignment.  As the aspect of destruction/detonation  of
anti personnel mines , could not be checked by the TEC due to non
availability of the anti personnel mines in the host country, it was decided
to conduct blast trials with the ibid mines as part of the JRI as per the
provisions of the Contract.
The Blast Test was conducted on the first de-mining vehicle during 27-28
June 03.
While the trial team made some observations, the same were not directly
related to the operational performance of the equipment and at no stage
was the equipment found unsuitable or rejected.  Also, as per the laid down
procedure and provisions of the Contract, quality and quantity claims had
been raised against the Vendor which were settled”.
Observations in Blast Tests
39. According to Audit, during the Blast Test of the first de-mining equipment,
the following shortcomings were noticed:—
“(i) 5 out of 10 mines did not detonate.
(ii) Direction keeping from inside the vehicle was difficult and visibility
was restricted due to the shield.
(iii) The vehicle got bogged down in slushy area and was recovered
using a dozer.
(iv) The vehicle did not have any sensor to indicate the blast of Anti
personnel mines.
(v) The speed of the vehicle was very slow”.
Audit has observed that all the shortcomings mentioned above were directly
related to the operational performance of the equipment. The Ministry did not mention
specifically whether the above shortcomings were even taken up with the firm and
the firm had set right the shortcomings.

12
Delay in actual delivery of the equipment
40. Audit has stated that a Contract was concluded with the firm in March,
2003, five months after the stipulated supply date, for the supply of 24 de-mining
equipment.  The delivery period was 9 months from the date of the Contract even
though the firm had given a delivery schedule of 4 months for the supply of
32 equipment during technical evaluation.  The equipment were received between
June, 2003 and March, 2004, 8 to 16 months beyond the date indicated by Army
HQrs.  Audit has further reported that even after enhancement of the delivery
schedule, 50 per cent of the ordered equipment, i.e. 12 equipment were supplied only
after the expiry of the delivery period of 9 months.
41. The Committee sought to know as to why the order for procurement of
equipment was placed in March, 2003, five months after stipulated supply date.  The
Ministry informed as under:—
“The procurement of the de-mining equipment was recommended by DPB
under FTP in its meeting on 01.10.2002 and the Contract was signed on
5.3.2003.  Considering the fact that the procurement action involved the
approval of RM, visit of TEC for evaluation of the equipment  offered by
the three short listed vendors, receipt of techno-commercial offers and
progressing case for seeking CFA approval, the period taken to conclude
the Contract was within the least time frame possible.
The first lot of equipment was thereafter received within three months from
the signing of the Contract i.e. in June 2003 after which the equipment was
deployed in field. Hence, it would not be correct to assume that the
procurement defeated the very purpose of FTP, which was strictly as per
the laid down procedure”.
42. On being asked about the reasons for non-adhering of the stipulated time
schedule of 9 months, the Ministry replied:—
“The Contract was signed on 05 March, 2003.  Article 4.2 of the Contract
clearly gives out the delivery schedule of the equipment and the same is
linked to the date of the opening of LC and not to date of signing of the
Contract.  The LC was opened on 08 May, 2003 and the deliveries were to
be completed within 39 weeks of this date i.e. 06 February, 2004.  The
deliveries of the goods were actually completed in January, 2004, which was
well within the delivery schedule of 9 months (39 weeks)”.
43. In response to the Ministry’s reply, the Audit have made the following
observation:—
“As per Article 3 of the Contract the effective date of the Contract was as
follows:
(a) Receipt of performance Bank Guarantee by the buyer.
(b) Receipt of Advance Payment in the sellers account.
Performance Bank Guarantee and Advance Bank Guarantee were furnished
by the firm on 21.3.2003 and advance payment was made on 28.03.2003.  Thus

13
the delivery schedule should have been commenced from April, 2003 and
supplies were to be completed by December, 2003.  However, the supplies
were completed in March, 2004.  Thus there was a delay of two months in
completing the supply.  The Ministry’s contention that effective date was
from the date of opening of letter of credit is not correct”.
44. Audit further pointed out that though there was a delay of two months in
completing the supply, L.D. clause was not invoked.
45. Specifying the reasons for not doing so, the Ministry intimated that there
was no requirement to invoke the L.D. clause as the delivery was completed within
the agreed delivery schedule.
Extent of utilization of the equipment actually delivered
46. Audit has observed that the actual utilization of the equipment purchased
due to operational urgency to de-mine 10 lakh mines revealed that most of the mine
fields had already been de-mined manually without the help of de-mining equipment.
Out of 2,78,300 mines proposed to be recovered, only 1182 mines (0.42 percent) were
recovered using the 19 de-mining equipment and remaining mines were recovered
manually.
47. Regarding, under utilization of the equipment procured, the Ministry
stated:—
“The equipment has been utilized extensively and has performed its task in
OP PARAKRAM.  This is also amply proved by the fact that during de-
mining, three equipment were damaged due to anti-tank mine blasts.  The
equipment will continue to be utilised in future for its entire service life,
including possible deployment in UN missions and hence will not result in
under-utilisation”.
48. While giving details of the reports from the field regarding the operational
performance of the equipment, the Ministry stated:
—
“Reports from field units on the performance of the equipment were positive
and confirmed that the equipment had performed its task effectively in the
conditions obtaining in the sectors of employment.
Some highlights of the reports were as follows:
—
(a) The equipment destroyed mines either by detonation or by
shattering them into pieces.
(b) The equipment actuates/destroys mines up to a depth of 80 cm. This
is satisfactory, since mines buried deeper than 80 cms. are   most
unlikely to cause accidental detonation by any other    vehicles/
personnel passing over the area”.
49. Audit has reported that as of March, 2004, 22 equipment were issued to
the field units and 2 equipment were kept as “reserved”. The actual utilization of the
equipment purchased due to operational urgency to de-mine 10 lakhs mines revealed

14
that most of the mine fields had already been de-mined manually without the help of
de-mining equipment due to undue delay in procurement of the equipment. Explaining
the reasons for this, the Ministry informed:—
“The equipment has been utilized in the de-mining operations post OP
PARAKRAM in the various command theatres.  This is clear from the fact
that 99.32% of the mines planned to be recovered from the 1370 mine fields
have been recovered, which has been possible due to a combination of
manual recovery and de-mining by usage of specialized equipment.
The de-mining equipment has not been procured for one-time utilization but
also future requirements.  Hence, exploitation of the equipment is need based
and on a long-term basis.  Therefore, the equipment has not been rendered
waste once the de-mining operation post OP PARAKARAM was
completed”.
No. of Mines recovered
50. Audit scrutiny has further revealed that out of 2,78,300 mines proposed
to be recovered, only 1182 mines (0.42 per cent) could be recovered using the
de-mining equipment imported under the Fast Track Procedure.  The remaining mines
had to be recovered manually.  Audit has thus concluded that by adopting the Fast
Track Procedure, the benefit of competitive rates through open tenders was lost,
while the very purpose of the Fast Track Procedure was defeated due to delayed
procurement and deployment.
51. On being asked as to how only 1182 mines were recovered using the
de-mining equipment, out of 2.78 lakh proposed to be recovered, the Ministry
replied:—
“ If all the mine fields had been de-mined by using this equipment instead
of being manually recovered it would not only have caused serious
deficiencies  in the holding of mines of the Indian Army, as all the mines
would have been destroyed, but also the entire de-mining equipment
damaged beyond economic repair/usage as any equipment cannot be
subjected to indefinite number of blasts/employed in a role for which it is
not designed for.
The equipment was successfully able to blast 1182 mines during the de-
mining operations.  These 1182 mines would otherwise have caused a number
of casualties if attempted to have been recovered manually as many were
not charted and had drifted away from their original locations.  Moreover,
de-mining operations are done in terms of area covered and number of mine
fields and not number of mines blasted.
99.32% of the mines planned to be recovered from the 1370 mine fields have
been recovered.  All mine fields barring one mine field were cleared of all
mines and handed over back to civilian authorities in October 2004. The
last mine field was also de-mined and handed over to civilians in April, 2005.
Out of the 10.6 Lakh mines laid, 6600 mines which were not recovered
physically are presumed to have been destroyed by various means”.

OBSERV ATIONS  AND  RECOMMENDATIONS
52. During the Operation Parakaram launched in December 16, 2001, the
Indian Army was mobilised along the borders. During this operation several mines
were laid extensively in the frontage area. Most of the minefields laid were on
agricultural land, which was required to be returned to the owners after the
termination of the operation in a usable condition after clearing the mines.
53. Mine clearance process, after the operation, involved two stages-initially
by manual recovery and  thereafter by mechanical means. Explaining the procedure
of de-mining the Ministry have indicated that during the process of manual recovery
of minefields, it is not possible to trace all the mines which could have drifted or
got further buried due to vagaries of nature i.e. flooding of area, shifting of soil/
sand wind etc. or dislocation due to animal/human interference. Hence there is need
for mechanical method which ensures that certain mines, which are not  found in
the process of manual recovery, are taken out.
54. The Committee note that for de-mining of over 10 lakh mines laid during
Operation Parakaram, the Army Headquarters proposed in August 2002 for
procurement of 40 de-mining equipment under ‘Fast Track Procedure’ through an
Empowered Committee. In order to minimize the risk of casualties involved in
manual de-mining and render the mined land 100% safe for cultivation, the Defence
Procurement Board approved the proposal for procurement of de-mining equipment
on a ‘Fast Track’ in October 2002. It is pertinent to note in this regard that while
Operation Parakaram was thought of in 2001, the Army sent the proposal for
procurement of de-mining equipment only in 2002. Needless to say that the Army
authorities woke up late in the matter for procurement of ‘Fast Track Equipment’
for de-mining purposes. The representative of the Ministry of Defence  also conceded
during evidence that earlier procurement of de-mining equipment could have been
thought of.
It is incomprehensible as to why the Ministry adopted the Fast Track
Procedure instead of the normal procedure when they did not take timely action
earlier to procure the same.  The instructions issued in 2001 regarding Fast Track
Procedure provide that such a procedure is to be adopted only in an operational
situation foreseen as imminent or for a situation where a crisis has emerged without
prior warning.  In the present case, the situation was not only  unforeseen but there
was ample time available with the Army authorities to conceive, plan and procure
the requisite equipment under the normal procedure itself.  The Committee,
therefore, feel that the necessity of  a Fast Track Procedure in this particular case
had arisen only because of the inaction on the part of concerned authorities earlier.
The Committee feel that adoption of Fast Track Procedure instead of normal
procedure for procurement of de-mining equipment is clearly indicative of lack of
perspective planning on the part of the concerned authorities. The Committee
emphasize that the Ministry should evolve a system so that the requirement for any
defence equipment is assessed timely and expeditious action taken to procure the
15

16
same under the normal procedure thereby dispensing with the need for a Fast Track
Mechanism.  Fast Track Procedure should be adopted only in emergent unavoidable
conditions.
55. The Committee note that based on technical literature and delivery
schedule offered by various firms, three firms supplying the required de-mining
equipment were shortlisted for evaluation by the Technical Evaluation Committee
(TEC), out of which, one firm was found to be technically superior and most suitable
for employment in the Indian operational scenario. According to the Ministry, de-
mining equipment of the selected firm was recommended after due evaluation of the
technical parameters against operational requirement and based on the performance
of the equipment during the demonstration organized for the Technical Evaluation
Committee.
56. The Committee find it strange that although the selected firm had offered
a delivery schedule of four months to the Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC)
for the supply of 32 equipment during technical evaluation, it was allowed a delivery
period of nine months for a lesser number of equipment in the contract. According
to the Ministry, being unaware of the procurement procedures of Ministry of
Defence, the vendor initially verbally intimated a delivery schedule of four months
assuming that the orders would be placed on them immediately by the Technical
Evaluation Committee itself and also due to higher production capacity of the firm
during winter as compared to summer.  The vendors subsequently proposed a revised
delivery schedule of 39 weeks for supply of 24 pieces of the equipment, when the
supply order was  finally placed on him.  Even though the equipment were sought to
be procured under Fast Track Procedure, the Government did not specify a shorter
delivery schedule but only asked the vendor that the goods must be delivered at the
earliest.  The Committee are inclined to conclude that the decision of the Government
to accept delivery period of nine months against the original period of four months
was not proper, which resulted in avoidable delay in receipt and actual utilization of
the equipment. This re-inforces the Committee’s belief that perhaps the equipment
could very well have been procured under normal procedure itself and there was
hardly any need for a Fast Track Procedure. If at all a decision had to be taken to
procure things urgently and that too under a Fast Track Mechanism, utmost
urgency should have been shown by the concerned authorities in planning and
procurement.
57. The Committee find that the Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC)
evaluated the equipment based on only live dynamic demonstrations against the
Operational Requirement at the Vendor’s premises. No trial evaluation is stated to
have been as such carried out on the equipment in India. However, Blast Tests were
carried out as part of the Joint Receipt Inspection (JRI) of the first consignment on
the first de-mining vehicles during 27-28 June, 2003. During these Blast Tests, it
was noticed that 5 out of 10 mines did not detonate, the vehicle got bogged down in
slushy area and was recovered using the dozer, the vehicle did not have any sensor
to indicate the blast of anti-personnel mines and the speed of the vehicle was also
very slow. The Ministry have tried to explain in their written submission that the

17
observations made by the trial team were not directly related to the operational
performance of the equipment and at no stage the equipment was found unsuitable
or rejected. However, the Ministry have not specifically indicated whether the
shortcomings pointed out during the Blast Tests were even taken up with the firm
and whether and when the firm had set right these shortcomings. The Committee
would therefore, like to be apprised in this regard and would also like to know as
to how the equipment worked satisfactorily subsequently. They desire that, in future,
the Ministry of Defence should take necessary precautions while framing the terms
and conditions of procurement contract, and ensure that the faults/shortcomings
brought to light during field trials are immediately rectified by the vendor.
58. Surprisingly, the contract executed with the supplier for procurement of
de-mining equipment did not contain any provision for life span of the equipment,
although all de-mining equipment are stated to have a specified shelf life. It has
been noticed that the equipment supplied  by the selected firm was assessed by
Controller of Quality Assurance (EE) {CQA(EE)} in the Ministry of Defence to have
a service life of 7 years and storage life of 10 years. The Ministry  have accepted
that they work on a principle of initial life of 10 years and extend the life by mid-
overhauls and generally work on a principle of 25 to 30 years of serviceable life of
equipment. The Committee are constrained to point out that since the stipulated
shelf life of the equipment was not explicitly mentioned in the contract, the Ministry’s
contention of the serviceable life of this particular equipment being 25 to 30 years
does not carry much weight. The Committee desire that while executing such
contracts in future, important provision of life-span of equipment should invariably
be considered carefully before entering into contract with the supplier.
59. The Committee note that the contract was concluded with the firm in
March, 2003,  five months after the stipulated supply date, for the supply of
24 de-mining equipment. The equipment was received between June, 2003 and
March 2004, 8 to 16 months beyond the date indicated by Army HQrs. Even after
extension of the delivery schedule, 50 percent of the ordered equipment, i.e.
12 equipment were supplied only after the expiry of the delivery period of 9 months.
It may not be out of place to mention here that the equipment was required rather
urgently for de-mining mine fields as a consequence of Army operation in 2001.
Given such an urgency, the cumulative delay in delivery of the equipment is
inexplicable.
The Committee further observe that though there was substantial delay
in completing the supply, Liquidated Damages (L.D). Clause was not invoked and
Penalty was not imposed on the vendor for the delay. The Ministry have contended
that there was no requirement to invoke LD clause as the delivery was completed
within the agreed delivery schedule. The Committee, however, believe that the
Ministry’s contention was based on the premise that the effective date for delivery
schedule was from the date of opening of letter of credit .  The delivery schedule
should have  commenced from the date on which  the advance payment was made.
Thus, there was a delay in completing the supply, for which the LD clause should
necessarily have been invoked on the vendor. While deploring the lackadaisical

18
approach of the Ministry in enforcing the contract, the Committee recommend that
the Ministry should invariably incorporate a LD clause in all future contracts in
case of delayed delivery by the supplier and impose penalty on the vendor by reducing
the cost of the contract.
60. Out of 2,78,300 mines proposed to be recovered, only 1182 mines (0.42
per cent) were recovered using the de-mining equipment and remaining mines were
recovered manually.  It is, thus, evident that the equipment purchased due to
operational urgency was hardly utilized as most of the mine fields had already been
de-mined manually. The Ministry of Defence have tried to explain the poor utilization
of the equipment purchased by stating that if all the minefields had been de-mined
by using this equipment, it would not only have caused serious deficiencies in the
holding of mines, but also the entire de-mining equipment would have been damaged
beyond economic repair/usage, as any equipment cannot be subjected to indefinite
number of blasts or employed in a role for which it is not designed for. Further,
according to them, de-mining operations are done in terms of area covered and
number of mine fields and not number of mines blasted. The Committee find this
explanation of the Ministry untenable. If their argument were to be accepted, then
it is difficult to comprehend as to why there was a need for import of such a costly
equipment in large number and that too urgently under Fast Track Procedure. Either
these facts now being explained were not visualized earlier, or, there is something
inherently wrong in the system of conception, planning and procurement of urgently
required defence equipment. Although, the Ministry have contended that the de-
mining equipment has been utilized extensively, the Committee would like to be
apprised about the extent of utilization thereof for the de-mining required in
connection with Operation Parakaram and subsequently.
61. The facts narrated above abundantly confirm that the process of
acquisition of de-mining equipment by the Government leaves much to be desired.
The equipment procured under Fast Track Procedure obviously involved a higher
cost than that procured under the normal procedure. Further, whatever justification
existed for adopting the Fast Track Procedure appeared to be defeated when the
Ministry took such a long time in the negotiations for bringing the equipment to
the country. The placement of order on the foreign supplier was unduly delayed, the
supplier’s delivery schedule of four months intimated to the Technical Evaluation
Committee was enhanced to nine months and even after the enhancement of the
delivery schedule, 50 per cent of the ordered quantity i.e. 12 equipment were supplied
after the expiry of the delivery period of nine months. The delay in procurement
thus rendered the very purpose of procurement infructuous, as the defective and
old vintage mines had to be cleared manually. By adopting the Fast Track Procedure,
the benefit of competitive rates through open tenders was lost, while the very purpose
of the Fast Track Mechanism was defeated due to delayed procurement. The
Committee trust that the Ministry would now learn the right  lessons from this
experience and take adequate care to prevent recurrence of lapses witnessed in the
instant case, while avoiding the pitfalls of procurement through fast-track
mechanism.

APPENDIX  I
PARAGRAPH 2.2 OF THE REPORT OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR
GENERAL OF INDIA FOR THE YEAR ENDED 31 MARCH, 2004 (NO. 6 OF
2005) UNION GOVERNMENT (DEFENCE SERVICES – ARMY AND
ORDNANCE FACTORIES) ON “DELAYED PURCHASE AND
INSIGNIFICANT UTILISATION OF EQUIPMENT PROCURED
UNDER F AST TRACK PROCEDURE”
Ministry of Defence while formulating the guidelines for Fast Track
Procedure (FTP) in August 2002 indicated a time frame of six to nine months and
in exceptional cases of 12 months for items to be imported. Army Headquarters
proposed in August 2002 procurement of 40 De-mining Equipment under FTP
through an Empowered Committee for de-mining over 10 lakh mines laid in the
Western Front during Operation Parakram. They wanted the equipment urgently
by October 2002 in order to minimize the risk of casualty involved in manual de-
mining and to free the mined land for cultivation. The Defence Procurement Board
approved the proposal on October 1, 2002.
A Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) visited three shortlisted firms,
located abroad from 25 October, 2002 to 4 November 2002 for technical evaluation
of de-mining equipment. TEC in its report (November 2002) found one of them
suitable for employment in the Indian operational scenario. The firm had given a
delivery schedule of four months for 32 equipment from the date of signing the
contract. The TEC, however, recommended to procure only a part of the sanctioned
quantity considering the limited exploitation of the equipment, lack of sufficient
data and the need for further examining its employability in Indian terrain.
In view of the operational urgency, the Price Negotiation Committee (PNC)
accepted the unit price of Euro 730000/724000 (Rs 3.98 crore/3.95 crore) offered
by the firm. Accordingly, a contract was concluded with the firm in March, 2003,
five months after the stipulated supply date, for the supply of 24 mining
equipment alongwith accessories at a total cost of Euro 19.05 million equivalent
to Rs. 103.91 crore. The delivery period was nine months from the date of the
contract even though the firm had given a delivery schedule of four months for
the supply of 32 equipment during technical evaluation. Equipment were received
at Engineer Stores Depots, Delhi between June 2003 and March 2004, eight to
16 months beyond the date indicated by Army Headquarters. As of March 2004,
22 equipment were issued to the field units and two equipment were kept as
“Reserve”. The actual utilisation of the equipment purchased due to operational
urgency to demine 10 lakh mines revealed that most of the mine fields had already
been demined manually without the help of demining equipment due to delay in
procurement of the equipment.
19

20
The purchase was made through FTP keeping in view the urgency of the
equipment. Audit noticed that though the firm had offered a delivery schedule of
four months to the TEC, it was allowed a delivery period of nine months in the
contract.
The placement of order on the foreign supplier was delayed, the supplier's
delivery schedule of four months intimated to TEC was enhanced to nine months
and even after the enhancement of delivery schedule, 50 per cent  of the ordered
quantity  i.e. 12 equipment were supplied after the expiry of the delivery period of
nine months. By adopting the FTP, the benefit of Competitive rates through open
tenders was lost, while the very purpose of FTP was defeated due to delayed
procurement.
Out of 2,78,300 mines proposed to be recovered, only 1182 mines
(0.42 per cent ) were recovered using the 19 de-mining equipment and remaining
mines were recovered manually.
The matter was referred to the Ministry in August 2004; their reply was
awaited as of December 2004.

APPENDIX II
STATEMENT OF OBSERVATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/ Observations/Recommendations
No. No. Department
12 3 4
1. 52 Defence During the Operation Parakaram launched in
December 16, 2001, the Indian Army was mobilised
along the borders. During this operation several
mines were laid extensively in the frontage area.
Most of the minefields laid were on agricultural land,
which was required to be returned to the owners
after the termination of the operation in a usable
condition after clearing the mines.
2. 53 -do- Mine clearance process, after the operation,
involved two stages-initially by manual recovery
and  thereafter by mechanical means. Explaining the
procedure of de-mining the Ministry have indicated
that during the process of manual recovery of
minefields, it is not possible to trace all the mines
which could have drifted or got further buried due
to vagaries of nature  i.e. flooding of area, shifting
of soil/sand wind etc. or dislocation due to animal/
human interference. Hence there is need for
mechanical method which ensures that certain
mines, which are not  found in the process of manual
recovery, are taken out.
3. 54 -do- The Committee note that for de-mining of over 10
lakh mines laid during Operation Parakaram, the
Army Headquarters proposed in August 2002 for
procurement of 40 de-mining equipment under ‘Fast
Track Procedure’ through an Empowered Committee.
In order to minimize the risk of casualties involved
in manual de-mining and render the mined land
100% safe for cultivation, the Defence Procurement
Board approved the proposal for procurement of
de-mining equipment on a ‘Fast Track’ in October
2002. It is pertinent to note in this regard that while
Operation Parakaram was thought of in 2001, the
Army sent the proposal for procurement of
de-mining equipment only in 2002. Needless to say
that the Army authorities woke up late in the matter
for procurement of ‘Fast Track Equipment’ for
21

22
de-mining purposes. The representative of the
Ministry of Defence  also conceded during evidence
that earlier procurement of de-mining equipment
could have been thought of.
It is incomprehensible as to why the Ministry
adopted the Fast Track Procedure instead of the
normal procedure when they did not take timely
action earlier to procure the same.  The instructions
issued in 2001 regarding Fast Track Procedure
provide that such a procedure is to be adopted only
in an operational situation foreseen as imminent or
for a situation where a crisis has emerged without
prior warning.  In the present case, the situation was
not only  unforeseen but there was ample time
available with the Army authorities to conceive,
plan and procure the requisite equipment under the
normal procedure itself.  The Committee, therefore,
feel that the necessity of  a Fast Track Procedure in
this particular case had arisen only because of the
inaction on the part of concerned authorities earlier.
The Committee feel that adoption of Fast Track
Procedure instead of normal procedure for
procurement of de-mining equipment is clearly
indicative of lack of perspective planning on the part
of the concerned authorities. The Committee
emphasize that the Ministry should evolve a system
so that the requirement for any defence equipment
is assessed timely and expeditious action taken to
procure the same under the normal procedure
thereby dispensing with the need for a Fast Track
Mechanism.  Fast Track Procedure should be
adopted only in emergent unavoidable conditions.
4. 55 Defence The Committee note that based on technical
literature and delivery schedule offered by various
firms, three firms supplying the required de-mining
equipment were shortlisted for evaluation by the
Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC), out of which,
one firm was found to be technically superior and
most suitable for employment in the Indian
operational scenario. According to the Ministry,
de-mining equipment of the selected firm was
recommended after due evaluation of the technical
parameters against operational requirement and
12 3 4

23
based on the performance of the equipment during
the demonstration organized for the Technical
Evaluation Committee.
5. 56 Defence The Committee find it strange that although the
selected firm had offered a delivery schedule of four
months to the Technical Evaluation Committee
(TEC) for the supply of 32 equipment during
technical evaluation, it was allowed a delivery
period of nine months for a lesser number of
equipment in the contract. According to the
Ministry, being unaware of the procurement
procedures of Ministry of Defence, the vendor
initially verbally intimated a delivery schedule of
four months assuming that the orders would be
placed on them immediately by the Technical
Evaluation Committee itself and also due to higher
production capacity of the firm during winter as
compared to summer.  The vendors subsequently
proposed a revised delivery schedule of 39 weeks
for supply of 24 pieces of the equipment, when the
supply order was  finally placed on him.  Even
though the equipment were sought to be procured
under Fast Track Procedure, the Government did not
specify a shorter delivery schedule but only asked
the vendor that the goods must be delivered at the
earliest.  The Committee are inclined to conclude that
the decision of the Government to accept delivery
period of nine months against the original period
of four months was not proper, which resulted in
avoidable delay in receipt and actual utilization of
the equipment. This re-inforces the Committee’s
belief that perhaps the equipment could very well
have been procured under normal procedure itself
and there was hardly any need for a Fast Track
Procedure. If at all a decision had to be taken to
procure things urgently and that too under a Fast
Track Mechanism, utmost urgency should have
been shown by the concerned authorities in
planning and procurement.
6. 57 -do- The Committee find that the Technical Evaluation
Committee (TEC) evaluated the equipment based on
only live dynamic demonstrations against the
Operational Requirement at the Vendor’s premises.
12 3 4

24
No trial evaluation is stated to have been as such
carried out on the equipment in India. However,
Blast Tests were carried out as part of the Joint
Receipt Inspection (JRI) of the first consignment on
the first de-mining vehicles during 27-28 June, 2003.
During these Blast Tests, it was noticed that 5 out
of 10 mines did not detonate, the vehicle got
bogged down in slushy area and was recovered
using the dozer, the vehicle did not have any sensor
to indicate the blast of anti-personnel mines and the
speed of the vehicle was also very slow. The
Ministry have tried to explain in their written
submission that the observations made by the trial
team were not directly related to the operational
performance of the equipment and at no stage the
equipment was found unsuitable or rejected.
However, the Ministry have not specifically
indicated whether the shortcomings pointed out
during the Blast Tests were even taken up with the
firm and whether and when the firm had set right
these shortcomings. The Committee would
therefore, like to be apprised in this regard and
would also like to know as to how the equipment
worked satisfactorily subsequently. They desire
that, in future, the Ministry of Defence should take
necessary precautions while framing the terms and
conditions of procurement contract, and ensure that
the faults/shortcomings brought to light during field
trials are immediately rectified by the vendor.
7. 58 Defence Surprisingly, the contract executed with the supplier
for procurement of de-mining equipment did not
contain any provision for life span of the equipment,
although all de-mining equipment are stated to have
a specified shelf life. It has been noticed that the
equipment supplied  by the selected firm was
assessed by Controller of Quality Assurance (EE)
{CQA(EE)} in the Ministry of Defence to have a
service life of 7 years and storage life of 10 years.
The Ministry  have accepted that they work on a
principle of initial life of 10 years and extend the life
by mid-overhauls and generally work on a principle
of 25 to 30 years of serviceable life of equipment.
The Committee are constrained to point out that
12 3 4

25
since the stipulated shelf life of the equipment was
not explicitly mentioned in the contract, the
Ministry’s contention of the serviceable life of this
particular equipment being 25 to 30 years does not
carry much weight. The Committee desire that while
executing such contracts in future, important
provision of life-span of equipment should
invariably be considered carefully before entering
into contract with the supplier.
8. 59 Defence The Committee note that the contract was
concluded with the firm in March, 2003,  five months
after the stipulated supply date, for the supply of
24 de-mining equipment. The equipment was
received between June, 2003 and March 2004, 8 to
16 months beyond the date indicated by Army
HQrs. Even after extension of the delivery schedule,
50 percent of the ordered equipment,  i.e.
12 equipment were supplied only after the expiry of
the delivery period of 9 months. It may not be out
of place to mention here that the equipment was
required rather urgently for de-mining mine fields
as a consequence of Army operation in 2001. Given
such an urgency, the cumulative delay in delivery
of the equipment is inexplicable.
The Committee further observe that though there
was substantial delay in completing the supply,
Liquidated Damages (L.D). Clause was not invoked
and Penalty was not imposed on the vendor for the
delay. The Ministry have contended that there was
no requirement to invoke LD clause as the delivery
was completed within the agreed delivery schedule.
The Committee, however, believe that the Ministry’s
contention was based on the premise that the
effective date for delivery schedule was from the
date of opening of letter of credit.  The delivery
schedule should have  commenced from the date
on which  the advance payment was made. Thus,
there was a delay in completing the supply, for
which the LD clause should necessarily have been
invoked on the vendor. While deploring the
lackadaisical approach of the Ministry in enforcing
the contract, the Committee recommend that the
Ministry should invariably incorporate a LD clause
12 3 4

26
in all future contracts in case of delayed delivery
by the supplier and impose penalty on the vendor
by reducing the cost of the contract.
9. 60 Defence Out of 2,78,300 mines proposed to be recovered,
only 1182 mines (0.42 percent) were recovered using
the de-mining equipment and remaining mines were
recovered manually.  It is, thus, evident that the
equipment purchased due to operational urgency
was hardly utilized as most of the mine fields had
already been de-mined manually. The Ministry of
Defence have tried to explain the poor utilization of
the equipment purchased by stating that if all the
mine fields had been de-mined by using this
equipment, it would not only have caused serious
deficiencies in the holding of mines, but also the
entire de-mining equipment would have been
damaged beyond economic repair/usage, as any
equipment cannot be subjected to indefinite
number of blasts or employed in a role for which it
is not designed for. Further, according to them, de-
mining operations are done in terms of area covered
and number of mine fields and not number of mines
blasted. The Committee find this explanation of the
Ministry untenable. If their argument were to be
accepted, then it is difficult to comprehend as to
why there was a need for import of such a costly
equipment in large number and that too urgently
under Fast Track Procedure. Either these facts now
being explained were not visualized earlier, or, there
is something inherently wrong in the system of
conception, planning and procurement of urgently
required defence equipment. Although, the Ministry
have contended that the de-mining equipment has
been utilized extensively, the Committee would like
to be apprised about the extent of utilization thereof
for the de-mining required in connection with
Operation Parakaram and subsequently.
10. 61 -do- The facts narrated above abundantly confirm that
the process of acquisition of de-mining equipment
by the Government leaves much to be desired. The
equipment procured under Fast Track Procedure
obviously involved a higher cost than that procured
under the normal procedure. Further, whatever
12 3 4

27
justification existed for adopting the Fast Track
Procedure appeared to be defeated when the
Ministry took such a long time in the negotiations
for bringing the equipment to the country. The
placement of order on the foreign supplier was
unduly delayed, the supplier’s delivery schedule of
four months intimated to the Technical Evaluation
Committee was enhanced to nine months and even
after the enhancement of the delivery schedule,
50 percent of the ordered quantity i.e. 12 equipment
were supplied after the expiry of the delivery period
of nine months. The delay in procurement thus
rendered the very purpose of procurement
infructuous, as the defective and old vintage mines
had to be cleared manually. By adopting the Fast
Track Procedure, the benefit of competitive rates
through open tenders was lost, while the very
purpose of the Fast Track Mechanism was defeated
due to delayed procurement. The Committee trust
that the Ministry would now learn the right  lessons
from this experience and take adequate care to
prevent recurrence of lapses witnessed in the
instant case, while avoiding the pitfalls of
procurement through fast-track mechanism.
12 3 4

MINUTES OF THE SEVENTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2005-2006) HELD ON 6TH JANUARY , 2006
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1300 hrs. on 6th January, 2006 in
Committee Room “E”, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Raghunath Jha
3. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
4. Dr. R. Senthil
5. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
6. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya  Sabha
7. Shri R. K. Dhawan
8. Shri V . Narayanasamy
9. Shri Jairam Ramesh
10. Prof. R. B. S. Verma
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri S. K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2.  Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3.  Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Officers of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India
1. Shri V . N. Kaul — Comptroller & Auditor General
2. Shri U. Bhattacharya — ADAI
3. Shri B. K. Chattopadhyay — Director General of Audit (Defence Services)
Representatives of the Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence)
1. Shri Shekhar Dutt — Defence Secretary
2. Shri V . K. Misra — Finance Advisor (DS)
3. Shri S. Banerjee — Director General (Acq)
4. Shri P.K. Anand — JS & AM (LS)
5. Shri Gautam Chatterjee — JS (O/N)
6. Maj. Gen. H. S. Sehgal — TM (LS)
28

29
Army Headquarters
7. Maj. Gen. A.K. Mehra — ADGWE
8. Maj. Gen. S.C. Gogna — ADGES
2. At the outset, the Chairman, welcomed the Members of the Committee
to the sitting and wished everybody a happy and prosperous New Year. The
Chairman informed the Members that the sitting has been convened to take oral
evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of Defence (Department of
Defence) on Paragraph 2.2 of Audit Report No. 6 of 2005 (Defence Services)
pertaining to “delayed purchase and insignificant utilisation of equipment
procured under Fast Track Procedure”. Thereafter, the Officers of the C&AG
briefed the Committee on the specific points arising out of the Audit Para. The
representatives of the Ministry of Defence (Department of Defence) were then
called and the Committee commenced the oral evidence.
3. To begin with, the Army Authorities made an audio-visual presentation,
which inter-alia  explained the process of laying and removing of land mines.
The Defence Secretary then explained the various points arising out of Audit
Para. To certain queries, for which the witnesses could not give satisfactory
reply, the Hon'ble  Chairman directed the Defence Secretary to furnish the
requisite information in writing at the earliest.
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on
record.
The Committee then adjourned.

MINUTES OF THE FOURTEENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2006-2007) HELD ON 31st OCTOBER, 2006.
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1245 hrs. on 31st October, 2006 in Committee
Room “A”, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri R.L. Jalappa
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Shri Brajesh Pathak
7. Prof. M. Ramadass
8. Shri Kharabela Swain
9. Shri K.V. Thangkabalu
10. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya  Sabha
11. Shri Janardhana Poojary
12. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
13. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
14. Dr. K. Malaisamy
15. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri A.K. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2.  Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3.  Smt. M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
4. Shri R.K. Suryanarayanan — Assistant Director
Officers of the office of C&AG of India
1. Shri Kanwal Nath — DAI
2. Ms. Subhashini Srinivasan — Principal Director (Railways)
30

31
Representatives of Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)
****** ****** ****** ****** ******
2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the
sitting. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of the
following draft Reports:
(i) Draft Report relating to “Injudicious Waiver of Demurrage Charges”
(Railways).
(ii) Draft Report relating to “Delayed purchase and insignificant utilization
of equipment procured under Fast Track Procedure” (Defence).
(iii) Draft Report on Action Taken on 12th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)
relating to “Allotment of Land to Private Hospitals and Dispensaries
by DDA”.
After some deliberations, the Committee adopted these draft Reports without
any amendments/modifications and authorized the Chairman to finalise and present
the same to Parliament in the light of factual verification done by Audit and the
security clearance received from the Ministry of Defence in respect of Report on
Fast Track Procedure.
3 . ****** ****** ****** ****** ******
4 . ****** ****** ****** ****** ******
5 . ****** ****** ****** ****** ******
The Committee then adjourned.