COUNCIL FOR ADVANCEMENT OF
PEOPLE’S ACTION AND RURAL
TECHNOLOGY (CAPART)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(DEPARTMENT OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
THIRTEENTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
SERVER5\657LS\658LS2.PM6.5 51

THIRTEENTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
COUNCIL FOR ADV ANCEMENT OF PEOPLE’S
ACTION AND RURAL TECHNOLOGY
(CAPART)
MINISTRY OF RURAL DEVELOPMENT
[Action Taken on 38th Report of Public Accounts Committee
13th Lok Sabha]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28.4.2005
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28.4.2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2005/Vaisakha 1927 (Saka)
SERVER5\657LS\658LS2.PM6.5 52

PAC No. 1776
Price: Rs. 20.00
©2005 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India
Press, Minto Road, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)..................................................................................................... (iii)
I
NTRODUCTION ................................................................................................... (v)
PART-I
CHAPTER I. Report ..................................................................................
CHAPTER II. Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
 by  the Government ............................................................
CHAPTER III. Observations/Recommendations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in the light of replies received from
Government. ........................................................................
C
HAPTER IV. Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
 and which require reiteration..............................................
C
HAPTER V . Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies. .......................
APPENDIX
Observations and Recommendations ..................................
PART-II
Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee held
on 15.04.2005 ......................................................................
5
43
44
45
46
49
1

COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
*6. Shri Naveen Jindal
7. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Dr. R. Senthil
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
13. Kunwar Revati Raman Singh
14. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Dr. K. Malaisamy
19. Shri V . Narayanasamy
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
21. Shri Jairam Ramesh
22. Prof. R.B.S. V arma
Secretariat
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
4. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Committee Officer
* Shri Naveen Jindal, MP has been elected a Member to the Committee on 16th December, 2004 vice
Shri A.R. Antulay, MP who resigned from the membership of the Committee w.e.f. 27th August, 2004.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of Public Accounts Committee having been authorised by the
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this Thirteenth Report on
action taken by Government on the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee
contained in their 38th Report (13th Lok Sabha) on “Council for Advancement of
People’s Action and Rural Technology (CAPART)”.
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 15th April, 2005. Minutes of the sitting form Part-II of the Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and have
also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter  by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
21 April, 2005 Chairman,
1 Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

ANDHRA PRADESH
1. M/s Vijay Book Agency, 11-1-477,
Mylargadda, Secundrabad-500361
2. M/s Booklinks Cooperation, 3-4-423/5 & 6,
Narayanguda, Hyderabad-500029.
3. M/s Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle,
Vasavya Nagar, Vijayawada-520006. (A.P.)
4. M/s Labour Law Publications, 873, Kothi
Bus Stand, Hyderabad-500001.
5. M/s Law Publico Pvt. Ltd., opp. Telegraph
Office, 5-1-873, Kothi, Hyderabad-500195.
6. Shri V.A.N. Raju, Newspaper Agent, H.No.
1-2-58, Rahamath Nagar, Kazipet-506003.
(A.P .)
7. M/s Vivekananda Law Publishers, Shop
No.8, opp. Secundrabad Courts,
Secundrabad-500010, Hyderabad.
BIHAR
8. Departmental Publications Sales Centre,
Vikas Bhavan, New-Secretariat, Patna
(Bihar).
9. M/s Progressive Book Centre, Zila School,
Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramma, Muzaffarpur-
842002 (Bihar).
GUJARAT
10. M/s Vijay Magazines Agency, Station Road,
Anand-388001 (Gujarat).
11. The New Order Book Company, Ellis Bridge,
Ahmedabad-380006. (T.No. 79065).
HARYANA
12. M/s Indian Documentation Service, Patel
Nagar, Post Box No. 13, Gurgaon-122001
(Haryana)
13. M/s Prabhu Book Service, Sadar Bazar,
Gurgaon-122001.
14. M/s Maharishi Dayanand University Book
Shop, Rohtak-124001. (Haryana)
JAMMU
15. M/s Haldia Publishers (India), 128-A,
Gandhi Nagar, Jammu-180004.
KARNATAKA
16. M/s People’s Book Houses, J.M. Palace
Road, Mysore-570024.
17. M/s Geetha Book House, K.R. Circle,
Mysore-570001.
18. The Editor, Youth Gazette No. 154, Jyoti
Niwas, 4th Cross, 4th Main, 2nd Phase,
Marjinath Nagar-560010 (Karnataka).
MAHARASHTRA
19. M/s Sunderdas Gian Chand, 601, Girgaum
Road, Near Princes Street, Bombay-400002.
20. The International Book Service, Deccan
Gymkhana, Pune-4.
21. The Current Book House, Maruti Lane,
Raghunath Dadaji Street, Bombay-400001.
22. M/s Usha Book Depot, “Law Book Sellers
and Publishers” Agents Govt. Publications,
585, Chira Bazar, Khar House, Bombay-
400002.
23. M & J Services, Publishers Representative
Accounts & Law Book Seller, Mohan Kunj,
Ground Floor 68, Jyotiba Fule Road,
Nalgaum-Dadar, Bombay-400014.
24. The Marathwada Book Distributors,
Parmimal Khadkeshwar, Aurangabad-
431001.
25. M/s Pragati Jer Mahal, 432, Kalbadevi,
Road, Bombay-400002.
26. M/s Jaina Book Agency (India), 649-A,
Girgaum Road, Dhobi Talao, Bombay-
400002.
27. M/s Thosar Granihagar Shabu Lasmi, 201,
Samrath Nagar, Aurangabad-431009.
MANIPUR
28. M/s P.C. Jain & Co. Thangal Bazar, Imphal-
795001.
MEGHALAYA
29. M/s Paul’s Agency & Distributors, R.K. Mis-
sion Road, Laitumkharh, Shillong-793003.
PONDICHERRY
30. Editor of Debates, Legislative Assembly,
Department, Pondicherry-605001.
PUNJAB
31. M/s Lyall Book Depot, Chaura Bazar,
Ludhiana-141008.
RAJASTHAN
32. M/s Pitaliya Pustak Bhandar, Jaipur-302001.
TAMIL NADU
33. M/s C. Sitaraman & Co., 37, Royappettah
High Road Madras-600014.
34. Shri I. Gopalkrishnan, Principal, Salem
Sowdeswari College, Salem-636010
35. M/s M.M. Subscription Agencies, 123, Third
Street, Tatabad, Coimbatore-641012.
UTTAR PRADESH
36. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel Marg, P.B. No.
70, Allahabad, (U.P.)
37. M/s International Publicity Service, GPO
Box No. 1114, Varanasi-211001 (U.P.)
38. The Law Book Company (P) Ltd., Sardar
Patel Marg, P.B. No. 1004, Allahabad-
211001. (U.P.)
Sl. Name of Agent
No.
LIST OF AUTHORISED AGENTS FOR THE SALE OF LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
PUBLICATIONS
Sl. Name of Agent
No.

39. M/s S. Kumar & Associates, Marketing &
Sales Division, Information Group, 32,
Sarojini Devi Lane, Guru Govind Singh
Marg, GPO Box No. 251, Lucknow-226001.
40. M/s Ram Advani Bookseller, Hazrat Ganj,
GPO Box No. 154, Lucknow-226001.
WEST BENGAL
41. M/s Manimala Buys & Sells, 123, Bow Bazar
Street, Kolkata-700001.
42. M/s Bankura News Paper Agency,
Machantola, P.O. & Distt. Bankura-722101.
43. M/s Book Corporation, 4, R.N. Mukherjee
Road, Kolkata-700001.
44. M/s Bolpur Pustakalaya, Rabindra Sarani
(Shantiniketan) P.O. Bolpur (W.B.)
DELHI
45. M/s Jain Book Agency, C-9, Connaught
Place, New Delhi-110001 (T.Nos. 23321663
& 23320806)
46. M/s J.M. Jaina & Brothers, P . Box 1020,
Mori Gate, Delhi-110006.
47. M/s Oxford Book & Stationery Co., Scindia
House, Connaught Place, New Delhi-110001
(T. Nos. 23315308 & 23315896)
48. M/s Bookwell, 2/72 Sant Nirankari Colony,
Kingsway Camp, Delhi-110009 (T.Nos.
27112309 & 23268786)
49. M/s Rajendra Book Agency, IV-DR-59,
Lajpat Nagar Old, Double Storey, New Delhi-
110024. (T.Nos. 26412362 & 26412131).
50. M/s Ashok Book Agency, BH-82, Poorvi
Shalimar Bagh, Delhi-110033.
51. M/s Venus Enterprises, B-2/85, Phase-II,
Ashok Vihar, Delhi.
52. M/s Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd., 23/90,
Connaught Circus, New Delhi-110001.
(T.Nos. 23364448, 23364478).
53. M/s Amrit Book Co., N-21, Connaught Cir-
cus, New Delhi-110001 (T.No. 23310398)
54. M/s Books India Corporation, Publishers,
Importers & Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110002. (T.Nos. 269631 & 714465).
55. M/s Sangam Book Depot, 4378/4B, Murari
Lal Street, Ansari Road, Darya Ganj, New
Delhi-110002.
56. M/s Grover Book & Stationery Co., 58/109,
Sahyog Building, Nehru Place, New Delhi-
110019. (T.Nos. 26419877, 26419651,
26440902).
57. M/s Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18, Ansari
Road, New Delhi-110001.
58. M/s Universal Book Traders, 80 Gokhale
Market, Opp. New Courts, Delhi-110054.
59. M/s Eastern Book Co. (Sales),  Kashmere
Gate, Delhi-110006.
60. M/s International Publicity Service, GPO
Box No. 1114.
61. M/s Jain Book Agency (South End) 1,
Aurobindo Place, Hauz Khas, New Delhi-
110016.
62. M/s Seth & Co., Room No. 31-D, Block B,
Delhi High Court, Sher Shah Road, New
Delhi-110003.
63. M/s Dhaowantra Medical & Law House,
592, Lajpat Rai Market, Delhi-110006.
64. M/s Oxford Subscription Agency, A-13,
Green Park, Extension, Delhi-110016.
65. M/s K.L. Seth, B-55, Shakarpur, Delhi-
110092.
66. M/s Jaina Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala,, Bank Street, Karol Bagh,
New Delhi-110005.
67. M/s Kamal & Co., 27, DDA Shopping Cen-
tre, Arjun Nagar, Safdarjung Enclave, New
Delhi110029.
68. M/s Standard Book Co., 125, Municipal
Market, Connaught Place, P.B. No. 708, New
Delhi-110001. (T. Nos. 23712828,
23313899)
69. M/s Jayale(W) Agency, I-196, Naraina Vihar,
New Delhi-110028.
70. M/s Sat Narain & Sons. 40-A, Municipal
Market, Babar Road, Behind Modern
School, Barakhamba Road, New Delhi-
110001.
71. M/s R.K. Books, 40/21-A, Gautam Nagar,
New Delhi-110049.
72. M/s D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd., A/15-17, Mohan
Garden, Najafgarh Road, New Delhi-
110059.
73. M/s Ishwar Chandra Co., Baldev Bhawan,
9986, Ram Behari Road, Sarai Rohella, New
Delhi-110005.
74. M/s Vijay Book Service C/D/123/C
Pitampura, New Delhi-110034.
Sl. Name of Agent
No.
Sl. Name of Agent
No.
PRINTED BY THE MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI.

PART-I
CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report deals with the action taken by Government on the Recommendations
of the Public Accounts Committee (2002-2003) contained in their 38th Report
(13th Lok Sabha) on paragraph 25  of the Report of Comptroller and Auditor General
of India for the year ended 31st March 1997 (No. 4 of 1998), Union Government
(Civil)—Other Autonomous Bodies) relating to “Council for Advancement of People’s
Action and Rural Technology (CAPART).’’
2. The 38th Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 16th December, 2002
contained 12 Observations/Recommendations. The Action Taken Notes in respect of
all the Observations/Recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee have been
received from the Government. These have been broadly categorised as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommedations that have been accepted by the Government
Paragraph Nos. 11.1,11.3, 11.4, 11.6, 11.7, 11.8, 11.9, 11.10, 11.11 & 11.12
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government
Paragraph No. 11.5
(iii) Observations/Recommendations replies to which have not been accepted
by the Committee and which require reiteration
Paragraph No. 11.2
(iv) Observations/Recommendations to which the Government have furnished
interim replies
-NIL-
3. The action taken notes furnished by the Ministry of Rural Development have
been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal
with the action taken by the Government on some of the Observations/
Recommendations which need reiteration or merit comments.
4. In order to integrate and hasten the process of socio-economic and technological
empowerment of the rural poor, the Council for Advancement of People’s Action and
Rural Technology (CAPART) was set up in September  1986 by merging  the Council
for Advancement of Rural Technology (CART) and People’s Action for Development
(India) (PADI). CAPART is an autonomous body, registered under the Society
Registration Act, 1860, under the aegis of the Ministry of Rural Development. It aims
at promoting and assisting V oluntary Organisations in implementing rural development
schemes and in their research efforts to develop rural technology and its dissemination.
CAPART provides assistance to V oluntary Organisations under eight main schemes,
1

2
five of which are Centrally sponsored schemes namely Jawahar Rozgar Yojana,
Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme, Central Rural Sanitation Programme,
Integrated Rural Development Programme, Development of Women and Children in
Rural Areas, Promotion of V oluntary Action in Rural Development, Organisation of
Beneficiaries of Anti-poverty Programme and Advancement of Rural Technology
Scheme.
Financial Management
(Paragraph 11.2)F)ccxxdddCCCCffff
5. The Public Accounts  Committee, in Paragraph 11.2  of their  Original Report,
had  noted that 15 to 47% of the grants  received by CAPART  (Ministry of Rural
Development) during the years  1991-92 to 1996-97 had remained unspent at the end
of each  year. The Audit  had attributed  the reasons for unspent grant as decrease in
the  number  of projects  sanctioned; release of on an average 41% of the funds in the
month of March; and non-exercise of control  in the release of funds.  The Ministry,
while admitting  the decrease  in the number of projects  sanctioned, had stated that
examination of the schemes during 1995-96 became  more critical leading  to dropping
of a large number of projects due to decentralisation of the work  and  introduction of
approval by the National Standing  Committees  and Regional  Committees  of CAPART.
The Ministry had conceded that the  details of on going  projects and the number of
expected  projects were not gathered by them before the release of funds. The Ministry
had subsequently stated that  the procedure for release  of funds was revised  in 1999
stipulating that release would be made on receipt of quarterly report giving  details of
the  on-going  projects, projects  awaiting clearance, projects  expected during the
next quarter and the details of funds position. With regard to release of funds in lump
sum in the month of March,  the representative  of the Ministry had deposed before the
Committee that the Institute of Public Auditors  were looking into the matter and they
would suggest action to be taken to improve the system of release of funds.  The
Committee, accordingly, were inclined  to conclude that the schemes were introduced
in haste, without proper planning and without framing  of guidelines for their
implementation. As prior to 1999, the grants  were released without  asking for  details
of ongoing  projects, the Committee, in their  Original  Report, had  expressed  the
hope that the Ministry/CAPART would ensure that the procedure revised in 1999
would be adhered to scrupulously and any deviation from the procedure/guidelines
would be dealt with sternly. The Committee had desired to be apprised of the
recommendations of the Institute  of Public  Auditors (IPA) and the action taken  thereon
to avoid rush of sanction of grants in the month of March.
6. In their  Action Taken Note, the Ministry have stated that the revised procedure
for release of funds  is being followed strictly. It has further been stated that the Institute
of Public  Auditors of India has not made any recommendation regarding   rush of
sanction of grants in the month of March.
7. The Committee had taken an adverse view of  the fact that 15 to 47% of the
grants  received  by the Council for Advancement  of People’s—Action and Rural
Technology (CAPART—Ministry of Rural Development) during  the years 1991-
92 to 1996-97, had remained  unspent  at the end of each year.  Contributing

3
factors  for this situation, according to the Ministry, were decrease   in the number
of projects  sanctioned; release of around 41% of the fund in the month  of March;
and non  exercise of proper  control while releasing funds. Moreover, a large
number of projects  were stated to have been  dropped  due to the need for  more
critical examination of the schemes   during 1995-96 as well as  decentralisation
of the Ministry. The Committee  had expressed the opinion  that the schemes
were introduced in haste, without  proper  planning and without  framing
guidelines for their implementation. The Ministry had conceded that the details
of on-going projects and the number of  expected  projects  were not  gathered by
them  before the release of  funds,  and had informed the Committee that the
Institute of Public  Auditors was looking  into   the  matter  with regard to release
of funds  in lump sum in the month of March so as to  suggest  the action to be
taken  to improve  the system  of release of funds. The Committee had desired  to
be apprised of the outcome of the exercise undertaken by Institute of Public
Auditors. The ministry have now informed in their Action Taken note that the
Institute has not made any recommendation in this regard. The Committee are
astonished that  the Institute did  not suggest any steps  for improvement in the
system of release of funds, which could  have helped  in streamlining  the existing
procedure  and plug  the loopholes, if any. The Ministry should have indicated
the precise  reasons as to why the Institute could not suggest any such measures
as well as how the Ministry  now is coping up with the situation. The Committee
expect  a precise reply from the Ministry in this regard.
8. According to the Ministry, the procedure  for release  of funds  was  revised
in the year 1999 stipulating that the funds would  be made available  on receipt of
quarterly report  indicating details of the on-going projects/projects  awaiting
clearances, projects expected  during the next quarter and the details of funds
positiion. In this  regard, the Committee had desired  that the said revised
procedure  should be scrupulously  adhered to. The Committee regret to observe
that the action taken reply submitted  by the Ministry merely states that the
revised procedure  for release of funds were being  followed strictly. The reply is
silent about the details in this regard as well as improvements in the overall
performance, if any, brought  about in pursuant to the implementation of the
said revised  procedure. The Committee would, therefore,  like to be apprised
about the details  regarding  revised procedure  for release  of funds, results
achieved so far as well  as the monitoring mechanism  in place to ensure  effective
utilisation  of funds  so allocated in this regard. They feel that the  Ministry
should have  taken adequate  care to initiate  precise action in furnishing  proper
reply in  response to the Committee’s  specific recommendation.
Regional Imbalances
(Paragraph 11.3)
9. In Paragraph 11.3 of their Report, the Committee  had noted that the objective
behind the setting up of CAPART was to encourage, promote  and assist voluntary
action in the implementation of rural development  schemes. They were concerned  to
note that the analysis of State-wise distribution of funds  had revealed that seven States
constituting  64% of rural population accounted for 73% of the total funds released

4
and the remaining  State/Union  Terrirotries  having rural  population of 36% received
only 27% of the funds. Strangely, Madhya Pradesh with the third highest rural population
in the country received 1.7% grants while the north eastern States (except Manipur)
received only nominal assistance. The Ministry  had conceded  unequal distribution
and stated that CAPART  was seized of the situtation and action was initiated  in 1994-
95 to correct the imbalance. The Committee had felt that the emphasis of the Ministry
should be to assist the V oluntary Organisations   to develop  rural technology  and, the
States should  receive assistance in proportion to their rural population. The  Committee
had also recommended that the V oluntary Organisations should be given proper
incentives  to work in  hilly, difficult  and remote areas.
10. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry have stated  that CAPART had noted
the regional  imbalances regarding  its activities and efforts  are being made to encourage
the promotion of voluntary action in States with a view to correct  the said  imbalances.
Special emphasis is being given to North East  and remote areas. To cite  an illustration,
it has been stated  that as against  30 awareness  workshops/trainings for Voluntary
Organisations conducted during 1995-2000 (5 years), 32 workshops had already  been
conducted from 2001-02 onwards till date (3 years)  in the North East with a view to
increase voluntary participation in rural development in these areas.
11. As regards the State-wise distribution of funds for implementation of various
rural development  schemes  by CAPART through  Voluntary  Organisations,
the Committee had felt that it was unequal  and disproportionate to the States’
with larger rural population, an example  of which was availability  of funds to
Madhya Pradesh. The Committee had desired  that the emphasis of the Ministry
should be on assisting the Voluntary Organisations   to develop rural technology
and that States  should receive  assistance in proportion to their rural population.
The  Committee had also desired that the Voluntary Organisations should be
given  proper incentives to work in hilly, difficult and remote  areas. Although
the Ministry have now informed the Committee that they are seized of the situation
and efforts are being  made to encourage the promotion of Voluntary
Organisations in the States with a view  to correct the said imbalances, the details
regarding  concrete steps taken in this connection have not been outlined. The
reply of the Ministry also does not specify the latest  position of State-wise
distribution of funds,   particularly in Madhya Pradesh, in support  of their
argument  to show that   the position is  much better now. Also the reply does not
properly explain in concrete terms, the  response to various  awareness workshops/
trainings  conducted for Voluntary Organisations and steps taken to provide
incentives  to the Voluntary Organisations to work in remote areas like  the North
East. This is  yet another example where the Ministry have furnished casual
reply to a specific recommendation. The Committee would, therefore, like to be
apprised of the latest position with regard to State-wise distribution of funds as
well as how the Voluntary Organisations are being motivated and the incentives
being offered to them so as to encourage them to work in hilly, difficult and
remote areas.

CHAPTER II
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS THAT HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
 11 The Council for Advancement of People’s Action and Rural Technology
(CAPART) was set up in September 1986 by merging the Council for Advancement of
Rural Technology  (CART) and People’s Action for Development (India) (PADI) with
a view to integrate  and hasten the process of socio-economic and technological
empowerment of the rural poor. CAPART provides financial assistance to Voluntary
Organisations aims at promoting and assisting voluntary organisations in implementing
rural development schemes in their  research efforts to develop rural technology and
its dissemination. The Audit test checked the records of the  CAPART for the period
1991-1992 to 1996-97, relating to  three main schemes, namely the Accelerated Rural
Water Supply Programme (ARWSP), Central Rural Sanitation Programme (CRSP)
and Advancement of Rural Technology Scheme (ARTS) accounting for 47% of the
total assistance received by  CAPART during the period. On examination of material
evidence, the Committee found some glaring shortcomings/irregularities in the
implementation of the schemes which are discussed in the succeeding paragraphs.
Action Taken
These are factual statements. Therefore, no comments are required.
Recommendation
13 The Committee note  that the objective behind the setting up of CAPART was to
encourage, promote and assist voluntary action in  the implementation of rural
development schemes. The analysis  of State-wise distribution of funds revealed that
seven States constituting 64% of rural population accounted  for 73% of the total
funds released and the remaining State/Union Territories having rural population of
36% received only 27% of the funds. Strangely, Madhya Pradesh with the third highest
rural population in the country received 1.7% grants  while the north eastern States
(except Manipur) received only nominal assistance. On being enquired, the Ministry
while conceding unequal distribution stated that CAPART was seized of the situation
and action was initiated in 1994-95 to correct the imbalance. The Committee feel that
the emphasis of the Ministry should be to assist the VOs to develop rural technology
and, so far as practicable, the States should receive assistance in proportion to their
rural population. The Committee also recommend that the VOs should be given proper
incentives to work in hilly, difficult and remote areas.
Action Taken
CAPART has noted the regional imbalances regarding its activities and efforts are being
made  to encourage the promotion of voluntary action in States with a view to correct the
said imbalances. Special emphasis is being  given to North East and remote areas.
5

6
To illustrate, as against 30 awareness workshops/trainings for VOs conducted during
1995-2000 (5 years), 32 workshops have already been conducted from 2001-02
onwards till date (3 years) in the North East with a view to increase voluntary
participation in rural development in these areas.
Recommendation
 The guidelines of CAPART stipulate that prior to sanction of the projects the
conditions like completion of three years of registration, pre-funding appraisal and
satisfactory performance of the past projects were mandatory.  Test check in audit
revealed that pre-funding was not conducted in 49 out of 50 cases under the Central
Rural Sanitation Programme (CRSP) Scheme and it was not conducted at all in
110 cases test checked under the Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme (ARWSP)
Scheme. Under ARWSP Scheme no evaluation was done at any stage in 22 cases and
post evaluation was done in 5 cases only. In 22 cases, no progress reports were received
at all while in 51 cases there was no follow up. Under CRSP Schemes no evaluation
was done in 18 cases and in 13 cases no progress reports were received out of
50 cases. Post evaluation was done only in 2 cases. According to the Ministry, pre
funding appraisal was made mandatory since April 1997 only but they did not consider
it a mandatory requirement for all projects as pre-funding appraisal was done where it
was so considered necessary. Taking  note of the apparently contradictory guidelines,
the Committee recommended that the guidelines may be suitably revised to avoid
ambivalence and to ensure that adequate pre-funding appraisal and post sanction
evaluation is done of VOs for the successful implementation of the schemes.
Action  Taken
CAPART has taken corrective steps and made it mandatory to conduct pre-funding
appraisal in all projects prior to sanction, mid-term evaluation prior to release of
subsequent installments and post evaluation—after completion of the project for the
successful implementation of the projects.
Recommendation
1.6: Yet another glaring irregularity brought to the notice of Committee was that
75 VOs who were members of various Committees of CAPART set up for screening
and approval of projects, were sanctioned a number of projects involving assistance
of Rs. 40.3 crore. Of these, 19 VOs received 506 projects involving Rs. 33 crore. One
VO in Bihar was sanctioned five projects in three months and other seven projects
after a gap of two months. Another VO in Gujarat was sanctioned seven projects
worth Rs. 52 lakh in one month. The Ministry, while conceding that there is a general
rule of limiting the number of sanctioned projects to a VO to three, stated that certain
exceptions were made. According to them, the sub-Committee constituted by the
Executive Committee (EC) went into the whole policy of CAPART and the report of
sub-Committee was considered by the EC in its meeting held on 5.8.2000. Subsequently,
in a post evidence note the Ministry stated that the final mechanism in this regard
would be decided on the finalization of the entire policy. The Committee are saddened
to observe that a number of projects were sanctioned indiscriminately and in
contravention of guidelines to VOs who were members of grant sanctioning

7
Committees. Obviously, such VOs being judges of their own cases, took advantage of
their membership to secure grants for their organisations. While considering such a
practice far from edifying, the Committee recommend that the grants given to such
VOs be stringently monitored  so as to ensure that the grants given are being used for
the intended purposes effectively. In order to maintain sanctity of grants approval
procedure, and to avoid recurrence of such irregularities, the Committee would like
the Government to expedite finalisation of new guidelines.
Action Taken
CAPART has finalized the Guidelines for sanctioning of projects to the VOs by the
NSCs/RCs. The majority of the members of the NSCs/RCs are non-officials and drawn
from the voluntary sector. According to the new Guidelines, as a policy imperative,
the members of the NSCs/RCs are not expected to promote proposals of VOs with
which they or their associations or members of their families are involved as office
bearers or partners. Such of the proposals relating to the VOs in which members are
office bearers shall not be dealt with at the level of RCs, but referred to the concerned
divisions at CAPART Head Quarters who on examination shall place them before the
concerned NSC with their comments.
Recommendation
The terms and conditions governing the sanction of projects required the VOs to
submit half yearly progress reports. Audit has pointed out that such reports were neither
submitted by many VOs nor were these obtained by CAPART  resulting in large number
of projects remaining incomplete. Only 8% of the projects were completed as on July
1997 although 95% of the projects were of short duration of six months to one year,
14082 projects involving Rs. 224.07 crore were incomplete and 64% of the incomplete
projects pertained to a period of over four years. According to Ministry, CAPART
sanctioned 18841 projects upto March 1997 out of which 7180 cases have since been
closed. Further, about 1000 files could not be immediately closed as the organisations
relating to these cases were under funding restrictions and action to settle the matter was
in progress while the remaining cases are under different stages of closure. Though the
Committee was assured by the Ministry that steps have been taken to improve monitoring
mechanism so as to ensure timely receipt of progress reports/completion reports etc. and
that special efforts have been made to review all the cases requiring closure, the  fact
remains that the terms and conditions were not followed and no effort was made by the
Ministry to obtain the progress reports. The Committee, therefore, recommend that a
thorough review of all the completed projects requiring closure be made expeditiously
and a suitable mechanism evolved to ensue that the progress report of every project is
obtained by CAPART and stern action taken against defaulting VOs.
Action Taken
CAPART has evolved a mechanism to close the completed projects expeditiously,
as per this system. Monitors are deputed to see the progress and the documents for
further processing and closure of the projects without waiting for the progress report
from the organisation. In case necessary documents are not submitted within the
stipulated time, the concerned VO is kept under funding restrictions.

8
A separate division has been formed at CAPART HQ to review and close the cases
of completed projects expeditiously. The Member Convenors of Regional Offices
have also been asked to review and close such cases expeditiously. Broad guidelines
for closing the project files have also been formulated.
Consequently, at the end of March 2003, 43.2% of the sanctioned project files have
been closed/terminated as against 8% reported by Audit at the end of July 1997.
Recommendation
The Committee note that CAPART had blacklisted 248 VOs in 16 States upto
December 1997 and out of an assistance of Rs. 4.05 crore provided to these VOs,
Rs. 2.42 crore or 60% were misutilised. CAPART could furnish reasons for blacklisting
209 VOs only. Audit has also highlighted that 23% of the VOs, inspected in Bihar
were found non-existent and out of 248 blacklisted VOs, CAPART referred 62 cases
to CBI and instituted departmental enquiry in 58 cases. While referring 34 cases to
CBI CAPART admitted the connivance of some of its officials including monitors
with respect to cases of cheating, forgery, criminal conspiracy and misappropriation
of funds. The Ministry also admitted that the documents submitted by VOs were forged
which were not scrutinized in CAPART. The Ministry in their action taken notes stated
that the 226 cases reported by Audit, 78 cases have been reviewed, show-cause notices
issued in 49 cases for blacklisting, and in 8 cases the VOs have been delisted from
“Further Assistance Stopped” (FAS) category and 21 were under examination at various
stages in the remaining 148 cases, investigation was said to be in hand. Undoubtedly,
owing to laxity on the part of grant sanctioning and monitoring authorities, fake VOs
maneuvered to get funds regularly for five to eight years. Test check in Audit also
revealed that proposals were sanctioned without verifying the eligibility, credibility,
professional competence of the VO and without verifying the genuineness of the
documents submitted. In certain cases, projects were sanctioned before completion of
mandatory period of three years of registration by the VOs. The Ministry have stated
that FIRs have been filed, show cause notices have been served for recovery of the
amounts misappropriated and disciplinary actions initiated against the officers involved.
The Committee are not at all happy with the pace at which CAPART is pursuing the
cases. The Committee, therefore, desired that all cases of irregularities pointed out in
audit be examined thoroughly without further loss of time and swift action taken to
recover the amount misappropriated by the said VOs. They would also like to be
apprised of the findings of the Institute of Public Auditors and action taken thereon to
recover the amount. The Committee futher desire that the list of blacklisted VOs be
compiled and furnished to them alongwith the reasons for such blacklisting. The status
of departmental proceedings against the officials found guilty of cheating, forgery and
conspiracy etc. be also placed before the Committee expeditiously.
Action Taken
1. The cases of irregularities pointed out in Audit are individually examined and
action initiated to recover the mis-utilised amount from the concerned VOs.
Simultaneously, CAPART has requested concerned/District Collectors  to recover the
amounts from blacklisted VOs by using their good offices. Superintendents of Police
have been requested to filed FIRs and the Registrars of Societies for de-registration of

9
the VOs. The Chief Secretaries and the Director-General of Police of the concerned
States have also been requested to intervene and help speedy settlement of the cases/
recovery of the funds.
2. On the basis of the review of the files and action taken against them are as under:—
Sl. Recommendations Action Taken
No.
1 Out of 375 project files involving release CAPART has recovered a
of grant of Rs. 487.51 lakh, Rs. 184.34 lakh is sum of Rs. 12.92 lakhs from
recommended for settlement. concerned VOs so far as a
Since the blacklisted cases reviewed by  result of discussions/
IPAI are very old and have become time vigorous pursuance with the
barred for recovery through the Civil Suites, defaulting VOs. In addition
it is feared that even the criminal proceedings to this, cases involving a
would not help recovery of sum of Rs. 87.01 lakhs
unutilized/misutilized funds. It would be have been settled after
better to initiate discussions with the necessary formalities, like
defaulting VOs for obtaining the refund of UC, audited accounts are
the unutilized/misutilized funds or audited complied with theVOs.
accounts and utilization certificates, etc.
3. The list of blacklisted VOs have been compiled with the reason for blacklisting
and is placed at  Annexure I.
4. The status of Departmental proceedings against the officials found guilty  of
various charges is placed at Annexure II.
Recommendation
Another case of considerable anxiety is the increase in overhead expenses. The
Committee noted that the administrative as well as projects linked expenses increased
from 5.9% in 1993-94 to 12.45% of disbursements in 1995-96. The Ministry stated
that the increase in administrative expenditure was mainly on account of the maintenance
charges payable to India Habitat Centre (IHC) for the area acquired for CAPART
headquarters. The Committee have been informed that CAPART acquired the existing
space at a provisional cost of Rs. 6.75 crore in May 1995 without obtaining the approval
of the Ministry of Rural Development while the old building at Janakpuri continued to
be vacant since 1995 on which Rs. 3.70 lakh are being spent annually on statutory
taxes and maintenance etc. CAPART stated that they were allotted office
accommodation in January 1994 at IHC through  the efforts of the Ministry and the
approval of the Executive Committee of CAPART was obtained when the acquisition
took place. In the considered opinion of the Committee, had CAPART acted with
prudence, the shifting of office of CAPART could have been so coordinated as to
avoid payment of Statutory taxes and maintenance charges of a vacant building. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the remedial action taken in this behalf by
the Ministry at the earliest.

10
Action Taken
CAPART has started using the Janakpuri building as a Training Centre for imparting
training to NGOs, Monitors, CAPART officials through Institute of Applied Manpower
Research (IAMR) which is an autonomous body under the Planning Commission,
Govt. of India w.e.f. 2003.
As per the MoU with IAMR, the Council will receive Rs. 3.00 lakhs annually as
institutional fee in teh 1st year and thereafter Rs. 4.00 lakhs per annum from IAMR for
using th epremises. IAMR will also meet the expenses on water, electricity charges etc.
Thus CAPART is not incurring any expenditure on the Janakpuri building. Overhead
charges of CAPART have also been reduced from 12.45% in 1995-96 to less than
10% in 2002-03.
Recommendation
The Committee hardly need to reiterate that monitoring is an essential pre-requisite
for the successful implementation of a scheme. The audit scrutiny of the schemes
revealed that the monitors appointed to assess the projects were expected to submit
their reports within 45 days of their appointment. In 22 cases, however, involving
assistance of Rs. 1.56 crore CAPART ordered evaluation which was either not
conducted  or there were delays of upto 14 months in the submission of the reports.
The Ministry in their replies stated that out of 505 monitors on the panel, 253 have
been reviewed and 103 monitors have been dropped from the Panel. The Committee
desire that all the remaining monitors be reviewed and the results of the review furnished
to them.
Action Taken
CAPART has reviewed the performance of all the Monitors. As a result of the
review, all the 505 monitors, who had completed their tenure, referred to above have
been dropped and fresh monitors have been empanelled in accordance with CAPART’
norms.  At present, there are 597 monitors in the list empanelled from 2000 and onwards.
Recommendation
The Committee note that the Tata Consultancy Services, engaged by CAPART to
suggest improvements in its monitoring mechanism, commented adversely, among
other things, on the monitoring criteria for pre-funding appraisal, system of collection
of information, empanelment policies for appointment of monitors, parameters for
voluntary organisation evaluation and monitoring, suitability of monitors etc. The
Ministry stated that the Executive Committee of CAPART has constituted a high
powered Committee to look into report of the Tata Consultancy Services and the
recommendations of the committee are under process for further action. The Committee
deplore the delay in taking action on the recommendations of the high powered
Committee and desire the Ministry to expedite action thereon without any further loss
of time. They would like to be apprised of the action taken in the matter.
Action Taken
The High Power Committee appointed by the Executive Committee (EC) CAPART
to look into the report of the Tata Consultancy Services (TCS) has considered and
made the following recommendations with reference to monitoring criteria for

11
pre-funding appraisal, system of collection of information, empanelment policies for
appointment of monitors, parameters for voluntary organization evaluation and
monitoring, suitability of monitors etc. The details of the recommendations of the
High Power Committee vis-a vis the action taken there against are as under:
No. Recommendations Action Taken
12 3
1. Pre-funding appraisal is an CAPART has made the Pre-
extremely important and funding  Appraisal mandatory.
significant part of project’s scrutiny. This is being strictly followed.
2. Empanelment policies for There are no specific recommendations
appointment of monitors, of High Power Committee on this
parameters for evaluating and aspect. However, the process of
monitoring. empanelment of monitors has been
revised on the basis of the comments
of TCS. As per the revised procedure
the following eligibility criteria has
been fixed for empanelment of
individual monitors:
• Should be atleast 30 years and
not more than 65 years of age.
• Should be atleast a graduate
from a recognized university,
experience in rural  develop-
ment sector.
• Should be willing to take up
any type of assignment
entrusted to him.
• Should not have a past criminal
record.
The performance of the monitors is
periodically reviewed and decision to
delist the monitors is taken on the
following grounds:
• Poor and sketchy reporting.
• Rejection of assignment
entrusted to Monitor.
• Not submitting report in time.
• Complaints received against
the Monitor.
• Mis-reporting and false-
reporting.

12
3. Evaluators to be restricted to 3 Guidelines have been issued
projects. Evaluators to be given restricting the number of
assignments in the same region evaluation assignments to an
as far as possible. individual to three at a time and eight
in a year and this norm  is being
strictly followed. Assignments are
given as far as possible to the evaluators
located in the same region.
4. System of collection of TCS commented that the system
information of collecting information on the
projects was not clearly understood by
the VOs.
High Power Committee has not made
any recommendations on this aspect.
However, keeping in view the comments
of the TCS, format for  collection of
information on VOs and projects have
been developed and incorporated in the
scheme guidelines including simplified
format for small VOs.
Recommendation
The Accelerated Rural Water Supply Programme (ARWSP) Scheme was taken up
by CAPART in 1986 for providing sustainable safe drinking water to the uncovered
rural population. Similarly, the Central Rural Water Programme (CRSP) Scheme  and
the Advancement of Rural Technology Scheme (ARTS) were launched for construction
of low cost individual latrines for household below poverty line and to further the
development of innovative technology and its dissemination respectively. According
to audit, a sample study conducted by CAPART through Socio-Economic Research
Centre, New Delhi in February 1996 of ARWSP and sample evaluation study got
conducted in July/August 1994 and December 1995 of CRSP revealed various
shortcomings/irregularities like inadequate discharge of water in 33% of handpumps
installed in U.P. location of handpumps favourable to a few households, provision of
poor quality construction of latrines and use of latrines for other purposes etc. The
Ministry stated that the guidelines were being revised to take care of the deficiencies
brought out in the similar studies in other districts of the country. Apparently, such
glaring shortcomings/irregularities speak volumes about the deficient and lackadaisical
implementation of the scheme. The Committee, therefore, desire that the evaluation
system be suitably revised and strengthened and the decision to conduct the sample
studies in each district of the country be implemented expeditiously.
Action Taken
Since April 1999, CAPART has discontinued individual schemes including CRSP
and ARWSP. Moreover, CAPART has been following three-tier system of monitoring
12 3

13
of each project proposal i.e. (a) Pre-funding appraisal before consideration/sanction
of the project proposal, (b) mid-term evaluation before release of subsequent
installments and (c) post evaluation after receipt of completion report, audited statement
of accounts and Utilisation certificate.
In addition to the above mentioned three-tier evaluation system, CAPART also
conducts Comprehensive Impact Assessment and Post Evaluation Studies by an
independent professional body or a team of expert consultants in all the cases where a
VO has been given assistance of more than Rs. 1 crore in a period of four years or
Rs. 50 lakhs in a single project.

ANNEXURE-I
Sl. Name and Address of VO Reason for Blacklisting
No.
12 3
ANDHRA PRADESH
1. Arundhatee Yuvajana Sangham (Bogus Organisation)
Bayyanagudam, Distt-West Godavari Misutilisation & Commission of
irregularities.
2. Brighter Integrated Rural Development Misappropriation of funds
Society, 1/180-4 Lal Bahadur Nagar,
Anantapur
3. Cuddapah District Gram Seva Samiti, Misutilisation
Hajirah-matulla street. Cuddapah
4. Cuddapah District Harijana Christava & Non-cooperation/misconduct
Venukabadina Jathula Vimochana
Simiti, 21/46 Cuddapah
5. Divya Joyti Mahilla, 1-8-31, Main Defunct Organisation and
Bazar, Allagadda, Distt. Kurnool Submission of Forged Document
6. Health and Welfare Service Non-cooperation with Monitor &
Centre, Gaddipaddu, Distt-Guntur serious irregularities
7. Joyti Mahila Mandali, RS Road, Kodur, Serious lapses detected prior to
Distt-Cuddapah sanction
8. Multipurpose Social Development Misutilisation & Commission of
Society, Vill. Gundlapalli irregularities
P .O Duggannagarjpalli, Via Pulivendla,
Distt.-Cuddapah
9. Nagamani Film and TV Training Institute Serious lapses detected prior to
of Acting, Nagamani Films, sanction
Distt.-Guntur
10. Navjeevana Rural Development Society, Serious lapses detected prior to
Sangham, Cuddapah sanction
11. Nirmala Weaker Section Mahila Non-cooperation/misconduct
Mandali, Distt.-Guntur
12. Rural Awakening Development Non-cooperation/misconduct
Organisation,  Anantapur
13. Rural Development and Integrated Serious lapses detected prior to
Social Evolution Society,  3-6-551/1, sanction
Himavath Nagar, Hyderabad
14

15
14. Rural Education Agricultural and Non-existent and running two
Community Health Society, Parallel Organisations
H.No. 16.32 SA, Dhamavaram,
Distt. Anantapur
15. Rural People Development Society, Non-cooperation/misconduct
Koyyalagudem, Vill. Chowtseppal Mandal
Distt. Nalgonda, A.P.
16. Social Service Society, Misutilisation & Commission of
Chinnamachupalli, Chennur Mandal, irregularities
Distt. Cuddappah
17. Social Welfare Society for Weaker Non-cooperation/misconduct
Community, Chinammachuppali, Chennur
Mandal, Cuddappah Distt.
18. Society for Promotion of Health Non-cooperation/misconduct
Education Rehabilitation and Education
(SPHERE) Anantpur
19. Society of Natural Studies (SONS) Non-cooperation misconduct
H.No. 206, Khanapuram Haveli Industrial
Area Khamman
20. Tala Marla Integrated Rural Non-cooperation misconduct
Development and Social Educational
Society, Sathya Sai Taluk,
Distt.  Anantpur,  Andhra Pradesh
21. The Girijan Labour Welfare Contract Serious lapses detected  prior to
Society, Cuddapah sanction
22. The Rayalaseema Nellore and Serious lapses detected  prior to
Prakasam Districts Weaker Section sanction
Rural Development Society, Cuddapah
23. The Rural Labour Welfare  Board, Serious lapses detected prior to
Cuddapah sanction
24. Young Evangelistic Society, Sai Nagar Misutilisation & Commission of
Distt. Anantapur irregularities
25. Down Trodden Development Society, Forgery of Registration Certificate
Vill. Thoorpuppali, Etimaripuram,
Penagalur Mandal, Distt. Cuddapah,
Andhra Pradesh
26. Kisan Development Society Misutilisation of funds
Peddanapalli, B Sittypali, Chilamathur,
Distt.—Anantapur, Andhra Pradesh.
12 3

16
ASSAM
Swahid Kanaklata Silpa Kala Kendra, Family based/misutilised
P .O.—Kowripathar, Sonitpur
BIHAR
1. Akhil Bhartiya Dalit Vikas Parishad VO Existence not Traceable
Anisabad, Patna
2. Akhil Bahartiya Gramin Vikas Seva VO Existence not Traceable
Parishad, Mokama, Patna
3. Akhil Bhartiya Samajik Patishthan VO Existence not Traceable
Parishad, Patna
4. Akhil Bhartiya Samajik Arthik Evam VO Existence not Traceable
Shaikshik Sansthan, 209, Ashiana
Tower, Patna
5. All India Rural Research Centre, Bailev VO Existence not Traceable
Road, Patna
6. All India Society for Research in Rural Forged Bank Assurance Letter
Area North Krishna Puri, submitted by the VO
10, Lal Bahadur  Shastri Marg, Patna.
7. Amba Samajik Vikas Sansthan, VO Existence not Traceable
Haziganj, Patna City, Patna
8. Bharat Mahila Vikas Sanstha, Urdu Submission of Forged Bank
Bazar , Distt-Darbhanga Assurance Letter
9. Bhartiya Gramin Kalyan Parishad, VO Existence not Traceable
Farasi, Mokama, Patna
10. Bhartiya Gramin Y uva Vikas, Jhauganj, VO Existence not Traceable
Patna City
11. Bhartiya Mahila Vikas Sangh, VO Existence not Traceable
At Bajitpur Road, PO. RS. Barh, Distt-Patna
12. Bhartiya Samajik Samta Nyaya Forged Bank Assurance Letter
Parishad At DB Road, PO. Saharsa submitted by the VO
13. Bihar Gramin Seva Parishad, Patna VO Existence not Traceable
14. Bihar Mahila Pragatisheel Kendra, VO Existence not Traceable
Patna
15. Bihar Nagrik Seva Parishad, Sabalpur, VO Existence not Traceable
Deedarganj, Patna
12 3

17
16. Bihar Paramarik Urja Vikas Sansthan, VO Existence not Traceable
Opp. Hathwa Market Bani Road, Patna
17. Bihar Pragatisheel Mahila Uthan Seva, VO Existence not Traceable
Daribabad, Bhadru Road, Serma Patna
City, Patna
18. Bihar Samaj Kalyan Vikas Parishad, Improper Implementation of
Distt-Mokama Projects
19. Bihar Seva Chetna, Nawada Forged Bank Assurance Letter
submitted by the VO
20. Darbhanga Zila Khadi Gramodya Misutilisation of the Grants by
Sansthan, Darbhanga the VO
21. Deshbhakati Chetna Parishad, Mohalla, VO Existence not Traceable
Purandapur, Patna
22. Dr. Ambedkar Gramabimukh Vikas VO Existence not Traceable
Sansthan, Farasi Mohalla, Mokama, Patna
23. Dr. Ambedkar Samaj Kalyankari Yojana VO Existence not Traceable
Samiti, Mokama, District, Patna
24. Dr. Zakir Hussain Samajik Adhyan VO Existence not Traceable
Vikas Chetna Parishad, Patna
25. Gramin Vikas Evam Anusandhan Kendra, VO Existence not Traceable
Bajitpur Road PO, RS, Barh, Distt. Patna
26. Guru Govind Singh Mahila Vikas VO Existence not Traceable
Parishad, Haminder Gali, Patna City, Patna
27. Guru Nanak Mahila Shilpa Kala Tout involvement confirmed
Kendra, Patna
28. Harijan Girijan Alpsankhyak Utthan VO Existence not Traceable
Parishad, Farsi Mohalla, Mokama
29. Hind Seva Sadan, Patna VO Existence not Traceable
30. Indra Antuodaya Gramabhimukh VO Existence not Traceable
Prashikshan Kendra, Mokama Distt.-Patna
31. Jai Prabha Gramabhimukh Antyodaya VO Existence not Traceable
Vidyapeeth, Mokama, Patna
32. Jai Prabha Gramin Chetna Vikas VO Existence not Traceable
Samiti, Chamoria, Patna City, Patna
33. Jan Vikas Samiti, Harn Nagar Colony, Serious Irregularities in the
Phulwari Shariiff, Patna Implementation of the Projects
34. Janbhimukh Vikas Sansthan, VO Existence not Traceable
Vill. Chattiparm Khusharupar, Patna
12 3

18
35. Kamla Nehru Samaj Kalyan Kendra, Improper Implementation of
Gopalganj, Sasaram, Distt-Rohtas Projects
36. Kanta Gramin Vikas Sansthan, Bihar Serious irregularities committed
by projects Holder and the Bank
in Loan Disbursement
37. Kasturba Pratisthan  Mahila Silai Kendra, VO Existence not Traceable
Neura, Patna
38. Kosikanchal Audyogik Vikas Parishad, Forged Bank assurance Letter
At & PO, Sharda Nagar, PO Saharsa Submitted by the VO
39. Lohia Seva Parishad, Doctor Toli, VO Existence not Traceable
Mokama, Patna
40. Lok Nayak Jai Prakash Ashram Seva VO Existence not Traceable
Parishad, Killa Road, Patna City, Patna
41. Mahila Mandal, Amber Lalu Pokhar,
Rupan Bhawan Bihar Sarif
42. Mata Jan Kalyan Pragatisheel Vikas VO Existence not Traceable
Parishad, Bela Moni, Hathidah, Patna
43. Narayani Mahila Silai Katai Prashikshan VO Existence not Traceable
Kendra, Patna
44. Nav Chetna Samiti, Patna VO Non-Existent
45. Parivartan Samajik Vikas Sansthan, VO Existence not Traceable
Patna
46. Pataliputra Bal Mahila Kalyan VO Existence not Traceable
Sansthan, Killa Road, Patna City, Patna
47. Pataliputra Gramin Sewa Vikas VO Existence not Traceable
Pratishthan, Haziganj, Patna City, Patna
48. Pidit Shoshit Harijan Evam Adivasi VO Existence not Traceable
Kalyan, B-13, Vijay Hanumannagarm, Patna
49. Rachna, Boring Road, Chauraha, Patna VO Existence not Traceable
50. Ramvati Prashikshan Kendra, Vill. & P.O. Malafide intention of the
Routara, Dist. Katihar Secretary of the VO
51. Rashmi Rati Nav Chetan Samiti, VO Existence not Traceable
Rashmi Jyoti Bhawan, New Jakkanpur, Patna
52. Rastriya Manav Kalyan Samiti, Distt. Patna Forged Bank Document
Submitted by the VO
53. Rupa Mahila Prashiksha Sansthan Improper Implementation of
At Bajitpur Road PO RS Barh, Patna Project and Misrepresentation
of the facts
12 3

19
54. Samajik Shaikshanik Vikas Kendra, At & Improper utilisation of Funds
P .O. Patrahi, R.S. Jhanjaharpur, by the VO
Distt Madhubani, Bihar
55. Samarpit, At Pachim Palli, PO/Distt- Improper Implementation of
Kisanganj Project
56. Sarvodaya Ashram, Bihar Sarif, Bihar Several Irregularities
57. Shri Rajendra Samaj Seva Sansthan, VO Existence not Traceable
Kunipukra, Bihar
58. Veer Kunwar Singh Samajik Jagriti VO Existence not Traceable
Parishad, Chamoria, Patna
59. Vinobha Gramabhimukh Chetna VO Existence not Traceable
Kendra, Patna City
60. Jan Vikas Parishad, Harun Nagar Forged Documents submitted in
Colony, P.O. Phulwari Sharif, Patna, Bihar the P/P
DELHI
1. All India Association for Social Welfare of Misutilisation of fund.
Down Trodden, 10/111 Khichripur,
New Delhi, Also at Chandra Tilak Marg,
East Babarpur, New Delhi
2. All India Samajothan Samiti, A-3—5/1, Lij Misutilisation of funds
Rohini,  Sector-7, Delhi
3. Bharat Seva Samiti, Sadatpur, Karawal Misutilisation of funds
Nagar Road, Delhi
4. Children and Widow Women Welfare Improper implementation of
Society, X-103/4, Gali No. 2, project & controlled by one
Brahampur, New Delhi man
5. Gram Bhrati Seva Ashram, Chandra Tilak Inter-relation with other VOs
House, India Marg, East Babarpur, New Delhi.
6. Lallit Koshi Seva Ashrm, 77, Bank Misappropriation
Colony, Nand Nagri, New Delhi.
7. North India Welfare Society, 279/1, Improper implementation of
X-Block, Gali No. 9, Brahampuri, New Project & controlled by one man
Delhi.
8. Samaj Sudhar Society, F-18, Non-cooperation with project &
Dharampura, Najafgarh, New Delhi. evaluator, family based and non-
submission of price.
9. Sanchetna, 237, Sector-III, R.K. Puram, Improper implementation
New Delhi.
12 3

20
10. Summer Field Education Society, H.No. 31, Improper implementation of
Gali No. 13-14, Brahampuri, New Delhi. Project & controlled by one
mand
11. Vikas Educational & Social Welfare Non-cooperation with project &
Society, 456/s-1, Vikaspuri, New Delhi. evaluator, these VO are run by
Shri Vinod Mehra, Shri Dharam
Veer Singh Rangal and their
family members
HARYANA
1. Banjar Bhumi Sundar Mandal, 19/563, Bogus records
Delhi Road, Sonipat Stand, Rohtak
2. Dehat Vikas Kendra, At & PO Dongada Improper Implementation
ahir, Distt. Mahendragarh
3. Gulia Gramodyog Sangha, Jahagirpuri, Improper Implementation
Distt.-Rohtak
4. Hindustan Processing Cereal & Pulses Improper Implementation
Gramodyog Institute, Banso Gate, Karnal
5. Lok Seva Dal, 137, Poo Chand Health Several Irregularities
Club, MT Distt.-Rohtak, Haryana
6. Rathee Grmodyog Sangh, Mie Several Irregularities
Bahadurgarh, Rohtak
7. Rural Development and Research Centre, Bogus records
Delhi Road, Sonipat Stand, Rohtak
8. Saraswati Educational Association, Multiple VO run by Family
484/18, Shivaji Park, Gurgaon (Haryana) Members
9. Sheed Club, Vill./PO-Sanjarwas, Non-cooperation with FCE
Distt. Bhiwani, Haryana during Monitoring
10. Social Welfare and Society for Weaker Multiple VO run by single/Same
Communities, 246, Bjola Niwas, Circular Office Bearer
Road, Jhajjar, Distt-Rohtak, Haryana
11. Women Social Welfare Society, 798/27, Several Irregularities
Medical Crossing, Model Town,
Distt. Rohtak, Haryana
JHARKHAND
1. Central Industrial and Technical VO Non-existent
Training-Cum-Production Institute,
Shastri Nagar, Gumla
2. Rahul Janwadi Sansthan, Rural Janbadi Serious Irregularities committed
Club, Sector-2, Site-4, Ranchi by Projrct Holder
3. Youth Mobilisation for National Manipulated and forged
Advancement, C/o Raghunath Roy, documents submitted by the VO
Govind Bhavan, Distt.-Deoghar,
Jharkhand
Sl. Name and Address of VO Reason for Blacklisting
No.
12 3

21
KERALA
1. Bapooji Sevak Samaj, PO DG ordered premature closure of
Chakkupallam Kumily, Idukki all the on going/pipeline projects
2. PKP Mamorial Mahila Samajam, PO Mis-appropriation funds
Nedungolan, Distt-Quilon
3. Thrikkadavoor Fish Culture Samiti, No work done
Kurupuzha Perinad, Quilon
KARNATAKA
1. A Need, Chiltra Kurungda Non-existent
Gauribidanur, Distt-Kolar
2. Adarsh Rural Development Society, Vill. Non-existent
Mittemari Tq. Bagepally, Distt.-Kolar
3. Amar Association, V eerandahalli Non-existent
extension, Gauribidanur, Distt.-Kolar
4. Bhagyajoyti Education trust, Ratna Non-existent
Niwas, 11-889/6, Ramanagar Gulbarga,
Distt.-Kolar
5. Chetna, C/o Bedanna Fort, Non-existent
Gauribidanr, Distt.-Kolar
6. Chinthalu Education & Rural Improper implementation of
Development Society, Rampatna Projects
Taluka Chikaballapur, Distt.-Kolar
7. Harijan Girijana Kalyan Samiti Non-existent
Guudibanda, Distt.-Kolar
8. Karthik Foundation, K.P. Temple Street Non-existent
Gauribidanur, Distt.-Kolar
9. Khadi Gramodyog Vikas Improper implementation of
Mandal, Malapur, K.P . Pec-Taluka, CRSP
Distt.-Mandya
10. Kumar Gramodyoga Sangha, Thirumani Non-cooperation with the
PO, Gudibanda Taluk, Distt-Kolar monitor
11. Lakshminarayan Rural Development Non-existent
Society, Ramanaswamypalli Baghepally,
Distt.-Kolar
12. Mahalaxmi Mahila Mandal, Via Non-existent
Peresendra Dibanda, Distt-Kolar
13. Mamatha Religious Association Improper implementation of
Uligombu, PO. Hampasandra, Projects
Gudibanda, Distt-Kolar
14. Mysore Social Education Centre, Overlapping of activities
Magadi, Distt-Bangalore
15. Nalanda Education & Economic Non-existent
12 3

22
Development Society, Beedagena Halli,
Chickballapur, Distt-Kolar
16. Sacred Rural Development, Bagepalli, Non-existent
Distt-Kolar
17. Shanthala Mahila Mandal, Non-existent
Chickballapur Taluk, Distt-Kolar
18. Shri Maruti Gramodyog Sangh, Doda Failed to implement project
Chimmahali, Distt-Kolar
19. Sri Venkateswara Silk Khadi  Gramodyog Non-existent
Sangh, POI. Gunlakothur, Distt-Kolar
20. Tripathi Welfare Society, Non-existent
Chowtathimmanahali, PO Gudibanda,
Distt-Kolar
21. Janardhan Khadi Gramodyog Industries Non-Reponse of VO
Association, Nandanazaman, Mittahali, Chin
MANIPUR
1. All Manipur Mushroom Grower Improper utilisation of funds
Association, Imphal
2. Maram Khonou Women’s Society, Non-existent
Distt-Senapati, Manipur
3. Uneven Rural Development Organisation, Malpractice Committed by the
H.O. Thoubal Bazar, Distt-Thoubal, VO
Manipur
4. South Eastern Child Care  Centre, Tried to bribe the monitor &
Khunarak, Irilbung Bazar, BPO-Keriao, Mis-utilisation of funds
Wangkhem, Manipur
5. Women Community Welfare Mis-utilisation of Funds
Association, Segu Road, Khunarakpuram
Leikai, Imphal, Manipur
6. Tamei Area Tribal Development Non Response of the VO
Association, Taloulong Village, PO Tamei,
Tamei, Distt-Tamenglong, Manipur
7. Sapermeian Women Society, Vill & PO Non Response of the VO
Spermeina, Sadar Hills, Distt-Senapati,
Manipur
8. Bangringlon Christain Women Society, Misutilisation of Funds
Office-cum-Rest House AR Ex-Servicemen
Association Minuthong Ragailong Road
Impphal, Manipur
MIZORAM
1. Samaritan Society of Mizoram, V-20, Forgery of registration certificate
Bunkawn, Aizawl, Mizoram
12 3

23
2. Centre for Development of Rural areas, Forgery of registration certificate
Bungkawn, Aizawl
3. Mizoram Buddhist Development Non implementation of CRSP
Welfare Association, Demaqire, Lungleil, Programme
Mizoram
MAHARASHTRA
1. Shri Yogananda Shikshan Prasarak Mis-Utilisation of Grants
Mandal, Partur, Distt-Jalna, Maharashtra
2. Madhubani Kusth Rog Nirmulan Serious Mis-Appropriation of
Sansthan, Jambulghat Talika Chimur, Funds
Distt-Chandrapur, Maharashtra
3. Gayatri Education Society, 89-East Improper Implementation
Wardhman Nagar, Nagpur-Maharashtra
4. Social Economic Assistance for Rural Mis-Utilisation of Grants
and City Habitats, 1/A, Prince of Wales
 Drive, Pune, Maharashtra
MADHY A PRADESH
1. Adarsh Gramin Seva Samiti, Bhopal Objectional activities
2. Banvasi Adivasi Uthan Seva Samiti, Non-existent and Submission of
Gadora, Morena Forged Documents
3. Chambal Shiksha Prasar Samiti, Serious Irregularities
Gadora, Morena
4. Lok Kalyan Samiti, C-8, Kaushal Nagar, Non Response of the VO
Gwalior, Madhya Pradesh
5. Madhya Bhartu, B-36, Kamla Nagar, Serious Irregularities
Distt.-Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh
6. Manav Vikas Samiti, Ganeshpura, Serious Irregularities
Morena, Madhya Pradesh
7. Priya Samajik Kalyan Seva, Samiti, Submission of Forged
House of Lamte, 203, Ansar Colony, Documents
MIG , Bhind Police station, Indore,
 Madhya Pradesh
8. Resources Development Institute, 1100, RTD Programme not
Quarters Area, Hikkarni Nagar, Bhopal Materialised
9. Satpuda Integrated Rural Development Non Response of the VO
Institution, Bhainsdehi, Distt-Betul,
Madhya Pradesh
10. Self Employed Women Association, Non Response of the VO
Gandhi Bhawan, Shyamla Hills, Distt-Bhopal,
 Madhya Pradesh
11. Shri Abhay Shikha Prasar Samiti Un-reliable organisation
Gughra, Distt-Jabalpur
12 3

24
NAGALAND
1. The western United Club, New Market Non-existent
Road, Daklane, Kohima
2. Children Welfare Society, Non-existent
Chiepfuchiepfe, Post Box No. 150,
Kohima
3. Tening Y outh Association, Tening Non-existent
Town, PO-Kohima, Post Box No. 168,
Kohima
4. Wisemen’s Fellowship Enterprises, Non-existent
V onkhesung Mission Compound,
Wokha/PB No.-283, Kohima
5. Likya Women Society, Likya Colony, Non-existent
Wokha Town, Wokha/forest colony,
PB No. 213, Distt-Dimapur
6. Lovistso Welfare Society, Vill/PO Non-existent
Viswema, Kohima
7. Zricon Club, Larie Colony, PO/Distt- Tried to bribe the monitor for
Kohima favourable report
8. Study and Action For Comprehensive Non Response of the VO
Development, P .B. No. 26, Dimapur,
Kohima, Nagaland
9. Centre for Rural Upliftment, C.R.U., Non Response of the VO
Building, Kohima-Imphal road, P.B.
No.-287, Distt-Kohima, Nagaland
10. Association of Tribal Welfare Forgery of Registration Certificate
Development, PB No. 117, Woodlands
Mansion Naharbari, Distt-Dimapur,
Nagaland
ORISSA
1. Community Action for Rural Mis-utilisation of Funds
Development (CARD), Bassam
Dhenkanal
2. Yugasakti Palli Unnayan Club, Complaint from village Sarpunch
Vill Baidya Kateni, PO-Lar,
Distt-Dhenkanal
12 3

25
3. Shri Aurbindo Pathagar, AR/PO Barada, Improper implementation of
Distt-Dhenkanal Programme
4. Manav Sambal Vikas Simiti, 27, Adverse report of Monitor
Buddeshwari Colony,  Bhubaneswar
5. Abaj Adivasi Harijana Seva Sangha, Non Response of the VO
At-Sansthapur, Via-Gondha,
Distt-Dhenkanal, Orissa
6. Rajiv Gandhi Youth Club, New Danapashi, Adverse report of Monitor
Distt-Dhenkanal, Orissa
RAJASTHAN
1. Adarsh Bal Vidya Mandir, Krishna Mis-Appropriation of Funds,
Colony, Hindaun city, Sawai Madhopur Duplication of work and Multiple
VO run by family members
2. Adarsh Bal Vidya Mandir Society, ward Mis-Appropriation of Funds,
No.-3 Khairahiganj, Distt. Alwar Duplication of work and Multiple
VO run by family members
3. Adarsh Bal Vidya Mandir Samiti, Ward Mis-Appropriation of Funds
No. 2, Mahashay Colony, Khedli Ganj, Duplication of work and Multiple
Alwar  VO run by family members
4. Akhil Bhartiya Vikas Sansthan, All India Mis-Appropriation of Funds,
Development Institute Hinduan city, Sawai Duplication of work and Multiple
Madhopur VO run by family members
5. Chetna Public School Shiksha Samiti, Inter relationship with Chetna
B-22, Sanjay Colony, Nehru Nagar, Public School Samiti an
Distt. Jaipur Blacklisted VO
6. Child Home Public School Shiksha Improper implementation of
Samiti, Plot No. 2, Barkat Nagar Kisan Projects and Poor quality of
 Marg, Jaipur  material were used
7. Gandhi Nav Yuvak Mandal, Baman Used foul means to get the project
Baroda, Gangapur city, Kaushalpur, sanctioned
Sawai Madhopur
8. Gandhi Shiksha Sansthan Samiti, Improper implementation of
Gangapur City, Distt.-Sawai Madhopur ARWSP & false reporting
12 3

26
9. Gandhi Y uva Mandal, Baman Baroda, Used foul means to get the
Gangapur City, Distt. Sawai Madhopur project sanctioned
10. Gramin Mewar Seva Samiti, Bharatpur Un-satisfactory work/
Vill V erur Nagar,  Bharatpur ARWSP
11. Gramin Vikas Society, Samogar, Khareri, Mis-Appropriation of Funds,
Sawai Madhopur Duplication of work and Multiple
VO run by family members
12. Kishori Shikshan & Prashikshan Udyogik Non-implementation
Sansthan, Kumharedil, Distt. Bharatpur
13. Narottam Vidya Mandir, Gher Kot False reporting and improper
Mania, Back side of Kotwalim implementation of Project
Distt. Bharatpur
14. Navjeevan Education and Evangilical DWCRA project not
Society, Gangapur city implemented in desired
manner
15. Navoday Samaj Kalyan Vikas Samiti, Forged documents
38, Arya Nagar, Alwar
16. Nehru Vidya Mandir Samiti, Golbagh Poor Implementation of CRSP
Road, Mathura Gate, Bharatpur
17. Rajasthan Gramin Vikas Samiti, Family based organisation
Rajgarh, Distt. Alwar
18. Rajasthan Mahila Bachchey Vikas Family based organisation
Samiti, Bharatpur
19. Rajasthan Mahila Bal Vikas Samiti Used foul means to get the project
Gherkota, Bhaniya Kumhare Gate, sanctioned
Bharatpur
20. Rural Education Development Society, Common office bearers of this
154, Nasiya Colony, Gangapur Society and Navjeevan E.E.
Society.
21. Sarvajanik Vikas Sewa Sansthan, Mis-Appropriation of Funds,
Lapawali, Hinduan, Sawai Madhopur Duplication of work and Multiple
VO run by family members
22. Tilak Balika Modern Shiksha, Jaipur Lack of Proper motivation/
misuse of  materials
23. Victoria Montessary School Shiksha Inter relationship with Chetana
Samiti D-16, Ram Nagar, Jaipur Public School Samiti, an
Blacklisted VO
12 3

27
24. Rural Development Society, Samogar Mis-Appropriation of Funds,
Khareri, Distt. Bharatpur Duplication of work and Multiple
VO run by family members
25. Rural Development Society, Lapavali, Mis-Appropriation of Funds,
Via Hinduan city, Distt.-Sawai Madhopur Duplication of work and Multiple
VO run by family members
TAMIL NADU
1. Raja Educational and Charitable Trust, Non response of the VO
Raja Nagar, V adakkanglam, Trunelveli,
Kattabomman Distt. Tamil Nadu
2. Selvam Educational and Charitable Non response of the VO
Trust, 4/59, Aneu Street, Ponnappandar
Colony, Nagercoil, Distt.-Kanyakumari,
Tamil Nadu
3. Sucheta Kriplani Development Centre, Financial irregularities &
Distt.-Ramnath Malpractices
4. Village Development Organisation, Non-existent
Pudhur Admangalam
5. Weal Organisation, Chathirapatti Defficiencies in the execution of
Village, PO, Poorvaeamkudi, projects.
Pudukkottai
UTTAR PRADESH
1. Adarsh Gramodyog Vikas Sansthan Improper Implementation
Distt.-Rampur, Guyya Talab
2. Akhil Bharatiya Kalyan Parishad, Serious Irregularities
At & P.O. Arahera, Agra
3. Anjana Samaj Kalyan Samiti, Paratapur, Non-Submission of Documents
Firozabad & Non-cooperation with the
Monitor
4. Arjunwahi Audyogik Vikas Sansthan Used foul means to get the
Jiyadech, Allahabad, U.P . project sanctioned
12 3

28
5. Arya Gramodaya Vidya Mandir Trust, Forged Bank letter
C-44, Jal Vayu Vihar Society, Sector-21,
Noida
6. Bhartiya Gramin Seva Mandal, Non-existent
Seshgrah, Distt.-Bareily
7. Bhartiya Gramya Vikas Samiti, Jwala Non Implementation of the
Nagar, Distt.-Rampur project
8. Bhartiya Gramya Vikas society, Adverse report of monitor
Lucknow
9. Bhartiya Mahila Vikas Sansthan, Adverse report of monitor
Dhamaura, Moradabad, U.P .
10. Bhartiya Vikas Sansthan, Purdilnagar, Forged Document
Aligarh-204124
11. Bhawani Shiksha Samiti, Vill./ Adverse report of monitor
PO-Chinauti, Distt.-Lucknow, U.P.
12. Child and Women Development Mis-appropriation of funds &
Society, Gangakhera, Near Kanosi incapable organisation
RDSO, Lucknow
13. Durgesh Shiksha Niketan Samiti, Adverse report of monitor
Vill.-Lohna, PO-Piparsano,
Lucknow
14. Forestry  and Rural Development Adverse Evaluation report
Organisation, 9 State Bank Colony,
Distt.-Muzaffarnagar, U.P .
15. Gram Vikas Sanstha, Vill. Pawasara, Common office bearers with
Distt-Moradabad, U.P. NEE Society
16. Gram Vikas Mandal, Shahpur Jainpur, Non Implementation
PO Arnavali, Bhola Ford, Meerut
17. Gram Vikas Sansthan, Mrihakur, Several Irregularities
Distt.-Agra, Uttar Pradesh
18. Gramodya At & PO Bhikhanpur, Several Irregularities &
Distt.-Ghaziabad Diversion of  funds
19. Gramodya Vikas Mandal, 147, Improper Implementation
Rambagh, Surajkund, Meerut, UP.
12 3

29
20. Gramodya Vill. Tehri, PO Deoria, Uttar Improper Implementation
Pradesh
21. Indrani Gramin Vikas Samiti, Patla, Non-utilisation & non-refund
Distt.-Rampur, of grant
22. Jagdeo Seva Sansthan, Deoria Khas, Non-existent
Deoria
23. Jai Bharat Nursery School Samiti, Non-response of VO
Gosain Talab, Civil Lines, Distt.-
Mirzapur, Uttar Pradesh
24. Jai Maa Padmavati Kalyan Samiti, 32, Forged signature of CAPART,
Hanumangarh, Distt.-Firozabad official to release the subsidy by
the VO
25. Jan Jagran Parishad, Saibabad, Non-cooperation with Monitor
Allahabad
26. Jan Kalyan Sansthan, Baldco Bhawan, Several Irregularities in the
Jal Kal Road, Deoria Execution of the Project and
Non-Co-operation with FCE
27. Jan Udyog Gramin Vikas Kalyan Samiti, Adverse Evaluation report
Ambedkar Colony, Distt.- Firozabad, U.P.
28. Kal Niketan Vidyalaya Samiti, Lucknow Adverse report of monitor
29. Kashi Hastkala Pratishthan, V aransi, Mis-Utilisation of funds
Uttar Pradesh
30. Khadi Gramodyog Seva Sadan, Improper Implementation and
Rampur, (COD farm, Aghapur Road) unsatisfactory performance
Rampur of the VO
31. Khadi Gramodyog Vikas Samiti, PO- Improper Implementation
Chaukuni, Distt.-Muradabad, Uttar
Pradesh
32. Laxmi Vikashit Seva Sansthan, Vill.-Jogia Forged registration certificate
PO Jogia, The Hathras, Distt.-Aligarh
33. Mahila Evam Bal Kalyan Samiti, Naini Forged Document
Lar, Deoria
34. Nautan Gram Vikash Samiti, At/PO Non-response of VO
Gowahar, Distt.-Bijnour, U.P.
35. Pragati Seva Sansthan, 151, Boarding False Documents submission/Mis
House, Hardoi represented the facts
12 3

30
36. Pushpa Vikas Samiti, 45-E, Civil Lines, Non-satisfactory implementation
Badaun
37. Raja Chet Singh Shiksha Sansthan, Non-Submission of Documents
Natilmli, V aranasi
38. Sahyog Gramodyog Vikas Sanstha, Non-implementation of the
C-1/100, Gandhi Nagar, Kumar Kunj, projects
 Moradabad
39. Rural Reforms, Moradabad Family Based Organisation
40. Serve India, Shashtri Nagar, Meerut In capable Organisation and the
project has not achieved the target
41. Sharda Seva Samiti, Vill. Chirgora, PO, Forged Document
Kinderpatti, Distt-Deoria
42. Shree Vidyanath Vidyalaya Samiti, Adverse report of monitor
Lucknow
43. Shri Durga Devi Seva Samiti, Mis-appropriation of funds &
Palliarailsing, P.O. Teriya, Tehsil misrepresentation of facts
Sandila, Distt.-Hardoi
44. Tara Devi Shiksha Samiti, Nehru Nagar, Forged Document
Deoria
45. Vikas Sanstha, Rakaba, Amila False reporting
46. Vinoba Adarsh Shiksha Samiti, Vinoba Forged Document
Near Nai Bazar Allahabad
47. Vivek Sadhana Mandir, Vill./PO. Gahmar Mis-Utilisation of funds
Patti, Chaudhary Rai, Distt.-Gazipur
48. Vivekananda Sanstha, Akbarpur, Faizabad False reporting
49. Youth Association For Rural Improper Implementation &
Development, Vill. Behta, Non-cooperation
Distt.-Bulandshahar
50. Yuva Evam Bal Vikas Samiti, Deoria Family Based Organisation &
Non-cooperation with Monitor
51. Manav Kalyan Evam Utthan Sansthan, Submission of forged
Mathura, U.P. documents to Rural
Development Ministry
52. Akhil Bharatiya Mahila Evam Bal Utthan Due to improper
Samiti, Distt.-Mirzapur implementation
53. Mahila Vikas Sansthan, Dehradun Due to improper
implementation
12 3

31
WEST BENGAL
1. Bayarshing Sibaji Sangha, PO Taldi, Adverse report of
Distt.-South, 24 Parganas, West Bangal monitor (housing)
2. Jan Kalyan Brotochari Sanstha, Vill. Malafide intention of VO
Morjada, PO-Hotar, Distt.-24 Parganas
(South), West Bangal
3. Management Society of Bhatar, Dispute among the functionary
Dr. Ambedkar Abasik Shiksha Niketan, as per the Notice of the
PO/At Karjana, Bhati, Bhatar, Advocate Matter was pending
Distt.-Burdwan with the court
4. Matangini Seva Sangh, West Bangal Complaint of Mis-appropriation
of funds as reported by the
FCE, substandard work and
change of beneficaries
5. Nari ‘O’ Shishu Kalyan Samiti, At/PO- Several Irregularities & Mis-
Ganesh Nagar, Distt.-24 Parganas (S) utilisation of funds
6. Rural Poor People Welfare Association, Mis-utilisation of fund and fake
4 Shankari Pukur, Nichu Colony, PO registration certificate, and bad
Sreepalli, Distt.-Burdwan implementation of drinking
water project and pilferage of
CAPARTs fund
7. Sebak Samiti, Atal Bihari Jan Bhawan, Adverse report of monitor
Vill.-Kismat Diwan Chowk, PO-Chowka, (CRSP)
Via Khirpai Distt.-Midnapore, West Bangal
8. Unemployed Young Worker’s Society Mis-representation of facts and
4, Shankari Pukur, PO-Sreepalli, performance of the Housing
Distt-Burdwan project found Unsatisafactory
9. Vivekananda Child Welfare Home, Improper implementation of the
At/PO Lakdwip Distt.-(S) 24 Parganas prog., defalcation of funds and
Non-Co-operation with the FCE
10. Kaliganj Block Gramin Khukdra and Unsatisfactory response of the
Khutir Silpa Jan Kalyan Samiti At VO
Dangapara, PO Debagram, West Bangal
11. Asha Welfare Society Unsatisfactory performance of
the Organisation
12 3

CHAPTER-III
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
RECEIVED FROM GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
According to Audit, the Deputy Director General, CAPART Sanctioned 323 projects
involving assistance of Rs. 11.47 crore in October 1994 of which 111 projects worth
Rs. 4.31 crore were sanctioned on the last working day of his tenure. Of the projects
sanctioned by him, CAPART released grants against 165 projects only as of July 1997.
The Ministry stated that consequent upon review of these cases some of the sanctions
were cancelled and releases stopped as the sanctions deviated from the guidelines.
The Ministry have also stated that in view of audit observations and their own experience
remedial measures have been taken and the system of approval of the projects by the
individual officer has been dispensed with and Committees consisting of eminent
persons from voluntary sector and Government are now sanctioning the projects. In
the opinion of the Committee, such a course constitutes a clear and wilful deviation
from the guidelines and they, therefore, desire that appropriate actions be taken against
the official concerned for such a deviant action. The  Committee  would like to be
apprised of the impact of the new grant sanctioning system vis-a-vis complaints of
irregularities received subsequently as also the punitive/deterrent action taken against
the guilty officers(s).
Action Taken
Deputy Director General, CAPART referred to in the para has since expired and,
therefore, no action can be taken at this stage.
As per the new grant sanctioning system, National Standing Committees in the
Headquarter and Regional Committees in the Regional Offices are competent to
sanction the projects. These Committees consist of eminent people from voluntary
sector and Government officials. After introduction of the new system, no individual
officer of CAPART has power to sanction any projects. CAPART has not received any
complaint of irregularities of the nature reported in the audit report.
43

CHAPTER-IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation
The Committee noted that 15 to 47% of the grants received during the years
1991-1992 to 1996-97 remained unspent at the end of each year. The Audit has
attributed the reasons for unspent grants as the decrease in the number of projects
sanctioned, release of, on an average, 41% of the funds in the month of March and non
exercise of control in the release of funds. On enquiry, the Ministry, while admitting
the decrease in the number of sanctioned stated that examination of the schemes during
1995-96 became more critical leading to dropping of a large number of projects due
to decentralisation of the work and introduction of approval by the National Standing
Committees and Regional Committees of CAPART. Asked about the release of funds
without supporting details, the Ministry stated that the details of ongoing projects and
the number of expected projects were not gathered by them before the release of fund.
The Ministry subsequently stated that the procedure for release of fund was revised in
1999 stipulating that release would be made on receipt of quarterly report giving details
of the on-going projects, projects awaiting clearance, projects expected during the
next quarter and the details of funds position. With regard to release of funds in lump
sum in the month of March, the witness deposed that the Institute of Public Auditors
were looking into the matter and they would suggest the action to be taken to improve
the system of release of funds. The Committee are convinced that the schemes were
introduced in haste, without proper planning and without framing of guidelines for
their implementation. The Committee further noted that prior to 1999, the grants were
released without asking for details of ongoing projects, projects awaiting completion
and expected projects during the year. The Committee expect the Ministry/CAPART
to ensure that the revised procedures is adhered to scrupulously and any deviation
from the procedure/guidelines be dealt with sternly. The Committee would also like to
be apprised of the recommendations of the Institute of Public Auditors and the action
taken thereon to avoid rush of sanctions of grants in the Month of March.
Action Taken
As recommended by the Committee, the revised procedure for release of funds is
being followed strictly.
The Institute of Public Auditors of India has not made any recommendation regarding
rush of sanction of grants in the month of March.
44

CHAPTER-V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
-NIL-
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
21 April, 2005 Chairman,
1 Vaisakha 1927 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
45

APPENDIX
OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry  concerned Observations and Recommendations
No. No.
12 3 4
1. 7 Rural Development The Committee had taken an adverse view of
the fact that 15 to 47% of the grants received
by the Council for Advancement of People’s
Action and Rural Technology (CAPART-
Ministry of Rural Development) during the
years 1991-92 to 1996-1997, had remained
unspent at the end of each year. Contributing
factors for this situation, according to the
Ministry, were decrease in the number of
projects sanctioned; release of around 41% of
the fund in the month of March; and non exercise
of proper control while releasing funds.
Moreover, a large number of projects were stated
to have been dropped due to the need for more
critical examination of the schemes during 1995-
96 as well as decentralisation of the Ministry.
The Committee had expressed the opinion that
the schemes were introduced in haste, without
proper planning and without framing of
guidelines for their implementation. The
Ministry had conceded that the details of on-
going proejcts and the number of expected
projects were not gathered by them before the
release of funds, and had informed the
Committee that the Institute of Public Auditors
was looking into the matter with regard to release
of funds in lump sum in the month of March so
as to suggest the action to be taken to improve
the system of release of funds. The Committee
had desired to be apprised of the outcome of
the exercise undertaken by Institute of Public
Auditors. The Ministry have now informed in
their Action Taken note that the Institute has not
made any recommendation in this regard. The
46

47
Commitee are astonished that the Institute did
not suggest any steps for improvement in the
system of release of funds, which could have
helped in streamlining the existing procedure
and plug the loopholes, if any. The Ministry
should have indicated the precise reasons as to
why the Institute could not suggest any such
measures as well as how the Ministry now is
coping up with the situation. The Committee
expect a precise reply from the Ministry in this
regard.
2. 8 Rural Development According to the Ministry, the procedure for
release of funds was revised in the year 1999
stipulating that  the funds would be made
available on receipt of quarterly report indicating
details of the ongoing projects, projects awaiting
clearances, projects expected during the next
quarter and the details of funds position. In this
regard, the Committee had desired that the said
revised procedure should be scrupulously
adhered to. The Committee regret to observe that
the action taken reply submitted by the Ministry
merely states that the revised procedure for
release of funds was being followed strictly. The
reply is silent about the details in this regard
as well as improvements in the overall
performance, if any brought about in pursuant
to the implementation of the said revised
procedure. The Committee would, therefore, like
to be apprised about the details regarding revised
procedure for release of funds, results achieved
so far as well as the monitoring mechanism in
place to ensure effective utilisation of funds so
allocated in this regard. They feel that the
Ministry should have taken adequate care to
initiate precise action in furnishing proper reply
in response to the Committee’s specific
recommendation.
3. 11 Rural Development As regards the State-wise distribution of funds
for implementation of various rural development
schemes by CAPART through V oluntary
Organisations, the Committee had felt that it was
unequal and disproportionate to the States’ with
12 3 4

48
larger rural pupulation, and example of which
was availability of funds to Madhya Pradesh.
The Committee had desired that the emphasis
of the Ministry should be on assisting the
V oluntary Organisations to develop rural
technology and that States should receive
assistance in proportion to their rural pupulation.
The Committee had also desired that the
V oluntary Organisations should be given proper
incentives to work in hilly, difficult and remote
areas. Although the Ministry have now informed
the Committee that they are seized of the
situation and efforts are being made to encourage
the promotion of Voluntary Organisations in the
States with a view to correct the said imbalances,
the details regarding concrete  steps taken in this
connection have not been outlined. The reply
of the Ministry also does not specify the latest
position of State-wise distribution of funds,
particularly in Madhya Pradesh, in support of
their argument to show that the position is much
better now. Also the reply does not properly
explain in concrete terms, the response to
various awareness workshops/trainings
conducted for V oluntary Organisations and steps
taken to provide incentives to the V oluntary
Organistions to work in remote areas like the
North East. This is yet another example where
the Ministry have furnished casual reply to a
specific recommendation. The Committee
would, therefore, like to be apprised of the latest
position with regard to State-wise distribution
of funds as well as how the V oluntary
Organisations are being motivated and the
incentives being offered to them so as to
encourage them to work in hilly, difficult and
remote areas.
12 3 4

PART-II
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2004-2005) HELD ON 15TH APRIL, 2005
The Committee sat from 16.30 hrs. to 17.00 hrs. on 15th April, 2005 in Room No.
“51” (Chairman’s Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. .Shri Naveen Jindal
4. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
5. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
6. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri  R.K. Dhawan
9. Dr. K. Malaisamy
10. Shri Jairam Ramesh
11. Prof. R.B.S. V erma
Secretariat
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
2. Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
3. Shri J.M. Baisakh — Under Secretary
Officers of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Anusua Basu — Addl. Dy. Comptroller and Auditor General
2. Shri Roy S. Mathrani — Pr. Director
3. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Pr. Director
4. Shri R.K. Ghose — Accountant General (Audit)-Delhi
49

2. At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the
sitting. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Reports:
(i) “Allotment of Land to Private Hospitals and Dispensaries by Delhi
Development Authority (DDA)”
(ii) Action Taken on the recommendations contained in 38th Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha) relating to “Council for Advancement of People’s Action
and Rural Technology (CAPART)”.
3. After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report on DDA with
slight modifications/amendments. The draft Report on “CAPART” was adopted without
any changes. The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these Reports in the
light of verbal and consequential changes arising out of factual verification by audit or
otherwise and present the same to the House.
4. The Chairman referred to the fact that two Members of the Committee, namely,
Shri Naveen Jindal and Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat would not be with the next Committee,
the term of which would begin from 1st May, 2005. The Committee appreciated the
keen interest taken by these Members in the work undertaken and valuable contribution
made by them during their deliberations.
The Committee then adjourned.
50
MGIPMRND—658LS—30-05-2005

32
ANNEXURE II
LIST OF VIGILANCE CASES TAKEN UP IN THE  LAST
FOUR YEARS
(A) Cases completed
Sl. Name and designation of the Charges Action taken
No. Officials/Officers
12 3 4
1. Shri P.N. Srinivasan, Deputy Pre-mature blacklisting of Minor penalty of Censure’
Director voluntary organisations imposed
2. Shri S.K. Thakur, RA Irregular processing of project No malafide intention is involved as reported
proposal by the Inquiry Officer. So a warning  has been
issued against him.
3. Shri S.H. Indurkar, DD Ignoring  FAS Circular and A serious view could  have been taken against
processing case him but since this was his first congnizable
lapse so a warning was issued.
4. Shri D.P.S. Choudhary, RA Ignoring FAS circular and Explanation of Charged Officer
processing case accepted and case closed.
5. Shri Om Prakash, AD Release of funds when Charges against Shri Om Prakash were not
VO blacklisted substantiated by the  IO. The report of the IO
was accepted and he was exonerated.

33
6. Shri C. Minz, Director Release of funds when VO Charges against Shri C. Minz were not substan-
blacklisted tiated by the IO. The report of the IO was
accepted and he was exonerated
7. Shri Surendera Singh, DD Release of funds to VO under FAS Explanation of Charged Officer
8. Smt. Rama Raghavan, SM Misconduct in purchased orders Minor penalty of Censure imposed
and stock maintenance
9. Shri B.R. Suman, AD Identification of beneficiaries Minor penalty of Censure imposed
were not formulated according to
CAPART guidelines. Identity of  the
VO was not verified properly
10. Shri M.P. Singh, RA
11. Shri S.K. Das, RA Office absence and Minor penalty of Censure
impolite/delayed noting imposed
12. Shri Lalit Kumar, Accountant Non-completion of assigned job Minor penalty of Reduction to
within specified time 3 lower stages without cumulative effect
13. Shri C.S.  Pandey, Director Release of funds to the VO No mala fide intentions were
FAS category involved, so warning were issued
against these officers
14. Smt. Asha Joglekar, LIO -do- -do-
15. Shri Shravan Kumar, RA -do- -do-
16. Shri P.N. Srinivasan, DD (i) Project sanctioned before Explanation of charged Officers
completion of 3 years accepted and case closed
17. Shri V.K. Babu, DD

34
18. Shri Om Prakash, AD (ii) Second instlment released
19. Shri S.K. Thakur, RA without mid-term evaluation
20. Shri M.P. Singh, RA (iii) Loss of Rs. 10,000/- Demand
21. Shri Y. Bhakta, RA Draft as not followed up
(iv) No action initiated on
monitors’ report or to close
the project
(v) No reference to earlier
projects sanctioned
22. Shri C. Minz, Director No action was taken to close the No mala fide intentions were
23. Shri C.S. Pandey, Directorproject involved, so warnings were issued
24. Shri L.J.K. Singh, RA No action was taken on the against these officers (recordable
monitor’s report warning for L.J.K. Singh)
25. Shri M.P. Singh, RA Favour in processing and Minor penalty of reduction to one
sanctioned project in one day lower stage with cumulative effect imposed
26. Shri A.P. Barnwal, RA No action initiated to call for the Minor penalty of one further increment
progress report. withheld/imposed
No follow up action initiated
to call for monitor’s report.
27. Shri C.S. Pandey, Director -do- Minor penalty of Censure imposed
28. Shri  Sharavan Kumar, RA Processed the case which he is Penalty of Reduction to
not supposed to process. lower stage by one stage
Habit of creating  indiscipline imposed
Committing financial irregulari-
ties, not attending promptly to work.
12 3 4

35
29. Shri Mahendra Singh, LDC Disorted accounts of sale books. The IO held charge not
Not issued cash memo on the day poved. The report of IO
of sale and kept public fund with was accepted and case closed
him. No maintenance  of proper
cash memo books.
30. Shri S.H. Indurkar, DD No reminder sent to the VO Minor penalty of ‘Censure’ imposed
when the date of holding the and case closed
main camp was not conveyed.
No notice for non-submission of
utilisation certificate.
No action initiated to recover the money.
31. Shri Ram Singh, RA-do-Minor penalty of ‘Censure’ imposed.
32. Shri  H.K. Kaushik, RA Project approved before the VO Minor penalty of ‘Censure’ imposed.
33. Shri A.P. Barnwal, RA completed three years of
34. Shri C.S. Pandey, Director registration.
No action initiated to get the
progress report and to conduct
evaluation.
No action initiated to call back funds.
35. Shri Y. Bhakta, RA Release of fund to FAS The IO held held charge not
category of VO proved. The report of IO is accepted.
36. Shri M.L. Gupta, DD Did not process the proposal The minor penalty of ‘censure’
appropriately imposed

36
37. Shri Ashok Sharma, RA Did not check out whether the The minor penalty of ‘censure’ imposed.
revolving fund is kept in the
joint account of CAPART and VO.
38. Shri C.S. Pandey, Director No action initiated to get the Minor penalty of ‘censure’ imposed.
quarterly report of the VO nor
any follow up action was taken
39. Shri N.K. Gupta, Sr. Accountant Unauthorised absence The penalty of withholding of two
exhibited erratic attendance future increments without cumulative
Not available  in office during effect imposed.
working hours
40. Shri Surendra Singh, DD Release of funds to blacklisted Imposition of the penalty of
VO reduction of pay by two
stages in the time scale of
pay for a period of two years
with further direction that he
shall not earn increment of
pay during reduction of pay and on
expiry of this period the reduction
of pay will have the effect of
postponing future increment.
41. Shri B.R. Suman, AD Irregular revival of closed file Reduction of the pay
by two stages in the time scale of
pay for a period of two years with
further direction that he will not
earn the increment during the reduction of the
pay and on the expiry of this period this
12 3 4

37
reduction will have the effect of postponing
future increment of pay
42. Shri M.L. Gupta, DD Cost of sewing machine was Penalty of reduction to lower stage
allowed at the rate of by two stages imposed.
Rs. 2400/- per machine where
the VO had  quoted the rate
of Rs. 800/- per machine.
No action was taken to
obtain the progress report
and account  of the
project.
43. Shri Surender Singh, DD Nexus between VO and For lack of evidence, cases of
44. Shri B.N. Singh, RA monitor. Shri Surender Singh, DD and
Shri B.N. Singh, RA not
pursued further
45. Shri B.R. Suman, AD Favour by processing and Imposed the major
sanctioned project in one day. penalty of complulsory retirement
from CAPART’s service.
46. Shri V .K. Babu, DD Excess amount have been Imposition of penalty of one  future
allowed without recording increment withheld without
any reason. cumulative effect.
47. Shri S.K. Takur, RA Cost of sewing machine was Imposition of penalty of withholding
allowed at the rate of Rs. two future increments with
2400/-per machine where cumulative effect.

38
the VO had quoted the rate
of Rs. 800/- per machine.
No action was taken to
obtain the progress report
and account of the project.
48. Shri S.K. Das, RA Projects sanctioned violating The penalty of ‘Censure’ imposed.
DG’s orders in circular No.
DD(Mont.)/Misc./94
49. Shri R.K. Singh, RA Excess amount have been The penalty of withholding of two
allowed  without recording future increments without cumulative
any reason. effect has been imposed.
50. Shri Toran Lal, LDC Did not report to the place of The penalty of withholding of two
posting, unauthorised absence, future increments with cumulative
indicated his designation as UDC effect has been imposed.
when he was reverted to LDC.
Deliberately marked his attendance
in the attendance register.
Claimed LTC illegally. Used
CAPART Union illegally.
Chequered record of service.
51. Shri Lalit Kumar He was transferred from Penalty of warning imposed.
Hedquarters to RC, Further penalty under examination.
Guwahati but he did not
report for duty, absented
himself unauthorisedly.
12 3 4

39
52. Shri Ladli Saran. Unauthorised sale of Order of compulsory retirement
publication. issued on 29.8.2000.
53. Shri Naresh Kumar, Staff Car Tempering in the entry of Penalty imposed to reduce one stage
Driver Logbook and  demanding the time scale of pay for a period of
petrol on the basis of false three years and will not earn
entries. increment of pay during the period
of reduction and on expiry of this
period the reduction will have the
effect of postponing his future
increment of pay.
54. Shri Ranjit Singh, CAO Handed over the cheque to the Accepted the findings of Inquiry
(Accounts) VO without the approval of Officer and case dropped.
the competent authority.
55. Shri C.S. Pandey, Director -do- -do-
56. Shri P.N. Srinivasan, DD Wrong, incomplete and false Case closed.
interaction with monitor. File
received back from CVC with
their advice to close the case.
57. Shri Naresh Kumar Used the CAPART’s staff  car without prior Closed as no vigilance angle involved. Sent
Staff Car Driver permission and met with an accident. to Adm. for action.
58. Shri B.R. Suman Undue favour given to VO, project sanctioned Closed as the charged officer has been
before 3 years of completion of registration. compulsorily retired.
59. Shri. B.R. Suman Project sanctioned in spite of the VO being -do-
blacklisted.

40
60. Shri B.R. Suman Project proposal processed and recommended for -do-
sanction in spite of DD(P)’s order not to sanction
any project to Kolar based Organisation.
61. Shri Ram Niwas, LDC Absent without leave and concealment of facts Closed from vigilance angle and sent to
AED
62. Shri Peter Sunny, Staff Car Unauthorized absence exhibitent errabic Closed as no vigilance angle involved and
Driver attendance, no improvement shown by him in the case sent to AED
spite of warning
63. Shri B.N. Singh, RA unauthorized changes in fair letter after Minor penalty ‘Censure’ imposed on
Singnature. 22.6.2001. Case Completed and closed.
64. Shri Y. Bhakta, RA Amount released to BLA VO Imposition of minor penalty withholding
one increment.
65. Shri C. Minz. Favouritism in processing project of the As per CVC advice, case has been dropped.
Ex-Director VO. SSVK. Madhubani, Bihar.
66. Shri DPS Choudhary, The Officers had suggested submission of project - Chargesheet has been filed by the CBI.
RA proposals in the name of old and dead Societies Case is going on.
offering speedy process of such files and in retum - Chargesheet has been filed by
illegal gratification.  CAPART, case kept under abeyance.
following by stay order from Hon’ble Delhi
High Court.
67. Shri H.K. Kaushik, The Officers had suggested submission of - Chargesheet has been filed by the CBI.
RA project proposals in the name of old and dead Case in going on.
Societies offering speedy process of such files - Chargesheet has been filed by
and in return illegal gratification.  CAPART, case kept under abeyance
following by stay order from Hon’ble
Delhi High Court.
12 3 4

41
68. Shri A.P. Barnwal, RA The Officers had suggested submission of - Chargesheet has been filed by the CBI.
project proposals in the name of old and dead.  Case is going on.
Societies offering speedy process of such files - Chargesheet has been filed by
and in retum illegal gratification.  CAPART, case kept under abeyance
following by stay order from Hon’ble
Delhi High Court.
69. Smt. Rachna Sharma, DD Proposal not dealt with as per norms. Funds
released in contravention of norms.
70. Shri S.S. Machal, Favouritism in processing project of the The officer is no longer with CAPART.
Ex-Senior Director VO.SSVK, Madhubani, Bihar. CVC has advised action against him for
which his case/papers has been sent to the
KVIC. His case, therefore, stands deleted in
CAPART.
71. Shri M.P. Singh, Amount released to BLA VO. Minor penalty imposed on the CO. Order
RAissued on 28.3.2002. Case completed and
Closed.
72. Shri M.P. Singh, Favouritism in processing project of the Delete. Chargesheet not issued.
RA VO.SSVK. Madhubani, Bihar.
73. Dr. Arun Sud, Director Proposal not dealt with as per norms. Funds Case completed and closed as per the advice
released in contravention of norms. of CVC.
74. Shri S.K. Das, RA Amount released to BLA VO. Major penalty imposed. Reduction to a
lower stage in the scale of pay for a period
of 2 years.
75. Shri S.D. Singh, AD Proposal not dealt with as per norms. Funds Case completed aand closed as per the advice
released in contravention of norms. of CVC.

76. Shri Om Prakash, AD Obviously led to financial impropriety in a Case completed and closed.
project of Drinking water supply.
77. Shri C. Minz., Obviously led to financial impropriety in a Case completed and closed.
Ex-Director project of Drinking water supply.
78. Shri Surender Singh, DD Amount released to defaulter category VO. Minor penalty ‘Censure’ is imposed.
79. Shri Om Prakash, AD The wrong address of the VO was indicated to Minor penalty.
Shri A.N. Kapur. The project Monitor was ‘Censure’ is imposed.
Changed on the statement of VO without cross
checking with the Monitor. The first release was
made without the approval of the competent
authority and ex-post facto approval was sought
subsequently.
LIST OF VIGILANCE CASES ON-GOING
1. Shri Shree Ram Singh, RA Amount released to BLA VO The Penalty of “CENSURE” imposed on
the officials. The order expected to be issued
in May, 2003.
2. Shri S.D. Singh, AD Fund released to BLA VO Chargesheet under major penalty.
Proceeding has been issued on 3.4.2003.
Reply from the official awaited.
3. Dr. ARRR. Pillai, RA Fund released to BLA VO Chargesheet under major penalty.
Proceeding has been issued on 3.4.2003.
Reply from the official awaited.
12 3 4
42