15
REFUNDS UNDER THE INCOME TAX
ACT, 1961
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2005-2006
FIFTEENTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

FIFTEENTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
REFUNDS UNDER THE INCOME TAX
ACT, 1961
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
[Action Taken on 55th Report of Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok  Sabha on................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on.......................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
July, 2005/Sravana, 1927 (Saka)
SERVER5\1497LS\1497LS.PM6.5

PAC No. 1778
Price :  Rs. 10.00
©2005 BY  LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and printed by Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi.
SERVER5\1497LS\1497LS.PM6.5

SERVER5\1497LS\1497LS.PM6.5
CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2005-2006) . . . . . . . . . . (iii)
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (v)
CHAPTER I Report . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been
accepted by Government . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
replies of Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies . . . . . . . . . . . 11
APPENDIX
Observations and Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
PART II
Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee—
(2005-2006) held on 30.05.2005 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15

COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok  Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Dr. R. Senthil
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
13. Kunwar Revati Raman Singh
14. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya  Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Dr. K. Malaisamy
19. Shri V. Narayanasamy
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
21. Shri Jairam Ramesh
22. Prof. R.B.S. V arma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P.D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
4. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar — Committee Officer
(iii)
SERVER5\1497LS\1497LS.PM6.5

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee having been authorised by the
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this 15th Report on action
taken by Government on the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee
contained in their 55th Report (13th Lok Sabha) on "Refunds under the Income Tax
Act, 1961".
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee
at their sitting held on 30th May, 2005. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the
Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the recommendations of the
Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and have also
been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
3 June, 2005 Chairman,
13 Jyaistha, 1927 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)
SERVER5\1497LS\1497LS.PM6.5

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with action taken by Government of India,
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) on Observations/Recommendations
contained in their Fifty-Fifth Report (13th Lok Sabha) on Chapter-5 of Report of
Comptroller and Auditor General of India (Direct Taxes—System Appraisals) for the
year ended 31st March, 2001 (No. 12A of 2002) relating to "Refunds under the Income
Tax Act, 1961."
2. The Audit findings on which the Original Report was prepared highlighted
that during the period of review i.e. from Financial Year 1997-98 to 1999-2000, the
gross collection of Direct Taxes, the total refunds made and the percentage of refunds
made to the gross collection, showed that nearly 1/4th of the gross collections were
refunded to the assessees. As regards the percentage of refunds in respect of various
charges, the audit reviewed state-wise details of refunds and concluded that the
percentage of refunds to gross collections during the period 1997-98 to 1999-2000
had ranged from 5.3 to 43.4 per cent of gross collections.
3. The Committee in their Original Report had observed that an assessee is
entitled to a refund of the excess amount when the tax paid by him in any assessed year
exceeded the amount correctly payable by him. Refund may arise in many
circumstances, as for instance, where the tax deducted at source is at a higher rate than
the rate applicable or where total income having fallen below the taxable limit and no
tax is payable at all by the assessee, or where the advance tax paid or self-assessment
tax paid exceeds the tax payable as determined at the time of final assessment or as a
consequence to appeal, revision, rectification of mistakes, the tax originally determined
gets reduced.
4. The Committee had pointed out that Audit appraisal had indicated cases of
excess refunds due to mistakes in computation, double payment of refunds, refunds
granted after completion of scrutiny assessment, non-adjustment of refunds granted in
earlier assessments, inadmissible refunds due to incorrect allowance of TDS credit,
irregular set-off of refunds, set-off of refunds against demands of other direct taxes or
vice versa, delay in issue of refunds, non-issue of refunds, avoidable payment of interest
due to delay in completion of assessment, irregular withholding of refunds, delay in
allowing refunds in appeal cases, interest on refunds less than 10 per cent of assessed
tax, non-maintenance of refund register, demand and collection register, cheque register
and several procedural irregularities.
5. The Committee examined all the issues in details and had made suitable
Observations/Recommendations. The 55th Report was presented to Lok Sabha on
15th December, 2003 and contained six Observations/Recommendations. The Action
1

2
Taken Notes on all the Observations/Recommendations have been received from the
Ministry of Finance. These have been broadly categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by Government:
Paragraph Nos. 46 and 50
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from Government:
Paragraph Nos. 49 and 51
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee which require reiteration:
Paragraph No. 47
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies
Paragraph No. 48
6. The Action Taken Notes by the Ministry of Finance have been reproduced in
the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with action taken
by the Government on some of their Observations/Recommendations made by the
Committee in their Original Report which need reiteration or merit comments.
Delays/Irregularities in Granting Refunds
(Sl. Nos. 2, Paragraph 47)
7. The Committee in paragraph 47 of the Original Report had expressed the
concern over the percentage of refunds which ranged from 5.3 to 43.4 of gross revenue
collection during the period 1997-98 to 1999-2000. The Committee had observed that
during the period from 1997-98 to 1999-2000 refunds constituted, on an average,
23.53 per cent of gross collections in company cases and 10.5 per cent in non-company
cases. The Audit scrutiny detected that the mistakes in computation had led to over
payment, short-payment and non-payment of interest in 827 cases. Considering the
large number of such cases, the Committee had felt that  such a situation could have
been avoided had the Department paid greater attention to prevent mistakes in
computation and other procedural irregularities through a stringent scrutiny by their
internal audit mechanism. The Committee were not convinced with the stand taken by
the Ministry that due to shortage of staff, heavy workload and movement of assessment
files to various authorities, serveral irregularities/mistakes failed to get detected by
their internal audit. The Committee had, therefore, observed that the Department had
not shown any interest to detect avoidable errors and mistakes which had a major  role
to play in the heavy outflow of government revenue in the form of interest on refund
paid to assessee.
8. In the action taken note furnished to the Committee, the Ministry of Finance
have stated that field formations have been directed to strengthen the mechanism of
checking of computation of refund. Trainings are imparted to A.Os (Assessing Officers)
to minimize errors and compendium of common mistakes have been circulated among
the Assessing Officers. The processing of the return has been computerized. The
computer application software AIS (Assessment Information System) connected to
National Computer Centre and TMS (Tax Management Software) for processing of

3
return has been inroduced. The software is updated from time-to-time by Directorate
of Income Tax (System) based on feedback received from field formations. processing
on the AST/TMS (Computer) is expected to minimize mistakes in the Tax Calculation.
9. The Ministry have further stated that the new chain audit mechanism has
started functioning vide CBDT's Instruction No. 8 of 2001 dated 6.12.2001. Norms
have been fixed for checking of the refunds. The Directorate of Income Tax (Audit)
has issued instruction that audit of all refund cases of Rs. 50,000/- and above will have
to be conducted. The new chain Audit has deployed 783 Addl. CIT/JCIT, TTI CDIT/
ACIT & 3855 ITOs for Internal Audit work. 360748 cases have been audited in financial
year 2002-03. In this way audit mechanism has been strengthened.
10. In their Action Taken Notes the Ministry have tried to explain the efforts
made by them to update the computerization process in relation to refunds and
implementation of new chain audit for internal audit work. However, the
Committee are dismayed to find that the steps taken up by the Ministry are too
general and lack specifics. The Action taken Note does not contain any specific
order, direction, circlar number etc., regarding the instructions given to field
formations on the steps taken by the Government to strengthen the mechanism
of checking of computation of refunds. The details of training, if held, have also
not been furnished to the Committee. The Committee, therefore, desire that
documents substantiating the submission by the Ministry should be made available
and at the same time performance appraisals/progress of implementation of
updating of new software as well as the impact of the training imparted to
Assessing Officers to minimize errors be intimated to the Committee. The report
of the progress made should be supported by data suggesting improvement
brought about and enhancement of efficiency noticed in strengthening the
mechanism of computation of refund.
The Committee also desire that a body be set up to look into the
Department's problems of shortage of staff, heavy workload and slow movement
of assessment files, irregularities/mistakes which were not detected by their
internal audit with a view to ensuring that such mistakes/problems are remedied
at the earliest.
Existing Mechanism and Initiatives to Check the Shortcomings
(Sl. No. 3, Paragraph 48)
11. With reference to the existing mechanism and initiatives to check delays/
irregularities in granting refunds, the Committee had noted that there had been inordinate
delay of upto 50 months on issue of refunds. Audit scrutiny had revealed that the
Government had made avoidable payment of interest of Rs. 11,397.61 lakh in 1881
cases and Rs. 2133.87 lakh in 138 appeal cases due to delay in granting refunds beyond
the relevant assessment year and the ministry had attributed the same to heavy workload
on the Assessing Officers, shortage of refund vouchers, delay in verification of TDS
certificates and deficiencies in the form of returns of Income/Challans/ Banks scrolls.
The  Committee had noted that a Fact Finding Committee had been set up to fix
responsibility in respect of cases involving inordinate delay on issue of refunds. The
Committee were given to understand that under Central Action Plan (CAP)

4
2002-2003, targets have been fixed to process returns involving refunds within three
months as well as issue and dispatch of refunds along with advice within seven days of
determination of refund. While expressing the hope that the optimism of the Ministry
to speed up refunds under the CAP would bear fruit, the Committee had desired that,
the Report of the Fact Finding Committee of the Ministry may be placed before them
for their perusal. It was also emphasized that the Ministry would spare no efforts to
ensure that their internal procedures are strengthened in the best possible manner to
ensure prompt detection of delays and irregularities in handling cases of refund.
12. In their Action Taken reply, the Ministry of Finance have stated as under:
“The field formations have been instructed to strengthen their internal
procedures for prompt detection of delays and iregularities in handling of
refunds. Instructions included prompt issue of refunds returns within
prescribed time, submission of Monthly Report on Refunds and processing
of refund returns first to minimize payment of interest u/s 244A. Monitoring
of refunds are also being done by higher authorities through Central Action
Plan (CAP). The electronic filing of returns has been introduced for early
processing of returns which will result in early issuance of refunds. Report
of the Fact Finding Committee is under consideration of the Central Board
of Direct Taxes (CBDT)”.
13. In riposte to Committee's desire to strengthen the internal procedures
by the Ministry to avoid the huge amount of avoidable interest payment due to
delay in payment of refunds, the Ministry of Finance have informed that the
instructions have been issued to the field formations and efforts have been made
to minimize the payment of interest u/s 244A. The Committee are however, not
satisfied with the reply of the Ministry. It is not clear from the Action Taken Note
whether the issuance of instructions to field formations has yielded any positive
results in the internal audit system; or if the delays in making refunds have been
reduced; or whether Monthly Report on Refunds and processing of refunds are
being regularly monitored. It has also not been ascertained whether the target
fixed to process return involving refunds within 3 months as well as issue &
dispatch of returns alongwith advice within 7 days of determination of refund
have been achieved. The Committee consider the reply vague and incomplete.
The Committee expect the Ministry to be precise in responding to specific
recommendations of the Committee.
Although the Ministry have claimed that monitoring of refunds are also
being done by higher authorities through Central Action Plan (CAP), hey have
not furnished details of the CAP. The Committee would like to know the various
aspects of it and how it would help in minimizing delays of refunds.
The Committee are constrained to point out that no action has yet been
taken on the Report of the Fact Finding Committee which was set up to fix
responsibility in respect of cases involving inordinate delays on issue of refunds.
The Report is stated to be under consideration of CBDT. The Committee would
like to know as to what are the findings of the Fact Finding Committee and what
action has been taken/propose to be taken by the Ministry thereon.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Committee note that an assessee is entitled to a refund of the excess amount
when the tax paid by him in any assessed year exceeds the amount correctly payable
by him. Refund may arise in many circumstances, as for instance, where the tax deducted
at source is at a higher rate than the rate applicable or where total income having
falling below the taxable limit and no tax is payable at all by the assessee, or where the
advance tax paid or self-assessment tax paid exceeds the tax payable as determined at
the time of final assessment or as a consequence to appeal, revision, rectification of
mistakes, the tax originally determined gets reduced. The Committee's examination of
the Audit review on "Refunds under the Income Tax Act", has revealed several lacunae
in the existing law and procedures regarding issue of refunds which are commented
upon in the succeeding paragraphs.
(Para 46 of 55th Report of PAC)
(13th Lok Sabha)
Action Taken
Amendments have been made in section 244A for reduction of rate of interest
payable to assessee. New section 2341 has been inserted for charging of interest on
excess refund granted at the time of summary assessment.
In order to simplify procedures, computerized processing of returns have been
introduced E-filing of returns have also been introduced. This will result into early
processing of refunds.
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue O.M.F. No. 241/1/2004-A&PAC. I
dated 24th August, 2004
TPL Div. (CBDT) F.No. 154/10/2002-TPL dt. 18.09.2003.
ITA-II (CBDT) F.No. 228/3/2002-ITA-II dt. 11.11.2003.
Recommendation
The Committee is perturbed to note that many Public Sector Undertakings are
claimants for refunds as they were paying excess advance tax to by pass their
responsibility. Therefore, they feel that the Department should conduct a study on the
trends in advance tax payment system and other factors giving rise to huge refunds in
order to ascertain as to who are major claimants for refunds and rationalize further the
procedure for advance tax payments. In this connection, the Committee desire that the
cases of habitual excess advance tax payers may be selected for scrutiny assessment
under section 143(3) as a deferent. With regard to individual assessees, the Committee
5

6
note the Ministry's view that most of the returns are received during the fortnight
preceding the due date of filing of refunds. In this context, they suggest that the fixed
deadlines for filing I.T. returns each year may be made suitably flexible as in the last-
minute rush, the possibility of receiving incorrect returns tends to increase, thus leading
to further rise in refund claims. The Committee therefore, feel that providing more
time to the assessees for self-assessment of income would encourage a positive response
to file correct returns and thus, put less pressure/workload on the Department in
processing refund claims.
(Para 50 of 55th Report of PAC)
(13th Lok Sabha)
Action Taken
The Taxation Laws (Amendment) Act, 2003 has reduced the rates of interest
payable on refunds from 8% to 6% per annum. This will discourage parking of funds
with the Income Tax Department in the form of extra advance tax payments.
CBDT has noted the observation of the Hon'ble Committee that the cases of
habitual excess advance tax payers may be selected for scrutiny.
As per the existing provisions of the Income-tax Act, 1961, the due date for
filing of returns is 31st July, for non-auditable/non-corporate assessee and 31st October
for auditable/corporate assessees. Thus, there is sufficient time available to an assessee
for filing his return after due verification of his record. Moreover, an assessee can file
his return of income well before the due date. Thus, the law already allows sufficient
time and flexibility for filing correct returns.
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue O.M.F. No. 241/1/2004-A&PAC. I
dated 24th August, 2004
TPL Division,  CBDT’s O.M.F. No. 154/2/2004-TPL dated 16.8.04
ITA-II (CBDT) F.No. 228/2/2004-ITA-II dt. 7.7.2004.

CHAPTER  III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Committee note that another highlight of the audit findings following their
review of refund cases was improper maintenance of the records of refunds in various
field formations. Although the Department informed that necessary records of cases
involving refunds are maintained for six years from the end of the Financial Year,
however, vital records pertaining to refund applications, vouchers and cheques, TDS
certificates etc. were either not submitted to audit or also if submitted, were found to
be ill-maintained. The Committee's examination further revealed that though the
Department have issued instructions regarding maintenance of refund records, same
was not being monitored at appropriate levels leaving a lot to be desired. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that Government should seriously address this issue
and take appropriate measures with a view to ensuring that their instructions regarding
maintenance of necessary records are followed scrupulously and diligently with
supervision by senior level officers in all the field formations so that those could be
properly utilized for bona-fide purposes as well as produced promptly whenever
required.
(Para 49 of 55th Report of PAC)
(13th Lok Sabha)
Action Taken
Field formations have been directed to ensure that instructions regarding
maintenance of necessary records are followed scrupulously and diligently and to be
monitored by concerned senior officers. Adequate supervision is continuously
maintained by the senior officers and annual inspection is also carried out by
Commissioners of Income Tax which includes timely issuance of refunds as per CBDT's
instruction and proper maintenance of records. Manual record keeping will be
minimized by computerized processing of returns.
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue O.M.F. No. 241/1/2004-A&PAC. I
dated 24th August, 2004
ITA-II (CBDT) F.No. 228/2/2004-ITA-II dt. 7.7.2004.
ITA-II (CBDT) F.No. 228/3/2002-ITA-II dt. 11.11.2003.
Recommendation
The Committee note that as a sequel to the deposition by the representatives of
the Ministry of Finance before the Public Accounts Committee, the Union Minister of
7

8
Finance informed Parliament, while presenting the Annual Budget for 2003-2004,
that the Government was due to initiate "direct crediting of all refunds to the bank
accounts of the tax payers, through electronic clearance system, but obviously only if
the tax payers furnish a bank account number". The Committee are optimistic that
such an initiative would go a long way in bringing about tax administration reforms,
decreasing the workload of the department and minimizing harassment to the tax payers.
In this regard, the Committee would also like to known the steps taken to further
streamline the procedure.
(Para 51 of 55th Report of PAC)
(13th Lok Sabha)
Action Taken
The Board has decided vide AIS  Instruction No. 26 dated 16/3/2004 to introduce
facility of issuing of electronic refunds and their direct credit to the bank account of
tax payer through Electronic Clearance Scheme (ECS) of the Reserve Bank of India.
Presently, refunds upto Rs. 25,000 can be issued through ECS in 12 cities including
Delhi.
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue O.M.F. No. 241/1/2004-A&PAC. I
dated 24th August, 2004
ITA-II (CBDT) F.No. 228/2/2004-ITA-II dt. 16.08.2004.
DIT (System) Delhi's Note F.No. SW/07/01/03/04-DIT(S) dt. 12.07.2004.
TPL, Division F. No. 154/2/2004-TPL dt. 16.08.2004

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation
The Committee are constrained to note that the percentage of refunds during the
period 1997-98 to 1999-2002 ranged from 5.3 to 43.4 per cent of gross revenue
collection. They also find that during Financial year 1997-98 to 1999-2000, refunds
constituted, on an average, 23.53% of gross collections in company cases and 10.5%
in non-company cases. The Committee are further dismayed to find that mistakes in
computation have led to over-payment, short-payment and non-payment of interest in
827 cases detected during audit scrutiny. Considering the large number of such cases,
they feel that such a situation could have been avoided had the Department paid greater
attention to prevent mistakes in computation and other procedural irregularities through
a stringent scrutiny by their internal audit mechanism. In this regard, the Committee
are not convinced with the stand taken by the Ministry that due to shortage of staff,
heavy workload and movement of assessment files to various authorities, several
irregularities/mistakes failed to get detected by their internal audit. Though the
Department has claimed to have revamped their audit mechanism, the number of
computational mistakes have yet to show any decline. From the foregoing, it is amply
clear to the Committee that hardly any interest has been shown by the Department to
detect avoidable errors and mistakes which have a major role to play in the heavy
outflow of Government revenue in the form of interest on refund paid to the assessee.
(Para 47of 55th Report of PAC)
(13th Lok Sabha)
Action Taken
Field formations have been directed to strengthen the mechanism of checking of
computation of refund. Trainings are imparted to A.O.s (Assessing Officers) to minimize
errors. Compendium of Common Mistakes is circulated among the Assessing Officers.
The processing of the return has been computerized. The computer application
software AIS (Assessment Information System) connected to National Computer
Centre and TMS (Tax Management Software) for processing of return has been
introduced. The software is updated from time-to-time by Directorate of Income Tax
(System) based on feedback received from the field formations. Processing on the
AIS/TMS (Computer) is expected to minimize mistakes in the Tax Calculation.
The new chain audit mechanism has started functioning vide CBDT's Instruction
No. 8 of 2001 dated 6.12.2001. Norms have been fixed for checking of the refunds.
The Directorate of Income Tax (Audit) has issued instruction that audit of all refund
9

10
cases of Rs. 50,000 and above will have to be conducted. The new Chain Audit has
deployed 783 Addl. CIT/JCIT, 771 DCIT/ACIT & 3855 ITOs for Internal Audit work.
360784 cases have been audited in Financial Year 2002-03. In this way audit mechanism
has been strengthened.
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue O.M.F. No. 241/1/2004-A&PAC. I dated
24th August, 2004
DIT (A). Delhi F.No. -Audit/55th Report/PAC/Refund/DIT/78 dt. 12.04.2004.
DIT (A). Delhi F.No. -Audit/PAC/2002-03/DIT/3382 dt. 5.08.2003.
ITA-II (CBDT) F.No. 228/3/2002-ITA-II dt. 11.11.2003.

CHAPTER  V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
Recommendation
Another disquieting feature about issue of refunds as noted by the Committee
have been the inordinate delays of upto 50 months in the issue of refunds. In this
connection, the Audit scrutiny had revealed that due to delay in granting refunds beyond
the relevant assessment year, there was avoidable payment of interest of Rs. 11,397.61
lakh in 1881 cases and Rs. 2133.87 lakh in 138 appeal cases. During the course of
examination by the Committee, the Ministry have attributed the same to heavy workload
on the Assessing Officers, shortage of refund vouchers, delay in verification of TDS
certificates and deficiencies in the form of returns of income/challans/bank serolls.
On further inquiry by the Committee, the Ministry informed that a Fact Finding
Committee was set up to fix responsibility in respect of cases involving inordinate
delays in issue of refunds. It has also been informed that the power with the Income
Tax authorities to hold back refunds has been removed w.e.f. 1/6/2001. The Committee
further note that under Central Action Plan 2002-2003, targets have been fixed to
process returns involving refunds within three months as well as issue and dispatch of
refunds alongwith advice within seven days of determination of refund. While hoping
that the optimism of the Ministry to speed up refunds under the Central Action Plant
will bear fruit, the Committee desire that on completion, the report of the Fact Finding
Committee of the Ministry may be placed before them for their perusal. The Committee
further desire  that the Ministry should spare no efforts to ensure that their internal
procedures are strengthened in the best possible manner to ensure prompt detection of
delays and irregularities in handling cases of refund.
(Para 48 of 55the Report of PAC)
(13th Lok Sabha)
Action Taken
The field formations have been instructed to strengthen their internal procedures
for prompt detection of delays and irregularities in handling of refunds. Instructions
include prompt issue of refunds within prescribed time, submission of Monthly Report
on Refunds and processing of refund returns first to minimize payment of interest u/s
244A. Monitoring of refunds are also being done by higher authorities through Central
Action Plan (CAP). Electronic filing of returns has been introduced for early processing
of the returns which will result in early issuance of refunds. Report of The Fact Finding
Committee is under consideration of the CBDT.
Ministry of Finance/Department of Revenue O.M.F. No. 241/1/2004-A&PAC. I
dated 24th August, 2004
11

12
ITA-II (CBDT) F. No.-228/2/2004-ITA-II dt. 7.7.2004
ITA-II (CBDT) F. No.-228/3/2004-ITA-II dt. 11.11.2003
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
3 June, 2005 Chairman,
13 Jyaistha, 1927 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX
OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/Deptt. Observations/Recommendations
No. No. Concerned
12 3 4
1 10 Finance In theirAction Taken Notes the Ministry have
(Department tried to explain the efforts made by them to update
of Revenue) the computerization process in relation to refunds
and implementation of new chain audit for internal
audit work. However, the Committee are dismayed
to find that the steps taken up by the Ministry are too
general and lack specifics. The Action Taken Note
does not contain any specific order, direction, circular
number etc., regarding the instructions given to field
formations on the steps taken by the Government to
strengthen the mechanism of checking of
computation of refunds. The details of training, if
held, have also not been furnished to the Committee.
The Committee, therefore, desire that documents
substantiating the submission by the Ministry should
be made available and at the same time performance
appraisals/progress of implementation of updating
of new software as well as the impact of the training
imparted to Assessing Officers to minimize errors
be intimated to the Committee. The report of the
progress made should be supported by data
suggesting improvement brought about and
enhancement of efficiency noticed in strengthening
the mechanism of computation of refund.
The Committee also desire that a body be set up
to look into the Department's problems of shortage
of staff, heavy workload and slow movement of
assessment files, irregularities/mistakes which were
not detected by their internal audit with a view to
ensuring that such mistakes/problems are remedied
at the earliest.
13

14
2 13 Finance In riposte to Committee's desire to strengthen the
(Department internal procedures by the Ministry to avoid the
of Revenue) huge amount of avoidable interest payment due to
delay in payment  of refunds, the Ministry of Finance
have informed that the instructions have been issued
to the field formations and efforts have been made
to minimize the payment of interest u/s 244A. The
Committee are however, not satisfied with the reply
of the Ministry. It is not clear from the Action Taken
Note whether the issuance of instructions to field
formations has yielded any positive results in the
internal audit system; or if the delays in making
refunds have been reduced; or whether  Monthly
Report on Refunds and processing of refunds are
being regularly monitored. It has also not been
ascertained whether the target fixed to process return
involving refunds within 3 months as well as issue
& dispatch of returns alongwith advice within 7 days
of determination of refund have been achieved. The
Committee consider the reply vague and incomplete.
The Committee expect the Ministry to be precise in
responding to specific recommendations of the
Committee.
Although the Ministry have claimed that
monitoring of refunds are also being done by higher
authorities through Central Action Plan (CAP), they
have not furnished details of the CAP. The Committee
would like to know the various aspects of it and how
it would help in minimizing delays of refunds.
The Committee are constrained to point out that
no action has yet been taken on the Report of the
Fact Finding Committee which was set up to fix
responsibility in respect of cases involving inordinate
delays on issue of refunds. The Report is stated to be
under consideration of CBDT. The Committee would
like to know as to what are the findings of the Fact
Finding Committee and what action has been taken/
propose to be taken by the Ministry thereon.
12 3 4

PART  II
MINUTES OF THE SECOND SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2005-2006) HELD ON 30TH MAY , 2005
The Committee sat from 1100 to 1140 hours on 30th May, 2005 in Committee
Room 'D', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
3. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
4. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
5. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
6. Shri R.K. Dhawan
7. Dr. K. Malaisamy
8. Prof. R.B.S. V erma
SECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
2. Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India
1. Ms. Mamta Kundra — Pr. Director of Audit (Direct Taxes)
2. Mrs. Sumedha Verma Ojha — Director of Audit (Direct Taxes)
2. To begin with, the Chairman, PAC welcomed  the Members and Audit Officers
to the sitting of the Committee.
3. The Committee took up for consideration the Action Taken Report on 55th
Report (13th Lok Sabha) on Chapter V of C&AG's Report No. 12A of 2002 relating to
"Refunds under Income Tax Act, 1961".
15

16
4. The Committee adopted the same without any modifications/amendments
and authorised the Chairman to finalise the Draft Report in the light of changes suggested
by Audit through factual verification, if any, or otherwise and to present the same to
Parliament in the next session.
5. *** *** *** ***
The Committee then adjourned.
MGIPMRND—1497LS—20-7-2005