71
DELAY IN FINALISATION OF DEMANDS
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE)
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2007-2008
SEVENTY-FIRST REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

SEVENTY-FIRST REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
DELAY IN FINALISATION OF DEMANDS
[Action Taken on 50th Report of Public Accounts Committee
(14th Lok Sabha)]
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(Department of Revenue)
Presented to Lok Sabha on 28.4.08
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 28.4.08
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2008/Chaitra, 1930 (Saka)

P.A.C No. 1872
Price: Rs. 31.00
© 2008 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of India
Press, Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2007-2008)........................ (iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................ (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. 1
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations which have been
accepted by the Government ............................................. 6
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government......................................................... 14
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations which have not been
accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration..... 15
CHAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of  which
Government have furnished interim  replies/no replies ..... 19
PART II
Minutes of the twentieth sitting of the Public Accounts
 Committee (2007-08) held on 07.04.2008........................... 22
APPENDIX
Statement of Recommendations and Observations .......... 24
(i)

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok  Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
 #6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
14. Shri Kharabela Swain
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
#16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Prof. P.J. Kurien
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
*19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
†20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri R. K. Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
5. Smt. A. Jyothirmayi — Committee Officer
(iii)
* Ceased to be a Member of the Committee on Public Accounts w.e.f. 9th January, 2008 on his
resignation from Rajya Sabha.
† Ceased to be a Member of the Committee on Public Accounts w.e.f. 2nd April, 2008 consequent
to expiry of his term of Rajya Sabha.
# Ceased to be Members of the Committee on Public Accounts w.e.f. 6th April, 2008 on their
appointment as Ministers.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Seventy-first Report on action taken by Government on the
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 50th Report
(14th Lok Sabha) on “Delay in finalisation of demands”.
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 7th April, 2008. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations of the Committee
have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and have also been reproduced
in a consolidated form in Appendix to the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable assistance
rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the Committee.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
9th April, 2008 Chairman,
20 Chaitra, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Committee contained in their Fiftieth Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on "Delay in finalisation of Demands" (central excise duty).
2. In their Fiftieth Report presented to Lok Sabha on 23rd August, 2007, the
Committee had dealt with issues relating to delay in finalisation of 'demands' relating
to central excise levies owing to non-adherance to time limit prescribed for finalizing
adjudication, slow pace of finalisation of high revenue cases and pendency of
'de novo ' adjudication cases beyond time limit. The Report contained eight
Recommendations/Observations.
3. The Action Taken Notes have been received from the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Revenue) in respect of all the eight Recommendations/Observations
and these have been categorised as under:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which  have been accepted by the
Government;
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 1, 3, 5, 7 and 8 (Para Nos. 40, 42, 44, 46 and 47)
Total : 5
Chapter-II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which  the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the reply received from the Government;
-NIL-
Total : NIL
Chapter-III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which reply of Government has
not been accepted by the Committee and which requires reiteration;
Recommendation Sl. No. 6 (Para No. 45)
Total : 1
Chapter-IV
(vi) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government has furnished
interim replies;
Recommendation Sl. Nos. 2 and 4 (Para Nos. 41 and 43)
Total : 2
Chapter-V
1

2
IMPORTANT RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS CONTAINED IN THE
50th REPORT OF PAC (14th LOK SABHA)
4. The gist of the important Recommendations/Observations made by the Committee
in their 50th Report on the subject are as follows:
• Government was asked to devise more effective and stringent administrative
measures and controls beyond routine circulars and instructions in order to
ensure that adjudications were made promptly and within the stipulated period.
• Board was asked to streamline their methods and functioning with tangible
outcomes for Revenue.
• Early disposal of ' high revenue' cases by constituting specially empowered
cells for time-bound disposals was recommended.
• Adjudicating officers be provided with adequate administrative/infrastructural
support for disposal of demand cases pending adjudication.
• Emphasis was laid on enforcing the statutory limits on grants of adjournments
or review the limitation itself in the light of practical constraints faced by the
Adjudicating officers.
• Government was asked to treat and monitor 'de novo' cases as a separate category
of adjudication and dispose them accordingly within the stipulated time.
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Finance (Department  of
Revenue) have been reproduced in the subsequent Chapters of this Report. The
Committee will now deal with the Action Taken by the Government on some of their
Recommendations/Observations that require reiteration or merit comments.
A. MONITORING CASES PENDING ADJUDICATION
[Recommendation Sl. Nos. 2 and 4 (Para Nos. 41 and 43)]
6. In their 50th Report, the Committee had expressed their concern over the fact that
inspite of fixation of time limit of one year for adjudication of demand cases, pendency
of demand cases for adjudication had not only continued but also rose during the
years 2001-02 to 2004-05. The Committee had expressed their unhappiness to find that
problem of delay and pendency adjudication cases had persisted inspite of fixation of
time limit. The Committee had accordingly, asked the Government to devise more
effective and stringent administrative measures and controls beyond routine Circulars
and Instructions in order to ensure that adjudications are carried out promptly and
within the stipulated period. The Committee had felt that the saving clause i.e. 'where
it is possible to do so' was being resorted to at the slightest pretext resulting in
postponement of finalisation of demands. In this context, the Committee had
recommended that the usage of this clause had to be minimized and should be resorted
to as an exception rather than as a rule. The Committee had also suggested that the
Department should gear up their machiney for early disposal of cases, particularly the
'high revenue' ones, even by constituting specially empowered cells for time-bound
disposals.

3
7. The Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue) in their Action Taken Note
have stated as under:—
"The Board has decided that a special cell will be created in the Directorate
General of Inspection (DGI), Customs and Central Excise, to monitor disposal of
adjudication cases. A special report of cases pending beyond the stipulated
time limit will be submitted by the field formations to the DGI alongwith the
Monthly Technical Report. The Director General of Inspection would be
competent to seek the explanation of Commissioners, whose disposal is not
satisfactory. Thereafter, the Director General will forward the explanation
along with his comments to the Board for taking further action.
In addition, the DGI will also send a monthly report to the zonal Member,
highlighting the  Commissionerate-wise details wherein the disposal figures are
poor, or where the pendency has increased, or where a large number of cases
are pending adjudication. It has also been decided that the Board will review,
once in a quarter, the zone-wise pendency of cases pending  beyond the
prescribed time limit.
It is felt that these steps will improve the  monitoring of adjudication cases, and
will be helpful in ensuring that cases are disposed of within the time limits
stipulated in Section 11A(2A) so that the usage of the ' where it is possible to
do so' clause is minimised.
The Committee has rightly recommended  that the usage of 'where it is possible
to do so' clause  should be minimized  and be deemed  as an exception rather
than a rule. The Board  has issued  instructions dated 5-11-07 to the field
formations accordingly.
Notification No. 11/2007-CE  dated 01.03.2007 has been issued, empowering  Chief
Commissioners   to assign  adjudication   cases amongst  Commissioners  posted
within their Zone. Instructions are being issues asking the Chief  Commissioners
to  re-distribute pending cases among officers under his jurisdiction."
8. The Committee  are happy to note that as a follow-up action by the Goverment  on
their recommendation, Board  had decided to create a Special  Cell  in the Directorate
General  of Inspection, Customs and Central  Excise in  order to monitor  disposal  of
adjudication cases. The Committee desire  that  this Special Cell should be made
functional at the earliest with a view to expedite disposal  of adjudication cases. The
Committee would also  like to be apprised  about the actual performance  of this Cell
and the efforts  made by this  body in actually bringing  down the pendency  cases.
Needless  to emphasise that this Special  Cell would  not be ornamental  in nature but
does play   an effective role in streamlining the adjudication process and also ensuring
that  the cases  pending adjudication  would be kept to the bare minimum.
B. ADJOURNMENTS DURING ADJUDICATION
[Recommendation  Sl. No. 6 (Para No. 45)]
9. The Committee had noted that in several cases personal hearings during the
adjudication  process were deferred well beyond the stipulated number of adjournments

4
i.e. thrice to a party. While furnishing information about such cases, the Ministry had
stated  that the assessees sought  to delay the adjudication proceedings by citing
and pleading violation of principles  of natural  justice. In the opinion of the Committee,
the statutory limitation on adjournments  either had no sanctity  or it was stipulated
without  taking into consideration the practical difficulties.  The  Committee has thus
expressed their concern that the limitation  on adjournments  did not  seem to be
working  at the ground  level, as many  cases  were being  indefinitely delayed at the
expense of the Government revenue. The Committee had,  therefore, suggested that
either the statutory limit on the grant of adjournments should be  strictly enforced or
the Ministry should review  the limitation itself in the light of practical  constraints
faced by adjudicating  officers.
10. While  responding  to the Committee's  recommendation, the Ministry in their
Action  Taken  Note  have stated that the provision stipulating limitation on grant of
adjournment   as contained  in the statute appears  to  be practical and  feasible. They
have informed  that the Board  has also issued instructions in  this regard to the field
formations that this limitation provision should be strictly  adhered to. The  instructions
issued by the Board also state that if there is  any  practical difficulty in adhering to
this provision, the same may be brought  to the notice of the Board.
11. The Committee  had expressed their   concern  on the  chronic  delays caused
in the adjudication proceedings by way of repeated adjournments  sought  by assessees,
thereby  nullifying the statutory  limitation  imposed  on adjournments. In their
reply the Ministry  have informed  that the Central Board  of Excise and Customs
have again issued  instructions to their  field   formations  asking them to enforce
limitation provision  strictly. As the  statutory  limitation   on adjournments  was
incorporated  only at the behest of the Public  Accounts  Committee, it is necessary
that the adjudicating  officials  as well  as the assessees  are not  allowed  to circumvent
this provision. The  Committee,  would, therefore,  like the Ministry/Board  to keep
strict  vigil  based  on feedback received  from field  formation in this regard  to
ensure strict  adherence to  the statutory  limitation  on adjournments.
 C. CASES  PERTAINING TO  'DE NOVO' ADJUDICATION
[ Recommendation Sl. No. 7 (Para No. 46)]
12. Regarding  the maintenance  of basic records, the Committee had expressed
their  surprise   over the fact that the mandatory requirement  of maintaining certain
records  was not being fulfilled. Further,  the Board  had admitted that ' de novo '
adjudication  cases  were not  monitored as a separate  category. The Committee had
expressed  their  apprehension that various  measures  initiated by the Ministry/
Board  had not  yielded the desired results  as there was lack of consistent monitoring
and the controls exercised  were insufficient. The Committee  had recommended  that
'de novo' cases be  treated  and monitored  as a separate  category of adjudication  and
disposed  off accordingly  within the stipulated  time.
13.  While furnishing the Action  Taken Note,  the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Revenue) have stated  as under:
"The Board  has issued  instructions dated 14.09.07 directing   that de novo

5
cases  should be taken into account as fresh receipts in the relevant registers/
records maintained  for monitoring   adjudication,  and that the competent
authority should  pass orders in such cases within the time limit of six months/
one year,   as the case may be.
In terms  of the recommendation of the Committee,  and to ensure  more close
and effective  monitoring  of de  novo   cases, a quarterly report  has been
prescribed  by the Board  for the purpose of monitoring adjudication  of cases
remanded by the Supreme  Court, High Courts, and the Tribunal."
14. Taking  cognisance of the Committee's  recommendation, the Ministry have
issued   instructions for monitoring adjudication of  'de novo'  cases  separately  and
their disposal with in the prescribed  time limit. The Committee  have also  been
informed  that a  quarterly report  has been prescribed  by the  Board  for the purpose
of monitoring  adjudication of cases  remanded  by the Supreme Court, High Courts
and the Tribunal. However,  the Committee would  like to emphasise  that these
reports   ought  not lose their relevance over  a period of time but act as a means  for
effective   monitoring  of the  pendency  cases. Needless  to point out that the quarterly
reports would  enable the  Ministry/Board to analyse  the causes  of delays for taking
timely corrective  measures to curb the pendency of cases.
D. CLEARANCE OF PENDING CASES
[Recommendation Sl. No. 8 (Para No.  47)]
15.  The Committee  had been  assured  that the Department had formulated  an
Action Taken Plan  to achieve  'nil' pendency of all cases  that were   either more than
one year old  or would be so as on 31st  March, 2007.  The Committee  had desired  that
the Ministry would keep  up their assurance  and follow their initiatives  more effectively
and with greater focus.
16. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
have put forth  as under:
"The target  fixed  was disposal of all Central  Excise  demand cases pending as
on 31-03-06,  by 31-03-07, so as to acheive 'nil'  pendency  of over  one year old
cases by that date.  Out of a total number of 13,941 Central  Excise  demand
cases, involving  Rs. 9,851.49 crore, pending  as on 31-03-06, only  194  cases
(i.e. 1.39%  of the cases pending as on 31.03.06), involving Rs. 117.64 crore (i.e.
1.19% of the amount  involved  in the cases pending  as on 31-03-06), were
pending  as on 31-03-07. As on  31-12-07, only  15 of these cases, involving
Rs. 71.92 crore, are pending."
17.  The Committee  note that  out  of 13,941 Central  Excise  demand  cases  as on
March, 2006,  involving  Rs. 9851.49  crore, only 15 (involving  Rs. 71.92 crore)
were pending  as on 31.12.2007. The   Committee  hope that these  demand cases
would be cleared  at the earliest  and those cases pending adjudication which  have
been added subsequently  would also  be expedited. The  Committee hope  that the
system put in  place would be effective  and ensure that the demand  cases pending
adjudication  would not  pile up unreasonably.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONSWHICH HAVE BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
40. Section 11A of the Central Excise Act, 1944, provides that when any duty of
excise has not been levied or has been short-levied or short-paid or erroneously refunded,
the appropriate Central Excise Officer may, within one year from the relevant date serve
notice on the person chargeable with duty which has not been levied or paid or which
has been short-levied or short-paid or erroneously refunded, requiring him to show
cause why he should not pay the amount specified in the notice. Period of one year
stands extended to five years where duty has been short-paid due to fraud, collusion,
wilful mis-statement or suppression of facts with the intention to evade duty. Central
Excise officer shall, after considering the representation, if any, made by the person on
whom Show Cause Notice (SCN) has been served, determine amount of duty due from
such person and thereupon such person shall pay the amounts so determined. SCN is
the main instrument through which Department ensures that excise duty is correctly
paid as per provisions of the Act, Rules and orders issued by it.
Sub-section 11A(2A) inserted vide the Finance Act, 2001, with effect from 11 May
2001 stipulated that the Central Excise Officer, in cases where any duty of excise has
not been levied or paid by reason of fraud, collusion or any wilful mis-statement or
suppression of facts or contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of the
Rules made thereunder with intent to evade payment of duty shall determine the
amount of such duty, within a period of one year from the date of service of the notice.
In any other case, he shall determine the amount of duty of excise within a period of
six months from the date of service of the notice on the person.
[Sl. No. 1, Para 40 of 50th Report of PAC, 14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
No comments/action required.
[Approved by Additional Secretary to the Government of India
 (F. No. 238/5/2007-CX-7)]
Ministry of Finance (Department of Revenue)
Recommendation
Inspite of a galore of instructions and circulars issued by the Ministry/Board to
adhere to the provisions and conditions enumerated in them, the Committee have
found that they have not made any significant impact on the functioning of the
adjudicating authorities. In several cases, adjudication was kept pending for want of
administrative action. In such a situation characterised by laxity and even inaction by
the field formations, mere issuance of circulars/instructions appeared to be an action,
6

7
routine in manner serving no meaningful purpose. Obviously, the circulars and
instructions have not been followed up with regular monitoring by the Board. Matters
were allowed to drift and substantial revenue remained blocked and uncollected.
Apparently, the periodical reports and returns which the revenue field formations are
required to furnish to the Board either did not reflect a true picture of the adjudication
position or were simply ignored by the Board. The Committee expect that the Board,
which is the apex body responsible for the performance of the field offices, would
play their assigned role and streamline their methods and functioning with tangible
outcomes for Revenue.
[Sl. No. 3, Para 42 of 50th Report of PAC, 14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
The action taken regarding monitoring of adjudication cases by the Board, with the
assistance of the DGI, has been detailed above in relation to Recommendation No. 2.
It has also been decided to enhance the powers of adjudication of Joint
Commissioners to those of Additional Commissioners. This will facilitate disposal of
cases of the competence of Additional Commissioner in Commissionerates where no
Additional Commissioners are posted. Besides Notification No. 11/2007-C.E.(NT)
dated 1.3.07 (copy enclosed as Annexure ‘A’) has been issued, empowering Chief
Commissioners to assign adjudication cases amongst the Commissioners posted
within their Zone.
[Approved by Additional Secretary to the Government of India
(F. No. 238/5/2007-CX-7)]

ANNEXURE A
 Notification New Delhi, the 1st March, 2007
No.11/2007-Central Excise (N.T.) 10 Phalguna,  1928 (Saka)
G .S.R. (E).—In exercise of the powers  conferred  by  section 37A of the Central
Excise Act, 1944 (1 of  1944), the Central  Government  hereby directs  that the powers
exercisable  by the Central Board of Excise   and Customs under  the provisions of
sub-rule (2) of rule 3 of the Central Excise Rules, 2002, shall  also be exercised by the
Chief  Commissioner of Central Excise  for the purpose of adjudication of notices
issued  under the provisions of the said Act or the rules made thereunder  within his
jurisdiction.
[F. No. 334/1/2007-TRU]
Sd/-
Under Secretary  to the Government of India
Recommendation
Furthermore, the analysis of demand cases pending adjudication as on
31st March, 2006 has revealed that cases involving about 89 per cent of revenue
were pending at the level of Commissioners, although it constituted only about
13 per cent in terms of figures. Instructions are stated to have been issued to the
Commissioners in this regard. The Committee hope that the instructions issued will
be strictly complied with and non-compliance viewed seriously by the Ministry/
Board. The Committee would expect the Ministry to enforce accountability of the
Adjudicating officers responsible for carrying out their orders and instructions.
The Committee would like to be apprised about the concrete action taken in this
matter. In this connection, it will not be out of place to mention that the Ministry
must also ensure, that the Adjudicating officers are given a reasonably stable tenure
to accomplish their targets. They should also be provided with adequate
administrative/infrastructural support for this purpose.
[Sl.No. 5, Para 44 of 50th Report of PAC, 14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
As already stated above in the Action Taken Note relating to Recommendation
No. 2, the Board has decided that the Director General of Inspection would be competent
to seek the explanation of Commissioners, whose disposal is not satisfactory.
Thereafter, the Director General will forward the explanation along with his comments
to the Board for taking further action.
8

9
Necessary action is also being taken on the observations of the Committee
regarding providing reasonably stable tenure and adequate administrative/
infrastructural support to adjudicating officers.
[Approved by Additional Secretary to the Government of India
(F. No. 238/5/2007-CX-7)]
Recommendation
With regard to maintenance of basic records, the Committee are surprised to note
that the mandatory requirement of maintaining certain records was not being fulfilled.
As per amended section 11A(2) of the Act, adjudication of cases remanded by appellate
authorities for 'de novo' adjudication were required to be entered into the records as
new cases and finalised within the prescribed time limit as in the case of any regular
Show Cause Notice. In order to expedite adjudication of 'remanded back cases', the
Ministry had made it mandatory for the field offices to submit reports on fortnightly
basis. It is disconcerting to learn that no such fortnightly reports were being submitted.
Furthermore, the Ministry have categorically stated that the Board did not monitor
'de novo' adjudication cases as a separate category. With no fortnightly reports
being furnished and no separate monitoring of 'de novo' adjudication cases, the
Committee are unable to comprehend as to how the Board monitored the disposal of
these cases. The Committee are thus constrained to observe that various measures
initiated by the Ministry/Board have not yielded the desired results as there was lack
of consistent monitoring and the controls exercised were insufficient. In this regard,
the Committee would like to emphasise that various wings of the Department ought to
work in tandem and in close co-ordination so that red tapism and delay, which
particularly come to fore when cases are remanded back for fresh or 'de novo'
adjudication, are eliminated. 'de novo' cases should henceforth be treated and
monitored as a separate category of adjudication and disposed of accordingly within
the stipulated time.
[Sl.No. 7, Para 46 of 50th Report of PAC, 14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
The Board has issued instructions dated 14-09-07 (copy enclosed as Annexure B),
directing that de novo cases should be taken into account as fresh receipts in the
relevant registers/records maintained for monitoring adjudication, and that the
competent authority should pass orders in such cases within the time limit of six
months/one year, as the case may be.
In terms of the recommendation of the Committee, and to ensure more close and
effective monitoring of de novo cases, a quarterly report has been prescribed by the
Board for the purpose of monitoring adjudication of cases remanded by the Supreme
Court, High Courts, and the Tribunal.
[Approved by Additional Secretary to the Government of India
(F. No. 238/5/2007-CX-7)]

ANNEXURE B
Circular No. 865/3/2008-CX
F.No. 208/27/2003-CX-6
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Revenue
Central Board of Excise & Customs
New Delhi dated the February 19, 2008
To
All Chief Commissioners of Central Excise
All Chief Commissioners of Customs and Central Excise
All Commissioners of Central Excise
All Commissioners of Central Excise (Appeals)
All Director Generals of Customs and Central Excise
Subject: Power of adjudication of Central Excise Officers—instructions reg.
Sir/Madam,
The undersigned is directed to refer to Circular No. 752/68/2003-CX dated 01.10.03
(as amended) on the above subject. This circular prescribes monetary limits of Central
Excise Officers at various levels for adjudicating of cases under sections 11A and 33
of Central Excise Act, 1944.
2. In this regard, it has been brought to the notice of the Board that in many
Commissionerates, there is no officer of the rank of the Additional Commissioner
posted. This is leading to delay in adjudication of cases falling under the monetary
limit prescribed for Additional Commissioners. The matter has been examined by the
Board. It has been decided to enhance the monetary limit of adjudication of cases by
Joint Commissioners equal to that of Additional Commissioners. Accordingly, parts A
& B of para 2.1 of the said circular stand amended as follows:
Central Excise Officers P ower of adjudication
(Amount of duty involved)
Joint Commissioners Above. Rs. 5 lakh and upto Rs. 50 lakh
3. The jurisdictional Commissioners of Central Excise may redistribute the pending
cases among Joint Commissioners/Additional Commissioners posted in the
Commissionerate based on appropriate factors. It is further clarified that
notwithstanding this revision, in all cases, where the personal hearing has already
10

11
been completed, orders will be passed by the officer before whom the hearing has
been held. Such orders should normally be issued within a month of the date of
completion of the personal hearing. It may also be noted that the age-wise pendency
of cases as shown in MTR would be reflected based on the date of issuance of Show
Cause Notice, and not on the basis of transfer of cases to the new Adjudicating
Authority. The jurisdictional Commissioners should ensure that the work regarding
re-allocation of pending cases, issuance of corrigendum to the Show Cause Notices,
transfer of relevant files and records, etc., should be completed within 15 days. A
compliance report in this regard should be sent to the zonal Chief Commissioner, who
in turn, should submit a report to the Board by 15.03.2008, certifying that all the work
regarding re-allocation of cases has been completed.
4. Field formations may be informed suitably.
5. Receipt of the Circular may please be acknowledged.
6. Hindi version will follow.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
Under Secretary to the Govt. of India
Copy to:
1. All sections under CBEC.

ANNEXURE C
(Central Board of Excise & Customs)
Legal Cell
New Delhi, dated the 14th September, 2007
To
All the Chief Commissioners of Customs
All the Chief Commissioners of Central Excise
All the Chief Commissioners of Customs (Preventive)
Subject: Pendency of remand cases with original adjudicating authorities.
Sir/Madam,
In connection with a notice for Lok Sabha Starred/Unstarred Question Dy.
No. 2116, the Board had obtained the details regarding number of remand cases
pending with the various adjudicating authorities as on 9.8.2007. As per the
consolidated report, 9327 cases were remanded by the various appellate authorities
and Courts during the period 1.4.2004—31.3.2007 and out of which 2003 cases are
pending for denovo adjudication with various adjudicating authorities as on 9.8.2007.
2. Board vide Circular No. 4/2007-Cus. dated 10.1.2007 issued from F.No. 401/243/
2006-Cus.III instructed the field formations to take into account the denovo cases as
fresh receipts in the relevant records/registers maintained for monitoring adjudication,
and that the competent authority should pass orders in such cases within 6 months/
1 year, as the case may be, in accordance with the guidelines prescribed under
Section 28(2A) of the Customs Act, 1962. In case the time period of 6 months/1 year
cannot be observed in a particular case, the adjudicating officer shall keep his
supervisory officer informed regarding the circumstances which prevented the
observance of the time frame and the supervisory officer would fix an appropriate
time frame for disposal of such cases and monitor their disposal accordingly. The
contents of the circular applies to Central Excise cases also in terms of the provisions
of Section 11A(2A) of the Central Excise Act, 1944.
3. I am directed to request you to ensure that all the cases as reported in your letter
which are pending for adjudication under remand proceedings with various
adjudicating authorities may be adjudicated within 6 months/1 year of the remand
order of the appellate authorities and Courts or within the time frame as fixed by the
respective supervisory officers. You may also advise the Commissioners (Appeals)
under your jurisdiction to send a monthly list of cases remanded by them in a particular
month to the Commissioner concerned with copy to the respective adjudicating
12

13
authority so that adjudication of these remand cases can be monitored effectively by
the Commissioner concerned. A copy of the communication could be endorsed to the
Chief Commissioner for his information.
4. A status report regarding the cases pending for adjudication under remand as
stated in your letter in response to the above mentioned notice for Lok Sabha Question
Dy. No. 2116 may be sent by 1.1.2008 positively.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
Director (Legal)
Recommendation
The Committee note that in response to the Committee's earlier Observations/
Recommendations on this subject, the Department have taken some remedial steps to
finalise the adjudication of demand cases. Obviously, these measures have not proved
to be adequate and belatedly now, when the Committee took up the matter, the
Department have formulated an Action Plan to achieve 'nil' pendency of all cases that
are either more than one year old or will be so, unless adjudicated, on or before
31 March, 2007. The top ten Commissionerates in terms of high pendency as on
31st March, 2006 have been subjected to special inspection by the Board. The Chief
Commissioners have been specially asked to inspect other Commissionerates where
pendency is higher. In this regard, the Secretary (Revenue) gave an assurance to the
Committee during his deposition that they are absolutely confident of achieving the
desired results. The Committee would now expect the Department to keep the assurance
given to the Committee and follow up their initiatives more effectively and with greater
focus. The Committee on their part would continue their scrutiny of the subject and
monitor the result achieved in the finalisation of demands.
[Sl.No. 8, Para 47 of 50th Report of PAC, 14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
As already stated above in the Action Taken Note on Recommendation No. 4, an
Action Plan was formulated by the Board during 2006-07 for expeditious adjudication
of demand cases. The target fixed was disposal of all Central Excise demand cases
pending as on 31-03-06, by 31-03-07, so as to achieve 'nil' pendency of over one year
old cases by that date. Out of a total number of 13,941 Central Excise demand cases,
involving Rs. 9,851.49 crore, pending as on 31-03-06, only 194 cases (i.e. 1.39% of the
cases pending as on 31-03-06), involving Rs. 117.64 crore (i.e. 1.19% of the amount
involved in the cases pending as on 31-03-06), were pending as on
31-03-07. As on 31-12-07, only 15 of these cases, involving Rs. 71.92 crore, are pending.
[Approved by Additional Secretary to the Government of India
(F. No. 238/5/2007-CX-7)]

CHAPTER III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED
FROM THE GOVERNMENT
-NIL-
14

CHAPTER IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS REPLIES TO WHICH HA VE NOT BEEN
ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation
Inspite of the fact that Section 33(A) (2) in Central Excise Act was inserted with
effect from 13 May, 2004 stipulating that the adjudicating officer shall not grant
adjournments during adjudication proceedings more than thrice to a party, it was
found in certain cases that personal hearings in the case had been deferred well
beyond stipulated number. While furnishing information about such case where
adjudication had been kept pending, the Ministry have stated that the assessees
sought to delay the adjudication proceedings by citing and pleading violation of
principles of natural justice. In the opinion of the Committee, the limitation prescribed
either had no sanctity or the limitation had been stipulated without taking into
consideration the practical problems. When instructions are issued, the practicality
and feasibility of the same ought to be studied before implementing them. The
Committee would like the Ministry to analyse this problem and satisfy themselves
whether this stipulation had actually succeeded in expediting the adjudication process.
It is a moot point that inspite of restricting the number of adjournments for expediting
the adjudication proceedings, assessees have been allowed to delay and stall the
proceedings under some pretext or the other. The Committee would like to point out
that the advantages of a quasi-judicial process, wherein adjudication at the initial
stages are made by departmental officers themselves, will be lost, if the process is
allowed to linger on. The rationale of shorter procedures and quicker decisions inherent
and expected in a quasi-judicial proceeding, specially formulated at the initial stages
of the adjudicatory/appellate mechanism, will also thus be defeated, if cases are
indefinitely delayed at the expense of revenue. The Ministry should therefore either
strictly enforce the statutory limits on grant of adjournments or review the limitation
itself in the light of practical constraints faced by the Adjudicating officers. The
Committee may be apprised about the initiative taken in this regard.
[Sl.No. 6, Para 45 of 50th Report of PAC, 14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
The provisions contained in Section 33A (2) of the Central Excise Act appear to be
practical and feasible. The Board has issued instructions dated 5.11.07 (copy enclosed
as Annexure C) to the field formations that these provisions should be strictly adhered
to.
[Approved by Additional Secretary to the Government of India
(F. No. 238/5/2007-CX7)]
15

ANNEXURE C
D.O. No. 221/01/2006-CX-6 (Pt.)
February 18, 2008
My dear
I may invite your attention to my D.O. letter of even number dated 05.11.2007,
wherein the recommendations of PAC regarding delay in finalization of demands were
discussed. The Board has further examined the recommendations of PAC, and following
proposals have been approved for implementation:
(i) A special cell is to be created in the directorate General of Inspection (DGI) to
monitor the disposal of cases.
(ii)  A separate report for cases pending beyond the time limit stipulated in
Section 11A of the Central Excise Act, is to be submitted by the Zonal Chief
Commissioners in the following format along with MTR to DGI;
Details of adjudication cases pending beyond the Time Limit stipulated in
Section 11A of the Central Excise Act:
COMMISSIONERATE:————————————
Sl. Name of Date of Name and designation Reasons for not Action
No. the issue of of the Adjudicating disposing of the proposed
assessee SCN authority case within the
time limit
(iii)  The Director General of Inspection has been authorized to call for the explanation
of Commissioners, whose disposal of adjudication cases is not satisfactory.
Thereafter, DGI will forward the explanation along with his comments to the
Board for taking further action. However, it may be ensured that explanation of
senior officers should normally be called for in justified cases only, and zonal
Chief Commissioners must also be kept informed of such action. The views of
the Chief Commissioner should also be incorporated before sending the
explanation to the Board.
(iv) In addition to the existing monthly report on the progress of adjudication
cases which is sent to the Board, DGI would also send a monthly report to the
zonal member highlighting the Commissionerate-wise details, whose disposal
progress is unsatisfactory or where the pendency has increased or where a
large number of cases are pending adjudication. It is clarified that report on
exceptional basis only is required to be sent to the zonal member, which means
16

17
that only such cases which need to be brought to the notice of the Member for
taking further action should be covered in the report. Copy of the said report
also be sent to Member (CX) or Member (Cus.) as the case may be. Further,
the Board will review the zonal member-wise pendency once in a quarter for
cases pending for more than a year (suppression cases) or six months (non-
suppression cases), and for that purpose, brief for the Board Meeting would
be sent by DGI at the end of each quarter. First of such zonal member-wise
review may be done at the end of April, 2008 for pendency of cases up to
31.03.08.
(v) In a number of Commissionerates, there are no Additional Commissioners
posted, which results in delay in adjudication of the cases to be adjudicated
by ADC. Therefore, a policy decision has been taken to enhance the powers
of adjudication of Joint Commissioners to that of the Additional Commissioner.
However, instructions in this regard will be issued shortly for giving effect to
the decision.
(vi) The Board noted that as the Chief Commissioners have already been
empowered vide notification No. 11/2007-CE (NT), dated 01.03.2007 to assign
cases amongst the Commissioners posted within their zone, therefore, the
Chief Commissioners are being directed to take necessary action to re-
distribute the pending cases among officers at all levels. You may also like to
advise Chief Commissioners in appropriate cases.
2. In view of the above decisions, you are requested to take action to put in place
the necessary mechanism with immediate effect. A special cell may be created in the
Directorate General of inspection, immediately, under intimation to the Board. Further,
reports in the prescribed format should be collected from field formations and submitted
to the Board. Zonal members should be informed every month about the progress of
disposal of adjudication cases. You may write a separate letter to all the zonal Chief
Commissioners on this issue with a copy to the Board.
With best wishes,
Yours sincerely,
Sd/-
(P.C. JHA)
Copy to:
1.  All Members in the Central Board of Excise & Customs—for information on
point No. (iv)
2. The Chief Commissioner of Central Excise —(All)
3. The Commissioner of Central Excise —(All)

ANNEXURE C
F.No. 221/01/2006-CX-6(Pt.)
Government of India
Ministry of Finance
Department of Revenue
Central Board of Excise and Customs
New Delhi, dated the November 5, 2007
To
The Chief Commissioners of Central Excise (All)
The Commissioners of Central Excise (All)
Subject: Recommendation of PAC in its Report (50th Report) presented to the
Lok Sabha/Rajya Sabha on 23.08.2007 relating to "Delay in finalization of
demands"—regarding.
***
Sir/Madam,
Public Accounts Committee in its report (50th Report) presented to Lok Sabha/
Rajya Sabha on 23.8.2007 relating to “Delay in finalization of Demands”  have given
various recommendations for expeditious disposal of pending adjudication cases.
The recommendations have been examined. Based on these recommendations, the
following instructions are issued:
2.1 The usage of the saving clause (as far as possible) of Section 11A(2A) of the
Central Excise Act, 1944 should be minimized and be deemed as an exception rather than
a rule. Each adjudicating authority shall submit a report to his immediate superior if the
time limit given in Section 11A (2A) is not adhered to. In this report, specific reasons
should be given for delay in adjudication beyond the normal limit prescribed. The
Supervisory Authority should satisfy himself that reasons given for the delay are
genuine or else he should take further appropriate action to ensure adjudication of the
case without delay. All the cases presently pending adjudication should be reviewed
accordingly, and a compliance report should be sent to the DG (Inspection) by 01.01.2008.
2.2 Section 33(A) (2) of the Act stipulates that the adjudicating officer shall not
grant adjournments during adjudication proceedings more than thrice to a notice.
This provision should be strictly adhered to. However, if there is any practical difficulty
in adhering to this provision, the same may be brought to the notice of the Board.
Yours faithfully,
Sd/-
(RAHUL NANGARE)
Under Secretary (CS-6&8)
18

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HAVE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES/NO REPLIES
Recommendation
The Committee note that the amount involved in demand cases ( i.e. where
showcause notices have been issued) pending adjudication for a period beyond the
stipulated one year was substantial. The inclusion of sub-section 11A(2A) wherein a
provision was made to qualify the time limit does not seem to have acted as a deterrent
in this regard. It is matter of concern for the Committee that inspite of fixation of time
limit in the statute, pendency not only continued but actually rose during the years
2001-02 and 2004-05. Though the number of cases came down by nearly 32 per cent
during 2005-06, the excise duty involved in the pending cases were about 82 per cent
of pendency of previous year. It would be pertinent to note that fixation of time limit
of adjudication was actually a consequence of the Committee's recommendation in
their earlier Report on the subject. However, the Committee are perturbed that the
problem of delay and pendency of adjudication cases persists nevertheless. Although,
the Department have been issuing circulars and instructions to improve the situation,
evidently this has not had the desired impact at the ground level. The Committee
would therefore now like the Department to devise more effective and stringent
administrative measures and controls beyond routine circulars and instructions in
order to ensure that adjudications are made promptly and within the stipulated period.
Further, it appears that adjudication officers are prone to postponing finalisation
of demands by taking shelter under the clause ''Where it is possible to do so” . The
Committee find that the saving clause, inserted in order to be invoked under exceptional
circumstances is being used at the slightest pretext. The Committee recommend that
the usage of this clause should be minimised and be deemed as an exception rather
than a rule.
[Sl. No. 2, Para 41 of 50th Report of PAC, 14th Lok  Sabha]
Action Taken
The Board has decided that a special cell will be created in the Directorate General
of Inspection (DGI), Customs and Central Excise, to monitor disposal of adjudication
cases. A special report of cases pending beyond the stipulated time limit will be
submitted by the field formations to the DGI along with the Monthly Technical Report.
The Director General of Inspection would be competent to seek the explanation of
Commissioners, whose disposal is not satisfactory. Thereafter, the Director General
will forward the explanation along with his comments to the Board for taking further
action.
19

20
In addition, the DGI will also send a monthly report to the zonal Member, highlighting
the Commissionerate-wise details wherein the disposal figures are poor, or where the
pendency has increased, or where a large number of cases are pending adjudication.
It has also been decided that the Board will review, once in a quarter, the zone-wise
pendency of cases pending beyond the prescribed time limit.
It is felt that these steps will improve the monitoring of adjudication cases, and will
be helpful in ensuring that cases are disposed of within the time limits stipulated in
Section 11A(2A) so that the usage of the ' where it is possible to do so'  clause is
minimised.
The Committee has rightly recommended that the usage of 'where it is possible to
do so' clause should be minimized and be deemed as an exception rather than a rule.
The Board has issued instructions dated 5-11-07 (copy enclosed as Annexure C) to
the field formations accordingly.
Approved by Additional Secretary to the Government of India
(F. No. 238/5/2007-CX-7)
Recommendation
On perusal of the age-wise pendency of various adjudication cases, the Committee
have noted that there was a general tendency on the part of the adjudicating officers
to deal with low revenue cases at the cost of keeping high revenue cases pending. As
a result pendency of high revenue cases rose significantly. Further, an analysis of the
reduction in pendency of adjudication cases as on 1st April, 2006 revealed that cases
where duty involved was Rs. 1 crore and more, the reduction achieved in the number
of cases was 32 per cent, while the reduction achieved in terms of revenue was only
14 per cent. The Ministry have informed that they had launched a special drive for
expeditious adjudication of cases involving high revenue stakes during 2005-06. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the results achieved therefrom and expect
that the momentum generated in such special drive should be sustained. The Committee
also recommend that the Department should gear up their machinery for early disposal
of 'high revenue' cases even by constituting specially empowered cells for time-
bound disposals.
[Sl. No. 4, Para 43 of 50th Report of PAC, 14th Lok Sabha]
Action Taken
The results achieved from the special drive during 2005-06 have already been
furnished, and are reflected in para 26 of the Committee's Report.
During 2006-07, an Action Plan was formulated by the Board for expeditious
adjudication of demand cases. The target fixed was disposal of all  Central Excise
demand cases pending as on 31-3-06, by 31-03-07, so as to achieve 'nil' pendency of
over one year old cases by that date. The progress was monitored closely by the
Board throughout the year, which contributed towards the remarkable success of the
effort. A total number of 13,941 Central Excise demand cases, involving Rs. 9,851.49
crore, were pending as on 31-03-06. Out of these, 13,747 cases (i.e. 98.61%), involving
Rs. 9,733.85 crore (i.e. 98.81%), were disposed of during 2006-07. Therefore, out of the

21
cases pending as on 31-03-06, only 194 cases (i.e. 1.39% of the cases pending as on
31-03-06) involving Rs. 117.64 crore (i.e. 1.19% of the amount involved in the cases
pending as on 31-03-06), were pending as on 31-03-07.
As stated above, in the Action Taken on Recommendation No. 3, Notification
No. 11/2007-C.E. (NT) dated 1-3-07 (copy enclosed as Annexure A) has been issued,
empowering Chief Commissioners to assign adjudication cases amongst the
Commissioners posted within their Zone. Instructions are being issued to the Chief
Commissioners asking them to take necessary action to re-distribute pending cases
among officers.
Approved by Additional Secretary to the Government of India
(F.No 238/5/2007-CX-7)
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA
9th April, 2008 Chairman,
20 Chaitra, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

PART - II
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2007-08) HELD ON 7TH APRIL, 2008
The Committee sat from 1100 hrs. to 1130 hrs. on 7th April, 2008 in Room No. “51”
(Chairman's Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra—Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Krip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
5. Shri K.S. Rao
6. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
7. Shri Kharabela Swain
8. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Janardhana Poojary
10. Shri K. Malaisamy
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri Ramkumar Suryanarayanan — Under Secretary
Officer of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Shri Jayanta Chatterjee — Director General (AB)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee. He mentioned that two of the Members of PAC have resigned/retired from
Rajya Sabha, namely, Shri Suresh Bhardwaj, resigned from membership of Rajya Sabha
22

23
on 9th January, 2008 after he was elected to Himachal Pradesh Legislative Assembly
and Shri Prasanta Chatterjee, who has retired from Rajya Sabha on 2nd April, 2008. He
also congratulated S/Shri Raghunath Jha and V . Narayansamy, Members of PAC, who
have become Ministers in the Union Government w.e.f. 6th April, 2008.
3. The Committee placed on record their appreciation for the valuable contribution
to the Committee made by these Members.
4. Thereafter the Committee took up for consideration the following draft Reports:—
(i) *** *** ***
(ii) *** *** ***
(iii) Draft Action Taken Report on 50th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to
"Delay in finalisation of demands".
5. The Chairman invited suggestions of the Members on the draft Reports. After
discussing the contents of the draft Reports in detail, the Committee adopted the
same with some verbal changes and authorised the Chairman to finalise and present
these Reports in the light of factual verification done by the Audit.
6. Further, it was decided that the Committee would hold their next sitting on
21st April, 2008.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
STA TEMENT OF RECOMMENDATIONS AND OBSERV ATIONS
Sl. Para Ministry/ Recommendations/Observations
No. No. Department
12 3 4
1. 8 Finance (Department The Committee are happy to note that as a
of Revenue) follow-up action by the Government on their
recommendation, Board has decided to create
a Special Cell in the Directorate General of
Inspection, Customs and Central Excise in
order to monitor disposal of adjudication
cases. The Committee desire that this Special
Cell should be made functional at the earliest
with a view to expedite disposal of
adjudication cases. The Committee would also
like to be apprised about the actual
performance of this Cell and the efforts made
by this body in actually bringing down the
pendency cases. Needless to emphasise that
this Special Cell would not be ornamental in
nature but does play an effective role in
streamlining the adjudication process and also
ensuring that the cases pending adjudication
would be kept to the bare minimum.
2. 11 -do- The Committee had expressed their concern
on the chronic delays caused in the
adjudication proceedings by way of repeated
adjournments sought by assessees, thereby
nullifying the statutory limitation imposed on
adjournments. In their reply, the Ministry have
informed that the Central Board of Excise and
Customs have again issued instructions to
their field formations asking them to enforce
limitation provision strictly. As the statutory
limitation on adjournments was incorporated
only at the behest of the Public Accounts
Committee, it is necessary that the
adjudicating officials as well as the assessees
24

25
are not allowed to circumvent this provision.
The Committee would, therefore, like the
Ministry/Board to keep strict vigil based on
feedback received from field formations in this
regard to ensure strict adherence to the
statutory limitation on adjournments.
3. 14 Finance (Department T aking cognisance of the Committee's
of Revenue) recommendation, the Ministry have issued
instructions for monitoring adjudication of  'de
novo' cases separately and their disposal
within the prescribed time limit. The Committee
have also been informed that a quarterly report
has been prescribed by the Board for the
purpose of monitoring adjudication of cases
remanded by the Supreme Court, High Courts
and the Tribunal. However, the Committee
would like to emphasise that these reports
ought not lose their relevance over a period
of time but act as a means for effective
monitoring of the pendency cases. Needless
to point out that the quarterly reports would
enable the Ministry/Board to analyse the
cause of delays for taking timely corrective
measures to curb the pendency of cases.
4. 17 -do- The Committee note that out of 13.941 Central
Excise demand cases as of March, 2006,
involving Rs. 9851.49 crore, only 15 (involving
Rs. 71.92 crore) were pending as on
31.12.2007. The Committee hope that these
demand cases would be cleared at the earliest
and those cases pending adjudication which
have been added subsequently would also
be expedited. The Committee hope that the
system put in place would be effective and
ensure that the demand cases pending
adjudication would not pile up unreasonably.
12 3 4