TWELFTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
ALLOTMENT OF LAND TO
PRIVATE HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES BY
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
Presented to Lok Sabha on 26 April, 2005
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 26 April, 2005
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
April, 2005/Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka)

PAC No. 1775
Price: Rs. 30.00
© 2005 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi - 110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2004-2005) . . . . . . . . . . (iii)
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (v)
PART-I
REPORT
I. Introductory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
II. Irregular allotment of land to Trusts or Private Companies . . . . . . 2
III. Allotment of land to private Hospitals/Dispensaries . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
IV. Non-inclusion of conditions for monitoring provision of free
 treatment to indigent patients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
V. Inaction in reported cases  of  non-adherence  in  terms  of
allotment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
VI. Non-appointment of Government representatives . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18
VII. Timely construction of hospital and dispensary buildings . . . . . . . 19
VIII. Heavy outstanding dues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
IX. Treatment of poor patients . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
X. Observations and Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25
ANNEXURES
(i) Paragraph 3.1 of C&AG's Report No. 4 of 2004 . . . 36
(ii) List indicating the rate of premium of land charged
from 65 hospitals/dispensaries . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 47
(iii) List of hospitals/dispensaries which had been issued
show cause notices . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 56
(iv) Instructions  issued  by  the  Directorate   of   Health
Services, Government of Delhi for compliance of the
provisions of free treatment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 57
(v) Proforma of fortnightly details of the patients treated
free . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 59
(vi) Status of the construction of Hospital Buildings . . . 60
PART-II
Minutes of the sittings of Public Accounts Committee
(2004-2005) held on 8.11.2004, 9.11.2004 and 15.4.2005 . . . . . . . 66

COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Shri Raghunath Jha
6. Shri Naveen Jindal
7. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Dr. R. Senthil
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
13. Kunwar Revati Raman Singh
14. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Dr. K. Malaisamy
19. Shri V. Narayanasamy
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
21. Shri Jairam Ramesh
22. Prof. R.B.S. V arma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee having been authorised by the
Committee to submit the Report on their behalf, do present this 12th Report relating to
"Allotment to Land to Private Hospitals and Dispensaries by Delhi Development
Authority (DDA)" on Paragraph 3.1 the Report of C&AG of India for the year ended
31 March, 2003 (No. 4 of 2004), Union Government (Civil—Autonomous Bodies).
2. The Report of the C&AG of India for the year ended 31 March, 2003 (No. 4 of
2004), Union Government (Civil—Autonomous Bodies) was laid on theTable of the
House on 13 July, 2004.
3. The Committee took the evidence of the representatives of the Ministry of
Urban Development, Delhi Development Authority and the Government of NCT of
Delhi on the subject at their sittings held on 8th and 9th November, 2004. The
Committee considered and finalised this Report at their sitting held on 15 April, 2005.
Minutes of the sittings form Part II of the Report.
4. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and have
been produced in a consolidated form at the end of the Report.
5. The Committee would like to express their thanks to the officers of the Ministry
of Urban Development, Delhi Development Authority and the Government of NCT of
Delhi for the cooperation extended by them in furnishing information and tendering
evidence before the Committee.
6. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the  assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
21 April, 2005 Chairman,
1 Vaisakha, 1927 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

SERVER5\657LS\657LS.PM6.5 1
PART-I
REPORT
I. Introductory
1. Delhi Development Authority (DDA) was established to promote and secure
planned development of Delhi on 30th December, 1957 under the provisions of the
Delhi Development Act, 1957. It acquires land and develops lands and properties. It
also disposes of plots and properties for commercial, industrial, institutional and
residential uses in accordance with the provisions of the DDA (Disposal of Developed
Nazul Land) Rules, 1981 popularly known as Nazul Rules. Of these Rules, Rule 5
stipulates that DDA may allot Nazul lands for construction of hospitals and dispensaries
to social or charitable institutions. The premium and ground rend for this purpose will
be determined by the Government of India. Allotment of Nazul land to public institutions
is subject to fulfilment of certain conditions prescribed in Rule 20 which, inter alia,
states that an institution seeking allotment of institutional land should be a society
registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, or such institution should be
owned and run by the Government or any local authority or constituted or established
under any law for the time being in force.
2. Till May, 2003, DDA had allotted land to 65 social or charitable institutions for
construction of 53 hosptials and 12 dispensaries under Rules 5 and 20 of Nazul Rules.
The allotments were made at concessional premium and ground rend fixed by the
Union Ministry of Urban Development from time to time upto 1995-96 and at rates
fixed by the DDA in consultation with the Ministry thereafter subject to the condition
that the institution shall serve as a general public hospital with at least 25 per cent of
total indoor beds reserved for free treatment to indigent patients and that it would
provide free treatment to 40 per cent patients in the outdoor department. The primary
objective of providing free treatment to the poor patients has, however, not been
achieved even after a lapse of period ranging from 4 to over 30 years from the date of
allotment of land.
3. This Report is based on paragraph 3.1 of Report of the C&AG of India for the
year ended March 2003, Union Government (Civil Autonomous Bodies). No. 4 of
2004 relating to "Allotment of Lands to Private Hospitals and Dispensaries by Delhi
Development Authority (DDA)" [Annexure I].
Organization
4. The allotment of land for the purpose of construction of hospitals and
dispensaries to charitable and other organisations in Delhi is looked after by the Land
Disposal Department of DDA. The Department is headed by the Commissioner (Land
Disposal) who is assisted by the Director (Lands), the Deputy Director (Institutional

2
Land) and other subordinate staff. The accounting of receipts including recovery of
ground rent is looked after by the Director (Land  Costing) who is assisted by the
Deputy Chief Accounts Officer (Land Costing) and other subordinate staff.
Scope of Audit
5. The Audit review conducted from April 2003 to July 2003 included examination
of the records of the Institutional Land branch of DDA relating to allotment of land to
hospitals and dispensaries for the period from 1981-82 to 2000-2001 and records of
the Land Sales Accounts (Nazul Accounts) branch relating to recovery of dues to
ensure that:—
(i) the allotment of land to private hospitals and dispensaries had been made
according to the rules and orders in force from time to time;
(ii) the premia of land and ground rent had been charged at the rates approved
by the Government of India/DDA;
(iii) a proper mechanism for monitoring the adherence to the terms and conditions
of allotment existed; and
(iv) a proper account of dues recoverable and received from the institutions had
been maintained.
6. The Committee have dealt with Audit findings and observations in the succeeding
paragraphs.
II. Irregular allotment of land to Trusts or Private Companies
7. Audit scrutiny had revealed that allotments of land were made to three ineligible
institutions viz. Arya V aidya Sala, Kottakkal; Dharmshila Cancer Foundation and
Research Centre and Unique Hospitals and Research Institute at concessional
institutional rates instead of at commercial rates in contravention of the extant
guidelines, which deprived the DDA of revenue of Rs. 38.54 crore.
Arya Vaidya Sala, Kottakkal
8. According to Audit, Arya Vaidya Sala, Kottakkal, a charitable Trust of a public
nature since 1902, applied for allotment of land from DDA in December 1976 for
setting up of an Ayurvedic Centre in Delhi. A plot of  0.8 hect. in Kondli was allotted
to the Trusts in April 1985 on the advice of the then Chief Legal Adviser that a charitable
Trust duly constituted and registered under the law for the time being in force would
have to be treated at par with a society registered under the Societies Registration Act,
1860. The Trust was subsequently offered an alternative site of 1.10 hect. in Dallupura
Society complex in February 1987 due to non-development of the original site. This
site too could not be handed over due to encroachment. In the meantime, on the basis
of a legal opinion taken at the instance of the then Vice Chairman, DDA in September
1994, it was concluded that a public or private Trust cannot be deemed to be a Society
under the Societies Registration Act nor can it be deemed to have been constituted or
established under any law in terms of the meaning of Rule 20, hence it was not entitled
for allotment. However, allotment of a plot of land of 0.95 hect. in Karkardooma Complex

3
was approved by the Delhi Government in October 1994 as it was felt that a reversal
of the position at this stage would not be fair to the applicant. The approval was made
subject to the specific condition that the Trust would get itself registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860. Audit observed that the stipulation of the Trust getting
itself registered under the Societies Registration Act was not incorporated in the
allotment orders even while making a modified allotment in June 1995 despite the
specific directions of the Lt. Governor of Delhi of October 1994. This incorrect
interpretation of the rules resulted in allotment of land to an otherwise ineligible
institution and deprived the DDA of Rs. 1.40 crore as the allotment was made at the
concessional institutional rates instead of the commercial rates. Further, the specific
directions of the Government intended to remedy the lacunae in the status of the Trust
with reference to its eligiblity for such allotment was not incorporated in the allotment
orders. No responsibility has been fixed for the lapses.
9. The Committee desired to know the reasons for non-cancellation of the allotment
or non-charging, at least, the commercial rates. The Ministry stated in a note as under:—
“The decision for allotment of land to the Trust was taken in 1985 based on
the then legal opinion that the instituion was eligible for allotment. In the
light of conflicting legal opinion thereafter, as to whether such a Trust could
be treated as par with societies registered under the Societies Registration
Act, 1860 under the Nazul Rules, the matter was considered in its totality by
the then Lt. Governor and exemption permitting allotment of land to this
particular Trust was granted in view of various factors such as the fact that
the society had already made payments for the orginal allotment, that the
particular Trust was a public and charitable Trust which runs a renowned
Ayurvedic Centre in Kottakkal, Kerala and that having been created by a
'will' it could not convert itself into a registered society etc.”
10. Explaining the position in this regard, the Vice-Chairman, DDA stated during
evidence as under:—
"Actually the Trust had also applied to the DDA, and the Ministry of Health
had written to the DDA in 1976 that this particular institution wants to set up
an ayurvedic hospital here also, that the Government of India had used their
institution in the South as a referral hospital and it will be a good thing that a
facility of this nature would come up in Delhi. For almost 6 to 7 years, this
issue of the Trust and the society continued to remain in discussion. The
Nazul Rules came into being in 1981. When this case came up for discussion,
the then Chief Legal Advisor gave a note saying that a trust which has been
set up for a public purpose, because there is a Trusts Act, should be seen at an
equal footing, if not better footing, than a registered society under the Societies
Registration Act. After the legal advice of the CLA which was vetted by a
senior advocate, the allotment was initially made."
11. Audit had pointed out that the allotment of land in this case was ab-initio
irregular as the Trust was not eligible for allotment of land at concessional rates under
the rules. The then Vice-Chairman, DDA vide his note dated 17.10.1994 had

4
recommended that land at Karkardooma should be allotted to the Trust as a substitute
for earlier allotment with the express condition that they would register themselves as
a 'Society' within one month. The Lt. Governor, Delhi approved this proposal on
18.10.1994.
12. The Committee enquired as to why the Trust could not register themselves as
a 'Society' subsequently in spite of imposition of this condition. In reply Vice-Chairman
DDA explain during evidence as under:—
"When that conditionality was imposed them they were also asked and they
responded to it. The crux of the matter is that this was a Trust created by a
will and this Trust could not be transformed or created into a society. With
the legal advice, the allotment was made to them as a Trust."
13. According to Audit, in January 1995, while considering the rates to be charged
from the Trust, Lt. Governor approved a proposal of then Vice-Chairman for seeking
government approval for one time exemption from Nazul Rules for allotting land to
the Trust. The Committee enquired as to whether the Government approval had been
obtained in this regard. The Ministry in their note stated as under:—
"The Government approval had not been obtained. Since DDA had received
the payment long ago in respect of Arya Vaidya Sala, any other decision
other than post-facto approval may not be feasible at this stage."
14. When asked whether amendment to Nazul Rules had been moved as per orders
of Lt. Governor in this context. The Ministry stated in a note as under:—
"In view of the fact that the Nazul Rules already stand amended vide
notification dated 5th July 2002 permitting DDA to dispose of land to private
hospitals through auction only, there is now no requirement for amendment
of the Nazul Rules as far as allotment of land to hospitals and dispensaries is
concerned. As regards institutional allotment generally the whole policy is
under review."
Dharmashila Cancer Foundation and Research Centre
15. As is seen from Audit paragraph, Dharmashila Cancer Foundation and Research
Centre, a public charitable Trust, was allotted two acres of land at Rs. 14.25 lakh per
acre in March 1990 though it was not registered as a society under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860, as required under the rules for allotment of land at concessional
rates. This foundation was sponsored by the Delhi Administration for allotment of
land. The Trust was subsequently registered as a Society in April 1990. In December
1992, while dealing with a reference from the Trust relating to revision of rates
applicable to it, the Joint Director (Institutional) of DDA observed that the Trust was
not in fact eligible for being considered for allotment as it was not a Society registered
under the Societies Registration Act at the time of its application/allotment. The Legal
Advisor concurred with this view and observed in January 1993 that (i) the allotment
of land to the Trust was ab initio void and (ii) since the allotment was void, the Trust
could not subsequently pass on the property to the Society and the subsequently formed
Society could not also take over the assets and liabilities of the erstwhile Trust in

5
respect of the allotted land. Despite this unambiguous advice of its Legal Advisor,
DDA by its Resolution of June 1993 approved a proposal permitting/passing over the
land alotted to the Trust to the Society without charging the unearned increase.
16. In this case, Audit had observed that as the land was allotted to an ineligible
institution and the allotment was ab initio void, the allotment could have been either
cancelled or alternatively, the Society charged the commercial rates instead of the
concessional institution rates. The decision of the Authority permitting passing over
the land to the society on concessional terms was in clear contravention of the conditions
for allotment of such land stipulated in the Rules and resulted in loss of Rs. 3.11 crore.
17. The Ministry of Urban Development in a note submitted to the Committee
stated that the Dharmshila Cancer Foundation and Research Centre, which was a Trust,
had been allotted land on provisional rates. Subsequently, the Dharmshila Cancer
Foundation and Research Centre was registered as a 'Society' under the same name
and title and the Trust merged with the society through its resolution passed in governing
body meeting held on 1.4.1991. No unearned increased was charged on merger of the
trust to the society, as the same was to facilitate the achievements of the objectives of
the Foundation, which was same for the trust and the society. A decision to this effect
was taken by Delhi Development Authority in its meeting held in June 1993 vide item
No. 95/93.
18. When asked as to why the allotment was not cancelled or alternatively the
Society charged the commercial rates, the Ministry of Urban Development in a note
contested the Audit observation:—
"The point being made by the Audit that the original allotment made to the
Trust in 1990 was ab-initio void and contrary to Nazul Rules was raised in
December, 1992. It was decided that the technical and legal issues be resolved
by placing the matter before the Authority for consideration. Accordingly,
the matter was placed before the Authority in its meeting held in June 11,
1993 where it was decided that the change in the allotment of land from the
Trust to the Registered Society be approved and no unearned increase be
charged since the Trust has merged into the society and the Trust and society
are managed by the same set of people for the same purpose. In view of this,
there was no question of cancellation of allotment or charging commercial
rates from the hospital."
19. Explaning further as to why the sbsequently formed society was charged a
provisional rate, the Vice-Chairman, DDA stated during evidence as under:—
"This is nothing exclusive to this. The rates are fixed by the Government of
India for each particular year and the rates for a particular year are often not
fixed at the time an allotment may be made."
20. The Committee enquired whether it was a fact that the Legal Advisor of DDA
had concurred with views explain by Joint Director (Institutional) of DDA and had
observed in January 1993 that (i) the allotment of land to the Trust was ab initio void
and (ii) since the allotment was void, the Trust could not subsequently pass on the
property to the Society and the subsequently formed Society could not take over the

6
assets liabilities of the erstwhile Trust in respect of the allotted land. In this regard, the
Vice-Chairman, DDA explained during evidence as under:—
"It appears from the file that there was a discussion. ........the issue of the
Trust versus the Society came up in the context of payment or possession
being given. An issue was raised on the file saying that since when the allotment
was made, this was a Trust and so should we consider this ab initio void and
make fresh allotment to them again as a Society. When this issue was
considered, it was decided to take it to the Authority. The proposal was taken
to the authority. The authority observed that under the terms of the Trust
itself, it could have been merged with or converted into any other registered
or other kind of an institution and it had been converted into a Society, and
there was no change of membership or anything else. Therefore, they observed
like this: "We may transfer the allotment in the name of the Society without
charging unearned increase." That was the other issue which you had raised.
Normally speaking, in all our lease deeds, there is a provision that a person
cannot transfer that property to anybody else and if the permission for transfer
is given, then the lessor shall be entitled to recover 50 per cent of the unearned
increase as a contribution to the Authority. In this case, they said that since
this is an issue of merger which may technically be seen as a transfer, no
unearned increase needs to be charged in this. This was the decision of the
Authority."
Unique Hospitals and Research Institute
21. Audit paragraph had revealed that an allotment of 8,097 sqm. of land was
made to the Unique Hospitals and Research Institute in December 1997. In April
1998, it was noticed that the Institute had been actually incorporated in January 1996
under the Companies Act, 1956 and registered itself as a Society under the Societies
Registration Act 1860, only in February 1997 and it applied for allotment of land in
February 1997 itself. The allotment was, however, allowed to continue by the
Government of Delhi in August 1998 on the Institute furnishing an undertaking to the
effect that the original company would not have any involvement in the management
of the hospital established by the society and that the hospital would made available
25 per cent of the out patient, diagnostic and bed facilities for free patients who would
be sent through a referral procedure to be finazlied by the Health Department of the
Delhi Government. It was also decided that the Director, Health Services, would be
responsible for monitoring and certifying the implementation of the arrangement and
that DDA would be free to get in checked through its empanelled auditors. According
to Audit, the failure to allot land at commercial rates to an organization which remained
in essence and to all intents and purposes a 'Company' resulted in loss of Rs. 34.03
crore to DDA.
22. When asked to explain the flaws in the official procedure which had gone
wrong in the identification of the Society in this case, the Ministry of Urban
Development in a note submitted:—
"There is no procedural irregularity in that the Unique Hospital and Research
Institute was a registered society in conformity with Section 20 of the Nazul

7
Rules. In addition, the society had a valid sponsorship from the Delhi
Government and had complied with all the formalities prescribed under the
Nazul Rules."
23. The Committee pointed out that the DDA failed to monitor the facts that the
Institute got itself registered in January, 1996 under Companies Act, 1956 and in order
to get the benefit of concessional rate of land allotment for Societies it also got itself
registered under Societies Registration Act, 1860 in February 1997, the very month in
which it applied for land. The Committee desired to be apprised whether the Institute
was still registered as a Company under the Companies Act, 1956. The Ministry of
Urban Development replied in a note:—
"As on the date of allotment of land to the society, it was functioning as such
and was eligible under the Nazul Rules for allotment of land and its previous
character as a company did not make it ineligible or debar it from allotment
of land. The society also furnished an affidavit regarding its non-profit making
character. It has also been ascertained that the society no longer exists as a
company under the Companies Act, 1956."
24. The Ministry added in this connection as under:—
"Keeping in view that the allotment of land was to eligible society as per the
provisions of Nazul Rules, subsequent observations on the files did not
tantamount to regularization. Hence, there does not appear to have any ground
for considering it as any financial loss made to the DDA."
25. Replying to a specific observation that allotment was made to a company
which converted itself into a society just ten months ago whereas there might have
been many genuine societies in the Waiting List for allotment of land, the Vice-
Chairman, DDA responded during evidence:—
"When they came for allotment of land, they came in the form of a society.
That was in February 1997. The Society being eligible for allotment under
the rules, they were given land.”
26. According to Audit para, allotment of land to the three ineligible institutions
discussed above at concessional rates in contravention of the guidelines deprived DDA
of revenue of Rs. 38.54 crore. The Committee enquired whether any responsibility
has been fixed for procedural lapses leading to land allotment to Trusts or Private
Companies, which were otherwise ineligible for land allotment at concessional rates.
The Ministry of Urban Development stated in a note as under:—
"All the three allotments in question were approved by the L.G., Delhi in his
capacity as Chairman, DDA through considered and detailed speaking orders
on the relevant files. Hence, there does not appear to be any necessity for
fixing responsibility since the cases have been examined in detail and
conscious decisions taken. They would, therefore, need to be seen in the
proper administrative perspective as brought out on the relevant files. There
is no procedural irregularity in the case of Unique Hospital; in the case of
Dharmshila Cancer Hospital, the procedural requirement was duly complied

8
with and approved by the full Authority Chaired by the L.G. and comprising
various officials and non-officials (elected representative members from
the DDA, State and Central Governments; and, in the case of Kottakkal
Arya V aidya Sala, whose proposal was recommended by the Government
of India, the allotment was approved as a one time exemption by the
Hon'ble L.G. in the background of conflicting legal opinion about the
eligibility of trusts for allotment of land for which no mala fides  can be
attributed."
27. The Committee enquired about the remedial steps taken up by the Ministry
to ensure that in future no ineligible institutions are allotted land, the Ministry of
Urban Development replied in a note:—
"The Government has vide  notification No. 486 (E) dated 5.7.02
amended the Nazul Rules to provide for auction of the DDA land to
hospitals and dispensary sites. This would include all sites except those
meant for local bodies and Government. This would ensure that the
Government would get maximum revenue for its land and also that only
those societies, which are genuinely interested in setting up the hospitals,
actually get the land."
III. Allotment of Land to Private Hospitals/Dispensaries
28. According to Audit para, DDA had allotted land to 65 social/charitable
Institutions for construction of hospitals/dispensaries at varying concessional rates.
29. The Committee desired to know the details of concessional rates vis-a-vis
prevalent market rate charged from 65 social/charitable institutions for construction
of hospitals/dispensaries as reported in Audit para. The Ministry of Urban
Development submitted in a note as under:—
"DDA has been assessing market price of land on the basis of price at
which plots are auctioned by DDA. DDA has intimated that it would be
difficult to assess prevalent market price (for hospital land) for allotments
made prior to 2002 since no auction were taking place at that time of plots
for hospitals. Although auctions were being made for commercial plots,
during that period these may not be comparable since the market price
derived from auction for any plot is related to its use. Thus the market
value of a hospital plot cannot be directly compared to a residential plot, or
to a commercial plot or to an industrial plot. The market rate of each category
would also vary in addition to the variation due to location specific factors."
30. In this connection, a list indicating the rate of premium of land charged
from each of the 65 hospitals/dispensaries as furnished by the Ministry has been
given in Annexure-II.
31. The Committee have been informed that the Government amended the Nazul
Rules on 5th July 2002 to provide for disposal of hospital/dispensary sites by auction/
tender, except sites to be given to the local bodies or for Government hospitals.
When enquired about the details of land allotment by DDA through auction after the

9
amendment of the Nazul Rules, the Ministry of Urban Development submitted in a note as under:—
S. Name of Society Area/Location Date of Date of Date of Reserve Amount of
No. auction allotment Possession Price bid
1. M/s Max Health 0.9 Hect./Saket 20.8.02 5.9.02 16.6.03 4.36 crores 10.11 crores
Care Institute 9050 sqm.
2. M/s PCL-JDRC 3.44 Hect./ -do- -do- 2.6.03 10.41 crores 10.80 crores
Dwarka
3. Oscar Biotech 2.97 Hect./ 5.12.03 22.12.03 — 9.32 crores 13.02,00,000/-
Pvt. Ltd. Shalimar Bagh
4. Akash Institute 0.60 Hect./ -do- -do- 27.10.04 1.88 crores 7,04,50,000/-
Pvt. Ltd. Dwarka
5. Metro Hospital 1.0 Hect./ Narela -do- -do- 17.11.04 2.20 crores 3,50,00,000/-
6. Wockhardt 0.72 Hect./ -do- -do- 15.10.04 2.20 crores 9,00,10,000/-
Hospital Ltd. Pitampura
7. Muthoot Hospital 3.50 Hect./ -do- -do- 31.5.04 10.98 crores 20,20,00,000/-
Dwarka
8. Dr. Lal Path Lab 3717 sqm. 29.3.04 28.4.04 17.11.04 1,16,64,418/- 6.11 crore
Pvt. Ltd. Rohini/Sec.-18
9. Ganesh Diagnostic & 616.6 sqm. -do- -do- 30.11.04 19,34,969/- 1.75 crore
Imaging Centre Rohini/Sec.-8
Total 81.53 crore

10
IV. Non-inclusion of conditions for monitoring provision of free treatment to
indigent patients
32. It is seen from Audit paragraph that the allotment of land to private hospitals
and dispensaries at concessional rates was made subject to the condition that the
beneficiary institution shall serve as a general public hospital with at least 25 per cent
of total indoor beds reserved for free treatment to indigent patients and that it would
provide free treatment to 40 per cent patients in the outdoor department. A test check
in Audit of 42 cases had revealed that DDA had failed to incorporate this condition in
the allotment letters in 24 out of 42 cases as shown under:—
Sl. Name of Hospital Date of Date of Whether
No. Allotment Possession condition for
free treatment
incorporated in
allotment letter
12 3 4 5
1. Amar Jyoti Charitable Trust 20-1-1983 30-4-1983 Yes
2. Fil Lt. Rajan Dhall Charitable Trust 29-8-1983 23-2-1987 No
3. Deepak Gupta Memorial Foundation 16-3-1982 18-10-1982 Yes
4. Ganesh Das Chawla Charitable Trust 28-4-1986 12-5-1986 Yes
5. Arya Vaidyasala, Kottakkal 4-4-1985 9-3-1995 Yes
6. Venu Charitable Trust 16-10-1992 18-12-1992 Yes
7. Laxmipat Singhania Medical Foundation 29-3-1990 12-7-1991 Yes
8. Dharamshila Cancer Foundation & 30-3-1990 6-12-1990 Yes
 Research Centre
9. Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Society 12-3-1990 11-5-1990 No
10. Sondhi Charitable Hospital 8-11-1993 12-11-1993 No
11. Sant Nirankari Mandal 24-6-1994 23-2-2000 No
12. Lala Munni Lal Mange Ram Charitable 24-10-1994 9-1-1995 No
Trust
13. Manav Sewarth Trust 10-11-1994 9-1-1995 No
14. Vikrant Children Medical Foundation 3-7-1995 16-9-1996 No
15. Multan Seva Samiti 26-4-1995 1-7-1998 No
16. Devki Devi Foundation 6-2-1996 5-6-1996 Yes
17. Human Care Medical Charitable Trust 15-5-1995 23-4-1996 No.
18. B.R. Dhawan Memorial Charitable Trust 6-3-1996 12-6-1996 Yes
19. Nirogi Charitable & Medical 8-7-1996 7-2-1997 No
Research Trust
20. Dr. Narain Dutt Shrimali Foundation 22-5-1996 26-6-1996 No
21. Param Shakti Peeth 17-1-1997 6-1-1998 No

11
22. Unique Hospital & Research Institute 17-12-1997 3-8-1998 Yes
23. Shanti Memorial Society 6-5-1999 30-8-1999 No
24. Balaji Medical & Diagnostic 14-8-1989 16-10-1996 Yes
Research Centre
25. Mukundi Lal Memorial Foundation 6-4-1988 11-5-1988 Yes
26. Maha Durga Charitable Trust 9-8-1999 Not Yes
handed over
27.  Delhi ENT Hospital & Research Centre 20-9-1999 1-2-2000 No
28. Dr. Walia Charitable Trust 7-2-1998 19-2-1998 Yes
29. Mai Kamli Wali Jan Kalyan Charitable Trust 15-5-1987 28-8-1988 Yes
30. Sarvodaya Health Foundation 24-3-1999 22-6-1999 Yes
31. Vivekanand Pratisthan Parishad 12-3-1985 21-8-1995 No
32. Tarawati Ram Gopal Mehra Foundation 15-7-1986 16-4-1987 No
33. Indian Medical Association 8-5-1997 5-7-1997 No
34. Dilshad Garden Ayyappa Sewa Samiti 18-1 1-1997 19-12-1997 No
35. Sh. Guru Singh Sabha Central 6-1-1997 15-1-1997 No
36. Parivar Seva Sanstha 1-7-1988 8-6-1989 Yes
37. Jai Sri Ram Sewa Sangh 29-5-1995 8-8-1995 No
38. Tagore Academy 2-7-1996 30-8-1996 No
39. Sanatan Dharam Public Trust 20-3-1998 6-4-1998 Yes
40. Sadhu Vasvani Mission 7-2-1984 18-4-1984 No
41. Arpna Trust 3-6-1996 21-6-1996 No
42. Khosla Medical Institute & 10-10-1983 17-6-1985 No
Research Centre
33. Five hospitals/dispensaries were allotted additional land for expansion. DDA,
however, failed to ascertain even in these cases whether the free indoor and outdoor
services for indigent patients stipulated in the conditions of allotment were in fact
being provided or not, although in two of these cases, the condition of providing free
treatment to indigent patients was specifically incorporated in the allottment letter.
34. Audit para points out that in November, 1999, the Minister for Health and
Family Welfare, Government of Delhi constituted a Committee under the Chairman,
Central Drug Purchase Committee in the Directorate of Health Services, to review the
free treatment facilities required to be provided by the hospitals which had been allotted
land at concessional rates. The Committee's review report in April 2000 confirmed
public apprehensions that beneficiary hospitals were not fulfilling their obligations of
providing free treatment to indigent patients. Subsequently in June 2000 another
Committee headed by Justice A.S. Qureshi also recommended inter-alia that allotment
of land at concessional rates to such institutions was liable to be cancelled for violation
12 3 4 5

12
of the terms of allotment. With due references to the findings of these Committees in
July-September 2001, the DDA sought a report from 14 institutions as to the fulfilment
of their obligations relating to provision of free treatment to indigent patients. Only
five institutions responded to the DDA's notice. However, no action was initiated
against the defaulters, nor was any action taken to verify the correctness of the report
furnished by the five institutions.
35. Audit para has also revealed that DDA stated in May 2003 that since the
allotment of land to hospitals and dispensaries was made on the recommendation of
the Central Government or the concerned department of the Government of NCT of
Delhi, it was for the concerned department to monitor whether all the terms and
conditions were being adhered too. DDA subsequently added in June 2003 that the
enforcement mechanism to supervise compliance with the terms and conditions of
allotment was being revised in consltation with the Government of Delhi.
36. However, the Director Health Services, Government of Delhi as reported by
Audit, while disagreeing with the DDA's position stated in July 2003 that the Directorate
had not laid down any guidelines for monitoring these aspects  and had only
recommended the cases to DDA for allotment of land after the approval of the Land
Allotment Committee. The Directorate was not aware as to which institution had been
allotted land by DDA and on what conditions. The Directorate only inspects the
hospitals while doing registration or renewal of registration of allopathic hospitals
under the Delhi Nursing Home Registration Act, 1953 and examines the aspect of
providing free beds as an additional activity in cases where the conditions for allotment
are disclosed by the allottees as this was not a pre-condition for registration or renewal.
37. The Committee desired to know the circumstances that compelled DDA to
include provisions of land allotment at concessional rates to Hospitals and Dispensaries.
The Minsiry submitted in their note:—
"Prior to 1994 DDA was allotting land at concessional rates of Rs. 10,000/-
per acre. Since 1994, the rates at which land is allotted to hospitals and
dispensaries are the zonal variant rates, which are actually the 'no profit no
loss' rates prescribed by Government of India every year for allotment of
land to various categories of institutions including social, cultural and
educational organisations. These rates include both the cost of acquisition
and the cost of development and are concessional only to the extent that they
are considerable less then the market rates. However, over a period to time, it
was observed that private hospitals were being run as commercial venture by
many of the societies to whom land had been allotted for hospitals DDA took
the initiative  through an Authority Resolution dated 18.8.2000 ( i.e. before
the present, audit objection) to dispose of institutional land to private hospitals
on an auction basis. based on this, the Government amended the Nazul Rules
on 5.7.2002, to provide for disposal of hospital/dispensary sites by auction/
tender, except sites to be given to the local bodies or for Government
hospitals."
38. The Committee enquired about the reasons for DDA's  failure to incorporate
the condition of providing free treatment while allotting land to 24 out of 42 hospitals/

13
dispensaries text checked by Audit. The Ministry of Urban Development replied in
their note:—
"The broad goal of providing institutional land to socieities for setting up
hospitals in Delhi was to provide medical facilities for the public as a whole
by supplementing the facilities directly established by the Government. It
may be noted that the Delhi Improvement Trust (DIT) which had allotted
land for two hospitals viz. Jassa Ram Hospial and B.L. Kapoor Hospital did
not include any condition of free treatment. The Nazul Rules also do not
have any provision in respect of free treatment. In this background, there had
been no uniformity of practice in respect of the imposition of such a condition
in various allotments. In the 53 cases where land was allotted for hospitals by
DDA there are only 6 cases where Government had stipulated such a condition
in the sponsorship whereas in a number of other cases, it appears that DDA
did so on its own. The primary aim of the policy had been to build up adequate
medical facilities using private initiative to supplement Government's own
medical infrastructure, at a time when Delhi was still being planned and
developed."
39. The Ministry have further stated in this connection as under:—
"It was only in 1992 when DDA brought out its 'Guidelines on Land
Management', that the following conditions were specifically mentioned in
the context of allotment of land to private hospitals at concessional rates:
(i) The institute shall serve as general public hospital with at least 25 per cent
of the total beds reserved for free treatment for weaker sections and other
25 per cent will be subsidized.
(ii) A representative of Delhi Administration will be made a member of the
registered society responsible for the administration of the project.
It is true however, that even after that DDA has not applied this condition uniformly,
and the non-uniform  practice followed in this regard in the past continued even after
1992. However, now DDA is in the process of bringing in this condition in respect of
those hospitals  where the same does not exist wherever possible and feasible in terms
of the allottees seeking various other permissions in terms of the existing lease terms
etc. or where the actual leases may not have been executed."
40. Clarifying the position in this regard, the Vice-Chairman, DDA explained
during evidence as under:—
"...why we  imposed conditionalities in some cases and why we did not impose
in others, I am to state that we have tried to look into this aspect. The reason
why for some hospitals these conditions are there and not for others can be
traced like this. The Nazul rules do not provide for these conditionalities.  In
some cases, there was an indication in the sponsorship letters received from
the Government of Delhi that a conditionality of this nature would be imposed.
In a number of cases, this conditionality was imposed on its own by DDA.
Now, out of these, there are three hospitals for which no possession has been

14
given. So, if I were to stick to about fifty hospitals, the position that emerges
is that we have not been able to locate any specific policy or decision by
virtue of which this might have happened. What we are now doing is that we
are trying to bring in these conditionalities even at this point of time."
41. The Committee drew the attention of the witnesses to the selective imposition
of conditionalities while allocating land for the institutions and pointed out whether
any steps were taken to fix responsibility for the lapses. The Vice-Chairman, DDA
assured dring oral evidence:—
"We will  do that. We will go through each file and try to arrive at a situation
of fixing the responsibility."
42. Elucidating the present psoition in this regard, the Ministry of Urban
Development further stated as under:—
"It is true that this particular issue was not given top priority and consequently,
there has been inadequacy in compliance of these terms by the Hospitals
concerned. That situation is now sought to be remedied  through the following
steps: Detailed show cause notices were issued to the 10 hospitals (Annexure-
III) identified by the Committee set up under the Secretary (UD), Government
of India for non-compliance with the freeship condition; DDA has written to
Directorate of Health Services, Government of NCT of Delhi enclosing a list
of 23 hospitals in which this condition exists and asking them to assist DDA
in monitoring compliance with this condition: the DHS has already issued
necessary instructions in this regard (Annexure-IV) and DDA has put all
these 23 hospitals on notice that failure in compliance with the fortnightly
reporting mechanism in prescribed proforma (Annexure - V) will lead to
cancellation of their leases."
43. Audit para has pointed out that failure to monitor the provisions of free treatment
to indigent patients defeated the primary objective of allotment of land at concessional
rates and deprived the indigent patients of the benefit of free medical treatment. The
Ministry added in a note as under:—
"...proper monitoring to ensure compliance of the condition of free treatment
has to be undertaken jointly by the Health Department of Government of
NCT of Delhi and the land owing agency i.e. DDA. The detail monitoring
mechanism along with suitable statutory backing, if required, is being worked
out so that a proper system can be put in place to ensure regular monitoring
of the hospitals to strictly enforce the conditions of free treatment as stipulated
in the letter/lease deed. Simultaneously other possibilities for health coverage
of the poor including a General Health Insurance Scheme are also being
examined."
44. In this context, the Vice-Chairman, DDA during evidence admitted:—
"...DDA does not have instrumentality or ability to be able to monitor the
compliance of these conditions or to ensure that these conditions have been
met. In fact, this should be done by the Government of Delhi. Even in the
Quareshi Committee's Report, it is stated that the Government of Delhi should
be monitoring them."

15
45. The Committee  sought the views of the Government of NCT of Delhi in this
connection. During evidence, the Principal Secretary, Health, Government of NCT of
Delhi explained his position as under:—
"...the Government of Delhi, presently through Directorate of Health Services,
has powers under the Delhi Nursing Homes (Registration) Act  under which
private hospital can be registered. We only see medical standards they have
got. If they fulfil the reqirement laid down in the Act, we have to register
them. Whether free service  is being provided by them or not is a matter
which is not covered under the Delhi Nursing Homes (Registration) Act.
This can only be implemented by the land-owing agency. Wherever land
owing agency requests us, we always check up with that reference and given
a report. We have done that in the case of Khanna Committee Report where
we did the entire check up and  submitted the report. But, to do it on a regular
basis with the present infrastructure is a problem. For that, the Qureshi
Committee had suggested a comprehensive amendment of the Delhi Nursing
Homes (Regisration) Act so that these powers could be statutorily available
to the Government. Once that power is statutorily available, infrastructure
would be amended accordingly."
46. On being enquired whether the Act (Delhi Nursing Home Act) had been
amended as per the recommendations of Qureshi Committee, the representative of the
Government of NCT of Delhi stated during evidence that the Act had not yet been
amended. He also  submitted:—
"Sir, the Act has not yet been amended. In fact, this does not  call for
amendment. This calls for totally having a new legislation because the existing
Act has a very limited kind of a role. It does not have much of a regulatory
function provided in it. This is what the Qureshi Committee has also
recommended that a  comprehensive amendment or entirely a new Act should
be brought by the Government. The reason why we have not been able to
finalise the amendment was that  before we could complete this exercise of
approval of recommendations of Qureshi Committee, there was a PIL in the
High Court  which was to find out the extent of free treatment that is being
provided and what should be done against the hospitals which have not been
providing free treatment. But we have done some initial exercise and it would
take us a couple of months to finally amend this Act because as the Secretary,
Urban Development has said that even after the policy of auction is  there,
there would be some hospitals which will continue to be governed by the old
lease  condition of free treatment, So, we will amend the Act now."
47. According to Audit, there had been absence of a clear demarcation of
responsibilities between DDA and Directorate of Health Services, Government of
NCT of Delhi to monitor the enforcement of the provisions of the allotment. When
asked  about this lapse, the Ministry stated in a note as under:—
"The demarcation of responsibility has been unclear so far but is now being
resolved... The responsibility of monitoring the conditions lies with
Government of NCT of Delhi  and enforcement of this condition on the basis
of such monitoring lies with DDA."

16
48. The Committee also asked  about the role of Land & Development Office
(L&DO), the Ministry of Urban Development, in the selective imposition of terms
and conditions of free medical treatment. The Secretary, the Ministry of Urban of
Development, replied during oral evidence as under:—
"Sir, the L&DO has allotted land to five hospitals, namely, Moolchand
Khairatiram Hospital, Sir Ganga Ram Hospital, St. Stephens Hospital,
Veeranwali International Hospital and Vimhans Hospital. Out of these five
hospitals, in only two there was stipulation for free services. Here there is a
trend available. Initially, when the first three hospitals were given the land,
there was no condition of free service. That was much earlier in 50s or 60s.
But when Veeranwali International Hospital came, they themselves proposed
that they would give 70 per cent free beds. They were allotted the land on
that condition. Thereafter, Vimhans Hospital was allotted the land. In their
case, it was imposed that it will give 70 per cent free service. Now, Veeranwali
International Hospital is continuing the condition of free obligation as
determined by the Committee under my predecessor. But in the case of
Vimhans Hospital, violations were noticed. A notice was given to them and
the lease has been cancelled. They  have represented against it. Now, we are
in the process of taking a policy decision as to what to do where these terms
and conditions are not being met."
V . Inaction in reported cases of non-adherence to terms of allotment
49. According to Audit para, no system has been laid down either by DDA or the
Directorate of Health Services to deal with complaints received  against the functioning
of the hospitals in contravention of the terms and conditions of allotment of land. In two
cases, complaints were received by DDA  during April-November 2002 against certain
institutions for not providing free treatment to indigent patients and show cause notices
were issued during October-December 2002. In the case of Deepak Gupta Memorial
Hospital, the reply was received in January 2003; however, no action could be taken as
the report of the investigating Assistant Engineer was awaited as of July 2003. No reply
was received in the case of Mai Kamli Wali Jan Kalyan Charitable Trust despite a lapse
of over six months. In the case of Sondhi Charitable Hospital, in response to a Starred
Question raised in the Delhi Assembly in March 2001 that the hospital was functioning
like a private nursing home and charging exorbitant fees, the Secretary (Health),
Governemnt of Delhi, directed the DDA to take  appropriate action against the hospital
for violating the terms and conditions of allotment. No action was, however, taken till
July 2003 despite the orders of the Director (Lands) to initiate cancellation proceedings
against the Institute. No responsibility for the inaction has been fixed.
50. Responding to the Audit observation that there was no system laid down to
deal with complaints received against the functioning of  the Hospitals in contravention
of the terms and conditions of allotment, the Ministry of Urban Development have
stated in a note as under:—
"Action is taken as and when complaints are received by DDA. The following
actions have been taken by DDA in specific cases—
(a) On the basis of report and clarification given by the Deepak Memorial
Hospital, the matter was sent to Director, Health Services, Government of

17
NCT of Delhi for evaluation. Directorate of Health Services, Government
of NCT of Delhi has confirmed that out of 48 beds, 12 have been reserved
for poor patients.
(b) Inquiry under Director (Lands) had been initiated to look into all the
complaints against Mai Kamli Wali Jan Kalyan Charitable Trust. Further
action would be taken against the Trust on receipt of the Inquiry Report.
(c) A final show cause notice had been issued to Sondhi Charitable Hospital on
31.10.2001. The Hospital replied on 12.11.03 undertaking to reserve 25%
beds for poor class of patients and adhere to all the conditions."
51. In regard to Deepak Gupta Memorial Hospital the Committee wanted to know
whether the report of the investigating engineer has since been received and what
follow up action has been taken thereon. The Ministry replied in a note as under:—
"The concerned officer inspected the hospital on 13.10.03 and informed that
the hospital is in possession of occupancy certificate and that 8 free beds are
available. However, he could not specifically establish the point relating to
the weaker sections. Further, the hsopital during inspection has informed that
they are participating in the National Health Programme. The hospital has
also given an affidavit on stamp paper that it is providing 25% free beds and
also free treatment to the poor and indigent category."
52. The Committee desired to know what action was taken against the Mai Kamli
Wali Jan Kalyan Charitable Trust which did not even reply to the show cause notice of
DDA, In reply, the Ministry stated in a note as under:—
"The enquiry is yet to be concluded."
53. When asked whether the order of Director (Lands) to initiate cancellation
proceedings against Sondhi Charitable Hospital have since been  complied with, the
Ministry stated in a note as under:—
"A show cause notice was issued on 31st October 2001 by Director (Lands)
to Sondhi Charitable Trust directing them to reserve 25 per cent  free beds
for poor and provide free OPD service to the poor besides taking part in
National Health Programme and offer maternity and child health care on free
cost basis. The Sondhi Charitable Trust replied on 12th November 2003.
Finally, while applying for mortgage permission on 12.7.04, the society has
further given undertaking to reserve 25 per cent beds for the poor and fulfil
the obligations."
54. The Committee desired to know whether DDA had a Grievances Redressal
Cell to look into complaints and initiate appropriate action against erring Hospitals/
Dispensaries. The Ministry in their note replied:—
"There is no specific cell in DDA for the purpose. As and when any complaints
are received, action as per lease terms is being taken.”
55. When asked to give the details of the total number of complaints received
during the last five years, the Ministry replied:—
"The details in this regard are not readily available. However, DDA takes

18
action in each case of complaint against any hospital for non-compliance
with the allotment terms".
56. When asked to specify  the action which  is taken by DDA where any social/
charitable institute start functioning as a purely commercial organisation, the Ministry
stated as under:—
"If information of any such unauthorized conversion/transfer is received, DDA
takes action under lease terms, for example in the case of Escorts Heart
Institute and Research Centre where the society has been converted into a
company, DDA has issued show cause notice for cancellation of lease and
their reply is now under examination by the Govenment."
VI. Non-appointment of Government representatives
57. According to the Guidelines  for Disposal of Institutional Land; a representative
of the Government of Delhi is required to be made a member of the registered society
responsible for administration of the project so as to ensure that the commitments of
medical care for indigent patients are honoured. DDA, however, failed to incorporate
this condition in the allotment letter in 39 out of 42 cases test checked in audit. Further
in the case of Venu Charitable Society where the condition was included in the allotment
letter, a representative  from the concerned sponsoring Department viz. Government
of Delhi and another from DDA was to be appointed on the Board of the Society. But
there was nothing on record to establish whether any such representative had been
appointed. In the case of  Tagore Academy, there was nothing on record to show
whether a nominee of the Delhi Government was appointed as Director on the Board
of Management of the Society. In another case of  Lala Munni Lal Mange Ram
Charitable Trust, neither any nominee from DDA was appointed as member nor was
the condition incorporated in the allotment letter despite clear directions of the
Lt. Governor of Delhi issued in September 1997.
58. Commenting on Audit findings, the Ministry of Urban Development in their
note replied:—
"The Nazul Rules do not provide for appointment of representative of the
Government as member of the society administering the hospital. However,
wherever, the sponsoring authority makes a subjected condition, the same is
incorporated to facilitate monitoring by the sponsoring authority, DDA takes
further action when violation is brought to its notice by the sponsoring
authority. In the three cases mentioned by the Audit, action has been taken by
DDA, which is as under:—
(a) A reminder is being sent to Venu Charitable Society to clarify the issue
and DHS (Directorate of  Health Services, Government of NCT of Delhi)
also requested to nominate suitable Government representative on the
Board of Management of all hospitals.
(b) Tagore Academy Delhi has intimated that as soon as the hospital becomes
functional, they shall apply to Government of Delhi to name its nominee
on the Board of Management of the Society.

19
(c) The compliance in this regard will be obtained from Lala Munni Lal
Mange Ram Trust. This hospital is under construction at present."
59. The Committee drew the attention of the Ministry toward non-appointment of
Government representatives in a large number of cases and enquired whether it was
due to gross negligence on the part of the concerned official/authority or deliberately
done to give favour to certain allottees. In reply, the Ministry stated in note as under:—
"Non-appointment of Government representatives appears to be a case of
omission and default rather than indicative of any intent to give undue favour
to such allottees. In any case, based on the facts pointed out by the Audit, all
the three hospitals have been made to give undertakings to appoint a
representative on their Board/Managing Committee and the Delhi Government
has already been requested to nominate their representatives in this regard.
DHS (Directorate of Health Services) has informed that the matter is being
considered and representatives will be appointed soon.”
60. When asked whether any time limit had been  fixed for the purpose, the Ministry
replied:—
"DDA have recently taken up the matter with Delhi Government in this regard.
However, no time limit can be fixed."
VII. Timely construction of hospital and dispensary buildings
61. Building plans according to the conditions of allotment should be approved
and sanctioned by the DDA and consruction completed within a period of two years
from the date of taking over possession of the land. Extension of period of  construction
can be granted as per the guidlines issued by the DDA from time to time upto a period
of 15 years (10 years in the case of plots upto 500 sqms) with or  without levy of
composition charges if the circumstances of the case so warranted. However, Audit
review had revealed that DDA did not maintain any consolidated record to watch the
timely construction of buildings for hospitals/dispensaries on the land allotted by it. It
was seen that out of 10 cases where extension was granted for construction fo buildings,
the extension period had already expired in seven cases. Thus, the status of construction
of buildings by the allottees in case where the period for construction including extension
had already expired, could not be ascertained. Audit noticed that despite lapse of
periods ranging from 4 to over 30 years. 23 out of 27 hospitals which were allotted
land during January 1971 to March 2000 had not started functioning till July 2003.
62. The Committee desired to know as to why twenty-three out of 27 hospitals
had not started functioning as of July, 2003 even after a lapse of periods ranging from
4 to over 30 years from the date of allotment of land. In reply, the Ministry explained
as under:—
"As per the term of the allotment, the allottee is required to construct the
hospital/dispensary within two years of allotment falling which he is required
to take extension of time. Extension of time is accorded subject to payment
of penalty (Composition fee) for non-construction. An inspection was
conducted to ascertain the number of allottees who have not taken up

20
construction. The status report in respect of the hospitals is available as per
Annexure-VI. Further action against non-construction will be taken accordingly.
In respect  of 23 hospitals, which according to audit are yet to start functioning,
it is pointed out that as per DDA's record and field inspections, there are at
present 19 such hospitals, which are under construction. Out of these, 2 are still
in the normal 5 years period of construction allowed to such institutions and in
respect of balance, penalities including composition fee are being levied to
ensure that construction takes  place expeditiously."
63. Explaining the position further in this regard, the Ministry of Urban
Development have stated:—
"Some of the reasons for non-construction including delay in handing over
possession due to encroachment etc., and pleas  that the building plans were
not sanctioned within the due period. Extension of time for construction is
being given after due consideration and after charging composition fee. It is
also pointed that many charitable societies also plead difficulties in mobilizing
resources for completing their construction, and some leniency in this regard
is not unjustified."
64. The Committee enquired about the Rules governing DDA's policy which
provides extension of time to the allottees for construction of hospitals. In reply, the
Ministry stated as under:—
"Besides levy of financial penalties in the form of composition fee for delay
in construction, as well as the continuing liabilities having to pay ground rent
to DDA without generating revenue, it is pointed out that DDA's Building
Department does not process building plans unless extension of time is given.
As a result, there is a proper system of checking to ensure that hospitals that
require time beyond 5 years have to approach DDA to obtain extension of
time and in all such cases, the competent authority in DDA take a considered
decision based on the merits of the case as to whether extension is to be given
or action under lease terms for cancellation etc. is to be taken."
VIII. Heavy  outstanding dues
65. Audit para has pointed out that the Director (Land Costing) is responsible for
maintenance of records of recoveries on account of premia and  ground rent of land
allotted  to hosptials and dispensaries. The premium is payable by the allottee within 60
days of demand (30 days upto September 1995) failing which interest at the rate of 18
per cent per annum is leviable. Ground rent is payable annually in advance failing which
interest at 10 per cent per annum is levied. The arrears of premium and ground rent are
recoverable under the Punjab Land  Revenue Act, 1887. Premia of Rs. 12 lakh was
outstanding in 3 cases while interest of Rs. 1.43 crores on premia not paid belatedly was
outstanding in seven cases as of October 2003. In addition, ground rent of Rs. 3.42 crore
was outstanding from 39 allottees while interest of Rs. 1.03 crore was outstanding from
36 allottees. The oustanding premia and interest thereon related to the period from 1996-
97 onwards whereas the outstanding ground rent related to the period from 1985-90
onwards. No broadsheet of recoveries was maintained with the result that the correctness
of credits afforded in the ledger accounts could not be ensured in audit.

21
66. Replying to the Audit observation, the Ministry of Urban Development stated
in a note as under:—
"For recovery of the outstanding dues relating to ground rent and interest
thereon, DDA  has issued default notices to the concerned societies/institutions.
Since no dues have been recovered, the institutions have also been issued
further notices to  that effect. In the meanwhile, for recovery of dues of  ground
rent and interest in respect of institutional/commercial/industrial properties,
DDA has decided to outsource the collection to a financial institution. On the
failure of the societies to remit the dues in respect of ground rent and interest,
further action under the Punjab Revenue Act, 1887 shall be initiated."
67. The Committee desired to know the reasons for heavy outstanding dues, to
the tune of Rs. 3.54 crore. In reply, the Ministry stated in a note as under:—
"Though lessee(s) are required to deposit  ground rent on their own in
compliance of terms and conditions of lease deed, yet they are reminded
from time to time by way of Notices, Press releases and display of this
obligation on lessee(s) on DDA Website. The fact that  still some of the
lessee(s) are reluctant to pay the ground rent in time despite persistent efforts
made by issue of reminders and notices cannot be denied."
68. Asked to give the latest status of recovery of outstanding arrears pointed out
by Audit, the Ministry stated in their note:—
"Against the outstanding ground rent of Rs. 3.42 crore and Rs. 1.02 crore
interest as shown in the para of audit report a sum of Rs. 1.68 crore has since
been recovered up to 9/2004 and thus a sum if Rs. 2.76 crore is outstanding
against the said dues for which lessees were reminded in 2/2004 as well as in
10/2004 and now the final action under Punjab Land Revenue  Act, 1887
will be initiated."
69. Explaining the actions to be taken under the Punjab  Revenue Act 1887 to
recover the outstanding dues, the Ministry stated in their note:—
"As per the procedure under section 68 to 72 of PLR Act of 1887 recovery
officer (Assistant Collector Gr. I & II) has to give ample opportunity to the
defaulter to pay the due amount and in case he fails to deposit the amount a
final notice is served upon him for giving one more opportunity to make the
payment or to appear in person in case already deposited. If even after issue
of final notice, the payment is not made by the defaulter, the attachment
orders are issued. If still the due amount is not deposited, the property is
liable to be sealed; however, in practice only the locked premises are sealed
and other working properties are cancelled for taking action under the Public
Premises (Eviction of Unauthorised Occupants) Act, 1971."
70. On being enquired about fixing responsibility and action to be taken against
those officials whose inaction left  these arrears pending, the Ministry replied:—
"...There do not appear to be lapses/shortcomings in the recovery of the dues
such as to hold any particular officials of DDA responsible and take
disciplinary action against them."

22
71. A test check in audit of the ledger accounts maintained by the Director (Land
Costing) further revealed that the outstanding dues as per the ledger accounts differed
from those certified and intimated to the Management from time to time. On the
discrepancies being pointed out in audit, DDA stated (July-August 2003) that the
ledger accounts might not represent the true picture of outstanding dues as the challans
received may not have been posted in the Demand and Collection Ledgers. DDA
added that the Demand and Collection Ledgers had since been updated and Demand
Letters issued to the defaulters whose list was also being sent to the Recovery Officers
for collection of ground rent dues. Clearly adequate action had not been taken to
effectively pursue the long pending dues which could have been collected even as
arrears of land revenue in cases of persistent  default. Effective pursuance of the dues
was also being thwarted by the incomplete maintenance of records and unreliable
ledger accounts. This resulted in accumulation of arrears of premium, ground rent and
interest thereon. Non-collection of dues from the defaulting institutions also constituted
and undue benefit to them.
72. In reply to a query whether the Ministry were statisfied with the maintenance
of records, the Ministry explained as under:—
"The Revenue Ledgers of ground rent, Demand & collections registers of
premia, challans, files pertaining to reconciliation for the recovery of ground
rent and premia are maintained properly. These are regularly updated by
making entries of receipts and the amount which becomes due. It is pertinent
to point out that  accounts  of ground rent have been switched over to computer
in respect of Industrial, Institutional and Commercial  properties."
IX. Treatment of poor patients
73. The Committee under the Chairmanship of Central Drug Purchase Committee
in the Directorate of Health Services had observed in their Reprot in April 2000 that in
the letters of allotment providing land, certain essential conditions had been given
such as the requirment that the institutions should admit peatients free of charge upto
25 percent as in-patients and that 40 per cent of OPD patients should be provided free
services. There was ambiguity as to what comprises "free services" leading to different
interpretations by different institutions. While some institutions interpreted free as
meaining consultation only, some provided certain restrictive numbers of medicines
and some other provided limited diagnostic services. There was also absence of clarity
in regard to eligibility criteria for provision of "free services" since no threshold limits
of income for potential beneficiaries has been laid down. Different institutions placed
different interpretations. Generally no proof of income was insisted upon and the
selection of patients for free treatment was subjective and in respect of in-patients on
the basis of recommendations of the OPD consultations. Although it is requirement
under the allotment of land that 25 per cent of the total beds should be kept for free
patients, the percentage so reserved varied. Dharmshila Cancer Hospital, Rajiv Gandhi
Cancer Institute and Batra Hospital provided only 10 per cent as free beds. Further,
monitoring of adherence to conditions was absent. There was also no audit of the
quality of medical services rendered 'free'.

23
74. On being enquired as to how the Ministry defined a 'poor' who can be benefited
under DDA's policy of allotting land at concessional rates to hospitals and dispensaries,
the Ministry stated as under:—
"As per the criteria approved by the  Central Government, a person will be
considered as being below the "Poverty Line" if his per day calorie intake is
less than 2400 in rural areas and 2100 in the urban areas. It is not practically
feasible for DDA to define  a poor person, particularly, in respect of patients
to be treated in a hospital. However, the Central Government is considering
a proposal for setting up a universal health insurance scheme for the families
below the poverty line. It is also considering the need of providing a safety
net for poor patients for whom it is being found difficult to effectively
implement the present provisions regarding free treatment in private hospitals."
75. During oral evidence, the Committee drew  the attention of the witnesses to
the fact that there had been specific cases in the past, wherein poor patients are told by
some beneficiary hospitals to get a letter from the Health Minister, Government of
NCT of Delhi for being eligible for benefits under this scheme. Responding to this, the
Principal Secretary, Health Government of NCT of Delhi, stated:—
"We have notified all hospitals with 100 beds and more in Delhi to make
these references because it was found that eveybody cannot approach the
Secretariat for this purpose or the Director, Health Services. In the  normal
course if he goes to a hospital and the hospital feels that he should be referred
to Apollo for specialized treatment, he is referred. You have mentioned about
other people who do not find it convenient to go to the hospital and the
Minister makes a reference. There are 31 authorities which can make reference
and the Minister is one."
76. When asked whether any complaint had come to Delhi Government that the
hospitals  that had been notified did not sponsor poor patients, the witness replied:—
"Adequate number of cases have not been referred. About a week back (i.e.
last week of October 2004) we had issued a warning to the Medical
Superintendents that they should be making more references of those patients
who are sick so that our quota is fulfilled."
77. When enquired the number of indigent patient who had been benefited during
the last five years from the concessional allotment of land by DDA to hospitals/
dispensaries, the Ministry replied without giving the number of patients in their note
that the details of patients who benefited from the hospitals had been obtained in the
past for special purposes whenever required by different Committees.
78. At the instance of the Committee the Ministry have furnished the following
note indicating the steps which are being taken by DDA to achieve the primary objective
of free treatment to indigent patient:—
"(i) DDA has taken up with the Delhi Government to appoint representatives
on the boards of management of the hospitals to enable oversight of the
working of these hospitals with reference to provision of free treatment to

24
the poor. Some of the hospitals have even come forward and expressed in
writing that they are ready to take the representatives on their board if
appointed by the Government. The mere presence of a representative itself
may compel the hospital administration to seriously implement the free
treatment.
(ii) DDA has in the recent past, inserted a free treatment condition in respect of
some hospitals (where this was not originally  there) while granting
permission for mortgage etc. by taking fresh applications/undertakings from
them.
(iii) In conjunction with the Directorate of Health Services (Government of NCT
of Delhi), DDA has set up a mechanism mandating  fortnightly reports to be
given by the 23 hospitals where the condition of freeship exists or have
been incorporated; so that compliance can be monitored."
79. Clarifying the position further in this regard the Secretary, the Ministry of
Urban Development explained during evidence as under:—
"On this question of free service by the hospitals which have been given land
at pre-determined rates, which is in a sense a concessional rate, the action
taken in DDA is that the hospital land is now allotted through auction
procedure. There is no pre-determined rate; there is no concessional rate
because this hidden subsidy was being exploited and cornered and people
were not fulfilling this obligation. Therefore, in the year 2002 a decision was
taken to allot land through auction procedure. Initially it was tender, followed
by auction thereafter.... It is because we have seen that lands which were
given earlier through subvention, through subsidy schemes, there were all
kinds of terms and conditions which at times were difficult to verify. For
example, membership, and change in the character from trust to society and
society to trust. We know both these are liable to be subverted in due course
of time. So, to enforce those decisions and to be able to ensure that no changes
take place from the original terms of allotment, at times may be difficult to
enforce. Therefore, we feel that in the future this should take care of the
difficulties of enforcement or the distortions that come in through  subsidy."
80. When asked whether this auction can be made on DDA's existing terms and
conditions of free  medical treatment so that poor patients could still get free treatment
in these hospitals, the Secretary, the Ministry of Urban Development stated during
evidence:—
"So far as the decision for auction of hospital land is concerned, it was taken
in 2002, not now. Another point in my view is that the land should not be
disposed of in this fashion. If the poor  people are to be supported, there are
other ways. From the money that is to be realised, a corpus can be created
and an insurance scheme can be started for the poor. There are four lakh poor
with identify cards given by the Food Department of the Government of
Delhi. Some poor can come under the insurance net. It is a much better upfront
system."

25
81. During oral evidence, the Committee were informed that DDA was considering
an offer from Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre which is one of the
beneficiaries that they wanted to give a lump sum amount in lieu being freed from the
obligation of free treatment. In regard to specific query on the possible impact of the
new system on the hospitals/dispensaries, which had already been allotted at
concessional rate, the Secretary, Urban Development, however, conceded during
evidence:—
"If this policy of allowing  them to pay the difference between market price
and auction price is finally accepted by the Government, there may still be
some who may not be willing or able to pay. So, they would remain under the
old regime of terms and conditions which will need to be enforced."
82. He also added:—
"This is the policy, whether by charging them the commercial rate of interest
and freeing them from obligation is the best course of action and from the
money so recovered have  the insurance scheme for the poor. This is what is
thought of."
X. Observations and Recommendations
83. The Delhi Development Authority (DDA) was established in 1957 with
the objective of promoting and securing planned development of Delhi which
was necessitated to check its haphazard growth following the inflow of migrants
to the capital city in the post independent days. To fulfil its obligations, DDA
acquires land, develops lands and properties under Master Plan and Zonal
plans. DDA also disposes of commercial, industrial institutional and residential
plots in accordance with the provisions of the DDA (Disposal of Developed
Nazul Land) Rules 1981. Rule 5 stipulates that DDA may allot Nazul lands for
construction of hospitals and dispensaries to social or charitable institutions.
The premium and ground rent will be determined by the Government of India.
Allotment of Nazul land to public institutions is subject to the fulfilment of
certain conditions prescribed in Rule 20. The Committee note that till May
2003, DDA had allotted land to 65 social or charitable institutions for
construction of 53 hospitals and 12 Dispensaries at  varying concessional rates
fixed by the Union Ministry of Urban Development from time to time upto
1995-96 and at rates fixed by the DDA in consultation with the Ministry
thereafter. The primary objective of these allotments was to provide free
treatment to the poor patients according to norms which stipulate that the
beneficiary hospitals and dispensaries shall serve as a general public hospital
with at least 25 per cent total indoor beds reserved for free treatment  to indigent
patients and that it would provide free treatment to 40 per cent of the outdoor
patients.
84. The review conducted by Audit from April 2003 to July 2003 included
examination of  the records of the instituional Land branch of DDA relating to
allotment of land to hospitals and dispensaries for the period from 1981-82 to
2000-2001 and  records of the Land  Sales Accounts (Nazul Accounts) branch

26
relating to recovery of dues to ensure that:—
l the allotment of land to private hospitals and dispensaries had been
made according to the rules and orders in force from time to time;
l the premia of land and ground rent had been charged at the rates
approved by the Government of India/DDA;
l a proper mechanism for monitoring the adherence to the terms and
conditions of allotment existed; and
l a proper account of dues recoverable and received from the institutions
had been maintained.
The allotment of land at concessional rates  to certain institutions by DDA
with the primary objective of providing free treatment to poor patients was a
laudable step towards making modern medical facilities accessible to economically
weaker sections of the society. If successfully implemented, the policy could have
provided life saving  opportunities to some of those, at least, who are afllicted
with complicated and deadly diseases but are practically beyond the realm of the
costly medical treatment. Unfortunately however, the policy  itself suffered from
serious inadequacies right from the beginning and instead of providing succour
to its targeted sections of the society, it became a victim of its own deficiency.
Ultimately, what was started with a grand idea of benefiting the poor turned out
to be a hunting ground for the rich in the garb of public charitable institutions.
The records of allotment of land to 42 hospitals and dispensaries revealed various
irregularities and shortcomings in both the allotment of land and in enforcement
of the terms of allotment which defeated or undermined the very purpose of
allotment of land to such organizations at concessional rates. At this stage, the
Committee cannot but deplore the failure on the part of Ministry of Urban
Development and DDA in taking proper, timely and necessary steps in allotment
of land and enforce the terms and conditions on the Societies. The Government
of NCT of Delhi too, on their part failed to provide logistic support to DDA for
ensuring successful implementation of the policy. Monitoring of adherence to
the terms and conditions of the concessional rates was conspicuously non-existent.
This will be amply corroborated by the Committee's findings dealt with in the
succeeding paragraphs.
85. Rule 20 of the DDA  Rules, 1981 prescribes inter-alia that an institution
seeking allotment of institutional land should be a society registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860 or such institution should be owned and run by
the Government or any local authority or constituted or established under any
law for the time being in force. The Committee have found that allotments of
land were made to the following three ineligible institutions at concessional
institutional rates instead of at commercial rates in contravention of the extant
guidelines which deprived the DDA of revenue of Rs. 38.54 crore:—
(i) Arya Vaidya Sala Kottakkal a charitable Trust of public nature since
1902 was allotted a plot of land measuring 0.95 hect. in Karkardooma
Complex. This was despite legal opinion taken at the instance of the
then Vice Chairman, DDA in September 1994 when it was concluded
that a public  or private Trust cannot be deemed to be a Society under

27
the Societies Registration Act nor can it be deemed to have been
constituted or established under any law in terms of the meaning of
Rule 20 and hence it was not entitled for allotment. However the
approval was made subject to the specific condition that the Trust would
get itself registered under the Societies Registration Act 1860.
Surprisingly, the stipulation of the Trust getting itself registered under
the Societies Registration Act was not incorporated in allotment orders
even while making a modified allotment in June 1995 despite the specific
directions of the Lt. Governor of Delhi in October 1994. The Ministry
have justified the allotment of land by stating that the matter was
considered in its totality by the then Lt. Governor and exemption
permitting allotment of land to this particular trust was granted in
view of various factors such as the fact that the society had already
made payments for the original allotment that the particular Trust was
a public and charitable trust which runs a renowned Ayurvedic Centre
in Kottakkal, Kerala and that having been created by a 'will' it could
not convert itself into a registered society etc.
(ii) Dharmshila Cancer Foundation and Research Centre a public
charitable  Trust was allotted two acres of land at Rs. 14.25 lakh per
acre in March 1990 though it was not registered as a society under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860 as required under the rules for allotment
of land at concessional rates. The Trust was subsequently registered as
a Society in April 1990. In December 1992, while dealing with a
reference from the Trust relating to revision of rates applicable to it,
the Join Director (Institutional) of DDA observed that the Trust was
not in fact eligible for being considered for allotment as it was not a
Society registered under the Societies Registration Act at the time of
its application/allotment. The Legal Advisor concurred with this view
and observed in January 1993 that (i) the allotment of land to the Trust
was ab initio void and (ii) since the allotment was void, the Trust could
not subsequently pass on the property to the Society and the
subsequently formed Society could not also take over the assets and
liabilities of the erstwhile Trust in respect of the allotted land. Despite
this unambiguous advice of its Legal Advisor, DDA by its Resolution of
June 1993 approved a proposal permitting/passing over the land allotted
to the Trust to the Society without charging the unearned increase.
The decision of the Authority permitting passing over the land to the
Society on concessional terms was in clear contravention of the
conditions for allotment of such land and resulted in loss of Rs. 3.11
crore.
(iii) Unique Hospitals and Research Institute applied for allotment of land
in February 1997. An allotment of 8,907 sqm. of land was made to the
Institute in December 1997. In April 1998, it was noticed that the
Instittue had been actually incorporated in January 1996 under the
Companies Act, 1956 and registered itself as a Society under the

28
Societies Registration Act, 1860 only in  February 1997. It was observed
by Audit that allotment of land at concessional rates to an organization
which remained in essence and to all intents and purposes a 'Company'
resulted in loss of Rs. 34.03 crore to DDA. The Ministry have explained
in this case that when the allotment was aplied, it was a registered
society and was thus eligible. The affidavit of no profit no loss character
of society was also furnished.
86. It is thus  evident that DDA had allotted land at concessional rates to
three ineligible institutions viz. Arya Vaidya Sala, Kottakkal; Dharmshila Cancer
Foundation and Research Centre and Unique Hospitals and Research Institute
in contravention of Rule 20 of the Nazul Rules which deprived DDA of revenue
of Rs. 38.54 crore. The Committee do not see the Ministry of Urban Development's
contention that the application of these institutions were sponsored by either the
Government of India or the Government of NCT of Delhi and duly approved by
the competent authority under the chairmanship of Lt. Governor of Delhi as the
legitimate basis for allotting land to these institutions when Rule 20 of the Nazul
Rules clearly prescribes, inter alia,  that an institution seeking allotment of
institutional land should be a society registered under the Societies Registration
Act, 1860. Institutional land was allotted at concessional rate to Arya Vaidya
Sala, Kottakkal which still remains as a trust. The Ministry of Urban Development
claimed that one time exemption from this requirement was given to Arya Vaidya
Sala, Kottakkal whereas the Nazul Rules do not provide for such exemptions. No
Government approval for this exemption was obtained. Dharmshila Cancer
Foundation and Research Centre was a trust when it was alloted land in March
1990 and controversially allowed to retain the land when it was converted into a
society in April 1990. Even after converting from trust to society, it remained
more or less same as before. The Institution has also been issued a 'show cause
notice' for failing to honour their commitment of providing free treatment to
indigent patients. Unique Hospitals and Research Institute incorporated as a
company in January 1996 under the Companies Act, 1956 registered itself as a
society under the Societies Registration Act, 1860 only in  February 1997 when it
applied for allotment of land. Without ascertaining the fact that the Unique
Hospitals and Research Institute continued to subsist as a company and
registration as a society was a mere facade in order to obtain allotment of land at
concessional rates, the Institute was allotted land in December 1997. This undue
haste became meaningless as the Hospital is yet to be constructed and extension
of time for construction of the building has been given. The  Committee view the
land allotments to these ineligible institutions as glaring examples of abuse of
official position and machinery at the highest echelons in DDA to show favouritism
to certain institutions on one or the other pretext. The Committee therefore, desire
that responsibility should be fixed for these irregular allotments and appropriate
punitive action taken against the erring officials who misinterpreted the rules to
enable certain institutions to have the land allotted at concessional rates.
87. Institutional land was allotted to hospitals and dispensaries at
concessional rates on the condition that the institution shall serve as a general

29
public hospital with at least 25 per cent of total indoor patients and that it would
provide free treatment to 40 per cent patients in the outdoor departments. The
Committee are surprised to find that DDA did not impose this mandatory
condition without assigning any reason in allotment letters in 24 cases during
1982 to 1999. The Ministry of Urban Development stated that it was only in 1992
when DDA brought out guidelines in which the conditions were specifically
mentioned in the context of allotment of land to private hospitals at concessional
rates. However, the fact remains that even after its introduction, DDA had not
applied the condition uniformly with the result that out of 26 cases belonging to
post 1992 period test checked by Audit, the condition was not imposed in as
many as 18 cases. Failure to incorporate in the letters of allotment the term
stipulating provision of 25 per cent free indoor and 40 per cent free out door
treatment to poor patients defeated the primary objective of such allotment of
land at concessional rates and deprived the indigent patients of the benefit of
free treatment. The Committee are of the firm view that nothing is going to set
the things right until the system stops tolerating the officials who do not perform
the task assigned to them judiciously and impartially. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that a high level inquiry by an independent agency should be
constituted for a thorough probe to fix responsibility and appropriate punitive
action taken against officials who failed to incorporate requisite caluse in the
letters of allotment for whatsoever reasons.
88. What has surprised the Committee is the fact that even in the cases where
the condition for free treatment was imposed in the allotment letters, there have
been numerous instances where the respective hospitals/dispensaries did not
adhere to the requisite  conditions. The Committee regret to observe that there
was no mechanism in place to demarcate responsibilities between DDA and
Directorate of Health Services, Government of NCT of Delhi for monitoring the
terms of allotment and their effective enforcement. Whereas DDA contested that
they did not have proper mechanism or ability to be able to monitor the compliance
of these conditions, the Principal Secretary, Health of Government of NCT of
Delhi pleaded that land owning agency can alone ensure the implementation of
the requirements by the private hospitals as Delhi Nursing Homes (Registration)
Act does not empower them to do so. The Committee are inclined to conclude
that lack of coordination and shifting of responsibility by DDA and Government
of Delhi on each other provided ample opportunity to beneficiaries in avoiding
the implementation of the terms and condition of land allotment under the Nazul
Rules. As a consequence, no effective monitoring of the provisions of free treatment
to indigent patients could be enforced with the result that the primary objective
of allotment of land at concessional rates was defeated. Obviously, DDA's motive
was directed more towards providing favours to certain allottees than its genuine
concern for providing free treatment to indigent patients. The Committee desire
that the Ministry of Urban Development should work in close coordination with
DDA and Government of NCT of Delhi to ensure compliance of the terms and
condition by the hospitals/dispensaries. The Government of NCT of Delhi may
be impressed upon to amend Delhi Nursing Home (Registration) Act, if necessary,
which would empower them to enforce on the hospitals, the requisite condition
regarding provision of free treatment to indigent patients.

30
89. The Committee have also been informed that DDA is considering a
proposal put forward by some of the beneficiaries like Escorts Heart Institute
and Research Centre for freeing them from the obligation of free treatment by
charging them the commercial rates. The Committee view such proposals from
these beneficiaries which have earned huge profits after acquiring precious land
at concessional rates on the plea of being charitable institutions as unethical and
unacceptable. The  Committee are of the firm opinion that primary objective of
allotment of land by Government to hospitals and dispensaries at concessional
rates should be driven more towards alleviating miseries  caused by diseases to
the poor people rather than earning hefty profits. The Committee, therefore,
strongly recommend that no hospital/dispensary that was allotted land at
concessional rate should be allowed under any circumstances to back track their
commitments of providing free treatment to poor patients.
90. The Committee desire that DDA should immediately review land
allotment (before the introduction of auction system) to all the hospitals and
dispensaries and take adequate steps to impose the requisite condition of providing
free treatment to indigent patients as per the provisions on all the hospitals and
dispensaries retrospectively. For this, the Government, if considered necessary,
should bring about appropriate legislative changes. An effective mechanism should
also be put in place to monitor the implementation of terms and conditions of
allotment by the parties. Failure to adhere to such terms should attract a deterrent
penalty.
91. The Committee are constrained to point out that the Ministry/DDA could
not furnish information regarding the prevalent market price of land allotted to
hospital/dispensaries at concessional rates prior to the year 2002 which would
have indicated the huge financial benefits derived by the respective hospital/
dispensaries. This advantage would appear more pronounced considering the
fact the some of the hospitals/dispensaries were not even asked to adhere to the
requisite clauses of free treatment and the remaining, though required to do so,
did not eventually bother to implement the same. It is also pertinent to note in
this regard that out of 65 cases, DDA could provide only provisional rates of
concessional land allotment to 33 hospitals/dispensaries despite the fact that they
were allotted plots 6 to 25 years ago. Worse still, in 9 other cases the related files
are not available whereas in 2 more cases of land allotment during 1995 and
1996, the files are still under submission. The Committee deplore the casual
approach adopted by DDA in maintaining the proper records for allotment of
land and would like the matter to be investigated with a view to taking deterrent
action against the delinquent officials. The Committee expect the DDA to take
suitable steps to ensure maintenance of proper records in future.
92. The Committee are perturbed to find that DDA neither set up any
Grievances Redressal Cell nor put in place any other system to deal with the
complaints received against the hospitals functioning in contravention of the terms
and conditions of allotment. The Ministry of Urban Development claim that as
and when complaints are received against erring hospitals or dispensaries, action

31
as per lease terms is taken. However this contention of the Ministry is unacceptable
as DDA failed to take any concrete action in complaints received against Deepak
Gupta Memorial Hospital, Mai Kamli Wali Jan Kalyan Charitable Trust and
Sondhi Charitable Hospital during April-November 2002. In Deepak Gupta
Memorial Hospital case, the investigating officer inspected the hospital after more
than one year of the receipt of complaints. Even then he could not give any
conclusive report and no further action was taken after the hospital submitted
and affidavit  on stamp paper that it was providing 25 per cent free beds and also
free treatment to the poor and indigent category. Inquiry report of Director
(Lands), DDA in respect of Mai Kamli Wali Jan Kalyan Charitable Trust is
pending as of now. No action was taken against Sondhi Charitable Hospital despite
the orders of the Director (Lands) to initiate cancellation proceedings against
the Institute except for issuing a final show cause notice on 30.10.2003. No further
action was contemplated after the hospital replied on 12.11.2003 undertaking to
reserve 25 per cent beds for poor patients and to adhere to all the conditions. The
Committee are constrained to point out that action taken in these cases was not
only belated but also totally inadequate. What is surprising is the fact that DDA
at times simply relied on the statement of hospital authorities that they are
entertaining poor patients as per provision and did not care to cross-check their
version by having surprise checks. The Committee desire that responsibility should
be fixed on the erring officials for their inaction in these reported cases of
complaints. The Committee do not consider measures taken by these hospitals as
appropriate and are of the opinion that strict deterrent penal action should have
been taken against known defaulters of terms and conditions of allotment to set
an example for other hospitals. Renowned and highly profitable hospitals like
Escorts Heart Institute and Research Centre, Vimhans, which were allotted land
on the same condition, have violated the obligation of free treatment. However
no concrete follow-up action could be taken against them. Worse still, the Ministry
of Urban Development could not submit information regarding the number of
complaints received during the last five years. Obviously, there is no system to
deal with complaints received against the functioning of the hospitals in
contravention of the terms and conditions of allotment. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that DDA should evolve a proper mechanism with adequate
manpower and authority to ensure prompt and proper follow up action on
complaints received against hospitals functioning in contravention of terms of
conditions of allotment.
93. Another area of concern is the DDA's failure to define in specific terms
as to 'what comprises free treatment' and 'who can be benefitted under this free
treatment' which ultimately became the biggest stumbling block in achieving the
primary objective of the policy of allotting land at concessional rates to hospitals
and dispensaries. The Committee feel that this lapse, no doubt, empowered
hospitals and dispensaries to interpret the provisions differently which in turn
gave them immunity from restricting the scope of free service to consultations
only and even not entertaining eligible 'poor' patients at all. Further, the Ministry
of Urban Development could not furnish information regarding the number of

32
patients who have been benefited from this policy over the eyars. It may not be
out of place to mention that in few cases which hospitals/dispensaries claim to
have entertained poor patients for free treatment, it is actually the friends and
relatives of their staff who ultimately get the benefit.
94. The Committee recommend that DDA in consultation and coordination
with the concerned authorities should specify clear norms to identify the category
of people who could be eligible for this ‘free treatment'. In order to eliminate
differences in interpretation as to what comprises the 'free treatment', the Ministry
of Urban Development in consultation with DDA and the Directorate of Health
Services, Government of NCT of Delhi should stipulate the nature of service
indicating a list of medicines; a list of diagnostic services; a list of surgical services
etc. that should be provided free of charge. Further, it should be made compulsory
for the hospitals to display clearly the sign boards indicating that it is functioning
on concessional land allotted by DDA for public charity and the type of free
treatment and services available with  them for a particular category of people.
The position of availability of free beds in such a hospital should also be notified
on daily basis. Surprise checks need to be conducted by DDA and concerned
Health Officials of the Government of NCT of Delhi to ensure that poor patients
are actually given the requisite benefits and the hospitals/dispensaries simply do
not maintain and furnish the required statistics in this regard. A monthly report
to this effect should be obtained by DDA from the concerned hospitals/dispensaries
for forwarding of the same to the Ministry of Urban Development for effective
monitoring of the requisite clauses by the respective hospitals/dispensaries.
95. Another disquieting feature of the functioning of DDA is the fact that it
failed to incorporate the condition of the 'Guidelines for Disposal of Institutional
Land' requiring a representative of the Government of Delhi to be made a member
of the registered society administering the hospital in the allotment letter in 39
out of 42 cases. In the cases of Venu Charitable Society and Tagore Academy
where this condition was included in the allotment letter, where was nothing on
record to establish whether any such representative had been appointed. The
Committee are surprised at the reasons advanced by the Ministry that non-
appointment of Government representative appears to be a case of omission and
default rather than indicative of any intent to give undue favour to such allottees.
The Committee feel that this requisite incorporation of the condition could have
ensured that the commitment of medical care for indigent patients was honoured.
The Committee therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development
should impress upon DDA to immediately act in this direction in consultation
with Directorate of Health Services, Government of NCT of Delhi with a view to
ensuring appointment of representatives of Government in the Societies
administering these 42 hospitals within 3 months of the presentatiion of this
Report.
96. According to the conditions of allotment, building plans should be
approved and sanctioned by the DDA and construction completed within a period
of two years from the date of taking over possession of the land. If the society is
unable to construct the structure within two years, extension of time is allowed

33
upto five years without composite fee and thereafter extension of time [upto 20
years] can be granted on the basis of charging composite fee after a considered
decision is taken by the Competent authority in DDA. The Committee find it
strange that whereas conditions of allotment require the parties to construct the
structure in only two years, extension from time to time can be granted upto 20
years. 23 out of 27 hospitals had not started functioning till July 2003 despite
lapse of periods ranging from 4 to over 30 years. Such developments give an
unmistakable impression that the intention of the majority of the allottees was
more or less to grab the coveted plots of land at the concessional rate using ‘public
charity' as a ploy. What is intriguing is the fact that DDA did not have any system
to monitor timely construction of buildings for hospitals/dispensaries on the lands
allotted by it. This is evident from the fact that out of 10 cases where extension
was granted for construction of buildings, the extension period had already
expired in seven cases. DDA could not furnish to Audit the details of approval of
plans, stipulated date of completion, actual date of completion and date of
occupancy of buildings by various hospitals and dispensaries which was awaited
from the Building Department (July 2003). Obviously there did not exist any
inbuilt mechanism to ensure that societies build the hospitals quickly and within
the timeframe of extended period. As of now, no extension should be given to any
Society and they be asked to complete the construction and operationalise the
hospitals positively by the end of year 2005. The Committee recommend that
those hospitals/dispensaries which have not been able to start functioning before
the introduction of auction system and where there were lapses of more than 20
years in their construction should be auction off. The Ministry of Urban
Development may decide about the issues involved within three months of the
presentation of the Report.
97. The Committee observe that DDA need to follow a stricter norm for
selecting genuine charitable institutions and clear cut time limits to avoid delay
in construction and operationalisation of hospitals and dispensaries which is
synonymous with idling, if not waste, of precious land resources. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that DDA should amend the building construction rules in
this regard to provide therein that where the societies fail to complete construction
activities on the plots allotted to them and start functioning within a maximum
period of five years of allotment, letters of allotment are cancelled invariably.
provisions for not permitting transfer or resale of the allotted land to a third
party should also be made to help prevent commercial minded societies from
applying for institutional land at concessional rates. As of now, no extension should
be given to any Society and they be asked to complete the construction and
operationalise the hospitals positively by the end of the year 2005 failing which
the Ministry of Urban Development should take necessary action to cancel the
allotment of land made at concessional rates to these hospitals/dispensaries. The
Committee would like to be apprised about the latest position in regard to
construction in all these cases of allotment and the precise steps taken to
operationalise them within three months of the presentation of this Report. Action
taken by DDA to initiate recovery of penalty or action against defaulters violating
the conditions of allotment should also be intimated in the Action Taken note.

34
98. Due to inadequate and ineffective pursuance for recovering outstanding
dues on account of premia, ground rent and interest thereon, arrears to the tune
of Rs. 6 crores accumulated against the allottees as of October 2003. While the
outstanding premia and interest thereon related to the period 1996-97 onwards,
the outstanding ground rent related to the period from 1985—90 onwards. The
fact that such old arrears could not be collected so far only goes to prove the
gross negligence and carelessness exhibited by the DDA authorities in the matter.
What is surprising is the fact that Ledger Accounts maintained by the Director
(Land Costing) did not present the true picture of outstanding dues against the
allottees. Thus effective pursuance of the dues was also thwarted by the incomplete
maintenance of records and unreliable ledger accounts. The Committee are
inclined to conclude that adequate action was not taken to effectively pursue the
pending dues and non-collection of same from the defaulting institutions extended
an undue benefit to them.
99. The Committee are not satisfied with the reply of the Ministry that for
recovery of the outstanding dues, DDA has, from time to time issued default
notices to the concerned societies/organizations and also issued press releases in
this regard and the DDA propose to take action under Punjab Revenue Act, 1887
in case of the society fails to remit the requisite dues. The Committee feel that
mere issuance of reminders to the defaulters to pay the necessary dues was not
enough and the necessary action under this Act which empower the DDA to issue
the attachment order or seal the premises should have been taken much earlier.
The fact that this was not done against the defaulting parties is questionable. The
Committee desire that DDA should take immediate action in this regard so that
all the pending dues are recovered from the parties within three months of the
presentation of this Report.
100. The Committee have been informed that the Government had by
notification No. 486 (E) dated 5.7.02 amended the Nazul Rules to provide for
auction of the DDA land to hospitals and dispensary sites. This would include all
sites except those meant for local bodies and Government. Accordingly, DDA can
now allot land for hospitals/dispensaries through auction system without imposing
any condition for providing free treatment to the poor patients since there is no
subsidy and market forces determine the prices. After switching over to auction
system in the year 2002, a sum of about Rs. 81.53 crore has already been collected
from 9 societies. The Committee desire that the Ministry/DDA should examine
the feasibility of creating a corpus from the money so generated for providing
medical insurance to the bonafide poor and economically weaker sections of the
NCT of Delhi. In addition, the Committee desire that penalties and fines collected
from the those hospitals/dispensaries which were allotted land at concessional
rates prior to auction system and which have been found wanting in providing
free medical treatment as per laid down criterion may be added to this corpus.
The identification of poor and indigent persons who could be covered under this
insurance scheme may be left to the Government of NCT of Delhi as to how best
they can identify these people in Delhi through their Social Welfare Department

35
or Health Department or Urban Local Bodies within six months of the presentation
of this Report. Another option could also be to set up new Government hospitals
out of this fund to discourage the dangerous mushrooming of private clinics and
dispensaries by unqualified people at every nook and corner of the city. The
Committee would, therefore, like the authorities concerned to explore all viable
options in this regard so that these funds are utilised judiciously and the cause of
poor and indigent patients is best served.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
21 April, 2005 Chairman,
1 Vaisakha 1927 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

ANNEXURE-I
PARAGRAPH 3.1 OF THE REPORT OF C & AG OF INDIA FOR THE YEAR
ENDED 31 MARCH 2003, NO. 4 OF 2004
3.1 Allotment of Land to Private Hospitals and Dispensaries by Delhi Development
Authority
Delhi Development Authority (DDA) failed to encorce the terms of allotment of
institutional land, at concessional rates, to hospitals and dispensaries. The primary
objective or these allotments was to provide free treatment, according to norms, to the
poor. This was not achived. Allotment of land was made  to three ineligible institutions
which deprived DDA of revenue of Rs. 38.54 crore. Ineffective pursuance of outstanding
dues led to accumulation of arrears of Rs. 3.54 crore.
Highlights
Ø Allotment of land to three ineligible institutions at concessional rates in
contravention of the guidelines deprived the DDA of revenue of Rs. 38.54
crore.
Ø Failure to monitor the terms of allotment stipulating provision of 25 per
cent free indoor and 40 per cent free out door treatment to indigent patients
defeated the primary objective of such allotment of land at concessional
rates and deprived the indigent patients of the benefit of free treatment.
Ø No system was laid down to deal with complaints received against the
functioning of the hospitals in contravention of  the terms and conditions of
allotment.
Ø DDA failed to incorporate a condition for appointment of a representative
of the Government as a member of the Society administering the hospital
which could have ensured that the commitment of medical care for indigent
patients was honored.
Ø Twenty-three out of 27 hospitals had not started functioning as of July 2003
even after a lapse of periods ranging from 4 to over 30 years from the date
of allotement of land.
Ø Inadequate and ineffective pursuance of outstanding dues on account of
premia, ground rent and interest thereon resulted in accumulation of arrears
of Rs. 3.54 crore against the allottees.
3.1.1 Introduction
The Delhi Development Authority (DDA) Disposes of commercial, industrial
and residential plots in accordance with the provisions of the DDA (Disposal of
36

37
Developed Nazul Land) Rules, 1981. Rule 5 stipulates that DDA may allot Nazul
lands for construction of hospitals and dispensaries to social or charitable institutions.
The premium and ground rent will be determined by the Government of India. Allotment
of Nazul land to public institutions is subject to the fulfillment of certain conditions
prescribed in Rule 20.
Till May 2003, DDA had allotted land to 65 charitable institutions of which 53
were for construction of hospitals
1 and 12 for dispensaries2 (including three hospitals
where the possession of land was yet to be handed over). The allotment of land to
these institutions was made at varying concessional rates fixed by the Union Ministry
of Urban Development from time-to-time upto 1995-96 and at rates fixed by the DDA
in consultation with the Ministry thereafter. A test check in audit of the records of
allotment of land to 42 hospitals and dispensaries revealed various irregularities and
shortcomings in both the allotment of land and in enforcement of the terms of allotment
which defeated or undermined the very purpose of allotment of land to such
organizations at concessional rates.
3.1.2 Organization
The allotment of land for the purpose of construction of hospitals and dispensaries
to charitable and other organizations in Delhi is looked after by the Land Disposal
Department of DDA. The Department is headed by the Commissioner (Land Disposal)
who is assisted by the Director (Lands), the Deputy Director (Institutional Land) and
other subordinate staff.
The accountng of receipts including recovery of ground rent is looked after by the
Director (Land Costing) who is assisted by the Deputy Chief Accounts Officer (Land
Costing) and other subordinate staff.
3.1.3 Scope of Audit
The review conducted from April 2003 to July 2003 included examination of the
records of the Institutional Land branch of DDA relating to allotment of land to hospitals
and dispensaries for the period from 1981-82 to 2000-2001 and records of the Land
Sales Accounts (Nazul Accounts) branch relating to recovery of dues to ensure that:
l the allotment of land to private hospitals and dispensaries had been made
according to the rules and orders in force from time-to-time;
l the premia of land and ground rent had been charged at the rates approved
by the Government of India/DDA;
l a proper mechanism for monitoring the adherence to the terms and conditions
of allotment existed; and
l a proper account of dues recoverable and received from the institutions had
been maintained.
1. Hospital: Provides both indoor and outdoor treatment facilities to patients.
2. Dispensary: Provides only outdoor treatment facilities to patients.

38
Irregular Allotment of Land to Trusts or Private Companies
Rule 20 of the Rules prescribes, inter alia, that an institution
seeking allotment of institutional land should be a society registered
under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, or such institution should
be owned and run by the Government or any local authority or
constituted or established under any law for the time being in force.
Audit scrutiny revealed that allotments of land were made to three
ineligible institutions at concessional institutional rates instead of
at commercial rates in contravention of the extant guidelines which
deprived the DDA of revenue of Rs. 38.54 crore as discussed
below:
3.1.4 Arya Vaidyashala Kottakkal, a charitable Trust of a public nature since 1902,
applied for allotment of land in December 1976 for setting up of an Ayurvedic Centre.
A plot of 0.8 hect. in Kondli complex was allotted to the Trust in April 1985 on the
advice of the then Chief Legal Adviser that a charitable Trust duly constituted and
registered under the law for the time being in force would have to be treated at par
with a society registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860. The Trust was
subsequently offered an alternative site of 1.10 hect. in Dallupura Society complex in
February 1987 due to non-development of the original site. This site too could not be
handed over due to encroachment. In the meantime, on the basis of a legal opinion
taken at the instance of the then Vice Chairman DDA in September 1994, it was
concluded that a public or private Trust cannot be deemed to be a Society under the
Societies Registration Act nor can it be deemed to have been constituted or established
under any law in terms of the meaning of Rule 20 and hence it was not entitled for
allotment. However, allotment of a plot of land of 0.95 hect. in Karkarduma complex
was approved by the Delhi Government in October 1994 as it was felt that a reversal
of the position of this stage would not be fair to the applicant. The approval was made
subject to the specific condition that the  Trust would get itself registered under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860. Audit observed that the stipulation of the Trust getting
itself registered under the Societies Registration Act was not incorporated in the
allotment orders even while making a modified allotment in June 1995 despite the
specific directions of the Lt. Governor of Delhi of October 1994.
Thus, incorrect interpretation of the rules resulted in allotment of land to an
otherwise ineligible institution. This irregular allotment of land deprived the DDA of
Rs. 1.40 crore as the allotment was made at the concessional institutional rates instead
of the commercial rates. Further, the specific directions of the Government intended
to remedy the lacunae in the status of the Trust with reference to its eligibility for such
allotment was not incorporated in the allotment orders. No responsibility has been
fixed for the lapses.
3.1.5 Dharmshila Cancer Foundation and Research Centre, a public charitable Trust,
had applied for allotment of land in January 1989. It was allotted two acres of land at
Rs. 14.25 lakh per acre in March 1990 though it was not registered as a society under
Allotment of
land to three
ineligible
institutions
deprived DDA
of revenue of
Rs. 38.54
crore.

39
the Societies Registration Act, 1860, as required under the rules for allotment of land
at concessional rates. The Trust was subsequently registered as a Soceity in April
1990. In December 1992, while dealing with a reference from the Trust relating to the
revision of rates applicable to it, the Joint Director (Institutional) of DDA observed
that the Trust was not in fact eligible for being considered for allotment as it was not a
Society registered under the Societies Registration Act at the time of its application/
allotment. The Legal Advisor concurred with this view and observed in January 1993
that (i) the allotment of land to the Trust was ab initio void and (ii) since the allotment
was void, the Trust could not subsequently pass on the property to the Society and the
subsequently formed Society could not also take over the assets and liabilities of the
erstwhile Trust in respect of the allotted land. Despite this unambiguous advice of its
Legal Advisor, DDA by its Resolution of June 1993 approved a proposal permitting/
passing over the land allotted to the Trust to the Society without charging the unearned
increase.
As the land was allottted to an ineligible institution and the allotment was void ab
initio, the allotment could have been either cancelled or alternatively the Society charged
the commercial rates instead of the concessional institutional rates. The decision of
the Authority permitting passing over the land to the Society on concessional terms
was in clear contravention of the conditions for allotment of such land stipulated in the
Rules and resulted in loss of Rs. 3.11 crore.
3.1.6 Unique Hospitals and Research Institute applied for allotment of land in February
1997. An allotment of 8,097 sqm. of land was made to the Institute in December 1997.
In April 1998, it was noticed that the Institute had been actually incorporated in January
1996 under the Companies Act, 1956, and registered itself as a Society under the
Societies Registration Act, 1860, only in February 1997. It was observed in audit that
the original company continued to exist and the registration as a society was merely a
facade in order to obtain allotment of land at concessional rates. The allotment was,
however, allowed to continue by the Government of Delhi in August 1998 on the
Institute furnishing an undertaking to the effect that the original company would not
have any involvement in the management of the hospital established by the Society
and that the hospital would make available 25 per cent of the out-patient, diagnostic
and bed facilities for free patients who would be sent through a referral procedure to
be finalised by the Health Department of the Delhi Government. It was also decided
that the Director, Health Services, would be responsible for monitoring and certifying
the implementation of the arrangement and that DDA would be free to get it checked
through its empanelled auditors.
Though the initial allotment was made ostensibly to a Society, the fact remains
that the original company continued to subsist and registration as a society was obtained
only to get around the requirements for allotment of land at concessional rate. Thus
failure to allot land at commercial rates to an organization which remained in
essence and to all intents and purposes a 'Company' resulted in loss of Rs. 34.03 crore
to DDA.

40
3.1.7 Non-inclusion of conditions for monitoring provision of free treatment to
indigent patients
The allotment of land to private hospitals and dispensaries at
concessional rates is made subject to the condition that the institution
shall serve as a general public hospital with at least
25 per cent of total indoor beds reserved for free treatment to indigent
patients and that it would provide free treatment to 40 per cent
patients in the outdoor department. A test check in audit of
42 allotments as shown in Appendix-I to private hospitals and
dispensaries revealed that DDA had failed to incorporate this
condition in the allotment letters in 24 cases.
Further, five hospitals/dispensaries were allotted additional land for expansion.
DDA however failed to ascertain even in these cases whether the free indoor and
outdoor services for indigent patients stipulated in the conditions of allotment were in
fact being provided or not although in two of these cases, the condition of providing
free treatment to indigent patients was specially incorporated in the allotment letter.
In November, 1999, the Minister for Health & Family Welfare, Government of
Delhi, constituted a Committee under the Chairman, Central Drug Purchase Committee
in the Directorate of Health Services, to review the free treatment facilities required to
be provided by the hospitals which had been allotted land at concessional rates. The
Committee's findings submitted in April 2000 confirmed public apprehensions that
beneficiary hospitals were not fulfilling their obligation of providing free treatment to
indigent patients. Subsequently, another Committee headed by Justice A.S. Qureshi
was constituted in June 2000 to review the system of free treatment facilities by
charitable and other private hospitals. The Committee recommended inter alia that
the allotment of land at concessional rates to such institutions was liable to be cancelled
for violation of the terms of allotment. Subsequently in July-September 2001, the
DDA sought a report from 14 institutions as to the fulfillment of their obligations
relating to provision of free treatment to indigent patients. Only five institutions
responded to the DDA's notice. However, no action was initiated against the defaulters
nor was any action taken to verify the correctness of the report furnished by the five
institutions.
DDA stated in May 2003 that since the allotment of land to hospitals and
dispensaries was made on the recommendation of  the Central Government or the
concerned department of the Government of NCT of Delhi, it was for the concerned
department to monitor whether all the terms and conditions were being adhered to.
DDA subsequently added (June 2003) that the enforcement mechamism to supervise
compliance with the terms and conditions of allotment was being revised in consultation
with the Government of Delhi.
The Director, Health Services, Government of Delhi, while disagreeing with the
DDA's position, stated (July 2003) that the Directorate had not laid down any guidelines
for monitoring these aspects and had only recommended the cases to DDA for allotment
and land after the approval of the Land Allotment Committee. The Directorate was
not aware as to which institution had been allotted land by DDA and on what conditions.
The Directorate only inspects the hospitals while doing registration or renewal of
registration of allopathic hospitals under the Delhi Nursing Home Registration Act,
1953, and examines  the aspect of providing free beds as an additional activity in
cases where the conditions for allotment are disclosed by the allottees as this was not
a pre-condition for registration or renewal.
The condition
of providing
free indoor
and outdoor
treatment to
indigent
patients was
not included
in 24 cases.

41
Evidently, the DDA and the Directorate of Health Services did
not take the enforcement of the terms of allotment seriously. As a
consequence, no effective monitoring of the provision of free
treatment to indigent patients was carried out and the primary
objective of allotment of land at concessional rates was defeated.
As a result, undue benefit was afforded to the allottees. There was
clearly a need for a clear demarcation of responsibilities for
meaningful monitoring of the terms of allotment and their effective
enforcement.
3.1.8 Inaction in reported cases of non-adherence to terms of allotment
Audit observed that no system has been laid down either by
DDA or the Directorate of Health Service to deal with complaints
received against the functioning of the hospitals in contravention of
the terms and conditions of allotment of land. In two cases,
complaints were received by DDA during April-November 2002
against certain institutions for not providing free treatment to indigent
patients and show cause notices were issued during October-
December 2002. In one case (Deepak Gupta Memorial Hospital),
the reply was received in January 2003; however, no action could
be taken as the report of the investigating Assistant Engineer was
awaited (July 2003). No reply was received in the other cases (Mai
Kamli Wali Jan Kalyan Charitable Trust) despite a lapse of over six
months.
In another case (Sondhi Charitable Hospital), in reponse to a Starred Question
raised in the Delhi Assembly in March 2001 that the hospital was functioning like a
private nursing home and charging exorbitant fees, the Secretary (Health), Government
of Delhi, directed the DDA to take appropriate action against the hospital for violating
the terms and conditions of allotment. No action was, however, taken (July 2003)
despite the orders of the Director (Lands) to initiate cancellation proceedings against
the Institute. No responsibility for the inaction has been fixed.
3.1.9 Non-appointment of Government representative
According to the Guidelines for Disposal of Institutional Land,
a representative of the Government of Delhi is required to  be made
a member of the registered society responsible for administration
of the project so as to ensure that the commitments of medical care
for indigent patients are honoured. DDS, however, failed to
incorporate this conditionin the allotment letter in 39 out of 42 cases
test checked in audit.
In the case of Venu Charitable Society where the condition was included in the
allotment letter, a representative from the concerned sponsoring Department viz.
Government of Delhi and another from DDA was to be appointed on the Board of the
Society. But there was nothing on record to establish whether any such representative
had been appointed. In the case of Tagore Academy, there was nothing on record to
Non-monitoring
of the provisions
of free treatment
to indigent
patients defeated
the objective of
allotment of land
at concessional
rates.
No system has
been laid down
to deal with the
complaints
received against
the hospitals
functioning in
contravention of
the terms and
conditions of
allotment.
Condition of
appointment of a
Government
representative as
a member of the
institution was
not incorporated
in 39 cases.

42
show whether a nominee of the Delhi Government was appointed as Director on the
Board of Management  of the Society. In another case of Lala Munni Lal Mange Ram
Charitable Trust, neither any nominee from DDA was appointed as member nor was
the condition incorporated in the allotment letter despite clear directions of the Lt.
Governor of Delhi issued in September 1997.
The failure of the DDA to monitor adherence of this condition of allotment
undermined the objective of land  allotments at concessional rates.
3.1.10 Timely construction of hospital and dispensary buildings
According to the conditions of allotment, building plans should be approved and
sanctioned by the DDA and construction completed within a period of two years from
the date of taking over possession of the land. Extension of period of construction can
be granted as per the guidelines issued by the DDA from time-to-time upto a period of
15 years (10 years in the case of plots upto 500 sqms.) with or without levy of
composition charges if the circumstances of the case so warranted.
Audit noticed that DDA did not maintain any consolidated
record to watch the timely construction of buildings for hospitals/
dispensaries on the land allotted by it . It was seen that out of 10
cases where extension was granted for construction of buildings,
the extension period had already expired in seven cases. The Deputy
Director (Institutional Land) stated in June 2003 that the Building
Department was responsible for the approval of plans and for
watching the completion of buildings by the concerned institution.
However, the details of approval of plans, stipulated date of
completion, actual date of completion and date of occupancy of
buildings by various hospitals and dispensaries was awaited from
the Building Department (July 2003).
Thus, the status of construction of buildings by the allottees in cases where the
period for construction including extension had already expired, could not be
ascertained.
Audit noticed that 23 out of 27 hospitals which had been allotted
land during January 1971 to March 2000 had not started functioning
till July 2003 while three hospitals had sought extension for
construction although the land had been allotted during June 1996
to July 1998. In the remaining one case, the stipulated period of two
years permissible for construction had not yet expired.
3.1.11 Heavy Outstanding dues
The Director (Land Costing) is responsible for maintenance of records of recoveries
on account of premia and ground rent of land allotted to hospitals and dispensaries.
The premium is payable by the allottee within 60 days of demand (30 days upto
September 1995) failing which interest at the rate of 18 per cent per annum is leviable.
Record to watch
the timely
construction of
buildings for
hospitals/
dispensaries was
not maintained.
Out of 27
hospitals
allotted land, 23
have not started
functioning
despite lapse of
periods ranging
from 4 to over
30 years.

43
Ground rent is payable annually in advance failing which interest at 10 per cent per
annum is levied. The arrears of premium and ground rent are recoverable under the
Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887.
Premia of Rs. 12 lakh was outstanding in 3 cases while interest
of Rs. 1.43 crore on premia not paid or paid belatedly was
outstanding in seven cases of October 2003. In addition, ground
rent of Rs. 3.42 crore was outstanding from 39 allottees while interest
of Rs. 1.03 crore was outstanding from 36 allottees. The outstanding
premia and interest thereon related to the period from 1996-97
onwards whereas the outstanding ground rent related to the period
from 1985-90 onwards. No broadsheet of recoveries was maintained
with the result that the correctness of credits afforded in the ledger
accounts could not be ensured in audit.
A test check in audit of the ledger  accounts maintained by the
Director (Land Costing) further revealed that the outstanding dues
as per the ledger accounts differed from those certified and intimated
to the Management from time-to-time. On the discrepancies being
pointed out in audit, DDA  stated (July-August 2003) that the ledger
accounts might not represent the true picture of outstanding dues as
the challans received may not have been posted in the Demand and
Collection Ledgers. DDA added that the Demand and Collection
ledgers had since been updated and Demand Letters issued to the
defaulters whose list was also being sent to the recovery Officers
for collection of ground rent dues.
Clearly adequate action had not been taken to effectively pursue the long
pending dues which could have been collected even as arrears of land revenue in
cases of persistent default. Effective pursuance of the dues was also being thwarted
by the incomplete maintenance of records and unreliable ledger accounts. This
resulted in accumulation of arrears of premium, ground rent and interest thereon.
Non-collection of dues from the defaulting institutions also constituted an undue
benefit to them.
3.1.12 Conclusion and Recommendations
The Delhi Development Authority had allotted land to 53 hospitals and 12
dispensaries at concessional institutional rates with the primary objective of establishing
general public hospitals with reservations for free treatment to indigent patients. The
failure of the DDA to monitor implementation of this provision defeated the primary
objective of the allotments.
Based on the audit findings, the following recommendations are made:
l Allotments to ineligible institutions should be considered for cancellation
or the regular commercial rates charged. The circumstances leading to such
irregular allotments should also be investigated for determining
responsibility.
Ineffective
monitoring of
the outstanding
dues resulted in
accumulation of
arrears   of
Rs. 3.54 crore.
Ledger accounts
maintained did
not present the
true pictures of
outstanding dues
against the
allottees.

44
l An effective mechanism must be set up to monitor adherence to the terms
and conditions of allotment. Failure to adhere to the terms of allotment
should attract a deterrent penalty.
l There should also be a clear demarcation of responsibilities between the
DDA and the agencies of the Government of Delhi for meaningful monitoring
of the terms of allotment and their effective enforcement.
l A system for redressal of complaints must be established. A nodal officer
could be appointed to look into and pursue the complaints received and
initiate appropriate action against erring hospitals and dispensaries.
The matter was referred to the Ministry in September 2003; its reply was awaited
as of February 2004.

APPENDIX-I
(Referred to in Paragraph No. 3.1.7)
List of Hospitals and Dispensaries checked in Audit
Sl. Name of Hospital Date of Date of Whether condition
No. Allotment Possession for free treat-
ment incor-
porated in
allotment letter
12 3 4 5
1. Amar Jyoti Charitable Trust 20-1-1983 30-4-1983 Yes
2. Fil. Lt. Rajan Dhall Charitable Trust 29-8-1983 23-2-1987 No
3. Deepak Gupta Memorial Foundation 16-3-1982 18-10-1982 Yes
4. Ganesh Das Chawla Charitable Trust 28-4-1986 12-5-1986 Yes
5. Arya V aidyasala Kottakkal 4-4-1985 9-3-1995 Yes
6. Venu Charitable Trust 16-10-1992 18-12-1992 Yes
7. Laxmipat Singhania Medical Foundation 29-3-1990 12-7-1991 Yes
8. Dharamshila Cancer Foundation & 30-3-1990 6-12-1990 Yes
Research Centre
9. Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Society 12-3-1990 11-5-1990 No
10. Sondhi Charitable Hospital 8-11-1993 12-11-1993 No
11. Sant Nirankari Mandal 24-6-1994 23-2-2000 No
12. Lala Munni Lal Mange Ram 24-10-1994 9-1-1995 No
Charitable Trust
13. Manav Sewarth Trust 10-11-1994 9-1-1995 No
14. Vikrant Children Medical Foundation 3-7-1995 16-9-1996 No
15. Multan Seva Samiti 26-4-1995 1-7-1998 No
16. Devki Devi Foundation 6-2-1996 5-6-1996 Yes
17. Human Care Medical Charitable Trust 15-5-1995 23-4-1996 No
18. B.R. Dhawan Memorial Charitable Trust 6-3-1996 12-6-1996 Yes
19. Nirogi Charitable & Medical 8-7-1996 7-2-1997 No
Research Trust
20. Dr. Narain Dutt Shri Mali Foundation 22-5-1996 26-6-1996 No
21. Param Shakti Peeth 17-1-1997 6-1-1998 No
22. Unique Hospital & Research Institute 17-12-1997 3-8-1998 Yes
23. Shanti Memorial Society 6-5-1999 30-8-1999 No
45

46
24. Balaji Medical & Diagnostic 14-8-1989 16-10-1996 Yes
Research Center
25. Mukundi Lal Memorial Foundation 6-4-1988 11-5-1988 Yes
26. Maha Durga Charitable Trust 9-8-1999 Not handed over Yes
27. Delhi ENT Hospital & Research Centre 20-9-1999 1-2-2000 No
28. Dr. Walia Charitable Trust 7-2-1998 19-2-1998 Yes
29. Mai Kamli Wali Jan Kalyan Charitable 15-5-1987 28-8-1988 Yes
Trust
30. Sarvodaya Health Foundation 24-3-1999 22-6-1999 Yes
31. Vivekanand Pratisthan Parishad 12-3-1985 21-8-1995 No
32. Tarawati Ram Gopal Mehra Foundation 15-7-1986 16-4-1987 No
33. Indian Medical Association 8-5-1997 5-7-1997 No
34. Dilshad Garden Ayyappa Sewa Samiti 18-1 1-1997 19-12-1997 No
35. Sh. Guru Singh Sabha Central 6-1-1997 15-1-1997 No
36. Parivar Seva Sanstha 1-7-1988 8-6-1989 Yes
37. Jai Sri Ram Sewa Sangh 29-5-1995 8-8-1995 No
38. Tagore Academy 2-7-1996 30-8-1996 No
39. Sanatan Dharam Public Trust 20-3-1998 6-4-1998 Yes
40. Sadhu Vasvani Mission 7-2-1984 18-4-1984 No
41. Arpna Trust 3-6-1996 21-6-1996 No
42. Khosla Medical Institute & 10-10-1983 17-6-1985 No
Research Centre
12 3 4 5

47
ANNEXURE II (a)
LIST INDICATING THE RATE OF PREMIUM OF LAND CHARGED FROM 65 HOSPITALS/DISPENSARIES
LIST OF HOSPITALS
Sl. Name of Society Area/Location Date of Date of Date of Rate of premium
No. Allotment Possession execution of land as per
of  Lease Deed allotment letter
1              2 3         4        5         6   7
1. Ashi Ram Batra Public 10.50 Acr./ 9.5.83 & 30.5.79 3.5.85 5,000/-, 3 Lac
Chritable Trust, 1-Batra Tughlakabad 16.1.1996 28.11.83 24.7.2000 80 Lac per Acre
Hospital, 1 Tughlakabad 19.3.96 (Provisionally)
2. Gujarmal Modi Hospital & 15 Acr./Saket 25.5.80 21.12.80 5000/- per Acre
Research Centre, G . Mal for Hospital and 3
Modi Hospital, Saket Lac per Acre for
Staff Quarter
(Provisionally)
3. Amar Jyoti Charitable Trust 0.85 Acr. 726 20.8.83 30.4.83 12.10.83 10,000/- per Acre
Secy., N-192, Greater Sqm./Karkardooma for Hospital and 6
Kailash Lac per Acre
Staff Quarter
(Provisionally)
4. Fil. Lt. Rajan Dhall 1 Acr./Masoodpur 20.1.83 9.4.84 18.9.97 10,000/- & 6 Lac
Charitable Trust, Secy, N- per acre
192, Greater Kailash, (Provisionally)
5. Sunder Lal Jain Charitable 3.14 Acr./Ashok Vihar 29.3.84 23.10.74 1.2.82 10,000/- per Acre
Trust, President, Ashok 30.10.85 (Provisionally)
Vihar

48
1               2        3 4 5 6 7
6. Mata Channan Devi Eye 2.05 acr./ 9.2.93 3.3.82 10,000/- per Acre
Hospital, C-I Janakpuri 0.53 Acr./ Janak Puri 3.3.82 9.2.83 for Hospital
Treatree Indian Spinal 0.444 Acr./ 15.4.83 15.4.83 (Provisionally)
Injuries Centre, Sec-C 0.502 Acr/ 27.4.84 27.4.84
V asant Kunj 0.975 Acr./ 6.6.85 6.6.85
7. Indian Spinal Injuries 11.84 Acr./ Vasant Kunj 22.8.85 4.5.89 28.4.95 10,000/- per Acre
Centre for Hospital and
6 Lac per Acre for
Staff Quarter
(Provisionally)
8. Deepak Gupta Memorial 4840 Sqm./Karkardooma 30.9.90 & 4.2.86 31.1.83 10,000/- per Acre
Charitable Foundation, 17.7.95 6.5.87 for Hospital and
Director Admn. 5 Instt, 6 Lac per Acre
Karkardooma for Staff Quarter
(Provisionally)
9. Ganesh Das Chawala 4048 Sqm./Rohini 28.4.86 12.5.86 22.12.95 10,000/- per Acre
Charitable trust. President, for hospital and
Saroj Hospital, Madhuban 6 Lac per Acre for
Chowk Staff Quarter
(Provisionally)
10. Arya V aidshala Kottakkal, 9240 Sqm./Karkardooma 10.9.86 9.3.95 As per revise
Secretary. E-76, South Extn., demand dated
Phase-I 13.6.95 Rs.
7,84,742/- as
premia
11. Parmarath Mission 2420 Sqm./Pitampura 1 1.5.87 21.10.87 File presently not
Hospital, Gen. Secty., 2317, available
Shakti Nagar

49
12. V enu Charitable Society 2.5 Acr./Saket 29.3.90 10.12.92 28.50 Lac per
(Eye Hospital), Secy, C-40 Acre for Hospital
South Extn. II (Provisionally)
13. Laxmipat Singhania 2 Acr./ Saket 29.3.90 16.7.91 28.50 Lac per
Medical foundation, Acre for Hospital
Chairman.4Bahadurshah (Provisionally)
Zafer Marg
14. Dharam Shila Cancer 13175 Sqm./Dallupura 30.3.90 6.12.90 9.7.98 19 Lac per Acre
Foundation & Research 12.2.96 30.8.90 for Hospital
Centre, Director, (Provisionally)
V asundhara Enclave
15. Rajiv Gandhi Cancer 3.5 Acr/ 12.3.90 11.5.90 3.25 Lac, 26 Lac
Society President, Q-5A. 2330 Sqm. 15.4.90 9.1.92 & 45 Lac per
Jungpura Extn. 15.11.90 12.9.95 Acre (Provisionally)
16. Escorts Heart Instt. & 0.7 Acr./ Okhla 3.5.90 23.11.90 28.5 Lac per
Research Centre. Chairman, Acre
82-A, Kamla Nagar (Provisionally)
17. Sondhi Charitable Trust. 1.162 Acr./ Mayur Vihar 8.1 1.93 11.12.93 17.3.94 10 Lac & 27.50
Chairman, 82-A, Kamla Nagar Lac per Acre
18. Sant Nirankari Mandal, 10 Acr./ Dheerpur 24.6.94 23.2.2000 11.8.2000 10 Lac, 20 Lac,
Sant Nirankari Colony 50 Lac per Acre
and 5 Lac per Acre
for Dharamshalla

50
1               2           3 4 5 6 7
19. Lala Munni Lal Mange 2.34 Hact./ Paschimpuri 24.10.94 12.11.97 15.1.96 50 Lac+69%
Ram Ch. Trust President 29.9.97 9.1.95 per acre
15/17 East Punjabi Bagh
20. Manav Sewarath Trust , 506, 1Hact. 10.11.94 9.1.95 10.2.2001 50 Lac per Acre
Hemkunt Towers, 98, Nehru Place
21. Vikrant Children Medical 1.4 Hact./ Saket 3.7.95 16.9.96 File under
Foundation, President Submission
Vikrant Children Medical
foundation, V asant Vihar
22. Multan Sewa Samiti 1590 Sqm./Pitampura 3.7.95 1.7.98 1.4.97 50 Lac per Acre
President, 1476,
Sewa Samiti Marg.
23. Devki Devi Foundation. 1.123 Acr/Saket 6.12.96 5.9.96 1.4.97 80 Lac per Acre
President. 1476, 10B for Hospital
Kasturba Gandhi Nagar
24. Human Care Medical 7.7.95 23.4.96 11.6.96 50 Lac per Acre
Trust, B-1/B. Safdarjung Enclave,
Main Africa Avenue
25. B.R. Dhawan Medical Ch. 0.9 Hact./Dwarka 6.3.96 12.6.96 14.1.2000 File under
Trust. A-44, Vishal encalve  submission
26. Nirogi Ch. Medical Ch. 0.85 Hact/Mandawali. 8.7.96 7.2.97 45.50 Lac per
Trust. Presidnet, 301, G .K. Fazalpur Acre
House 187-A Sewa Nagar,
East of Kailash

51
27. Dr. Narain Dutt Shrimali 3.0 Hact./Pitampura 29.6.96 26.6.96 File presently not
Foundation  available
28. Param Shakti Peeth, 3.26 Hact./Mandawali 17.1.97 6.1.98 50 Lac+69%
President, 66, IP Extn., per Acre
Agrsen Aptt. (Provisionally)
29. Unique Hospital & 3.16 Hact./Dwarka 17.12.97 31.8.98 50 Lac+69%
Research Secy., 504, Gardeni per Acre
Institute, 6-3-865, Hyderabad (Provisionally)
30. Shanti Memorial Society, 1 Hact. Lado Sarai 6.5.99 30.6.99 80 Lac+120%
Lado Sarai per Acre
(Provisionally)
31. Madhukar Multi-Speciality 5500 Sqm./Geetanjali 21.1.99 15.6.2000 80 Lac+120%
Hospital, President, per Acre
23, Pushp Vihar, Community Centre (Provisionally)
32. B.R. Jesa Ram Hospital, 4840.55 Sqm./Karol Bagh 28.11.53 28.11.53 File presently
President, WEA, Karol Bagh. not available
33. Dr. B.L. Kapoor Memorial 5 Acr./Pusa Road 28.11.53 File presently
Hospital, Pusa Rd., Karol Bagh not available
34. Balaji Medical & Research 12000 Sqm./Mandawli 14.8.89 16.10.96 18.6.97 35 Lac+120%
Centre, President, Balaji 22.12.98 21.5.2001 1.6.2001 (Provisionally)
Medical & Research Centre,
Indraprasth Vihar
35. Jaipur Golden Ch. Trust, 2.45 Acr./Rohini 14.5.85 11.9.85 28.12.89 10,000/- per Acre
President, XIII/475.57, for Hospital and
Roshanara Road 6 Lac per Acre Staff
Quarter

52
36. Mukanda Lal Memorial 6852sqm. 6.4.88 7.6.88 9.8.88 8 Lac for Acre for
Foundation Secy, Mukanda Hospital
Lal Hospital, Karkardooma
37. National Health Insurance 743.80 sqm East of Kailash 6.7.95 31.5.2000 15 Lac per Acre
All India Heart Fundation,
49, Community Centre, East
of Kailash
38. Foundation of Applied 4013.66 sqm./South of IIT 24.1.90 17.4.90 File presently not
Research in Cancer, Fed. for available
Applied Reaserch Hospital,
IIT
39. Vivekanand Pratisthan Parishad, 8000 sqm./Khureji 12.3.85 21.8.95 27.3.2001 File presently not
Sen. Sec., VPP, Khureji available
40. Birla Centre for Medical 35 Acr/V . Vihar 1.12.83 8.1.85 File presently not
Research, Prakash Deep, available
Floor 7, Tolstoy Marg
41. Khosla Medical Institute & 9680 sqm./N Model Town 3.6.83 17.7.85 31.12.86 6 Lac per Acre
Research Centre, KMI&R (Provisionally)
Centre, Paschim Shalimar Bagh
42. Maha Durga CH. Trust, 8000 sqm./Model Town 9.8.99 Possession 50 Lac per Acre +
Model Town not taken over 120%
by the Society enhancement
43. Ashma & Bronchitis 0.602 Acr./Gautam Nagar 1.2.77 1.2.77 5000/-per Acre
Foundation (Delhi 26.2.81
University), Gautam Nagar
1               2           3 4 5 6 7

53
44. Bala Sahib Gurudwara, 46274 sqm./Kilokari 22.11.00 25.06.2002 10,000/-per Acre
President, Delhi Shikh for Hospital and 6
Gurudwara Management lac per Acre for
Committee Staff Quarter
45. National Society of 8.0 sqm./Karkardooma 22.2.88 24.9.90 19.11.91 8 Lac per Acre
Prevention of Blindness (Provisionally)
(small Hospital) NS for
pre. of Blindness
46. All India Society for Health 2 acre/Dwarka 2 Acre/Dwarka 1.12.84 Possession 10,000/- per Acre
Aid Education Research Land 10.7.04 yet to be for Hospital and 6
handed over Lac per Acre for
Residential
47. Lala Gela Ram Memorial 528 sqm./ 8.9.88 8.9.88 23.75 Lac per
Medical Research Centre, Pitam Pura Acre
(Dental Hospital) (Provisionally)
Gela Ram M&M Research
Center, CU-163-A, Vikash Enclave
48. Delhi Cheshire 3.502 Acr./Okhla 22.1.71 22.1.71 File presently not
Home (Hospital for Disabled available
Person) Delhi Cheshire Home.
C1/133, S.D.A.
49. Delhi ENT Hospital & 788 Sqm./Jassola FC-33 20.9.99 1.2.2000 80 Lac + 120%
Research Center (ENT per Acre
Hospital & Research Center)
Delhi ENT Hospital Research
Center, 127, Nav Jeevan,
50. V .N. Gupta Ch. Trust Rd, 0.2 Hact./Pitam Pura 23.3.89 19.08.2003 19 Lac per Acre
No. 43, Pitam Pura for Hospital

54
ANNEXURE-II (B)
LIST OF DISPENSARIES/HOSPITALS
Sl. Name of Society Area/Location Date of Date of Date of Rate of premium
No. Allotment Possession Execution of of land as per
Lease Deed allotment letter
1           2   3 4 5 6 7
1. Tarawati Ram Gopal 1000 sq. mtr./ 30.9.83 16.4.87 File presently not
Mehra Foundation Mandwali available
2. Indian Medical 400 Sqm./ 5.7.97 5.7.97 45.50 Lac per Acre
Association Karkardooma (Provisionally)
3. Walia Charitable Trust 795 Sqm./Mayur 19.2.98 19.2.98 12.3.2001 35 Lac +69%
Vihar-III per Acre
(Provisionally)
4. Dilshad Gardern 1020 Sqm./Dilshad 18.11.97 19.12.97 35 lac+60% per Acre
Ayyappa Sewa Samiti Garden (Provisionally)
5. Mai Kamali Wali Jan 434.50 Sqm./Rajouri 15.3.87 20.8.88 10,000/- & 8 Lac
Kalyan Ch. Trust Garden 22.7.97 per Acre
(Provisionally)
6. Guru Singh Sabha 380 Sqm./ Paschim 6.1.97 28.1.97 3.5.2000 50 Lac + 30%
Central Puri per Acre
(Provisionally)

55
7. Parivar Sewa Samiti 1000 Sqm./Pitampura 3.6.88 8.6.89 19 Lac per Acre
(Provisionally)
8. Jai Sri Ram Sewa 295 Sqm./ Pitampura 29.5.95 8.8.95 7.2.2000 50 Lac per Acre
Samiti (Provisionally)
9. Tagore Academy 908 Sqm./ Shalimar 2.7.96 30.8.96 19.5.99 19.50 Lac per acre
Bagh (Provisionally)
10. Sarvodaya Health 1000 sqm./ Rohini 24.3.99 22.6.99 28.2.2001 50 Lac+120% per
Foundation Acre
11. Sanatan Dharma Sabha 620 Sqm./ Dera Wal 20.3.98 6.4.98 50 Lac+69% per
Public Trust Nagar Acre
12. Delhi Common Wealth 1200 acres/Masood 7.2.84 12.10.83 80 Lac+142% per
Women's Association Pur Acre
13. Sadhu Vaswani 0.41 acre/Shanti 7.2.84 18.4.84 28.11.85 10,000/-per Acre
Mission Niketen (Provisionally)
14. Arpana Trust 500 Sqm./Vasant 3.6.96 21.6.96 80 Lac per Acre
Vihar (Provisionally)
15. Lok Kalyan Samiti 200 Sqm./Humayun 6.9.83 6.12.83 25.6.85 10,000/- per acre
Nagar ` (Provisionally)

ANNEXURE-III
LIST OF HOSPITALS AND DISPENSARIES WHICH WERE FOUND NOT
HONOURING THEIR COMMITMENTS OF PROVIDING FREE
TREATMENT TO POOR PATIENTS BY THE MINISTRY OF
URBAN DEVELOPMENT AND HAD, THEREFORE, BEEN
ISSUED SHOW CAUSE NOTICES
1. Amar Jyoti Charitable Trust, Karkardooma, Vikas Marg, Delhi
(a rehabilitation centre not hospital)
2. Pushpawati Singhania Research Institute for Renal & Digestive Diseases,
New Delhi
3. Dharamshila Cancer Hospital, Vasundhara Enclave, Delhi
4. Escorts Heart Institute & Research Centre, Okhla Road, Delhi
5. Jaipur Golden Hospital, Delhi
6. Shanti Mukand Hospital, Vikas Marg, Delhi
7. National Heart Institute, East of Kailash, New Delhi
8. Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Society, Rohini, Delhi
9. Bhagwati Hospital (Sarvodaya Fundation), Delhi
10. Mai Kamli Wali Jan Kalyan Charitable Trust, Rojouri Garden, New Delhi
56

ANNEXURE-IV
DIRECTORATE OF HEALTH SERVICES: GOVT. OF NCT OF DELHI
SWASTHAYA SEWA NIDESHALAYA BHAW AN,
F-17,  KARKARDOOMA, DELHI-110032
F. 13/2/2003/NH/DHS/ 44813-41 Dated 6.12.04
ORDER
The Hon’ble High Court of Delhi at New Delhi in its proceedings held on
18.11.2004 in the CWP the 2866/2002 titled as Social Jurist Vs GNCT Delhi and
others, had directed that the hospitals which have been granted land with the conditions
to provide treatment to the poor people to the extent of 25% beds, will adhere to this
condition till further orders.
Your are, therefore, directed to ensure that the conditions as stipulated in the
letter of allotment of land with regard to the treatment to the poor patients are strictly
adhered to. In case it is brought to the notice of this directorate that the above conditions
are not being adhered to, the same shall be viewed seriously and intimated to the land
allotment agency for necessary action. A report every fortnightly ending 15th and the
end of the month giving the details of the patients provided free treatment in OPD and
IPD is to be submitted (on the enclosed proforma) to this directorate positively till
further orders and to keep identifiable records of the patients so treated. The said
records will have to be made available to the officers so authorized on behalf of the
directorate.
ThThe receipt of the above order is to be acknowledged and is to be complied
scrupulously.
Sd/-
(Dr. R.N. BAISHYA)
DIRECTOR, HEALTH SERVICES
To
The Medical Suptd./Medical Directors
1. Dharmshila Cancer Hosp. and Research Centre V asundhara Enclave,
Delhi-110096.
2. Deepak Memorial Hospital & Medical Research Centre, 5, Institutional
Area,Vikas Marg Extn., Delhi-110092.
3. Escorts Heart Institute & Research Centre, Okhla Road, Okhla, Delhi-110025.
4. Indian Spinal Injuries  Centre, Opp. Police Station, Sector-C, V asant Kunj,
Delhi- 110070
5. Jaipur Golden Hospital  2, Institutional Area, Sector 2, Rohini, Delhi-110085
6. Pushpawati Singhania Research Institute, Sheikh Sarai, Phase-I, Saket, New
Delhi-110027
7. National Heart Institute, 49, Community Centre, East of Kailash, Delhi-110065.
8. Mai Kamliwali Hospital, Ch. Plot, No.12, J Block, Community Centre, Rajouri
Garden, Delhi-110027.
57

58
9. Saroj Hospital, Sector-14 Extn. Near Madhuban Chowk, Rohini, Delhi-110085.
10. Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Institute & Research Centre, D-18, Sector-V , Rohini,
Delhi-110085
11. Shanti Mukund Hospital, 2, Institutional Area, Vikas Marg Extn., Vikas Marg,
Delhi-110092
12. Venu Eye Institute & Research Centre, Plot-1, Shekh Sarai, New Delhi-110017
13. V eeranwali International Hospital, Chander Gupta Road, Chanakyapuri,
Delhi-110021
14. Dr. Vidya Sagar Kaushalya Devi Memorial Health Centre (VIMHANS),
Nehru Nagar Delhi-110065
15. Bhagwati Hospital, C-5/OCF-6 Sector-13, Rohini Delhi-110085
16. Gujarmal Modi Hospital, Mandir Marg, Saket, Delhi-110017
17. Kottakkal Arya Vaidyashala, Karkardooma, Delhi-110092
18. Amar Jyoti Ch. Trust Karkardooma, Delhi-110092
F. 13/2/2003/NH/DHS/44842-44 Date 6-12-04
Copy for information to
1. Vice Chairman, DDA, Vikas Sadan, INA Market, New Delhi
2. Pr. Secretary (H) Govt. of NCT Delhi 9th floor, Delhi, Secretariat, New Delhi.
3. Ms. Zubeda Begum Additional Standing Counsel, 436, Lawyers, Chamber,
Delhi High Court with the request to inform the court  accordingly.
Sd/-
(DR. R.N. BAISHYA)
DIRECTOR, HEALTH SERVICES

59
ANNEXURE-V
PROFORMA
Fortnightly Details of the Patients Treated Free/Subsidized as in Accordance with the Terms & Conditions of Allotment of Land
Name of the hospital___________________________ Year____________ Month _____________ Fortnight ending 15th/ End of Month
Sl. No. Total No. of No. of free Total No. of No. of  % age of No of       Remarks
beds      beds Patients Patients given Patients
free treatment treated at
subsidized rates
OPD IPD OPD IPD OPD IPD OPD IPD
Certified that the identifiable records of the patients treated under the category of poor patients has been kept for inspection
Prepared by _________________ Checked by _________________ Singed by authorized signatory_________________
Name in Block letters
Telephone No.

60
ANNEXURE-VI
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
INSTITUTIONAL BRANCH
STATUS OF THE CONSTRUCTION OF HOSPITAL BUILDINGS
List of Hospitals
Sl. Name of Society Area/Location Date of Date of Date of Remarks
No. Allotment Possession Execution of
Lease Deed
12 3 4 5 6 7
1. Ashi Ram Batra Public 10.50 Acr./ 9.5.83 & 16.1.96 30.5.79 3.5.85 Built up and functioning
Charitable Trust, 1-Batra Tughlakabad 28.11.83 24.7.2000
Hospital, 1- Tughlakabad 19.3.96
2. Gujarmal Modi Hospital & 15 Acr./ Saket 25.5.80 21.12.80 Built up and functioning
Research Centre, G . Mal
Modi Hospital, Saket
3. Amar Jyoti Charitable Trust, 0.85 Acr.* 726 Sqm./ 20.1.83 30.4.83 12.10.83 Built up and functioning
Secy., No.-192, Greater Karkardooma
Kailash
4. Flt. Lt. Rajan Dhall Charitable 1 Acr./Masoodpur 29.8.83 9.4.84 18.9.87 Built up and functioning
Trust, President, Flt. Lt. Rajan
Dhall Hospital, Masoodpur
5. Sunder Lal Jain Charitable 3.14 Acr./Ashok Vihar 29.3.84 23.10.74 1.2.82 Built up and functioning
Trust, President, Ashok Vihar 30.10.85
Phase-III

61
6. Mata Chanan Devi Eye 2.05 Acr./ 9.2.93 3.3.82 Built up and functioning
Hospital, C-1, Janakpuri, 0.53 Acr./Janakpuri 3.3.82 9.2.83
Treated Indian Spinal Injuries 0.444 Acr./ 15.4.83 15.4.83
Centre, Sec.-C, Vasant Kunj 0.502 Acr./ 27.4.84 27.4.84
0.975 Acr./ 6.6.85 6.6.85
7. Indian Spinal Injuries Centre 11.84 Acr./V asant Kunj 22.8.85 4.5.89 28.4.95 Built up and functioning
8. Deepak Gupta Memorial 4840 Sqm./ 30.9.90 & 4.2.86 31.1.83 Built up and functioning
Charitable Foundation, Karkardooma 17.7.95 6.5.87
Director Admn. 5 Instt. Area,
Karkardooma
9. Ganesh Das Chawla Charitable 4048 sqm./ Rohini 28.4.86 12.5.86 22.12.95 Built up and functioning
Trust, President Saroj Hospital,
Madhuban Chowk
10. Arya Vaidshala Kottalaya, 9240 sqm./ 10.9.86 9.3.95 Built up and functioning
Secretary E-76, South Extn. Ph.I Karkardooma
11. Parmarath Mission Hospital, 2420 sqm./Pitampura 1 1.5.87 21.10.87 Built up
Geo. Sec. 2317, Shakti Nagar
12. V enu Charitable Society (Eye 2.5  Acr./Saket 29.3.90 10.12.92 Built up and functioning
Hospital), Secy. C-40, South Extn.-II
13. Laxmipat Singhania Medical 2 Acr./Saket 29.3.90 16.7.91 Built up and functioning
Foundation, Chairman,
4-Bahadurshah Zafar Marg
14. Dharam Shila Cancer 13175 sqm./ Dallupura 30.3.90 6.12.90 9.7.98 Built up and functioning
Foundation & Research Centre 12.2.96 30.8.90
Director, V asundhara Enclave

62
12 3 4 5 6 7
15. Rajiv Gandhi Cancer Society, 3.5 Acr./ 12.3.90 11.5.90 Built up and functioning
President, Q-5A, Jangpura Extn. 2330 sqm. 15.4.90 9.1.92
15.11.90 12.9.95
16. Escorts Heart Instt. & Research 0.7 Acr./ Okhla 3.5.90 23.11.90 Built up and functioning
Centre, Chairman, 82-A, Kamla Nagar
17. Sondhi Charitable Trust, 1.162 Acr.,/ Mayur 8.11.93 1 1.12.93 17.3.94 Built up and functioning
Chaiman, 82-A Kamla Nagar V ihar
18. Sant Nirankari Mandal, Sant 10 Arr./ Dheerpur 24.6.94 23.2.2000 11.8.2000 Unbuilt
Nirankari Colony
19. Lala Munni Lal Mange Ram Ch. 2.34 Hact./Paschimpuri 24.10.94 12.11.97 15.1.96 Under construction
Trust President, 15/17 East 29.9.97 9.1.95
Punjabi Bagh
20. Manav Sewarath Trust 506 1 Hact. 10.11.94 9.1.95 10.2.2001 Unbuilt
Hemkunt Towers, 98, Nehru Place
21. Vikrant Children Medical 1.4 Hact./Saket 3.7.95 16.9.96 Under construction
Foundation, President, Vikrant
Children Medical Foundation
V asant Vihar
22. Multan Sewa Samiti, President, 1590 sqm./Pitampura 3.7.95 1.7.98 Unbuilt
1476, Sewa Samiti Marg
23. Devki Devi Foundation, 1.123 Acr./Saket 6.12.96 5.6.96 1.4.97 Under construction
President, 1476, 10B, Kasturba
Gandhi Nagar
24. Human Care Medical Trust, 1 Hact./Dwarka 7.7.95 23.4.96 11.6.96 Under construction
B-1/1B, Safdarjung Encl.

63
Main Africa Avenue
25. B.R. Dhawan Medical Ch. Trust 0.9 Hact./Dwarka 6.3.96 12.6.96 14.1.2000 —
A-44, Vishal Enclave
26. Nirogi Ch. Medical Ch. Trust 0.85 Hact./Mandawali, 8.7.96 7.2.97 Unbuilt
President 301, G.K. House Fazalpur
187-A, Sewa Nagar, East of
Kailash
27. Dr. Narain Dutt Shrimali 3.0 Hact./Pitampura 29.6.96 26.6.96 Unbuilt
Foundation
28. Param Shakti Peeth, President 3.26 Hact./Mandawali 17.1.97 6.1.98 Unbuilt
66, IP Extn., Agarsen Aptt.
29. Unique Hospital & Research 3.16 Hact./Dwarka 17.12.97 31.8.98 Under construction
Secy., 504, Garden Institute,
6-3-865, Hyderabad
30. Shanti Memorial Society, Lado 1 Hact./Lado Sarai 6.5.99 30.6.99 Unbuilt
Sarai
31. Madhukar Multi-Speciality 5500 sqm./Geetanjali 21.1.99 15.6.2000 Unbuilt
Hospital, President, 23, Pushp
Vihar, Community Centre
32. B.R. Jesa Ram Hospital, 4840.55 sqm./Karol 28.11.53 28.11.53 Built up and functioning
President, WEA Karol Bagh Bagh
33. Dr. B.L. Kapoor Memorial 5 Acr./Pusa Road 28.11.53 Old building demolished
Hospital, Pusa Rd, Karol Bagh by the allottee for
reconstruction.
34. Balaji Medical & Research 12000 sqm./Mandawali 14.8.89 16.10.96 18.6.97 Built up but not

64
Centre,President, Balaji Medical 22.12.98 21.5.2001 1.5.2001 functioning
& Research Centre, Indraprasth Vihar
12 3 4 5 6 7
35. Jaipur Golden Ch. Trust, 2.45 Acr./Rohini 14.9.85 11.9.85 28.12.89 Built up and functioning
President, XIII/475,57,
Roshanara Road
36. Mukand Lal Memorial 5852 sqm. 6.4.88 7.6.88 4.8.88 Built up and functioning
Foundation, Secy, Mukand Lal
Hospital, Karkardooma
37. National Heart Institute, All 743.80 sqm./East of 6.7.95 31.5.2000 Built up and functioning
India Heart Foundation,
49, Kailash  Community Centre,
 East of Kailash
38. Foundation of Applied Research 4013.66 sqm./South of 24.1.90 17.4.90 Built up and functioning
in Cancer, Fed. for Applied IIT
Research Hospital, IIT
39. Vivekanand Pratisthanm 8000 sqm./Khureji 12.3.85 21.8.95 27.3.2001 Partly built up
Parishad, Sen. Secy., VPP, Under construction
Khureji
40. Birla Centre for Medical 3.5 Acr.,V . Vihar 1.12.83 8.1.85 Mer ged in green
Research, Prakash Deep,
10th Floor, 7, Tolstoy Marg
41. Khosla Medical Institute & 9680 sqm./Shalimar 3.6.83 17.6.85 31.12.86 Built up and functioning
Research Centre, KMI & R Bagh
Centre, Paschim Shalimar Bagh
42. Maha Durga Ch. Trust, 8000 sqm./Model 9.8.99 Possession not Unbuilt
Mahadurga Ch. Trust, Model Town taken over by
Town          the Society

65
43. Ashma & Bronchitis Foundation 0.602 Acr./Gautam 1.2.77 1.2.77 Built up and functioning
(Delhi University), Gautam Nagar 26.2.81
Nagar
44. Bala Sahib Gurudwara, 46274 sqm./Kilokari 22.1 1.2000 25.6.2002 Under construction
President, Delhi Sikh Gurudwara
Management Committee
45. National Society for Prevention 8.0 sqm./Karkardooma 22.2.88 24.9.90 19.11.91 U. Const.
of Blindness (Small Hospital),
NS for Pre. of Blindness,
Karkardooma
46. All India Society for Health Aid 2.0 Acr.,/Mayur Vihar-II Land under Encroach
Education Research, Mayur encroachment by
Vihar-II Jhuggi dwellers
47. Lala Gela Ram Memorial 528 sqm./Pitampura 8.9.88 8.9.83 Built up and functioning
Medical Research Centre
(Dental Hospital), Gela Ram M.
& M. Research Centre. CU-163-A.
Vishakha Enclave
48. Delhi Cheshire Home (Hospital 3.502 Acr./Okhla 22.1.71 22.1.71 Built up
for Disabled Person), Delhi
Cheshire Home, C-1/133, S.D.A.
49. Delhi ENT Hospital & Research 788 sqm./Jasoia FC-33 20.9.99 1.2.2000 Unbuilt
Centre (ENT Hospital &
Research Centre), Delhi ENT
Hospital & Research Centre

127, Nav Jeevan
50. V .N. Gupta Ch. Trust, Rd. 0.2 Hact./Pitampura 23.3.89
Unbuilt
No. 13, Pitampura
66

67
PART II
MINUTES OF THE EIGHT SITTING OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005) HELD ON 8TH NOVEMBER, 2004
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1715 hrs. in Committee Room 'E', Parliament
House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Dr. M. Jagannath
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Dr. R. Senthil
6. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
7. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
8. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
10. Shri R.K. Dhawan
11. Shri Jairam Ramesh
12. Prof. R.B.S. V arma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Anusua Basu — ADAI (RC)
2. Shri Roy S. Mathrani — Principal Director (AB)
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development
1. Shri Anil Baijal — Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Pradhan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Azeer Vidya — Joint Secretary & Financial
Adviser
Representatives of Delhi Development Authority
1. Shri Madhukar Gupta — Vice-Chairman

2. Shri A.K. Patnaik — Finance Member
3. Shri R.K. Singh — Commissioner (LD)
4. Shri D.B. Gupta — Pr. Commissioner
Representative of Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi
Shri S.P. Aggarwal —  Principal Secretary (Health)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members and Audit Officers.
The Chairman informed the Members that the sitting has been convened to take oral
evidence of the representatives of the (i) Ministry of Urban Development, (ii) Delhi
Development Authority, and (iii) Government of NCT of  Delhi on Paragraph 3.1 of
Report of the C&AG of India for the year ended March 2003, Union Government
(Civil-Autonomous Bodies), No. 4 of 2004 relating to "Allotment of land to Private
Hospitals and Dispensaries by Delhi Development Authority (DDA)". Thereafter, the
officers of the office of C&AG of India briefed the Committee on the specific points
arising out of the aforesaid Audit paragraph. The representatives of the (i) Ministry of
Urban Development, (ii) Delhi Development Authority (DDA), and (iii) Government
of NCT of Delhi then explained their viewpoint on the issues arising out of the audit
paragraph. The evidence on the subject remained inconclusive and the Committee
decided to continue with it in the forenoon of 9th November, 2004.
3. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.
68

69
MINUTES OF THE NINTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2004-05) HELD ON 9TH NOVEMBER, 2004
The Committee sat from 1100 hours to 1300 hours on 9th November, 2004 in
Committee Room 'E', Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
6. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
7. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
8. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
Rajya Sabha
9. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
10. Shri R.K. Dhawan
11. Shri V. Narayanasamy
12. Shri Jairam Ramesh
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
2. Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
3. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Representatives of the Office of C&AG of India
1. Shri Anusua Basu — ADAI (RC)
2. Shri Roy S. Mathrani — Principal Director (AB)
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Development
1. Shri Anil Baijal — Secretary
2. Shri P.K. Pradhan — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Azeer Vidya — Joint Secretary & Financial
Adviser
Representatives of Delhi Development Authority
1. Shri Madhukar Gupta — Vice-Chairman, DDA
2. Shri A.K. Patnaik — Finance Member

3. Shri R.K. Singh — Commissioner (LD)
4. Shri D.B. Gupta — Pr. Commissioner
Representative of Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi
Shri S.P. Aggarwal — Principal Secretary (Health)
2. To begin with, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee, the
representatives of the (i) Ministry of Urban Development, (ii) Delhi Development
Authority, and (iii) Government of NCT of Delhi and the officials of C&AG to the
sitting of the Committee.
3. As the evidence relating to "Allotment of lands to private Hospitals and
Dispensaries by Delhi Development Authority (DDA)" had remained inconclusive on
8 November, 2004, the Committee resumed oral evidence on the subject. The witnesses
explained various points and queries raised by the Chairman and Members of the
Committee arising out of the Audit paragraph. As for the queries, which could not be
resolved, the representatives of the Government and DDA were asked to send written
replies within 15 days.
4. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.
70

71
MINUTES OF THE TWENTIETH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2004-2005) HELD ON 15TH APRIL, 2005
The Committee sat from 1630 hrs. to 1700 hrs. on 15th April, 2005 in Room
No. "51" (Chairman's Chamber), Parliament House, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri Naveen Jindal
4. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
5. Shri K.V . Thangka Balu
6. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
7. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
8. Shri R.K. Dhawan
9. Dr. K. Malaisamy
10. Shri Jairam Ramesh
11. Prof. R.B.S. V erma
S
ECRETARIAT
1. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
2. Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
3. Shri J.M. Baisakh — Under Secretary
Officers of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Shri Anusua Basu — Addl. Dy. Comptroller and
Auditor General
2. Shri Roy S. Mathrani — Pr. Director
3. Ms. Shubha Kumar — Pr. Director
4. Shri R.K. Ghose — Accountant General
(Audit)-Delhi
2.  At the outset, the Chairman welcomed the Members of the Committee to the
sitting. The Committee then took up for consideration the following draft Reports:
(i) "Allotment of Land to Private Hospitals and Dispensaries by Delhi
Development Authority (DDA)"
(ii) *** *** *** ***

72
3.  After some deliberations, the Committee adopted the draft Report on DDA
with slight modifications/amendments.
*** *** ***   ***
The Committee authorised the Chairman to finalise these Reports in the light of
verbal and consequential changes arising out of factual verification by audit or otherwise
and present the same to the House.
4.  The Chairman referred to the fact that two Members of the Committee, namely,
Shri Naveen Jindal and Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat would not be with the next Committee,
the term of which would begin from 1st May, 2005. The Committee appreciated the
keen interest taken by these Members in the work undertaken and valuable contribution
made by them during their deliberations.
The Committee then adjourned.