3
A VOIDABLE IMPORT OF HIGH
CAPACITY DIESEL POWERED
BREAKDOWN CRANES
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
2004-2005
THIRD REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI

THIRD REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
A VOIDABLE IMPORT OF HIGH
CAPACITY DIESEL POWERED
BREAKDOWN CRANES
MINISTRY OF RAILWAYS (RAILW AY BOARD)
[Action Taken on 36th Report of Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on .................................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ........................................
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)

PAC No. 1754
Price: Rs. 15.00
 © 2004 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of  Business in Lok
Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of  India Press, Minto
Road, New Delhi-110002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  (2004-2005) .................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report ................................................................................. I
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by the Government ............................................................ 8
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government........................................................................ 10
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies
 of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
 and which require reiteration ............................................ 17
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies ....................... 26
PART II
Minutes of the Sitting of Public Accounts Committee
 (2004-2005) held on 13.10.2004.......................................... 27
APPENDIX
Observations and Recommendations ................................ 29

COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. V acant*
3. Shri Ramesh Bais
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Dr. M. Jagannath
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasalu Reddy
9. Dr. R. Senthil
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
13. Kunwar Revati Raman Singh
14. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Dr. K. Malaisamy
19. Shri V . Narayanasamy
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
21. Shri Jairam Ramesh
22. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri P .D.T. Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
*Shri  A. R. Antulay resigned from the membership of the Committee w.e.f. 27 August, 2004.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee having been authorised by the
Committee to present this Report on their behalf, do present the Third Report on action
taken by Government on the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee
contained in their 36th Report (13th Lok Sabha) on "Avoidable import of high capacity
diesel powered breakdown cranes".
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 13th October, 2004. Minutes of the sittings form Part II of the
Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommenda-
tions of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and
have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
27 October, 2004 Chairman,
5 Kartika, 1926 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER   I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by Government on the
Observations/Recommendations contained in their Thirty-Sixth Reort (Thirteenth Lok
Sabha) on Paragraph 4.1.2 of the Report  of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India for the year ended 31 March, 1998 (No. 9 of 1999), Union Government (Railways)
relating to "Avoidable Import of High Capacity Diesel Powered Breakdown Cranes."
2. The 36th Report which was persented to Lok Sabha on 24 April, 2002 contained
nine Observations/Recommendations. The action taken notes have been received in
respect of all the Observations/Recommendations and these have been broadly
categorized as follows:
(i) Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted by Govern-
ment:
Paragraph Nos. 11 and 16
(ii) Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pur-
sue in view of the replies received from Government:
Paragraph Nos. 9, 10, 14, 15 and 17
(iii) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 12 and 13
(iv) Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Government have fur-
nished interim replies:
-NIL-
3. The action taken notes furnished by the Ministry of Railways (Railway Board)
have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. The Committee will now
deal with the action taken by the Government on some of their Observations/Recom-
mendations.
Delayed indigenisation of high capacity diesel powered breakdown cranes and huge
shortfall against requirement
[Sl. Nos. 4-5, Paragraphs 12-13]
4. In paragraph 12 of  their 36th Report, the Committee had noted that based on a
global review undertaken by Railway Board in 1994, the requirement of 'A' class
Accident Relief  Trains (ARTs) equipped with 140 Tonne cranes on Broad Gauge (BG)
was worked out at 63. As 24 cranes had already been procured through trade, there

was an additional requirement of 39 140 Tonne Cranes. Considering the urgent and
important requirement of these cranes, the Committee had emphasized the need for
their realistic assessment keeping in view the existing state-of-the-art technology.
The Committee in Paragraph 13 of the Report were surprised to find that in order
to meet the shortfall of 39 140 Tonne cranes, the Railway Board took a decision in 1995
to import cranes  instead of exploring the possibility of their indigenous manufacture
through organizations viz. M/s Jessops  & Co., Calcutta  and Jamalpur Workshop
where manufacturing capabilities were created. Taking note of the fact that M/s Jessops
& Co. had already supplied 12 140 Tonne cranes to Railways in the past and their
performance was reportedly satisfactory, the Railway Board should have  interacted
with them for procurement of required cranes. The Committee opined that such a
course was all the more necessary when it was inter alia decided at the meeting of the
Committee of Secretaries held in 1984 that order for further requirement of cranes by
the Railways should be placed on M/s jessops if their performance proved satisfac-
tory. The Committee had therefore observed that the Ministry of Railway failed to
exploit the existing and proven indigenous  expertise and infrastructure  possessed by
M/s. Jessops & Co., in spite of such a decision taken at the meeting of the Committee
of Secretaries.
5. In the action taken note furnished to the Committee in respect of Paragraph 12
of the Report, the Ministry of Railways stated that reviews of Accident Relief Trains
on Indian Railways had been done on the basis of requirements projected by the Zonal
Railways themselves. According to the Ministry, a 140 Tonne Crane attends to
accidents in a beat that  may cover different Railways and is not confined to the geo-
graphical limits of the Railways, which owns it. The Ministry in the same note added:
"The requirement of Crane is a dynamic figure. At any point in time this number
would depend upon factors such as gauge conversion, importance of section in
terms of traffic hauled, number of trains, geographical locations, topography,
pattern of traffic, maintenance infrastructure, condition of existing over-aged
Steam Cranes, etc.
Even the value of 63 Nos. as worked out in 1994, has undergone a major  change
with addition of over 8,000 kms of BG track in the intervening years by way of
conversion/new lines/doubling.
Even as of today when the requirement is over 80 Cranes, IR has only 40 Diesel
Cranes and manufacture 4 to 6 Cranes per annum.
When IR started replacing steam locos with Diesel Locomotives in 1962 they did
not assess the total requirement of diesel Loco a figure  that keeps going up
even today. Likewise, it is submitted that the need for assessing total require-
ment in 1994 was only of academic value and did not impinge on any of the
decisions of Crane manufacture for at least in the next one decades."
2

6. Intimating the Committee about the basis of assessing the requirement of
80 cranes in the year 2004, the Ministry have further added:
"The Committee on "Re-organisation  and Modernization of the Accident Relief
Trains" in its report in 1985 had recommended that the beat of the Accident
Relief Train on Broad Gauge should be about 250 to  300 kms. In other words,
each Crane can  cover a distance of approximately 500 kms. of track in a linear
section, 750 kms. of track if placed in a tri-junction etc. from the junction station
in which it is positioned.
Indian Railways' Broad Gauge network is spread over 45,000 route kms. With the
above guidelines in mind the entire  Railway map was scanned and in 1995, the
requirement was assessed at 73 Cranes in order  that every point on the entire BG
track is covered by a Crane within 250 to 300 kms. This was discussed in the
Conference of Chief Motive Power Engineers in charge of disaster management
and minor adjustments made suitably in the locations. During this meeting,
Eastern, NF, NE and SE Railways even pressed for more Cranes than what  were
provided within the plans. This was further firmed up in a Powerpoint presenta-
tion made to the Zonal General Managers.
In 1995, the requirement of 140 Tonne BG Cranes was worked out as 73 Nos. This
requirement goes up every year with addition of new lines & gauge conversion.
For example, during the 10th Five-Year Plan a total of 3750 kms. of BG track is to
be added. We manufacture about 4 to 6 Cranes only every year. Since we have 41
Cranes today in the system, there is a wide gap between demand & supply. The
requirement is itself  a figure moving far ahead of the 41 and 73 Cranes at a rate
solely dependent on the flow of funds for new lines and gauge conversion
which is rather uncertain. It is, therefore, submitted any fine tuning of this figure
at this  point in time would only be academic in nature. Suffice to say that there
would be no occasion in the foreseeable future when we have more Cranes than
is necessary."
7. In respect of Paragraph 13 of the Report, the Ministry in their action taken note
stated that in 1992, M/s Jessops had advised that their U.K. collaborator, had with-
drawn their support for  supply of materials, spares and services at site. This caused
M/s Jessops tremendous hardship both for achieving the required speed certificate
and later for servicing of Cranes and  supply of spares. According to the Ministry,  as
per contract with M/s Jessops, delivery of the first Crane was to be made within 18
months from the contract  and subsequently one Crane per month,  thus completing
the supply of all the  12 Cranes within 29 months from the date of the contract, i.e. April
1988. Actual supplies of the Cranes were however made between 1988 to 1991, with
delay of 43 months. The Ministry added that M/s Jessops stopped responding to the
tenders for spares being issued by Railways even on proprietary basis. They had also
stopped attending  to service calls on the plea that warrantly period was over. A
meeting was held in Board's  office in May' 1994 wherein the view of Research Designs
& Standard Organisation (RDSO) and all the user Railways were obtained in this
regard particularly for maintenance and procurement of spares, etc. It was also  brought
3

4
out in the note consequent to the meeting held in May 1994 that Jessops had
conceded that most of these components were not manufactured by them but would
be imported from the original manufacturer. Practically, all the Railways using Jessops
Cranes decried the poor response being given by M/s Jessop's in supply of spares
and other support services. Some of the specific cases highlighting M/s Jessop's poor
maintenance support have been brought to the notice of the Committee.
8. The Ministry further stated that due to M/s Jessops' lack of response Indian
Railways had to import critical spares for maintenance. These spares were procured
through Global Tenders since 1995 and M/s Jessops had not even participated in any
of these Global Tenders thus indicating either their inability or apathy to support
manufacture or maintenance of these Cranes. According to the Ministry, the Cranes
supplied by M/s Jessops against December, 1985 contract were with relieving bogies
which required extra preparatory time at the accident spots. Based on Indian Railway's
experience and developments overseas, the specifications for new Cranes were
reviewed and the revised specifications were called for Cranes. The Cranes without
relieving bogies required a complete redesigning of major structural assemblies for
which M/s Jessops neither had technology nor collaboration with M/s NEI (presently
M/s Cowans Sheldon) with them. The Committee have been informed that in view of
the above factors and importance of accident relief cranes, M/s Jessops was not
considered in tender for further procurement of Cranes.
9. Clarifying the point as to why further orders were not placed with M/s Jessops
as per decision taken in the meeting of Committee of Secretaries, the Ministry
explained as under:
"In 1984, when the decision was taken that, if the performance of Jessops
Cranes proved satisfactory, further requirement of Cranes would be met by
placement of orders on M/s Jessops, it was expected then that during the
currency of ToT Contract, M/s Jessops would gather sufficient know-how for
manufacture of 140 Tonne Diesel Hydraulic Breakdown Cranes. Since M/s Jessops
did not fulfil this condition further order was not placed on them. Thus it would
be seen that M/s Jessops were not in a position to either repair the old design of
Cranes or supply spares for these Cranes. In such a situation, when the Rail-
ways were decrying and heavily suffering from the poor response of M/s Jessops,
it would appear impudent, to again approach the very firm for further supply of
Cranes and that too of new upgraded design. It is submitted that it would not
have been possible for M/s Jessops to undertake manufacture of new design of
Cranes without obtaining the requisite Technology from M/s Cowans Sheldon
with whom their collaboration had already ended."
10. Intimating the status of indigenisation at Jamalpur workshop, the Ministry
stated:
"With regard to Jamalpur workshop, it is submitted that Railway Board had all
along been in favour of indigenous manufacture of 140 Tonne Cranes at this
Workshop. This is evident from the fact that along with the order placed on
 M/s Gottwald in 1985, the requisite Technology was got transferred to Jamalpur

5
Workshop. Under this Transfer of Technology Agreement, Jamalpur workshop
assembled and turned out three Cranes during 1988-90, which had been received
in complete knocked down condition from M/s Gottwald. Thereafter, Jamalpur
Workshop started the process of indigenisation of assemblies and components.
Since the technology was very complex and the number of Cranes to be manu-
factured was low, the indigenisation took time. Ultimately,Jamalpur Workshop
turned out two Cranes (using the kits supplied by M/s Gottwald) in 1994-95.The
last and third Crane using the kits was turned out by Jamalpur Workshop in June
1996. The indigenisation level achieved in these three Cranes was around 46%.
During this period, Jamalpur Workshop also created facilities for POH and repair
of 140 Tonne Cranes. It may please be noted that though last of the Cranes
(using the kits) was turned out By Jamalpur Workshop in June 1996, Railway
Board had povided funds to the tune of Rs. 32 Crores as early as in January, 1995
for indigenous manufacture of further 4 Nos. of Cranes. After rolling out the last
of these three Cranes in 1996, Jamalpur Workshop started the process of
indigenous development of most of the parts. Ultimately, most of the items were
successfully developed in India and the first indigenous 140 Tonne Crane with
70% indigenous content was manufactured by Jamalpur. Workshop in 1998-99.
After that, three more Cranes were manufactured in 1999-2000.Indigenisation of
the balance 30% items is not economically justified due to low volume required
by the Indian Railways."
11. Explaining the factors that led to import of 12 cranes, the Ministry in the action
taken note stated:
"Railway Board's decision of 1995-96 of importing 12 Cranes was taken against
the backdrop of the fact that the requirement of Cranes as voiced by all Zonal
Railways was very urgent and it was going to increase due to the rapid gauge
conversion work, there was a shortfall of 49 Cranes, production of Cranes at
Jamalpur Workshop had not yet stabilised. Further, by importing 12 Cranes
Indian Railways was going to get the two designs for indigenous manufacture,
incorporating latest technologies and features. It should be noted that there was
a net shortfall of 49 nos., as early as in 1995-96 and this figure was going up year
after year with additions due to New Lines & gauge conversion. We had
imported only 12 Cranes duly establishing infrastructure to manufacture the rest
in our Workshops. In case, Indian Railways had not resorted to import of 12
Cranes, the Cranes would not have been readily deployed and most importantly,
Indian Railways would have continued manufacture of just one design of Crane
at Jamalpur and that too not of the impoved design. In view of above, it is
submitted that the Indian Railways' decision of importing 12 Nos. 140 Tonne
Cranes of improved design was fully justified."
12. Recognising the emergent requirement of high capacity diesel powered break-
down cranes (140 T cranes) in Indian Railways for accident relief, the Committee in
their earlier Report had emphasized the need for a realistic assessment of these
cranes. The Committee had noted that there was a shortfall of 39 140 Tonne cranes as
per the assessment made by the Railway Board in the year 1994. The Committee's

6
examination also revealed that since the induction of these 140 Tonne cranes through
trade in 1984-85 with an agreement of Transfer of Technology (ToT), indigenous
expertise and infrastructure was created at two establishments viz. M/s Jessops &
Co. Calcutta and Jamalpur Workshop of Railways for manufacture of these cranes.
The Committee were, however, concerned to find that the Ministry of Railways
instead of exploring the possibility of their indigenous manufacture by the two Units
decided to import 12 cranes against the existing shortfall of 39 cranes. On the
question of firming up the requirement of cranes, the Committee do appreciate the
viewpoint of the Ministry that the requirement of cranes is a progressive figure
which goes up every year with addition of new lines and gauge conversion. In justifi-
cation of their decision to import cranes, the reasons adduced by the Ministry broadly
related to urgency of requirement, increasing gap between demand and supply which
rose to 49 in 1995-96 and non-availability of requisite indigenous technology at
Jamalpur Workshop at that point of time. The Committee have been informed that
M/s Jessops & Company was not considered for further procurement of cranes
because of its poor track record in delivery, maintenance and product support in
respect of cranes supplied to Railways in the past against the contract of 1985. It was
also added by the Ministry that with the revised specifications called for cranes in the
proposed import order, M/s Jessops was not in a position to manufacture the new
design cranes because they neither had the technology nor collaboration with M/s
Cowans Sheldon, UK, which was discontinued since 1992. Buttressing their argu-
ment further in favour of import of 12 cranes, the Ministry claimed that Indian
Railways also got two new designs for indigenous manufacture, incorporating latest
technologies and features. The Committee are extremely concerned to note that
there has been a persistent shortfall of 140 Tonne cranes against the estimated
requirements over the years. As a matter of fact, while there was a shortfall of 49
cranes in 1995-96 against the projected requirement of 73 cranes, the Indian Rail-
ways still had a huge shortfall of 40 cranes as against the assessed requirement of 80
cranes in April 2004. Having regard to the prevailing state of affairs, the Committee
are inclined to conclude that the Ministry have woefully failed to take appropriate
measures to remedy the situation. With the given trend, the Committee apprehend
that the growing requirement of cranes for ever expanding Indian Railways would
suffer in the long run and may be, at the time of urgently necessity, it would not be
possible for Railways to dispatch such cranes promptly.
What is further disquieting to observe is the fact that the Ministry have
failed to effectively pursue the envisaged indigenous manufacture of cranes which
started way back in 1986 with ToT from foreign vendors. Pertinently, while the
Ministry incurred an extra expenditure to the tune of Rs.14 crore with a view to
indigenising the manufacture of cranes by M/s Jessops, they failed to safeguard
their interest that M/s Jessops would manufacture the cranes for Railways in future
with the know-how obtained from M/s Cowans Sheldon, UK and that Railways would
not suffer due to termination of collaborative agreement with the company at any
stage. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry have merely stated that since M/s
Jessops failed to fulfil the agreement, further orders were not placed with the firm.
Expressing their dissatisfaction in the matter where the Company benefited at the

7
cost of the Exchequer and the Railways was denied the accrued benefits from its own
investment, the Committee would like the Ministry to apprise them about the action
taken against M/s Jessops for their failure to honour the agreement in terms of the
relevant provisions in ToT contract. As regards indigenous production of cranes at
Jamalpur workshop, the progress was extremely slow and the indigenisation level
achieved till 1996 was only around 46%. The Committee need hardly mention that
being a captive unit, the Ministry of Railways could have ensured that the technology
obtained from M/s Gottwald, West Germany was absorbed and indigenous manufac-
ture of cranes commenced swiftly by Jamalpur workshop so as to minizime import of
cranes.
From the foregoing, it is amply clear that the whole indigenisation programme
launched with the objective of fulfilling majority of the requirements of the 140
Tonne cranes was beset with delay and inept handling by the Ministry. The Committee
trust that steps would now be taken by the Ministry to ensure that the technology
obtained at considerable cost be perfected and absorbed at the designated units so as
to reap the maximum benefit from indigenisation and reduce the import to the barest
minimum. The Committee recommend that the Ministry should chalk out a definite
policy to progressively wipe out the widening gap between demand and supply of 140
Tonne cranes in the best interest of Indian Railways. They would also like to be
apprised of the latest availability of 140 Tonne cranes in the system vis-a-vis their
estimated requirement including steps taken to meet the shortfall, within a period of
three months.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH HA VE BEEN ACCEPTED BY
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Committee are surprised to note that at the instance of the Ministry of
Heavy Industry, an order of 12 cranes was placed on Jessop & Company; Calcutta in
December, 1985 instead of M/s NEI, UK. The Committee find that it was also decided in
August, 1984, that the order for further requirement of the cranes by the Railways
should be placed on Jessop, if their performance proved satisfactory. Total value of
the 24 cranes thus ordered worked out to Rs.67.40 crores including the cost of transfer
of technology and spares from M/s Gottwald and M/s NEI, UK. The German firm
completed the supply in 1986 and Jessop between March, 1988, and November, 1991.
These 24 cranes were deployed on Zonal Railways. The Committee have been in-
formed that the performance of those 24 cranes was satisfactory on the Railways after
some minor modifications were carried out in the initial stage in suspension system
and relieving body.
[Sl. No. 3 Appendix II Para 11 of 36th Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action taken
At the time of floating of Global Tender (GP-102) in 1982, M/s Jessops & Co.
had been manufacturing & Supplying altogether different type of Cranes, which find
usage in Steel Plants & Ports.
The technology for manufacture of 140 Tonne Diesel Hydraulic Railway Break-
down Cranes was NOT available in the country at that time. This is evident from the
fact that when Railway Board floated the Global Tender for procurement of 140 Tonne
Cranes, all the nine quotations that were received were from foreign firms only. NOT a
singly Indian firm had submitted its quotation. That M/s Jessops & Co., Calcutta, also
did NOT submit its offer explains the absence of know-how with them. Moreover, even
during the price negotiation process in 1985, M/s Jessops had CANDIDTLY
ADMITTED in a letter that they had not manufactured such type of Cranes in the past
and therefore, would have to spend some money in developing these Cranes, which in
other words meant that this technology had to be evolved by "trials and error" with
attendant risks.
When Railway Board, as per rules prevalent at that time, had sought
clearance of D.G.T.D. and Department of Heavy Industry for import of 140 Tonne
Cranes and the requisite Transfer of Technology from M/s NEI/UK, the Department of
Heavy Industry informed Railway Board that M/s Jessops had a collaborative agree-
ment with M/s NEI/UK and that they would be able to undertake manufacture of
Cranes for Railway's requirements also. Railway Board then placed the order on
8

9
M/s Jessops for supply of 12 Nos. 140 Tonne Diesel Hydraulic Breakdown Cranes.
Prior to placement of the order by Railway Board, M/s Jessops did not possess the
know-how and the technology for manufacture of 140 Tonne Diesel Hydraulic Break-
down Cranes. This technology was made available by M/s NEI, UK after award of
contract by Indian Railways on M/s Jessops and actual supplies of the Cranes were
made between 1988 to 1991 with delay of 43 months.
For procurement of Cranes in 1996-97, M/s Jessops was not considered
because their response to the contractual service calls for above mentioned 12 Cranes
of Railways was very poor, they had stopped responding to tenders for supply of
spares for maintenance of Cranes (for which they were contractually committed to
supply for life of the Crane) and they neither had technology, nor collaboration
(expired prior to 1991) to manufacture Cranes in accordance with the new specifica-
tions, which required a complete redesigning of major structural assemblies. Due to
the poor response of M/s Jessops, Railway suffered enormous difficulties in efficient
utilisation of Cranes supplied by M/s Jessops. Finally, Parel Workshop of Central
Railway was entrusted with the task of maintenance and POH of Jessops Cranes,
which handled this tortuous job quite commendably after lot of investment of time,
effort and money.
[M/o Railways' O.M. No. 2002/BC.PAC/XIII/36 dated 10-04-2003.]
Recommendation
The Committee find that there has been phenomenal increase in the occurrence of
major accidents on the Railways. The Committee have no doubt that the creation of
Central Disaster/Accident Management Authority can be of great help in such acci-
dents. The Committee would recommend that the question of creation of such an
authority should be examined in detail.
[Sl. No. 8 Appendix II Para 16 of 36th Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action taken
Committee's observation has been noted. The Ministry of Railways has already
set up a high-power Committee to look into all facets of Disaster Management.
[M/o Railways' O.M. No. 2002/BC/PAC/XIII/36 dated 10-04-2003.]

CHAPTER  III
OBSERVATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
 GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Committee note that breakdown cranes are a part of Accident Relief Trains
(ARTs). With the introduction of heavier freight stock and opening of new BG routes,
the need for induction of High Capacity Cranes was felt to meet this requirement.
Railway Board had placed an order for 4 Nos. of 120 tonne Cranes on Jamalpur work-
shop in 1972. As the progress of manufacture of these Cranes by the Jamalpur Work-
shop was slow, the order placed on this workshop in 1972 was cancelled by the
Railway Board in September, 1979. It was also then decided to procure 13 Nos. of
140 T cranes from trade. The Committee are unhappy to find that Jamalpur wokshop
failed to manufacture the 4 Nos. of 120 T Cranes till 1979 even after a period of  7 years
of the placement of the order in 1972, in spite of the fact that there was urgent need for
induction of these Cranes as a part of Accident Relief Trains. The Committee find that
Railway Board had constituted a Committee in December, 1982 to consider re-
organisation and modernisation of ARTs which was last re-organised in 1963. This
Committee submitted its Report in January, 1985 without making any recommenda-
tions as to the locations and the number of cranes required for the Indian Railways.
[Sl. No. 1 Appendix II Para 9 of 36th Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action taken
Till 1972, Jamalpur Workshop had been undertaking manufacture of very low
capacity Steam Cranes. It was in 1973 that Jamalpur Workshop turned out its first
batch of 75 Ton Steam Cranes. The first prototype 10 Ton Diesel Crane was turned out
by this Workshop in 1975.
In 1972, Railway Board asked the Research Design & Standard Organisation
(R.D.S.O.) to develop a design for 125/130 Tonne Capacity Diesel Breakdown Cranes.
However, due to reasons stated in the subsequent para, Jamalpur Workshop did not
develop the technology for manufacture of these Cranes. Further, the design details of
High Capacity Breakdown Cranes underwent a sea change due to phasing out of
steam technology and induction of heavier rolling stock such as BOX/BCX wagons
and Diesel/Electric locomotives.
Breakdown Crane design and manufacture involves, inter-alia, know-how on:
/circle4 Diesel Engine
/circle4  Electrics
10

11
/circle4  Hydraulics
/circle4  Pneumatics
/circle4 Vehicle Dynamics
This is a specialised area on a life saving equipment on which only few firms in the
world have developed expertise over many decades of protracted trial and error. It was,
therefore, necessary that we procured the best available technology and to manufac-
ture these cranes in the country to that technology. Further, the technology so brought
has to be tailored suit to our Indian condition of track, weather, speeds, rolling stock,
electric line clearance etc. It was, therefore, correctly decided to get some cranes built
by the manufacturer to these "India specific" requirements and to adopt the
technology thereafter for further manufacture.
As stated above, Breakdown Crane design is evolved over years of trials and
modifications and can not be perfected in the first or second attempt. Failure of Break-
down Cranes at an accident site has such a negative impact that is beyond explana-
tion. It was, therefore, necessary and prudent that we got the technology alongwith
few Cranes made to this technology as adopted to India, perfect this technology for
future manufacture in India for meeting requirement of balance Cranes. The fact that
even these Cranes made by the world leaders in their first attempt, needed modification
at a later stage further vindicates the Ministry's stance to import the technology
alongwih certain prototypes, and to adopt the technology after suitable field trials.
The terms of reference for the Committee, constituted in 1982, pertained to
Re-organisation and Modernisation of Accident Relief Trains. The Committee was not
asked to go into the issue of pin-pointing the locations of ARTs and number of Cranes,
because that was not in the Committee's brief. The Committee addressed the policy
issues, such as, composition of ARTs, capacity of Cranes, beat of ARTs, equipment
requirements, and other changes necessary for smooth operation in the wake of
introduction of heavier freight stock on the Railways. The exact requirement of ART is
a dynamic value that keeps going up with changes in gauge, new lines and technology.
The exact requirement was also NOT considered relevant since the number of Cranes
procured is a small fraction of over hundred cranes that existed in the country at that time.
(M/o Railways' O.M. No. 2002/BC/PAC/XIII/36 dated 10-04-2003).
Recommendation
The Committee observe that in March, 1982, the Railway Board had invited tender
for procurement of 12 Nos. of 140 T cranes with transfer of technology. Railway Board
after discussion with the Ministry of Finance approved on March 3, 1984, placement of
orders on two firms viz. M/s Gottwald, West Germany and M/s NEI, UK for supply of
12 Cranes each. The Committee are unhappy to note that the authorities failed o
approach M/s Jessops & Company in order to examine whether the company was in a
position to meet the requirement particularly when M/s Jessops & Company had
subsisting collaboration with M/s NEI, UK, for manufacture of the Cranes.
[Sl. No. 2,  Appendix II, Para 10 of 36th Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]

12
Action taken
At the time of floating of Global Tender (GP-102) in 1982, M/s Jessops & Co. had
been manufacturing & supplying altogether different types of Cranes, which find
usage in Steel Plants & Ports.
The technology for manufacture of 140 Tonne Diesel Hydraulic Railway Break-
down Cranes was NOT available in the country at that time. This is evident from the
fact that when Railway Board floated the Global Tender for procurement of 140 Tonne
Cranes, all the nine quotations that were received were from foreign firms only. NOT A
single Indian firm had submitted its quotation. That M/s Jessops & Co., Calcutta, also
did NOT submit its offer explains the absence of know-how with them. Moreover, even
during the price negotiation process in 1985, M/s Jessops had CANDIDTLY ADMIT-
TED in a letter that they had not manufactured such type of Cranes in the past and
therefore, would have to spend some money in developing these Cranes, which in
other words meant that this technology had to be evolved by "trials and error" with
attendant risks.
When Railway Board, as per rules prevalent at that time, had sought clearance of
D.G.T.D. and Department of Heavy Industries for import of 140 Tonne Cranes and the
requisite Transfer of Technology from M/s NEI, UK, the Department of Heavy
Industries informed Railway Board that M/s Jessops had a collaborative agreement
with M/s NEI, UK and that they would be able to undertake manufacture of Cranes for
Railway's requirements also. Railway Board then placed the order on M/s Jessops for
supply of 12 Nos. 140 Tonne Diesel Hydraulic Breakdown Cranes. Prior to placement
of the order by Railway Board, M/s Jessops did not possess the know-how and the
technology for manufacture of 140 Tonne Diesel Hydraulic Breakdown Cranes. This
technology was made available by M/s NEI, UK after award of contract by Indian
Railways on M/s Jessops and actual supplies of the Cranes were made between 1988
to 1991 with delay of 43 months.
For procurement of Cranes in 1996-97, M/s Jessops was not considered
because their response to the contractual service calls for above-mentioned 12
Cranes of Railways was very poor, they had stopped responding to tenders for
supply of spares for maintenance of Cranes (for which they were contractually
committed to supply for life of the Crane) and they neither had technology, nor
collaboration (expired prior to 1991) to manufacture Cranes in accordance with the
new specifications, which required a complete redesigning of major structural
assemblies. Due to the poor response of  M/s Jessops, Railway suffered enormous
difficulties in efficient utilisation of Cranes supplied by M/s Jessops. Finally, Parel
Workshop of Central Railway was entrusted with the task of maintenance and POH
of Jessops Cranes, which handled this tortuous job quite commendably after lot of
investment of time, effort and money.
[M/o Railways' O.M. No. 2002/BC/PAC/XIII/36 dated 10-04-2003.]

13
Recommendation
The High Level Study Team after visiting Germany and U.K. recommended that
Indian Railways should continue to manufacture cranes to Gottwald design and con-
tinue Transfer of Technology for another three years and that immediate shortage of
140 T crane should be got over by purchase from M/s Gottwald in order to supplement
production of Jamalpur for newly opened BG routes. The study team also recom-
mended that future strategy should be to procure the technology of telescopic boom
multi-tasking cranes of smaller capacity 120 Tonnes. The Committee observe that
these smaller cranes could be selectively deployed in addition to 140 T fixed boom
cranes. Surprisingly, the Railway do not favour the induction of telescopic boom
cranes as according to them, these cranes suffer from a number of disadvantages. The
Committee have no doubt that since both the indigenous and foreign tested sources
for the supply of 140 T cranes were available, there was absolutely no need to depute
the High Level Study Team to visit West Germany and U.K.
[Sl. No. 6,  Appendix II, Para 14 of 36th Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action taken
The Study Team had been deputed abroad to study the technological upgradation
in last decade in Breakdown Cranes & benefits derived by advanced railway systems,
innovations in respect of attending accidents in electrified territories & tunnels and
spot examination of manufacturing and other facilities of Crane manufacturers with a
view to suggesting future strategy for Indian Railways for acquiring Railway Accident
Relief Cranes.
2. The Study Team observed that a number of improvements had taken place in
the crane technology in the last decade. The following improvements were listed:
(i) Elimination of relieving bogies resulting in reduced set up time.
(ii) Based on the experience of the previous Cranes in order to enable unre-
stricted working under electrified territory, it was suggested that the Cranes
shall be either without 'A' frame or with modified design of 'A' frame.
(iii) Telescopic swing type outriggers with jack stacking support modules, which
reduces the amount of wood packing thereby reducing set up time.
(iv) Fast crane operation at accident site.
(v) Telescopic boom
(vi) Multi-tasking features such as utilization of Cranes for track laying, bridge
laying work, tackling of tunnel accidents, etc.
3. Items (i) to (iv) above were incorporated in the specification of the new
140 Tonne Crane. It was not found technically feasible/cost effective to incorporate
Items  (v) & (vi). The reasons are given below under the heading (120 Tonne Telescopic
Boom Cranes).

14
120 Tonne Telescopic Boom Cranes
4. The Study Team had recommended the 120 Tonne Telescopic Boom Cranes as
these were claimed to have the following advantages:
/circle4 Ability to operate in electrified territories without dismantling OHE.
/circle4 Multi-tasking feature for track and bridge work.
/circle4 Tackling the restoration inside tunnels.
5. After an in-depth study of the offers received against the Global Tender floated
by the Railway Board in 1996, the following intrinsic limitations of this type of Crane
came to light:—
/circle4Higher cost.
/circle4Capacity extremely limited while working under OHE.
/circle4Essentially suitable for track laying and not for heavy breakdown.
/circle4Hydraulic Re-railing Equipment can perform most of the jobs of telescopic
boom cranes more efficiently and economically.
/circle4 Absorption of this technology would have been time-consuming.
/circle4These Cranes would have been more difficult to maintain. Being mainte-
nance intenstive, operation and maintenance of these Cranes would have
been costly.
6. In view of limitation of 120 Tonne Telescopic Boom Crane and the Railway's
resource position, it was decided not to go ahead with the import and induction of this
technology.
7. The Study Team which went to Germany and UK in November 95, judged the
gap between the facilities available at Jamalpur workship and those at the works of
M/s Gottwald and M/s Cowans Boyd. The Study Team also observed the manufactur-
ing capability of above-mentioned manufacturers by visiting their design offices as
well as workshops. A feedback was also taken by the Study Team after visiting the
premises of user Railways. The major improvements brought out by the Study Team,
which has a bearing in
/circle4  reducing set-up time in an emergency
/circle4 working on electrified territory without switching off OHE on adjoining line
so as to allow relief trains
/circle4 multi-tasking
/circle4 design for higher speeds, etc.

15
are so important and path-breaking that it is submitted that the visit of the Study Team
had amply justified itself.
[M/o Railways' O.M. No. 2002/BC/PAC/XIII/36 dated 10-04-2003.]
Recommendation
The Committee note that in January, 1996, the Railway Board issued a limited
tender to M/s Gottwald and M/s Cowans Sheldon (erstwhile M/s NEI, UK). The com-
petent authority approved the procurement of 16 cranes on 29 September, 1996. In
January 1997/March 1998, the Railway Board placed two orders for 12 more
140 T cranes at Rs.132.30 crores. The Committee find that while placing these two
orders, the lowest technically suitable offer of another German firm (M/s Kirow) was
ignored. According to Audit, this resulted in an extra expenditure of Rs.60 crores. The
Committee have been informed that even the Tender Committee had admitted that the
offer of M/s Kirow was much lower than that of M/s Gottwald and M/s Cowans
Sheldon. The Railways have not yet confirmed the actual loss suffered by them by
ignoring the offer of M/s Kirow. The Committee also deprecate the lack of seriousness
on the part of Railway Board to affect all possible savings in the matter of procurement
of costly machinery.
[Sl. No. 7,  Appendix II, Para 15 of 36th Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The offer of M/s Kirow against the limited tender was not opened being
unsolicited offer. As such the rate quoted by M/s Kirow is not known. It is also not
possible to state whether quoted rate was lowest and the offer was technically suit-
able. No offer from M/s Kirow, therefore, was available to the tender committee for
consideration. However, tender committee, based on a letter dated 15.2.96 from
M/s Kirow mentioned that package price indicated by the firm in their letter was only
marginally lower than the prices at which ordering had been recommended by the
tender committee on M/s Gottwald and M/s Cowans Sheldon. It is mentioned that
Kirow's package price, as indicated in their letter, was DM 24,525,000 compared to
Gottwald/Cowans Sheldon's ordered price of DM 24,600,000. Even assuming that pack-
age price indicated in M/s Kirow's letter dated 15.02.96 was the same as in their offer
(which was not opened), the price differential was not substantial being only DM
75,000 (Rs.16.5 lakh and NOT Rs.60 crores as observed) for 8 cranes between the new
type of crane offered by Kirow and the ordered cranes on Gottwald and Cowans
Sheldon. It is further stated that M/s Kirow had offered to supply Crane (without
Match Truck) to Konkan Railway in June ‘94 at unit FOB rate of DM 2.89 million
(Rs.5.90 crore) as against Gottwald/Cowans Sheldon's comparable price of DM 2.95
million (without Match Truck) after 2 years i.e. in August  ‘96. It is, therefore, submitted
that the procurement was made in all seriousness, taking total life cycle costs, cost of
carrying spares, suitability of crane technology, at competitive prevailing rates and no
extra expenditure was incurred.
[M/o Railways' O.M. No. 2002/BC/PAC/XIII/36 dated 10-04-2003.]

16
Recommendation
The foregoing paragraphs reveal lack of concerted and purposive approach on the
part of the Railways in the matter of procurement of costly machinery. Not only the
existing and tested indigenous sources were ignored in such procurement but huge
avoidable extra expenditure was also incurred. The Committee believe that Railways
would learn appropriate lessons from such costly lapses and take necessary steps to
avoid recurrence of such lapses. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the
concrete remedial steps taken in this regard.
[Sl. No. 9,  Appendix II,  Para 17 of 36th Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action taken
After perusal of the Railway Board's reply to Recommendation No. 13, the Hon'ble
Committee will agree that:
/circle4The requirement of Cranes was urgent.
/circle4M/s Jessops had given very poor response in the past and since they did
not have the capability to repair or arrange spares for the Cranes earlier
supplied by them, manufacture of Cranes as per the new upgraded specifi-
cations would not have been possible for them.
/circle4Production of Cranes at Jamalpur workshop had not yet stabilised and the
production rate was not commensurate with the urgent requirement.
/circle4The Workshop was busy at that time in indigenous development of various
equipments and was also interacting with a large number of Indian equip-
ment manufacturers.
/circle4Along with the import of just 12 Nos. of Cranes, Indian Railways was going
to get the requisite technology for indigenous manufacture of two new
upgraded designs of 140 Tonne Cranes transferred to Jamalpur and Parel
Workshops on free-of-cost basis.
In view of above, it is once again submitted that the decision to import 12 Cranes
did not indicate lack of concerted approach on the part of Railways and nor could the
import of these life saving equipment in an environment of snowballing addition to
broad gauge track be termed as a huge avoidable expenditure.
For undertaking manufacture of Gottwald design of Cranes, Jamalpur Workshop
has now fully assimilated the technology. And insofar as manufacture of Cowans
Sheldon design of Cranes is concerned, unlike in the past when the technology was
available with M/s Jessops, an organisation outside the purview of Indian Railways,
this time the new advanced technology is available with us, the Parel Workshop of
Indian Railways.
The Committee's observation would, however, be kept in mind and utmost care
will be taken in every future case of technology imports, apart from endeavouring to
avoid such imports altogether.
[M/o Railways’ O.M. No. 2002/BC/PAC/XIII/36 dated 10-04-2003.]

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation
The Committee note that in 1994, a global review of ARTs was done by Railway
Board in consultation with Zonal Railways and requirement of  'A' class  ARTs equipped
with 140 T cranes on BG worked out at 63. This requirement figure was worked out on
the basis of review of global basis rather than any territorial perspective.  As 24 cranes
had already been procured or were under manufacture, 39 Nos. 140 Tonne Cranes were
additionally required. The Committee feel that at no stage the authorities worked out
their requirement for these cranes realistically. The Committee would emphasis the
need for adopting realistic methods for working out such urgent and important re-
quirement keeping in view the existing state-of-the-art technology.
[Sl. No. 4, Appendix II, Para 12 of 36th Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action taken
Reviews of Accident Relief Trains on Indian Railways have been done on the
basis of requirements projected by the Zonal Railways themselves. A 140 Tonne Crane
attends to accidents in a beat that may cover different Railways and is not confined to
the geographical limits of the Railway, which owns it. As explained earlier —
/circle4The requirement of Crane is a dynamic figure. At any point in time, this
number would depend upon factors such as, gauge conversion, importance
of section in terms of traffic hauled, number of trains, geographical loca-
tions, topography, pattern of traffic, maintenance infrastructure, condition
of existing over-aged Steam Cranes, etc.
/circle4Even the value of 63 Nos. as worked out in 1994 has undergone a major
change with addition of over 8,000 kms. of BG track in the intervening years
by way of conversion/new lines/doubling.
/circle4Even as of today, when the requirement is over 80 Cranes, IR has only
40 Diesel Cranes and manufacture 4 to 6 Cranes per annum.
When IR started replacing steam locos with Diesel Locomotives in 1962 they did
not assess the total requirement of diesel Loco; a figure that keeps going up even
today. Likewise, it is submitted that the need for assessing total requirement in 1994
was only of academic value and did not impinge on any of the decisions of Crane
manufacture for at least in the next one decade.
[M/o Railways' O.M. No. 2002/BC/PAC/XIII/36 dated 10-04-2003.]
17

18
Query of Audit
In their follow up action on Public Accounts Committee's recommendations that
realistic methods need to be adopted for working out requirement of important and
urgent items (cranes in this case) keeping in view the existing state-of-the-art technol-
ogy, Ministry of Railways states that against their present requirement for 80 cranes,
Indian Railways have only 40 diesel cranes.
In their reply, Ministry of Railways has, however, not spelt out for Public
Accounts Committee's kind information the basis on which the requirement has been
worked out at 80 cranes and whether the basis adopted is realistic.
Railway's Reply to the Query of Audit
The Committee on "Re-organisation and Modernization of the Accident Relief
Trains”  in its report in 1985 had recommended that the beat of the Accident Relief
Train on Broad Gauge should be about 250 to 300 kms. In other words, each Crane can
cover a distance of approximately 500 kms. of track in a linear section, 750 kms. of track
if placed in a tri-junction, etc., from the junction station in which it is positioned.
Indian Railways' Broad Gauge network is spread over 45,000 route kms. With the
above guidelines in mind, the entire Railway map was scanned and in 1995, the require-
ment was assessed at 73 Cranes in order that every point on the entire BG track is
covered by a Crane within 250 to 300 kms. This was discussed in the conference of
Chief Motive Power Engineers in charge of disaster management and minor adjust-
ments made suitably in the locations. During this meeting, Eastern, NF, NE and SE
Railways even pressed for more Cranes than what were provided within the plans.
This was further firmed up in a Powerpoint presentation made to the Zonal General
Managers.
In 1995, the requirement of 140 Tonne BG Cranes was worked out as 73 Nos.    This
requirement goes up every year with addition of new lines and gauge conversion. For
example, during the 10th Five-year Plan a total of 3750 kms. of BG track is to be added.
We manufacture about 4 to 6 Cranes only every year. Since we have 41 Cranes today
in the system, there is a wide gap between demand and supply. The requirement is
itself a figure moving far ahead of the 41 and 73 Cranes at a rate solely dependent on
the flow of funds for new lines and gauge conversion, which is rather uncertain. It is
therefore, submitted any fine tuning of this figure at this point in time would only be
academic in nature. Suffice to say that there would be no occasion in the foreseeable
future when we have more Cranes than is necessary.
[M/o Railways' O.M. No. 2002/BC/PAC/XIII/36 dated 10-04-2003.]
Recommendation
The Committee are surprised to find that in order to meet the shortfall of 39 140 T
cranes, the Railway Board failed to approach M/s. Jessops and Co., Calcutta, nor did
they place any order on Jamalpur Workshop for manufacture of 140 T cranes in spite of
the fact that Jamalpur Workshop had infrastructure for manufacture of 4 Nos. of 140 T
cranes per year. Instead, in October, 1995, the Railway Board deputed a high level

19
Study Team to Germany and U.K. to study the Accident Relief Trains being used and
to visit the Works of M/s Gottwald, Cowans Sheldon and Kirow. The Committee have
no doubt that the authorities should have interacted with Jessop and Co., Calcutta and
Jamalpur Workshop so as to utilise the indigenous know-how and manufacturing
capabilities created in these organisations particularly when M/s. Jessop and  Co., had
already supplied 12 140 T cranes to Railways and their performance had been quite
satisfactory. Such a course was all the more necessary when it was inter alia decided
at the meeting of the Committee of Secretaries held in 1984 that order for further
requirement of cranes by the Railways should be placed on M/s Jessop if their perfor-
mance proved satisfactory. The Committee note that the Railways failed to exploit the
existing and proven indigenous expertise and infrastructure possessed by M/s. Jessop
& Co., inspite of such a decision taken at the Committee of  Secretaries.
[Sl. No. 5 Appendix II Para 13 of 36th Report of PAC (13th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In 1992, M/s Jessops had advised that their U.K. collaborator, NEI, had withdrawn
their support for supply of materials, spares and services at site. This caused
M/s. Jessops tremendous hardship both for achieving the required speed certificate
and later for servicing of Cranes and supply of spares.
As per contract with M/s Jessops, delivery of the first Crane was to be made
within 18 months from the contract and subsequently one Crane per month, thus
completing the supply of all the 12 Cranes within 29 months from the date of the
contract, i.e. April 88. Actual supplies of the Cranes were however made between 1988
to 1991, with delay of 43 months.
M/s. Jessops STOPPED responding to the tenders for spares being issued by
Railways even on proprietary basis. They had also stopped attending to service calls
on the plea that warranty period was over. A meeting was held in Board's office in May
94 wherein the view of RDSO and all the user Railways were obtained in this regard
particularly for maintenance and procurement of spares, etc. It was also brought out in
the note consequent to the meeting held  in May 94 that Jessops had conceded that
most of these components were not manufactured by them but would be imported
from the original manufacturer. Practically, all  the Railways using Jessops Cranes
decried the poor response being given by M/s. Jessops in supply of spares and other
support services. Some of the specific cases are as under:—
(a)  SLI system of Gooty Crane, which gave problem, was attended to by M/s.
Jessop's service engineer thrice but could not be rectified. The complaint
made on 16.07.1992 was not attended to for almost 2 years despite repeated
requests from Southern Railway.
(b)  A minor derailment  of Kankaria Crane in March, 1995, resulted in develop-
ment of cracks on the transverse member of one of the bogies of the Crane.
Despite requests from Western Railway, M/s Jessops did not agree to

20
participate in any discussion to help in evolving a repair procedure. Ulti-
mately Railway Board had to intervene in the matter.
(c) South Central Railway reported to M/s Jessops in August, 1994 about the
failure of ENERPAC pump on Vijaywada Crane. When the same was not
repaired till June, 1995, South Central Railway requested Railway Board for
intervention.
It is also pertinent to mention here that due to M/s Jessop's lack of response
Indian Railways had to import critical spares for maintenance. These spares were
procured through Global Tenders since 1995 and M/s Jessops had NOT EVEN partici-
pated in any of these Global Tenders thus indicating either their inability or apathy to
support manufacture or maintenance of these Cranes.
The Cranes supplied by M/s Jessops against December, 1985 contract were with
relieving  bogies which required extra preparatory time at the accident spots. Based on
Indian Railway's experience and developments overseas, the specifications for new
Cranes were reviewed and the revised specifications called for Cranes with:
(i) Without relieving bogies with a view to reducing initial setting up time at
the accident site.
(ii) Jib is longer by 1 meter thereby increasing the area of coverage without
loss of lifting capacity.
(iii) Crane is either with modified A-frame or without A-frame for better
flexibility of operation.
(iv) Bogie design permits changing of broken springs without running out bo-
gies to reduce the repair time.
(v) Safe Load Indicator (Electronic control for safety of operation) is upgraded
using solid state electronic components.
(vi) Hydraulic Motors and Pumps are with higher speed of operation at
accident site.
The Cranes without relieving bogies required a complete redesigning of major
structural assemblies for which M/s Jossops neither had technology nor collaboration
with M/s NEI (presently M/s Cowans Sheldon) with them.
In view of the above factors and importance of accident relief cranes, M/s Jessops
was not considered in tender for further procurement of Cranes.
As a result of Railway's uni-gauge policy and construction of more BG lines there
was a further increase in the requirement of these Cranes. Keeping in view the urgency,
it was decided to buy 8 Nos. of 140 T Cranes from established and proven suppliers
whose Cranes have been working on the Indian Railway system for the last 6-7 years
and which can be deployed immediately. For the other 4 Nos. it was decided to induct
a new design of 120 T Cranes through a Global Tender.

21
It is significant that in the above-mentioned Global Tender for 4 Nos. of 120 Tonne
Telescopic Boom Cranes also M/s Jessops DID NOT participate, although M/s Cowans
Sheldon (the then M/s NEI) did quote.
In 1984, when the decision was taken that, if the performance of Jessops Cranes
proved satisfactory, further requirement of Cranes would be met by placement of
orders on M/s Jessops, it was expected then that during the currency of ToT Contract,
M/s Jessops would gather sufficient know-how for manufacture of 140 Tonne Diesel
Hydraulic Breakdown Cranes. Since M/s Jessops did not fulfil this condition, further
order was not placed on them.
Thus, it would be seen that M/s Jessops were not in a position to either repair the
old design of Cranes or supply spares for these Cranes. In such a situation, when the
Railways were decrying and heavily suffering from the poor response of M/s Jessops,
it would appear imprudent, to again approach the very firm for further supply of
Cranes, and that too of new upgraded design. It is submitted that it would NOT have
been possible for M/s Jessops to undertake manufacture of new design of Cranes
without obtaining  the requisite Technology from M/s Cowans Sheldon with whom
their collaboration had already ended.
In the present order placed by Indian Railways, the ToT is available with the Parel
Workshop of Central Railway. Since this Workshop has undergone the trauma of
overhauling these Cranes without the support from M/s Jessops and learnt the basics
of the technology the hard way, with marginal inputs the existing facility has been
upgraded for undertaking manufacture of new design of Cranes. The new facility will
also be useful for further improving the productivity of heavy repairs and Periodical
Overhauling (POH) of Cranes.
In a nutshell, Indian Railways took the right decision of not approaching
M/s Jessops, which in the past had given not only poor response to the Railways, but
also failed to repair the Cranes supplied by it, and to provide spares for the same. On
the other hand, Parel Workshop, to which the technology has now been transferred, is
a workshop of the Indian Railways, with the required infrastructure fully capable of
undertaking repair/POH of Cranes for years.
With regard to Jamalpur workshop, it is submitted that Railway Board had all
along been in favour of indigenous manufacture of 140 Tonne Cranes at this Work-
shop. This is evident from the fact that along with the order placed on M/s Gottwald in
1985, the requisite Technology was got transferred to Jamalpur Workshop. Under this
Transfer of Technology Agreement, Jamalpur workshop assembled and turned out
three Cranes during 1988-90, which had been received in complete knocked down
condition from M/s Gottwald. Thereafter, Jamalpur Workshop started the process of
indigenisation of assemblies and components. Since the technology was very com-
plex and the number of Cranes to be manufactured was low, the indigenisation took
time. Ultimately, Jamalpur Workshop turned out two Cranes (using the kits supplied by
M/s Gottwald) in 1994-95. The last and third Crane using the kits was turned out by
Jamalpur Workshop in June, 1996. The indigenisation level achieved in these three
Cranes was around 46%. During this period, Jamalpur Workshop also created facilities

22
for POH and repair of 140 Tonne Cranes. It may please be noted that though last of the
Cranes (using the kits) was turned out by Jamalpur Workshop in June, 1996, Railway
Board had provided funds to the tune of Rs. 32 crores as early as in January, 1995 for
indigenous manufacture of further 4 Nos. of Cranes.
After rolling out the last of these three Cranes in 1996, Jamalpur Workshop started
the process of indigenous development of most of the parts. Ultimately, most of the
items were successfully developed in India, and the first indigenous 140 Tonne Crane,
with 70% indigenous content, was manufactured by the Jamalpur Workshop in
1998-99. After that, three more Cranes were manufactured in 1999-2000. Indigenisation
of the balance 30% items is not economically justified due to low volume required by
the Indian Railways.
Railway Board's decision of 1995-96 of importing 12 Cranes was taken against the
backdrop of the fact that the requirement of Cranes as voiced by all Zonal Railways
was very urgent and  it was going to increase due to the rapid gauge conversion work,
there was a shortfall of 49 Cranes, production of Cranes at Jamalpur Workshop had not
yet stabilised. Further, by importing 12 Cranes Indian Railways was going to get the
two designs for indigenous manufacture, incorporating latest technologies and
features.
It should be noted that there was a net shortfall of 49 Nos., as early as in 1995-96
and this figure was going up year after year with additions due to New Lines and
gauge conversion. We had imported only 12 Cranes duly establishing infrastructure to
manufacture the rest in our Workshops.
In case, Indian Railways had not resorted to import of 12 Cranes, the Cranes
would not  have been readily deployed and most importantly, Indian Railways would
have continued manufacture of just one design of Crane at Jamalpur and that too not
of the improved design.
In view of above, it is submitted that the Indian Railways' decision of importing
12 Nos. 140 Tonne Cranes of improved design was fully justified.
[M/o Railways' O.M.No. 2002/BC/PAC/XIII/36 dated 10-04-2003.]
Query of Audit
In reply to Public Accounts Committee's conclusion that Ministry of Railways
failed to exploit the existing indigenous sources viz. M/s Jessops & Co. and Jamalpur
Workshop for procurement of cranes before deputing a Study Team abroad and
placing orders on foreign firms. Ministry of Railways states that:
/circle4An order for 12 cranes was placed on M/s Jessops at the instance of Min-
istry of Heavy Industries. Prior to placement of order, M/s Jessops had no
technical know-how to manufacture the type of crane in question. They
had, however, been manufacturing other types of cranes used in Steel Plants
and Ports. when the contract was awarded to them, they were provided
necessary technical know-how by M/s NEI, UK with whom they had a
subsisting collaborative agreement. But company's performance in delivery

23
schedules and post delivery maintenance of cranes in the previous
supplies was not satisfactory. The company also did not have the
know-how necessary for the upgraded design of cranes proposed to be
procured. In view of this, M/s Jessops were not considered for any orders
for the proposed procurement (1995-96).
/circle4An order for 12 cranes was placed on M/s Gottwald, West Germany in
November 1984 with Transfer of Technology in Workshop Jamalpur to
indigenise the manufacture of this type of crane. Till June 1996 the
indigenisation level achieved by the Workshop was only 46 per cent.
/circle4Against the backdrop of the above and the shortage of 49 cranes reported
from Zonal Railways, Ministry of Railways had to resort to import of cranes.
The reply is not tenable because:
 Ministry of Railways incurred an expenditure  of Rs. 43.38 crore (excluding cost of
spares) of 12 cranes from M/s Jessops against an expenditure of Rs. 29.21 crore on
procurement for the same number of cranes of similar type from M/s Gottwald, West
Germany. The extra cost of Rs. 14 crore was incurred with a view to indigenising the
manufacture of cranes by M/s Jessops. Despite this heavy extra expenditure (Rs. 14
crore) Ministry of Railways failed to safeguard Railways' interests that M/s Jessops
would manufacture the cranes for Railways in future with the know-how obtained from
M/s NEI, UK and that Railways would not suffer due to termination of collaborative
agrrement with  M/s NEI, UK at any stage. Ministry of Railways has  also not spelt out
whether they interacted direct or through Ministry  of Heavy Industries and  Ministry
of Finance to ascertain from M/s Jessops their capability to manufacture the cranes of
the proposed upgraded design so as to benefit from the know-how indigenised  by
them at Railways' cost.
As regards indegenous production of cranes in Workshops Jamalpur, a
10 year TOT agreement with M/s Gottwald was valid up to March 1996. During this
period, the workshop could absorb about 46 per cent of indigenous content. The pace
of work also was so slow that  an order of 4 cranes placed on workshop in January
1995, by Railway Board could be completed only in March 2000. Being a captive unit,
the Ministry  of Railways could have ensured that the technology was absorbed  and
indigenous manufacture of cranes commenced quickly by Jamalpur Workshop so as
to avoid or minimize import of cranes.
Reply to the Query of Audit
M/s Jessops
At  the time of floating of Limited Tender LT-38, M/s Jessops was not approached
because the new specifications called for Cranes without  relieving bogies, which
required a complete redesigning of major structural assemblies for which M/s Jessops
neither  had technology nor on-going collaboration with M/s NEI further,
(a) M/s Jessops had itself conceded that most of the components were not manu-
factured by it but were outsourced from original manufacturer through import.

24
(b) M/s Jessops had stopped attending  to service calls of the Railways.
(c) M/s Jessops had also discontinued providing spares for maintenance.
(d) M/s Jessops had not participated in any of the Global  Tenders floated by
Indian Railways for procurement of spares, which indicated their inability or
apathy to support manufacture or maintenance of these Cranes.
In view of above, it would have been impossible for M/s Jessops to under-
take manufacture of new design of cranes without obtaining the requisite technology
from M/s NEI with whom their  collaboration had already ended.
Since the technology for the new design of Cranes had to be got transferred,
Indian Railways took the right decision of getting Gottwald design technology
transferred to Jamalpur Workshop and Cowans design technology transfered to Parel
Workshop, which had available with it the required infrasturucture and had been
undertaking repair/POH of Cranes for years.
Moreover, it may please be noted that Indian Railways have been in the
forefront of encouraging indigenous manufacturers such as BHEL, SAIL, etc. How-
ever, in a critical equipment such as Crane which  has important bearing on speedy
restoration of through traffice  at the time of accidents, reliable performance of equip-
ment on a sustained basis with nil probability of failure on line far outweighs other
considerations.
Procurement of Cranes needs to be seen against this backdrop.
Jamalpur Workshop
It  may please be noted that 46% indigenisation level achieved at Jamalpur
Workshop was against those 3 Cranes, which  were manufactured, using the kits.
These kits for 3 Cranes formed part of the 1985-86 Supply Order of 12 Cranes placed on
M/s Gottwald. Naturally, only those items, which did not form part of the kits, wer
indigenised. The indigenisation level achieved in the first indigenous Crane manufac-
tured by Jamalpur Workshop in 1998-99 was as high as 70%.
Moreover, it may please be noted that there is a difference between assimila-
tion and indigenisation of technology. The technology had been assimilated to the
extent of 100% but only 70% of the items were manufactured indigenously. Rest of the
items were  imported. World over, manufacturers of all major complex items of
engineering don't manufacture all the items themselves.  They  manufacture some of
the items themselves and source the remaining items  from various  vendors, who have
already perfected the technology and manufacture these items in such large scale that
economics of their manufacture naturally work out favourable for them. They sell
these items either to other global crane manufacturers or  users of other industries. Till
1998-99, 30% of the total items could not be manufactured in India, because the
number of cranes to be manufactured in India was low and therefore, there was little
incentive for the Indian Manufacturers to attempt indigenisation of these complex
items. In many items, even if an Indian manufacturer had succeeded in indigenising
them, the ultimate cost would have been higher than the landed price of imported ones.

25
Till June 1996, Jamalpur Workshop was busy manufacturing the Cranes received
in kit form. During the period from June 1996 to 1998-99 when the first indigenous
Crane was trurned out, Jamalpur W orkshop concentrated on increasing the
indigenous level. Now, Jamalpur Workshop has started manufacturing 5-6 Cranes per
annum.
It may be noted that by importing 12 Cranes against 1997-98 tender, Indian
Railways also got two new designs for indigenous manufacture, incorporating latest
technologies and features.
[M/o Railways' O.M. No. 2002/BC/PAC/XIII/36 dated 10-04-2003.]

CHAPTER  V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
-NIL-
26
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
27 October, 2004 Chairman,
5 Kartika, 1926 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

PART  II
MINUTES  OF  THE  FIFTH  SITTING  OF  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)  HELD  ON  13TH  OCTOBER,  2004
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1745 hrs. in Room No. 53, Parliament House,
New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Dr. R. Senthil
6. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
7. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
9. Shri R.K. Dhawan
10. Dr. K. Malaisamy
11. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
12. Shri Jairam Ramesh
13. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri P.D.T.  Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
5. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
27

28
Representatives of the office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Anusua Basu — ADAI (RC)
2. Dr. A.K. Banerjee — Director General of Audit
 (Central Revenue)
Representatives of the Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment
1. Smt. Sarita Prasad — Secretary
2. Shri P. Narayana Murthy — Joint Secretary
3. Shri M. Sahoo — Joint Secretary & Financial Adviser
Representatives of the Ministry of Urban Employment & Poverty Alleviation
1. Smt. Chitra Chopra — Secretary
2. Shri M.N. Mathur — Economic Adviser
3. Dr. P.S. Rana — CMD, HUDCO
4. Shri U.S. Pant — Chief Controller of Accounts
Representative of the Ministry of Rural Development
(Department of Drinking Water Supply)
Smt. Lalitha Kumar — Joint Secretary
2. *** *** *** ***
3. Before, evidence, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption the
following draft reports:
(i) Action taken on the recommendations contained in the 36th Report of PAC
(13th Lok Sabha) relating to "Avoidable import of high capacity diesel powered break-
down cranes".
(ii) *** *** *** ***
4. The Committee adopted these draft Reports without any modifications/amend-
ments. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the draft Report in the light
of changes suggested by Audit through factual verification, if any, or otherwise and to
present the same to Parliament.
5. *** *** *** ***
6. A copy of the verbatim proceedings of the sitting has been kept on record.
The Committee then adjourned.

APPENDIX
OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Para Ministry Observations/Recommendations
No.
12. Railways Recognising the emergent requirement of high
(Railway Board) capacity diesel powered breakdown cranes (140 T
cranes) in Indian Railways for accident relief, the
Committee in their  earlier Report had emphasized
the need for a  realistic assessment of these cranes.
The Committee had noted that there was a shortfall
of 39 140 Tonne cranes as per the assessment made
by the Railway Board in the year 1994. The
Committee's examination also revealed that since the
induction of these 140 Tonne cranes through trade
in 1984-85 with an agreement of Transfer of  Tech-
nology (TOT), indigenous expertise and infrastruc-
ture was created at two establishments viz .
M/s Jessops & Co. Calcutta and Jamalpur Work-
shop of Railways for manufacture of these cranes.
The Committee were, however, concerned to find that
the Ministry of Railways instead of exploring the
possibility of their indigenous manufacture by the
two Units decided to import 12   cranes against the
existing shortfall of 39 cranes. On the question of
firming up the requirement of cranes, the Committee
do appreciate the viewpoint of the Ministry that the
requirement of cranes is a progressive figure which
goes up every year with addition of new lines and
guage conversion. In justification of their decision
to import cranes, the reasons adduced by the Minis-
try broadly related to urgency of requirement, in-
creasing gap between demand and supply which rose
to 49 in 1995-96 and non-availability of requisite in-
digenous technology at Jamalpur Workshop at that
point of time. The Committee have been informed
that M/s Jessops & Company was not considered
for further procurement of cranes because of its poor
track record in delivery, maintenance and product
support in respect of cranes supplied to Railways in
the past against the contract of 1985. It was also
29

30
added by the Ministry that with the revised specifi-
cations called for cranes in the proposed import
order, M/s Jessops was not in a position to manufac-
ture the new design cranes because they  neither
had the technology nor collaboration with M/s
Cowans Sheldon, UK, which was discontinued since
1992. Buttressing their argument further in favour of
import of 12 cranes, the Ministry claimed that Indian
Railways also got two new designs for indigenous
manufacture, incorporating latest technologies and
features.
The Committee are extremely concerned to note that
there has been a persistent shortfall of 140 Tonne
cranes against the estimated requirements over the
years. As a matter of fact, while there was a shortfall
of 49 cranes in 1995-96 against the projected require-
ment of 73 cranes, the Indian Railways still had a
huge shortfall of 40 cranes as against the assessed
requirement of 80 cranes in April 2004. Having
regard to the prevailing state of  affairs, the Commit-
tee are inclined to conclude that the Ministry have
woefully failed to take appropriate measures to rem-
edy the situation. With the given trend, the Commit-
tee apprehend that the growing requirement of cranes
for ever expanding Indian Railways would suffer in
the long run and may be at the time of urgent
necessity, it would not be possible for Railways to
dispatch suchm cranes promptly.
What is further disquieting to observe is the fact
that the Ministry have failed to effectively pursue
the envisaged indigenous manufacture of cranes
which started way back in 1986 with TOT from
foreign vendors. Pertinently, while the Ministry in-
curred an extra expenditure to the tune of Rs. 14 crore
with a view to indigenising the manufacture of cranes
by M/s Jessops, they failed to safeguard their inter-
est that M/s Jessops would manufacture the cranes
for Railways in future with the know-how obtained
from M/s Cowans Sheldon, UK and that Railways
would not suffer due to termination of collaborative
agreement with the company at any state. In their
Action Taken Note, the Ministry have merely stated
Para Ministry Observations/Recommendations
No.

31
that since M/s  Jessops failed to fulfil the agreement,
further orders were not placed with the firm. Express-
ing their dissatisfaction in the matter where the Com-
pany benefited at the cost of the Exchequer and the
Railways was denied the accrued benefits from its
own investment, the Committee would like the
Ministry to apprise them about the action taken
against M/s  Jessops for their failure to honour the
agreement in terms of the relevent provisions in TOT
contract. As regards indigenous production of cranes
at Jamalpur workshop, the progress was extremely
slow and the indigenisation level achieved till 1996
was only around 46% . The Committee need hardly
mention that being a captive unit, the Ministry of
Railways  could have  ensured that the technology
obtained from M/s Gottwald, West Germany was
absorbed and indigenous manufacture of cranes
commenced swiftly by Jamalpur workshop so as to
minimize import of cranes.
Para Ministry Observations/Recommendations
No.
MGIPMRND—2734LS—23-11-2004