SIXTY-THIRD REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
NATIONAL AIDS CONTROL PROGRAMME
(MINISTRY OF HEALTH AND FAMILY WELFARE)
(DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH)
[Action Taken on 19th Report of Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 13.03.2008
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 13.03.2008
LOK  SABHA   SECRETARIA T
NEW   DELHI
January, 2008/Pausa, 1929 (Saka)

PAC. No. 1859
Price:  Rs. 97.00
© 2008 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi-110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE (2007-2008) ............................  (iii)
INTRODUCTION ....................................................................................................... (v)
CHAPTER I Report ..................................................................................... 1
CHAPTER  II Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted
by the Government ................................................................ 20
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government ............................................................................ 69
C
HAPTER  IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration ................................................. 72
C
HAPTER  V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
Government have furnished interim replies ........................... 86
PART II
Minutes of the Sitting of the Public Accounts Committee
(2007-2008) held on 9th January, 2008 ................................... 90

COMPOSITION  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2007-2008)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra   —   Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
5. Shri R.L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
8. Dr. Rajesh Mishra
9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
11. Shri K.S. Rao
12. Shri Mohan Singh
13. Shri Rajiv Ranjan ‘Lalan’ Singh
14. Shri Kharabela Swain
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri V . Narayanasamy
17. Prof. P. J. Kurien
18. Shri Janardhana Poojary
*19. Shri Suresh Bhardwaj
20. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary Gr.-II
5. Dr. Yumnam Arun Kumar — Committee Officer
(iii)
*Resigned from membership of Rajya Sabha w.e.f. 9th January, 2008.

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Sixty-third Report on action taken by Government on the recommendations
of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their 19th Report (14th Lok Sabha) on
“National AIDS Control Programme”.
2.  This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 9th January, 2008. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Recommendations and
Observations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
4.  The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India.
5.  The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the
Committee.
N
EW DELHI;     PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
 17 January, 2008 Chairman,
 27 Pausa, 1929 (Saka)  Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by the Government on
the Recommendations/Observations contained in their 19th Report (14th Lok Sabha)
on the Report of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India for the year ended
31 March, 2003 (No. 3 of 2004), Union Government (Civil-Performance Appraisals)
relating to "National AIDS Control Programme".
2. In their 19th Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 8th December, 2005,
the Committee had dealt with various issues concerning the working of the National
AIDS Control Programme (NACP) covering all State/Municipal AIDS Control
Societies (SACS/MACS) and National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO) with a
view to ascertain the impact of various components of the programme viz. utilisation
of funds released and accounting; efficacy of priority Targeted Interventions for
groups at high risk; the Information, Education and Communication programme;
adequacy of training arrangements; functioning of blood banks and Sexually
Transmitted Diseases clinics; adequacy of procurement procedures, utilisation of
equipment; achievements of targets and impact evaluation; and monitoring and
evaluation procedures; etc.
3. The Action Taken Notes in respect of all the 53 Recommendations/Observations
have been received from the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and these have
been categorized as follows:—
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by Government:
Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8,11, 12, 14, 16, 21, 22, 24, 25, 26, 28, 29, 30, 31,
33, 34, 35, 36, 37, 38, 39, 40, 41, 44, 45, 46, 47, 50, 51 and 52.
Total : 35
Chapter II
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from Government:
Sl. Nos. 5, 17 and 27.
Total : 3
Chapter III
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Sl. Nos. 9, 10, 13, 15, 18, 19, 20, 23, 32, 42, 43 and 49.
Total : 12
Chapter IV
1

2
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
Sl. Nos. 1, 48  and 53.
Total : 3
Chapter V
Gist of Committee's Recommendations/Observations in 19th Report (14th Lok Sabha)
4. The Committee in their 19th Report on the subject had made the following important
Recommendations/Observations:—
n Noting the challenge ahead for conceiving realistic and effective programme
and targets for different components of  National AIDS Control Programme,
the Committee had sought for the desirability of conducting a fresh survey
of HIV/AIDS infected people especially in the context of many NGOs' and
International Bodies’ pointing out the inadequacies in the country's Sentinel
Surveillance network;
n The Committee had urged that the grants given by External Agencies for
HIV/AIDS should not be adjusted into the ceiling determined by Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance;
n The Committee had desired that the Ministry should review of the
epidemiological categorization of States into high, moderate and low. They
were of the opinion that such categorization may lead to a false sense of
complacency among the so-called low prevalence States resulting in poor
and tepid Governmental response;
n The Committee had recommended that the definition of high risk group
needs to be broad-based so as to include more vulnerable groups such as
new recruits to Army and Para-military forces, troops separated from
families and deployed in foreign countries, uniformed forces and their
families which are prone to high risk;
n Awareness about safe sex needs to be spread more effectively especially
in the rural areas by using all available fora such as Gram Sabhas and by
conducting Health Melas, etc.;
n Need to review the functioning of Sexually Transmitted Disease (STD)
clinics in its entirety and allocation of more funds for their upgradation
by providing them with state-of-the-art diagnostic tools and other
equipments;
n NACO should instruct all State AIDS Control Societies to offer pre-test
counselling to all persons before they are tested for HIV. This would ensure
that the affected persons gain confidence for living a normal life without
believing in myths and misinformation about HIV/AIDS;
n The Committee had desired that a High Level Committee should be
constituted to go into the entire gamut of functioning of blood banks in
the country and suggested measures for their modernization;

3
n Recognising the fact that the Commercial Sex Workers are the most
vulnerable and high risk group, the Committee had recommended that NACO
should take concerted steps/programme for their rescue and rehabilitation;
n Noting that the prices of Anti-Retroviral Therapy Drugs are quite exorbitant
and beyond the reach of common man, the Committee had emphasised that
there is an urgent need to develop an alternative drug which can be cost-
effective;
n Emphasising that the Government have to be vigilant against unscrupulous
persons claiming to have invented a cure for HIV/AIDS through magic
herbs, the Committee had suggested that if need be, the Drugs and Magic
Remedies Act could be suitably amended;
n National AIDS Committee should meet frequently and at least once in six
months to review the overall implementation of the programme and progress
made under various components of the NACP;
n Highlighting the international dimension to the problem of AIDS in the
North Eastern Region on account of illicit trans-border drug trafficking from
Laos, Myanmar and Thailand, the Committee had recommended for setting
up of a separate body/agency exclusively for North-Eastern States.
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In the succeeding
paragraphs, the Committee will deal with the action taken by the Government on some
of their Recommendations/Observations made in the Original Report, which need
reiteration of merit comments.
6. The Committee desire that Government should furnish final/conclusive action
taken replies to the recommendations for which interim replies have been furnished.
A. Fresh survey of HIV/AIDS infected people
Recommendation (Sl. Nos. 1 & 13, Para Nos. 195 & 207)
7. Examination of the subject by the Committee had revealed that the problem of
AIDS has ceased to be a mere health problem and has now acquired dimensions,
which perhaps have very few parallels in the history of mankind. The Committee,
therefore, had asked that the Ministry to conduct a fresh survey of HIV/AIDS infected
people especially in the context of many NGOs and international bodies pointing out
the inadequacies in the country's Sentinel Surveillance Network.
8. The Ministry in their Action Taken Notes on the aforementioned recommendation
inter-alia responded as under:—
"The spread of HIV/AIDS in the country is regularly tracked by conducting the
annual sentinel surveillance. Sentinel surveillance started with 180 sentinel sites
in 1998 and by 2005 increased to 750 sentinel sites located in different population
groups. During 2006, another 434 additional sentinel sites have been established
particularly in the northern and central parts of the country for filling gaps, and
ensure coverage of high risk population sites and every district in the country.

4
In order to ensure quality of the surveillance, both in terms of data collection
and laboratory procedures, five regional institutes and 10 national reference
laboratories have been identified to technically support the States and provide
continuous monitoring and supervision during surveillance. Also, a National
Expert Committee, under the Chairmanship of Director General, ICMR and
consisting among other expert from the WHO as well as UNAIDS, provides
technical expertise and estimations, and approves the surveillance data
findings. The nodal agencies that support the National AIDS Control
Organization in this work are the National Institute of Health and Family Welfare
and National Institute of Medical Statistics. In addition to the regular
surveillance sentinel system during the current year, for the first time HIV
infection has been included in the National Family Health Survey that is
conducted every five years by the Indian Institute of Population  Sciences
(IIPS). Under this population based data, blood samples of about 125,000 adult
population in the entire country are being analyzed for HIV infection. Further,
a specialized Integrated Behavioural and Biological Survey (IBBS) is also being
carried out in 173 districts of high prevalence States covering about 30,000
high risk population. The data generated from other sources such as the
Integrated Counselling and Testing Centres and blood banks are also being
analysed. The results of all these specialized activities will be available by the
early part of 2007 and should be able to provide a far more accurate picture of
the prevalence and incidence of HIV in the country."
9. The Committee take note of the various steps that have been taken by the
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare for providing accurate picture of the
prevalence and incidence of HIV/AIDS in the country. However, they are of the
opinion that their concern to have Sentinel Surveillance Network based on a
systematic and scientific approach has not been adequately addressed by the Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare. The apprehension of the Committee in this regard
increase especially in the light of the recent slashing of official estimates on HIV/
AIDS prevalence in India. As per the official website of NACO, the National adult
HIV prevalence in India is approximately 0.36 per cent, amounting to between 2 and
3.1 million people. If an average figure is taken, this comes to 2.5 million people
living with HIV and AIDS. This clearly indicates that the figure has almost come
down to 50 per cent of what they had projected in 2004 i.e. 5.14 million. However, the
Committee feel that the reliability of this data needs to be validated. They are of the
opinion that the inflated figures can be used to take resources and energy away
from equally important public health programmes and at the same time,
underestimates can result in a problem being ignored. Therefore, it is necessary to
identify an appropriate agency/authority and to have a realistic data with periodic
revision which is not only acceptable to the Government Departments but to all
International Health Organisations such as A VERT AIDS Education and Research
Trust, Global AIDS Programme, Global Health Council, International Federation
of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, UNAIDS, World Health Organisation
etc.

5
B. Radical change in attitudes and beliefs regarding HIV/AIDS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 2, Para No. 196)
10. The Committee had brought out that the AIDS, more than any other health
issue, is capable of hindering the country's development because it attacks the people
in their most productive years and places an undue strain on the economy. Therefore,
a thorough understanding of HIV/AIDS requires radical change in attitudes and beliefs,
as well as the emotional components concerning the virus and the syndrome, and the
behaviours that place ourselves vis-a-vis others at-risk of contracting the virus.
11. Apprising the Committee about the steps taken by the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare to bring behavioural changes among the masses, the Ministry, in
their Action Taken Note, stated as under:—
"For bringing about such behavioural change, massive IEC campaigns are
periodically launched. Through such campaigns, people are being informed of
the various aspects of the infection. It is seen that with knowledge and better
information, there is reduction in stigma and  discrimination, adoption of  safe
practices and reduction in risky behaviour. Since surveys showed young children
in age group of 15-19 experimented with casual sex, a sustained  programme of
sex education and life skill education has been taken up under which over 1,00,000
high schools have so far been covered."
12. The Committee take note of the work carried out by the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare regarding work done through Information Education and
Communication (IEC) campaigns by covering over 1,00,000 high schools. The
Committee would like to be apprised of the real impact/outcome of this initiative.
They also desire that some programmes should be  chalked out for the sections of the
society other than those covered by high school education.
C. Effective Utilization of Earmarked Funds
Recommendation (Sl. No. 7,  Para No. 201)
13. The Committee had noted that the implementation of NACP-II suffered for want
of adequacy of funds due to procedural flaws and lack of seriousness and urgency on
the part of Budget Allocating Authorities, besides failure of the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare to impress upon the Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission the
need for timely release of the total World Bank Grant for such a vital project. They had,
therefore, emphasized the need for ensuring not only total  utilization of earmarked
funds but also for enhancing further budgetary allocation for  the Programme. The
Committee had also urged that the external grants should be treated as supplement to
the Domestic Central Budgetary support rather than a substitution. Grants given by
external agencies should not be adjusted into the ceiling determined by Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance.
14. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in their Action Taken Notes have
inter-alia replied as under:—
"As can be seen from the Table below, inadequate allocation of funds was the
main reason for not spending as per target.

6
Utilisation of Funds Provided under NACP-II
(Rupees in crore)
Sl. Fiscal Year Projections Budgetary Shortfall Expenditure
No. Provisions against (%)
Projections
Budget Revised
Estimate Estimate
(B.E.) (R.E.)
1. 1999-2000 201.73 140 140 61.73 96.60%
2. 2000-2001 317.29 145 180 137.29 100.00%
3. 2001-2002 308.62 210 225 83.62 100.69%
4. 2002-2003 310.00 225 242 68.00 99.23%
5. 2003-2004 310.00 225 225 85.00 103.06%
6. 2004-2005 476.00 259 426 50.00 99.06%
Total: 1923.64 1204 1438 485.64
During 2005-06 and 2006-07, there was a further improvement in resource allocation
as shown below:—
Y ear Budget Estimate Revised Estimate Utilisation(%)
2005-06 533.50 533.50 99.41%
2006-07 905.67 (including Rs. 200 crore for NRHM)
The observation regarding treating external grant as a supplement to the
Domestic Budgetary Support has been agreed to in the Global Fund  assisted
project and Ministry of Health and Family Welfare has been able to get Rs.
122.74 crore as an additional grant over and above the X plan provision. However,
the issue with regard to other external grants to be provided as additional to the
ceiling determined by Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance will be
taken up with Planning Commission during the NACP-III formulation. As regards
Utilisation Certificate, it is true that in the earlier stages of programme
implementation, UCs were not being received on time. However, reimbursement
from the World Bank has been received continuously on the basis of SOE
submitted by SACS on quarterly basis. It is further submitted that Audit Reports
and UCs from the implementing agencies upto 2004-05 have been received and
Government of India has received 100% disbursement from the World Bank
within the approved period of implementation of the projects, i.e., upto 31.03.06."
15. The Committee are happy to note that there is improvement in the resource
allocation during the year 2006-07. This is particularly on account of Rs. 200 crore
for NRHM scheme. Considering the gigantic problem, the Committee desire that the
Ministry should continue to pursue with the Ministry of Finance as also with other
National/International agencies for more funds for the AIDS programmes with
matching programmes in the field.

7
D. Timely submission of Annual Action Plan by State AIDS control societies
Recommendation (Sl. No. 9,  Para No. 203)
16. In their 19th Report, the Committee had noted that till 2002-2003, none of the
SACS/MACS had submitted their Annual Action Plan on time. Inordinate delays in
submission of Annual Action Plan by SACS resulted in their belated approval which in
turn affected the proper utilization of funds and as a consequence there were
considerable unspent balances lying with the SACS/MACS at the end of the year.
This also affected the targets set in respect of some programmes like strengthening of
Sexually Transmitted Diseases (STD) clinics, V oluntary Counselling and Testing Centres
(VCTCs,) training etc. Therefore, the Committee had desired that NACO  should strictly
ensure that Annual Action Plans are submitted by all SACS/MACS within the stipulated
time frame.
17. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in their Action Taken  Note have
stated as under:—
"Annual Action Plans of all the societies are finalized within the 1st quarter of
that Financial Year and Funds released during the 1st quarter of the Financial
Year. The procedure adopted by NACO for timely submission of Annual Action
Plan by SACS/MACS has already been submitted in a written note to PAC."
18. In a written note submitted earlier to the Committee, the Ministry  had informed
that the State AIDS Controlled Societies were to send their Annual Action Plans by
31st December and the target month for completion of the process of  finalising the
Annual Action Plan of the implementing agencies was March, before the next Financial
Year starts (Para 34 of the 19th Report).
19. The Committee are not at all satisfied with the efforts made by the Ministry for
timely submission of Annual Action Plans.  The reply furnished by the Ministry is
vague and evasive in as much as it does not address the  core issue of inordinate delays
in submission of Annual Action Plans by State AIDS Control Societies. Rather taking
action for monitoring the timely submission of Annual Action Plans by State AIDS
Control Societies, the  Ministry have side stepped the issue by merely stating the
extant procedures  followed in NACO for submission of Annual Action Plans by
States AIDS Control  Societies, which is anything but regrettable. Further, there is
no mention about the status of submission of Annual Action Plans by the State AIDS
Control Societies during the subsequent years, i.e. 2003-04 to 2005-06. The
Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and urge upon the
Ministry to take the matter seriously with the concerned State Governments where it
has been found that SACS/MACS have not submitted  the Annual Action Plans
regularly and timely. It should be ensured that all  plan discussions are finalized and
approved before 31st March of the current financial  year so that fund should be
properly and fully utilized by all State AIDS Control Societies. In this connection, it
would be desirable to have a mechanism to ensure advance action and follow up to get
the Annual Action Plans on time.

8
E . Low  Cost  AIDS  Care  Outlay
Recommendation (Sl. No. 10,  Para No. 204)
20. In their Original Report on the subject, the Committee had noted that while the
expenditure on the component Preventive Interventions for General Community
exceeded the indicative percentage of the total outlay, the expenditure on Low Cost
AIDS Care and inter-sectoral collaboration fell far short of the indicative outlay. The
Committee had, therefore, recommended that the Ministry should identify the
bottlenecks responsible for low expenditure in the Low Cost AIDS Care and in inter-
sectoral collaboration components. They had also urged the Ministry to take necessary
steps to increase the expenditure on this component and also periodically monitor
progress made by SACS.
21. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in their Action Taken Notes have
inter-alia replied as under:—
"Low Cost AIDS Care includes the establishment of Community Care Centres,
Drop-in Centres, and treatment for Opportunistic Infections (OIs). These services
are made available to address the medical, psychosocial and care & support
needs of people living with HIV & AIDS. Initially, the provisioning of these
services were focused in the six high prevalent States and after 2001-02 expanded
to other States. As on date, 122 Community Care Centres, 84 Drop in Centres are
functional in the country. Treatments for Opportunistic Infections (OIs) are
being provided through the Community Care Centres and ART Centres. SACS
have been encouraged to develop positive networks so that the services made
available through these centres are extended to the neediest. The services of
People Living with HIV and AIDS (PLWHAs) are being utilized as positive
speakers for reducing the stigma and discrimination in the community."
22. The Committee are unhappy with the programme taken up by NACO regarding
"Low Cost AIDS Care" as the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have not identified
the thrust areas of the programme regarding planning, management, monitoring
and implementation of the programme and also the bottlenecks for low expenditure of
funds for the programme. The Committee regret to note from the Action Taken Note
furnished by the Ministry that even after the lapse of a considerable time since
presentation of their Report, no concrete action has been taken on the recommendation
of the Committee. The Ministry have merely mentioned about the objective of the
programme and the number of Community Care Centres and Drop-in Centres set up
till date. The Action Taken Note is completely silent about the reasons for low
expenditure of funds and the necessary corrective measures for stepping up the
expenditure for the programme. Obviously, the Ministry have not acted with
seriousness that it required. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier
recommendation and desired that conclusive action be taken on it.
F . Efforts for keeping the number of AIDS cases infected through blood transmission
 to the Minimum
Recommendation (Sl. No. 15,  Para No. 209)
23. The Committee had observed that though the transmission of AIDS through
blood and blood products has come down from 7.79 per cent in March, 1999 to

9
2.79 per cent in March,  2003, the number of cases in absolute terms have however
been increasing and the target of keeping it below one per cent still remains to be
achieved. Therefore, the Committee recommended that NACO should re-double their
efforts to achieve the target of keeping the number of AIDS cases infected through
blood transmission to minimum.
24. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in their Action Taken Notes have
inter-alia replied as under:—
"To ensure safety of blood and blood products in various blood transfusion
centres in the country, NACO has undertaken several steps as listed below:
n For the modernization of blood banks and component separation facilities,
one time equipment grant and yearly recurrent grants as per the approved
Pattern of Assistance are provided;
n Structured training on blood transfusion is being provided at 17 identified
centres all over the country for improving the capacity of the staff working
in the blood banks;
n During 2006, it has been planned to conduct 147 training sessions in
identified training institutions based on the training requirement of States/
UTs.
n Provision made for setting up of Blood Storage Centres to take care of
requirement of low volume of blood in remote/rural settings.
n To augment the proportion of voluntary blood donation, 45,000 voluntary
blood donation camps are being organized by various organizations like
Indian Red Cross Society, Rotary Club, State branches of Indian Medical
Association. During 2005, 53.2% of the blood units were collected through
voluntary blood donations.
n NACO has conducted five regional workshops and one orientation workshop
in each of the State on 'Rational use of Blood' to appraise them of the
appropriate clinical use of blood and blood products. The Standard Operating
Procedures for blood banks functioning have been developed and are in
place including testing protocols to ensure effeciency  in testing of
Transfusion Transmissible Infections (TTIs)."
25. The Committee note that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have
taken up a number of steps to ensure safety of blood and blood products in various
blood transfusion centres. The Committee, however, note that the Ministry is still
silent on the specific recommendation made by the Committee in their 19th Report
that NACO should re-double their efforts to achieve the target of keeping the number
of AIDS cases infected through blood transmission to minimum. The Committee,
therefore, would like to be apprised of the latest status/statistics in this regard inter-
alia giving details on the State-wise data of percentage of voluntary blood donation as
well as the percentage of HIV positive/AIDS cases which have been reported due to
infection through blood transfusion. They would also like to be apprised of the specific
measures undertaken by the Ministry for achieving the stipulated target of achieving
below one per cent the transmission of HIV/AIDS through blood and blood products.

10
G. Broad-base the current definition of  ‘High Risk Group'
Recommendation (Sl. No. 18,  Para  No. 212)
26. The Committee had observed that despite the Ministry's claim that there had
been a notable increase in terms of coverage of vulnerable population through Targeted
Intervention (TI), yet, 50 per cent of the population was still to be covered. They
therefore had desired that efforts needed to be step up to bring the uncovered population
under the ambit of TI Programme and had recommended that the definition of high risk
group needs to be broad-based so as to include more vulnerable groups such as new
recruits to Army and Para-military forces, troops separated from families and deployed
in foreign countries, uniformed forces and their families which are prone to high risk
and which need inter-sectoral participation in prevention of HIV/AIDS. They had also
emphasized that vulnerability and risk should form the basis of planning and programme
implementation for prevention and control of HIV/AIDS.
27. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in their Action Taken Notes have
inter-alia replied as under:—
"As on August 2006, a total of 1088 TIs are being implemented by NGOs/CBOs
across the country. Of these 325 are exclusively focussed on the three High Risk
Groups (CSW, IDU and MSM). Besides NACO assisted programmes, the Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation is also supporting an estimated 150 NGOs for TI
interventions. In addition to the 3 HRGs, TIs are also taken up for covering
bridge populations such as truckers, migrant workers, prison inmates, street
children etc. covering population groups who have high vulnerability to getting
this infection. Though the Armed and Para Military forces are not categorized as
high risk, very high priority has been and is continued to be provided to them. In
2003, nation wide mapping exercise was undertaken to assess the population of
HRGs in the country. This exercise has not only provided information on the
probable number but also points of concentration. This information is now
being further refined and used for upscaling to ensure saturation under the
NACP-III. Lack of funds during NACP-II, inadequate capacity among NGOs and
SACS and legal hurdles and social stigma related to the HRGs in particular
MSMs were the main factors for lower coverage.
Table below provides the estimated size and coverage of High Risk Groups
together by NACO and Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation through Targeted
Interventions programme:
Sl. High Risk No. of Estimated Estimated Percent
No. Groups TIs size coverage coverage
1. Sex Workers 8,31,677—12,50,115 5,88,777 55%
2. IDUs 96,463—1,89,729 1,02,344 53%
3. MSM 23,52,113 1,46,397 6%
4. Male Sex Workers 2,35,213

11
The TIs reporting format on CMIS has been revised to incorporate the
suggestions made by various stake holders. Monitoring and Evaluation division
of NACO conducted five regional workshops for streamlining the CMIS reports
on TI. The objective is to monitor the progress of TIs and simultaneously giving
the feed back to the NGOs implementing TIs. The reporting has improved from
35% in December 2004 to 54.3% in August 2006. SACS officials conduct
monitoring appraisals of TIs on regular basis and give feed back to NGOs/CBOs.
Project Support Units (PSUs) have been established in nine States for building
the capacity of NGOs/CBOs which has also contributed to improved reporting
and monitoring. Under NACP III all SACS will be provided with the PSUs as the
experience has been extremely positive."
28. The Committee have not been impressed by the belaboured reply of the Ministry
as nothing has been mentioned about broad basing of the definition of the high risk
groups. They would accordingly await Government's response to this specific aspect.
H. Emphasis for more Effective & Result Oriented Targeted Intervention Programme
Recommendation (Sl. No. 19,  Para No. 213)
29. The Committee had expressed their concern over the poor quality of different
elements of  Targeted Interventions due to which the Programme could not achieve the
desired results. The Committee, therefore, recommended that NACO should promptly
identify the weaknesses with a view to taking suitable corrective steps to make TIs
more effective and result oriented. Further, the Government ought to take the
Co-operation of NGOs, VOs, Community Based Organisations, the target community
and the Civil Society at large to make TI programme a truly mass movement.
30. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in their Action Taken Notes have
inter-alia replied as under:—
"During, 2003-04 NACO undertook two external evaluation studies of TI projects
in 22 States. The findings and recommendations of the evaluation studies were:—
n TIs have a critical role in reducing spread of the epidemic and therefore,
interventions must focus on groups at highest risk (CSW, MSM, IDU) and
saturate their coverage.
n Capacity building of NGOs and SACS should be further strengthened as
the number of trainings (2.67 / intervention / year) is inadequate and number
of training days (6.63/intervention/year) is low.
n Issues related to financial flows to the NGOs should be addressed to reduce
delays (91 days) and low volume of funds (Rs. 5.44 lakhs)
n Quality of implementation should be improved.
For generating a better focus on the Core groups (CSW, MSM, IDU), NACO
through national consultations (held in year 2004-05) has revised the costing
guidelines for Targeted Intervention projects. This helped in scaling up of the TI
programme for saturating the coverage of Core groups. All SACS have developed
plans for saturating the coverage of core groups. The Targeted Interventions

12
among CSWs have been increased from 147 in 2003 to 186 in 2006; the IDU
interventions have increased from 39 in 2003 to 114 in 2006 and
19 Interventions among MSM in 2003 to 30 in 2006. The geographically
scattered population of CSWs, MSM and IDUs are also being covered
through 416 composite interventions. NACO has set up Project Support
Units (PSUs) in nine States to facilitate the scaling up of TIs, building
capacity of NGOs and improving the quality of services. The PSUs have
developed a year wise training/capacity building action plan for each project
staff (Project Coordinators, Out Reach Workers, Counsellors, Accountants
& Peer Educators), for the themes (CSWs, MSM, IDUs, Truckers, Migrants)
and the number of training days have been worked out. The training
modules for each category has been compiled and shared with all the SACS
for taking up the training programme. Technical Resource Group for each
theme (CSWs, MSM, IDUs, Truckers and Migrants) has been developed
to provide technical guidance and assistance for improving the quality of
the programme. In order to address the delay in release of funds to NGOs
by SACS, the finance managers have been sensitized on regular basis. The
volume of funding has been improved from Rs. 5.44 lakhs to an average of
Rs. 10.00 lakhs. The quality of services such as Syndromic Case
Management of STIs, Condom Promotion etc. is being improved upon as
the cost for treating; seed money for Social Marketing of Condoms etc.
has been incorporated in the revised costing guidelines. The monitoring of
NGO activities is being carried out on the monthly and quarterly basis and
the monitoring framework has been developed to include increased condom
use, reduction in multi partner exchange (sex & needle), higher treatment
seeking behaviour among HRGs. The internal evaluation of TIs is being
conducted on half yearly and annual basis to strengthen the quality of the
TI programme."
31. With regard to the Targeted Interventions Programmes, the Committee have
been apprised that a number of steps have been taken by the Ministry to widen up the
coverage of  TIs Programmes. However, the Ministry have not apprised the Committee
about the impact which has been made by such interventions. The Committee expect
that the Ministry to take steps to have an effective evaluation of all TIs and at the same
time correlate with the previous findings so as to further take corrective measures in
this regard.
I.  Completion of all mapping exercises in all States
Recommendation (Sl. No. 20, Para No. 214)
32. The Committee noted that 33 mapping reports of major SACS were available
with the Government barring reports from States of Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan, Orissa,
Lakshadweep and Dadra & Nagar Haveli which are being finalized. The Committee had
therefore recommended that NACO should finish the mapping exercise of the remaining
States at the earliest so as to have a complete and reliable data relating to high risk
population.

13
33. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in their Action Taken Notes have
inter-alia replied as under:—
"Mapping of the High Risk Groups (i.e. Sex Workers, Men who have sex with
men, Injecting Drug Users, Truckers and Migrants) has been completed in all the
States to identify location and size of High Risk Groups. These studies
were commissioned by each State AIDS Control Societies (SACS) between year
2001–2004  through various research agencies of National repute. The mapping
exercise was completed in Haryana, Goa, Meghalaya & Lakshadweep in 2004-05
and the reports are available with NACO. A revalidation of all such mapping data
has also been carried out at National level in 2005-06 to consolidate the estimated
size and estimated sites of HRGs and the report of which is available with NACO.
Following estimates have been generated out of the mapping exercise:
Sl. No. High Risk Groups Estimated Size
1. Sex W orkers 8,31,677—12,50,115
2. IDUs 96,463—1,89,729
3. MSM 23,52,113
4. Male sex workers 2,35,213
5. Truckers 5-6 million
The States which have mapping information more than three years old are
revisiting the mapping exercise to update the mapping information. In the Annual
Action Plan for year 2006-07 Rs. 219.51 lakh has been allocated to 16 SACS for
undertaking an exercise to update the data."
34. The Committee have been informed about the completion of mapping exercises
of the high risk groups in all the States. However, the estimated size through the
mapping exercises furnished by the Ministry i.e. Sex Workers — 8,31,677 to
12,50,115, IDUs — 96,463 to 1,89,729, MSM — 23,52,113, Male sex workers —
2,35,213, Truckers — 5-6 million is absolutely different from the figure that have
recently been projected by the Government i.e. 2.5 million. As recommended in Para
9 of the Report, the Committee would await the realistic data on the subject.
J. Awareness about the use of Condoms to Prevent HIV/AIDS
Recommendation (Sl. No. 23, Para No. 217)
35. The Committee had observed that while awareness of condom use in urban
areas of the country was fairly high (90.4 per cent), it was relatively low in rural areas
particularly in the States of Assam (69.5 per cent), Bihar (64.8 per cent), Karnataka
(64.8 per cent), Madhya Pradesh (69.8 per cent), Maharashtra (67.2 per cent), Orissa
(61.2 per cent), other North Eastern states (62 per cent) and Tamil Nadu (67.6 per cent).
They, therefore, recommended that the awareness of safe sex should be spread more
effectively especially in the rural areas by using all available fora such as Gram Sabhas
and by conducting health meals, etc. Training for elected members of Gram Panchayats
and Women Self Help Groups on issues related to HIV/AIDS should be imparted so as
to bring about an attitudinal change and awareness among rural masses to fight against
HIV/AIDS. With a view to have a wider reach amongst the television viewers, the

14
Committee had suggested that the electronic medium should be used to the maximum
extent possible in prevention of HIV/AIDS and the Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare in coordination with Ministry of Information and Broadcasting should make
efforts to make it mandatory for all the Satellite Channels to telecast condom
advertisements compulsorily during prime time.
36. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare in their Action Taken Notes have
inter-alia replied as under:—
"The provisional results of BSS conducted during 2006 showed improvement in the
awareness level of general population from 76.1% during 2001 to 84.6% in 2006. The
condom use with last non-regular sex partner has also increased from 49.3% to
66.1%. National AIDS Control Organisation has extensively utilized Satellite Channels
for promotion of condoms. For greater visibility and to reach a large number of
viewers, the insertion of these advertisements were planned by considering the
following facts such as scheduling strategy, high frequency and impact and message
recall and acceptability. As per the telecast time available, NACO had judiciously
scheduled its 70% video spots during prime time, 20% in prime news channels and
10% in popular programmes in the afternoon slot to reinforce the viewership.
Considering the popularity and a large number of viewership of cable and satellite
channels in the current financial year (2006-07), NACO has proposed to release
advertisements in the cable and satellite channels focusing on condom promotion,
addressing vulnerability of youth, women and services."
37. The Committee are constrained to note that though the Ministry have informed
about the improvement in the awareness level of general population regarding the
condom use, the Ministry have not addressed the issue which was raised by the
Committee in their 19th Report regarding spreading awareness about safe sex in the
rural areas through Gram Sabha, health melas etc. The Committee are also dismayed
with the fact that the Ministry have not mentioned in their Action Taken Notes anything
on the training for elected members of Gram Panchayats and Women Self Help
Groups on issues related to AIDS so as to bring about an attitudinal change and
awareness among rural masses to fight against HIV/AIDS. The Committee also
regret to note that the Ministry have not specified whether conclusive action have
been taken to make all satellite channels cover condom advertisement during prime
time. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation and emphasise
that all necessary measures  should be taken by the Ministry to bring out concerted
efforts for better outreach of condom promotion and safe sex awareness campaigns
especially in rural and high risk areas.
K . Shifting of HIV Testing from 'Voluntary' to 'Routine'
Recommendation (Sl. No. 32,  Para No. 226)
38. The Committee had noted that though NACO had nearly achieved the targets
set for establishing V oluntary Counselling Testing Centres (VCTCs), but the scheme
remained non-starter due to their poor functioning. They had, therefore, recommended
that NACO should ensure that all the existing VCTCs are made fully functional at the
earliest by providing adequate number of trained technical manpower, latest equipment
and medical kits, etc. The Committee have also desired that NACO should instruct all

15
State AIDS Control Societies to offer pre-test counselling to all persons before they
are tested for HIV as this would ensure that the affected persons gain confidence for
living a normal life without believing in myths and misinformation about HIV/AIDS.
The Committee are also of the opinion that the testing of HIV should shift from 'voluntary'
to 'routine' which means regular HIV test for every person accessing the health care
system.
39. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have
stated as under:—
"NACO has now re-strategized HIV-AIDS service delivery by merging all the
existing PPTCT, VCTC and HIV-TB VCTCs. These centres will now be called as
Integrated Counselling and Testing Centres (ICTCs). The ICTCs will provide
services to all the needy clients' viz. ANC, RTI, STI, HIV-TB etc. The approach is
likely to enhance the coverage of HIV/AIDS related services to the needy clients.
The total number of existing ICTCs in 2815, of which PPTCT services are being
provided in 1880 centres. It is also proposed to open an additional 250 centres in
the current financial year."
40. As regards operationalising and strengthening of Voluntary Counselling and
Testing Centres (VCTCs) as recommended by the Committee in their 19th Report,
the Ministry in their Action Taken Note have informed that all the existing VCTCs
along PPTCTs etc. have been merged into a single entity and christened as Integrated
Counselling and Testing Centres (ICTCs). The Committee trust that the newly set up
ICTCs will function as a single window service to cater to the requirements of all the
needy clients. They also expect the Ministry to provide State-of-the-Art equipment
and adequate number of qualified technical manpower so that these Centres could
provide quality services to the patients. The Committee would like to be apprised of
the functioning of the ICTCs.
With respect to offering of pre-test Counselling to all persons before testing them
for HIV and shifting of HIV test from "Voluntary" to"Routine", the Committee regret
to find that the Ministry's reply is conspicuously silent on this issue. The Committee
therefore reiterate that Ministry should pay serious attention to this issue and take
concrete action for implementing the same. The Committee firmly believe that these
suggestions if implemented properly would go a long way in correct estimation of
HIV/AIDS patients in the country.
L. Development of Alternative Drug to Anti-Retroviral Therapy Drug through
Indian System of Medicine
Recommendation (Sl. No. 42, Para No. 236)
41. The Committee had felt that in the current scenario where the prices of Anti-
Retroviral Therapy Drugs are quite exorbitant and beyond the reach of common man,
there is an urgent need to develop an alternative drug which is cost-effective through
Indian systems of medicine like Ayurveda, Unani and Siddha apart from Homoeopathy.
They, therefore, recommended that Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should
sponsor a special Research and Development (R&D) Project for developing an
indigenous drug through all branches of Indian System of Medicine (ISM) and

16
Homoeopathy which is not only cheaper but also can act as an effective substitute for
Anti-Retrovirals Therapy, if not a total cure from the infection. The Committee had also
recommended that the Government should be vigilant against unscrupulous persons
claiming to have invented a cure for HIV/AIDS through magic herbs and if need be the
Drugs and Magic Remedies Act should be suitably amended so as to provide stringent
punishment to unscrupulous persons taking advantage of the misery of HIV-infected
persons and defrauding them of huge sums of money.
42. The  Ministry in their Action Taken Note, submitted to the Committee, stated
their position as under:—
"NACO examines the claims of products developed by the Indian System of
Medicine like Ayurveda, Unani and Sidha through ICMR for efficacy. At present,
we are suporting vaginal microbicides study-PRANEEM polyherbal formulation
at NARI, Pune, and also ARV activity in western Himalayan plants by the Institute
of Himalayan Bio Resources, Palampur, in Himachal Pradesh. The technical core
committee for research has also recommended testing of drug Receptol. AYUSH
drugs are also being tested through Homeopathic and Ayurvedic Medical Council.
NACO is supporting a study of Jyoti Amritum, a herbal product, for its efficacy.
The Government is developing standards of care in ART services and once these
are finalized, the ART centres in Government Sector, Public Sector Undertakings
and non-Government sector will be accredited. A drug resistance committee has
been constituted at NACO to  look into all issues related to primary drug resistance
and development of secondary drug resistance while on ART. A multi-media
approach has been planned to make people aware about ART services in the
country and discourage them to resort to any untested treatment. In the absence
of any regulations and enforcement machinery at the State level, NACO is finding
it difficult to take any action against quacks and unscrupulous persons exploiting
the gullibility of patients by promising them cure."
43. The Committee have taken note  of  the steps that have been taken by the
Ministry for examining the drugs manufactured by the Indian System of Medicines
and Homoeopathy. However, the Committee are perturbed to note that the Ministry
have not taken any steps for safeguarding the patients from unscrupulous persons/
quacks claiming to have invented a cure for HIV/AIDS through magic herbs on the
pretext that there is no regulation and enforcement machinery at the State level in
spite of the Committee's recommendation that if need be, the Drugs & Magic Remedies
(Objectionable Advertisement) Act, 1954, be amended suitably. The Committee would
like to be apprised of the measures/concrete actions taken in this regard at the
earliest.  The Committee are also of the opinion that NACO may take help of all the
State AIDS Control Societies by asking them to report on the objectionable
advertisements appearing in their respective States and suitably take penal action in
this regard.
M . Setting up of an exclusive research agency to monitor research work
Recommendation (Sl. No. 43, Para No. 237)
44. The Committee had suggested that the research and development work that is
being carried out in India and rest of the world should have a common meeting ground/

17
platform so that research findings can be shared and correlated with each other with a
view to arrive at a possible solution to combat HIV/AIDS. For this, the Committee had
recommended that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should establish a
Research Agency to monitor the research work that are being carried out in India and
all over the world with a view to developing vaccines and cheap life saving drugs for
control of HIV/AIDS.
45. The Ministry, in their Action Taken Notes, stated the position as under:
"Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) is involved in various research
activities relating to HIV/AIDS. Some of the studies being undertaken are as
follows:—
n Study on Incidence of HIV and Risk factors
n Development of effective vaginal microbicides
n Development of an AIDS vaccine".
46. The Committee regret to note that the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare have
not spelt out the follow-up steps taken regarding establishment of a 'Research Agency' to
monitor the research work that are being carried out in India and all over the world. The
Committee, therefore, would like to be apprised about ICMR being designated by the
Ministry as nodal agency to carry out research work on HIV/AIDS and also the monitoring
work done by ICMR for HIV/AIDS research work during the last three years.
N. Emphasis for National Performance Review of  NACP-I and II
Recommendation  (Sl. Nos. 48 and 53, Para No. 242 and 247)
47. The Committee had recommended that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
may examine the feasibility of conducting a National Performance Review so as to
assess the functioning of NACP-I & II and the deficiencies/shortcomings that may
come to their notice should be taken into cognizance while conceiving NACP-III.
48. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note, submitted to the Committee, stated
their position as under:—
"The programme is being monitored closely using CMIS, review meetings and
field visits by officers from NACO and SACS. Quarterly review meeting of SACS
are held on a regional basis for in-depth assessment of each component of each
State. Regular weekly meetings are taken by Additional Secretary & DG , NACO
to identify problems and progress on each issue and action points identified
during the meetings. An Independent Evaluation of NACP has been finalized to
be carried out by a consortium consisting of IIHMR, Jaipur, IIM Kolkata and
John Hopkins University, Baltimore (USA). The study is scheduled to be
undertaken during the current financial year."
49. The Committee are keen that the Ministry take effective measures to assess
the outcome of NACP-I and II. Although the Committee have been informed that an
independent evaluation of NACP have been finalised, as recommended by the
Committee. The Committee would await the findings of the evaluation of NACP-I & II
as done by IIHMR, Jaipur, IIM, Kolkata and John Hopkins University, Baltimore
(USA) and concrete follow up action taken in pursuance thereof. Needless to

18
re-emphasise the Government would continue to review closely the working of NGOs
working in the AIDS Programme.
O. Infrequent Meetings of National AIDS Committee
Recommendations (Sl. No. 49,  Para No. 243)
50. The Committee had observed that National AIDS Committee (NAC), which is
the high level deliberative body to oversee the performance of NACO and provide
overall policy direction and to forge multi-sectoral collaborative  efforts, had not met
since 2001 and no meeting had been held during the last 3 years which had exposed the
hollowness of the claim made by the Government that they are making serious efforts
to combat HIV/AIDS. The Committee expected that in future, NAC would meet as
frequently as they could and at least once in six months to review the overall
implementation of the programme and progress made under various components of
the NACP.
51. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note, submitted to the Committee, stated
their position as under:—
"The National AIDS Committee headed by the Minister of Health and Family
Welfare comprises of 23 officials, 6 Members of Parliament and 32 non-officials.
It is supposed to meet once a year. During the last 13 years of its existence six
meetings of the NAC were held viz. 15th February 1993, 11th October 1994,
26th March 1996, 3rd January 1997, 5th October 1998 and the 9th May 2001. This
was last re-constituted on 21st November 2003. The problems faced were the
frequent changes in the leadership and the time required for the incumbent
Chairman to make an assessment and call for a meeting. With the change in the
membership of Parliament the representatives from the Parliament had to be re-
nominated along with the changes suggested for non-official members. This
used to take a considerable amount of time. In the meantime, considering the
requirement of a much larger multi-sectoral support from all ministries the National
AIDS Council headed by the Prime Minister, with the Health and  Family Welfare
Ministers as Vice Chair and inclusive of 31 Ministers, 7 Chief Ministers, 15
officials was created on 21st November and the first meeting was held on the
16th February 2006. The ambit of the Council was to mainstream HIV/AIDS issue
in all Ministries and Departments by considering it as a development challenge
and not merely a public health problem. In addition it was also to lead the multi-
sectoral response to HIV/AIDS in the country with special reference to youth
and workforce. It is now being felt due to overlapping ambits, the National AIDS
Committee would probably be wound up."
52. The Committee are constrained to note that Ministry have not addressed the
issue regarding the frequent meetings of National AIDS Committee as recommended
by them in their 19th Report. The Committee have been only informed that National
AIDS Committee was last re-constituted on 21st November, 2003. The same status
was furnished by the Ministry to the Committee during the year 2005. What is more
surprising to the Committee is the fact that they have now been informed that the
Ministry is contemplating of winding up National AIDS Committee. The Committee
would like to be informed about the present status of National AIDS  Committee.

19
The Ministry have also informed the Committee about the formation of the National
AIDS Council to mainstream HIV/AIDS issues in all Ministries and Government
Departments. The Committee would like to be informed about the outcome of the
meetings held by the National AIDS Council and their impact and hope that with the
setting up of it, the implementation of  National AIDS Control Programme are
effectively reviewed and monitored. The Committee would like to be apprised of the
progress achieved in  this regard.

CHAPTER II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS  WHICH  HA VE  BEEN  ACCEPTED
BY  THE  GOVERNMENT
Recommendation/Observation
The Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome, more than any other health issue, is
capable of hindering the country's development because it attacks its people in their
most productive years and places an undue strain on the economy. Therefore, at the
foremost, a basic understanding and knowledge of HIV/AIDS is a pre-requisite to
grasp the scope and complexity of this human, socio-medico and public health problem.
In addition, a thorough understanding of HIV/AIDS requires radical change in attitudes
and beliefs, as well as the emotional components concerning the virus and the
syndrome, and the behaviours that place ourselves vis-a-vis others at risk of contracting
the virus.
[Sl. No. 2 of Appendix-II, Para No. 196 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
For bringing about such behaviour change a massive IEC campaigns are periodically
launched. Through such campaigns, people are being informed of the various aspects
of the infection. It is seen that with knowledge and better information, there is reduction
in stigma and discrimination, adoption of safe practices and reduction in risky behaviour.
Since surveys showed young children in age group of 15-19 experimented with casual
sex, a sustained programme of sex education and life skill education has been taken up
under which over 100,000 high schools have so far been covered.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health and  Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
India's battle against HIV/AIDS commenced in 1986 when a high powered National
AIDS Committee was constituted and a National AIDS Control Programme (NACP)
was launched in 1987. Since 1992, the National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO)
and the State AIDS Control Societies (SACS), which were set up subsequently, are
20

21
nodal implementing agencies under the NACP. The NACP is a wholly Centrally
Sponsored Scheme with assistance from International Donor Agencies (IDA). The
National AIDS Control Programme, Phase I (NACP-I) was to be implemented from
September 1992 to September 1997 with technical assistance from the World Health
Organisation (WHO), but due to slow utilization of funds in the first two years of the
project, it was extended upto March, 1999. Further, to encourage and enable States
themselves to take on the responsibility of responding to the epidemic and reduce the
spread of HIV infection and to strengthen India's capacity to respond to HIV/AIDS on
a long-term basis, the programme of NACP-II was launched in 1999 with a budget of
Rs. 1425.10 crore. The project which was supposed to have been completed in October
2004 is still continuing and it is expected to be completed by March 2006. The Committee
hope that all the possible remedial measure would be taken by Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare to ensure that NACP-II is not extended and is completed within the
stipulated targeted period.
[Sl. No. 3 of Appendix-II, Para No. 197 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The stipulated period of NACP Phase-II was from 1st April, 1999 to 31st July, 2004.
This project was extended upto March, 2006 as funds far lesser than the agreed quantum
were actually allocated, despite utilization of the budgets as indicated in the table
below:—
(Rupees in crore)
Sl. Fiscal Year Amount to be Expenditures
No. provided as per Actual Budgetary incurred
the Project Provisions (%)
Budget Revised
Estimates Estimates
(B.E.) (R.E.)
1. 1999-2000 201.73 140 140 96.60%
2. 2000-2001 317.29 145 180 100.00%
3. 2001-2002 308.62 210 225 100.69%
4. 2002-2003 310.00 225 242 99.23%
5. 2003-2004 310.00 225 225 103.06%
Total: 1447.64 945 1012
Even during 2004-05, the B.E. provisions were Rs. 259 crore which were augmented
to Rs. 426 crore at R.E. stage. The R.E. was finalized and reported during February,
2005. The expenditure during 2004-05 was 99.06%. Thus, if allocation had been provided

22
according to the projections the target of completing the project on time,  i.e., by
July, 2004 would have been achieved.
Phase-II of National AIDS Control Programme has ended on 31.03.06 and 100%
commitment of SDR 140.82 million (US $ 191 million) has been fully achieved by receiving
disbursement from IDA.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The key objectives of the NACP-I were to slow down the spread of HIV; to bring
down morbidity and mortality associated with HIV infection; and to minimize socio-
economic impact resulting from HIV infection. For NACP-II the main objectives were
focussed on to reduce the spread of HIV infection in India; and to strengthen India's
capacity to respond to HIV/AIDS on a long term basis. Some of the important targets
which were set to achieve by the completion of the Programme I and II were to keep
HIV prevalence rate below 5 per cent of adult population in Maharashtra, below 3 per
cent in Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Manipur and Tamil Nadu and below 1 per cent in
the remaining States where it is still at a nascent stage; to reduce the blood borne
transmission of HIV to less than 1 per cent; to attain awareness level of not less than
90% among the youth and others in the reproductive age group; and to achieve
condom use of not less than 90 per cent among high-risk categories like Commercial
Sex Workers.
[Sl. No. 4 of Appendix-II, Para No. 198 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The specific target of NACP-II was to keep HIV sero prevalence below 5% in high
prevalence States, below 3% in moderate prevalence States and below 1% in remaining
States besides attaining awareness level of 90% among youth and to achieve condom
use of 90% among high risk groups.
The results of HIV prevalence as per the 2005 sentinel surveillance data among the
pregnant mother attending the ANC clinics as a proxy of general population indicated
that the prevalence levels of HIV has been achieved as per the targets laid down in

23
NACP-II. The State-wise details on HIV prevalence during the last three years are
given below:—
State-wise HIV prevalence among ANC and STD population : 2003—2005
State Sites ANC Sites STD
(2005) (2005)
2003 2004 2005 2003 2004 2005
Andhra Pradesh 23 1.25 2.25 2.00 11 21.47 16.40 22.80
Karnataka 27 1.25 1.25 1.25 7 10.40 12.00 13.60
Maharashtra 39 1.25 1.25 1.25 12 10.00 10.40 10.40
Manipur 10 1.25 1.50 1.25 2 13.00 7.20 12.20
Nagaland 8 1.13 1.43 1.63 1 0.98 1.72 3.50
Tamil Nadu 32 0.75 0.50 0.50 11 9.64 8.40 9.20
Gujarat 8 0.38 0.13 0.25 8 4.47 3.60 2.00
Goa 2 0.50 1.10 0.00 2 14.62 16.00 14.01
Pondicherry 2 0.13 0.30 0.25 3 2.45 5.70 4.22
Assam 4 0.00 0.00 0.00 5 1.20 0.80 0.89
Bihar 6 0.00 0.00 0.00 9 0.40 1.20 0.00
Madhya Pradesh 13 0.00 0.25 0.25 10 1.81 1.80 0.49
Rajasthan 6 0.00 0.00 0.13 7 6.08 2.92 5.60
Uttar Pradesh 17 0.00 0.25 0.00 17 0.55 0.80 0.40
West Bengal 9 0.50 0.50 0.84 12 1.61 0.88 2.16
Arunachal Pradesh 2 0.00 0.20 0.43 4 0.45 0.00 0.00
Chhattisgarh 5 0.75 0.00 0.25 3 2.13 2.80 2.83
Delhi 4 0.13 0.38 0.25 4 6.52 7.98 9.15
Haryana 4 0.25 0.00 0.13 5 1.20 0.93 1.30
Himachal Pradesh 6 0.00 0.13 0.13 5 0.40 0.00 0.40
Jharkhand 6 0.00 0.00 0.13 4 0.13 0.10 0.00
Kerala 4 0.00 0.33 0.25 4 1.88 2.78 2.82
Orissa 5 0.00 0.50 0.25 7 2.40 2.80 4.00
Punjab 4 0.13 0.25 0.13 3 1.60 1.16 1.07
Uttaranchal 3 0.00 0.00 0.00 4 0.00 0.37 0.00
J & K 3 0.00 0.08 0.00 2 2.60 0.16 0.00
Meghalaya 1 0.35 0.00 0.00 2 0.25 0.00 0.00
Mizoram 4 2.08 1.25 0.88 2 3.80 1.00 3.00
Sikkim 1 0.25 0.00 0.30 1 0.00 0.00 0.86
Tripura 1 0.00 0.30 0.00 3 2.80 0.70 1.20
A & N Islands 2 0.58 0.00 0.58 2 1.80 1.60 0.40
D & N Haveli 1 0.25 0.00 0.30 0 0.00 0.00 0.00
Chandigarh 1 0.50 0.50 0.00 2 0.80 1.80 1.00
Daman & Diu 2 0.32 0.38 0.13 0 0.00 0.00 0.00
Lakshadweep 2 0.00 0.00 0.00 1 0.00 0.00 0.00
Further the available data on the results of HIVpositivity among blood donors
showed 0.3% positivity whereas 2.05% cases of total infections was on account of
transmission by blood and blood products.

24
The provisional data of BSS 2006 indicate increase in awareness among adult
population from 76.1% in 2001 in 84.6% in 2006 and the condom use during last sex
among high risk population has increased from 76% to 87.3%.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated  November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee are constrained to observe that the programme has achieved limited
success as it has failed in generating sufficient awareness among the masses. Besides,
there was very slow progress in implementation of its various components. Target
groups in many States have remained unidentified due to non-completion of mapping
exercises; the scheme of social marketing of condoms was found lacking as NACO
could not procure and distribute the targeted number of condoms. The Committee are
disturbed to find that the programme could not achieve the targets relating to setting
up of Sexually Transmitted Disease Clinics, modernized blood banks and voluntary
counseling and testing centres in every district of the country. 12 out of 20 Societies
during FHAC May 1999, 21 out of 29 Societies during FHAC December 1999, 19 out of
31 Societies during FHAC June 2000, 19 out of 33 Societies during FHAC April 2001
and 22 out of 37 Societies during FHAC February 2002 failed to attract even 20 per cent
of the targeted population. Community Care Centres and Drop-in Centres have been
established in very few States and the effectiveness of their functioning remained
un-assessed. Grants-in-aid were released to inter-sectoral collaborators without proper
assessment of requirement for implementing the various activities of the programme
resulting in poor utilization of the grants allocated to them. Besides, NACO had no
mechanism to monitor procurement of equipments and testing kits. These issues have
been discussed in detail in succeeding paragraphs.
[Sl.No. 6 of Appendix-II, Para No. 200 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The National AIDS Control Programme Phase-II attempted to decentralize the
programme to ensure that the programme could be appropriately scaled up and the
programme objectives could be reached. Mapping exercise was initiated and completed
for all the States and UTs. In some States after the completion of the mapping exercise
they have even gone in for a validation exercise. Further details are given in reply to
Para 212. Social marketing of condoms and distribution of condoms was attempted and
a fair amount of success was attained, the details of which are given in the reply to
Para 218. At the start of the NACP-II the target was to set up atleast one STD clinic and
modernise one blood bank in each district. If at the start in 1999 there were 504 STD
clinics there were 845 STD clinics in the country at the end of  2005-06. Similarly if
685 blood banks had been modernised at the end of 1999, at the end of 2005-06 there

25
were 1229 blood banks and in addition 42 additional blood component separation
units were set up. Voluntary Counseling and Testing Centres (VCTC) were a new
concept in prevention as well as detection of HIV and the country had 2815 at the end
of  NACP-II where there were none in 1999. 122 Community Care Centres were set up
by the end of NACP-II and the performance of 12 of them was recently done and all of
them would be taken up for evaluation. 84 Drop-in-Centres were established for people
living with HIV/AIDS by the end of the NACP-II where there were none at the start in
1999. Initially NTPC had been appointed as the procurement agent for NACO and after
an evaluation they were dropped and HLL and HSCC were appointed in their place.
Regular monitoring is now done of the various stages of procurement. Specific replies
in detail have been given in respect of each issue raised.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health and Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated  November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The total financial corpus of NACP-I and NACP-II from all the sources including
budgetary support from Government of India stood at Rs. 2344.65 crore. Out of this
Government of India and the World Bank contributed Rs. 253.34 crore (Phase I-
Rs. 57.34 crore+Phase II-Rs. 196.00 crore) and Rs. 1181.66 crore (Phase I-Rs. 222.66
crore+Rs. 959.00 crore) respectively and the rest was contributed by other funding
agencies namely. United States Agency for International Development (USAID) A VERT
(Rs. 166.00 crore in Phase-II), USAID APAC (Rs. 64.58 crore for Phase-II), Department
for International Development of the U.K. Government (Rs. 487.40 crore for Phase-II).
Canadian International Development Agency (Rs. 37.81 crore for Phase-II), Australian
AID (Rs. 24.65 crore for Phase-II), United Nations Development Programme (Rs. 6.47
crore for Phase-II) and the Global Fund (Rs. 122.74 crore for Phase-II). The Committee
are concerned to note that as against an approved allocation of Rs. 657.55 crore for
Phase-I, NACO could utilize only 75 per cent of the funds allocated and in Phase-II
(1999-2004) as against an approved allocation of Rs. 1155.10 crore from the Government
of India and the World Bank (GOI-Rs. 196 crore+World Bank-Rs. 959.10 crore) NACO
had been able to spend only 46% (Rs. 532 crore in the first four year i.e. upto March,
2004. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare attributed the reasons for non-utilisaton
of funds to the shortfall in the budgetary provision to the tune of Rs. 218.67 crore
during NACP-II. It has further been contended that the revised estimates were usually
finalized in the month of January-February of the Financial Year resulting in delay in
release of additional funds to the implementing agencies which ultimately resulted in
less utilization of funds during the year by the concerned agencies. The poor utilization
of the earmarked funds for such an important project resulting in non-achievement of
targets set under various programmes in nothing but regrettable. The Committee take
a serious view of the fact that NACP-II suffered for want of inadequate fund due to the
procedural flaws and lack of seriousness and urgency on the part of Budget Allocating
Authority. Obviously, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare also failed to impress
upon the Ministry of Finance and the Planning Commission the need for timely release

26
of the total World Bank Grant for such a vital project. The Committee cannot but over
emphasize the need for ensuring not only total utilization of earmarked funds but for
enhancing further budgetary allocation for such a vital programme in view of the fact
that India has the second largest population of people living with HIV/AIDS in the
World. The Ministry of Finance and Planning Commission ought to keep this fact in
view while allocating funds for different programmes of the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare. The Committee are also of the view that Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare should ensure that Utilisation Certificates by State AIDS Control Societies are
submitted timely so that there are no delays for reimbursements from the World Bank
in this regard. The Committee would also urge that external grants should be treated as
a supplement to the Domestic Central Budgetary Support rather than a substitution.
Grants given by External Agencies should not be adjusted into the ceiling determined
by Planning Commission and Ministry of Finance for such an important programme.
[Sl. No. 7 of Appendix-II, Para No. 201 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As can be seen from the table below, inadequate allocation of funds was the main
reason for not spending as per target.
Utilisation of Funds Provided under NACP-II
(Rupees in crore)
Sl. Fiscal Year Projections Budgetary Shortfall Expenditure
No. Provisions against (%)
Projections
Budget Revised
Estimate Estimate
(B.E.) (R.E.)
1. 1999-2000 201.73 140 140 61.73 96.60%
2. 2000-2001 317.29 145 180 137.29 100.00%
3. 2001-2002 308.62 210 225 83.62 100.69%
4. 2002-2003 310.00 225 242 68.00 99.23%
5. 2003-2004 310.00 225 225 85.00 103.06%
6. 2004-2005 476.00 259 426 50.00 99.06%
Total: 1923.64 1204 1438 485.64
During 2005-06 and 2006-07 there was a further improvement in resource allocation
as shown below:—
Y ear Budget Estimate Revised Estimate Utilisation(%)
2005-06 533.50 533.50 99.41%
2006-07 905.67 (including Rs. 200 crore for NRHM)

27
The observation regarding treating external grant as a supplement to the Domestic
Budgetary Support has been agreed to in the Global Fund assisted project and Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare has been able to get Rs. 122.74 crore as an additional
grant over and above the Xth Plan provision. However, issue with regard to other
external grants to be provided as additional to the ceiling determined by Planning
Commission and Ministry of Finance will be taken up with Planning Commission
during the NACP-III formulation.
As regards Utilisation Certificate, it is true that in the earlier stages of programme
implementation, UC were not received on time. However, reimbursement from the World
Bank has been received continuously on the basis of SOE submitted by SACS on
quarterly basis. It is further submitted that Audit Reports and UCs from the
implementing agencies upto 2004-05 have been received and Government of India has
received 100% disbursement from the World Bank within the approved period of
implementation of the projects, i.e., upto 31.03.06.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated  November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
NACO releases Grants-in-aid to Societies which are the main implementing agencies
under NACP and they in turn submit quarterly Statements of Expenditure (SOEs) to
the former. NACO claims reimbursement from the World Bank on the basis of SOEs. In
order to ensure the correctness of claims, expenditure mentioned in SOEs should be
reconciled with expenditure shown in the audited statement of accounts. The Audit
Review has revealed that in respect of 49 audited statements of accounts, there were
differences in figures in 46 cases. Obviously, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
did not make efforts to ensure that there are no differences in figures of Statement of
Expenditure and Audited Statements which was essential for timely and complete
reimbursement of the expenditures by the States AIDS Control Societies. Further, no
reasons or explanations were given for non-reconciliation of Statement of Expenditures
and Audited Statement of Accounts. The Committee have now been informed that the
exercise of reconciliation of Accounts has been completed till 2002-03, and the annual
audited statements of accounts for the year 2003-04 have been received and further
reconciliation of these accounts had been taken up on campaign basis and it is also
proposed to meet the financial functionaries from SACS twice in a year for discussion
on all issues relating to financial management. The Committee hope that belated
realization on the part of Ministry of Health & Family Welfare would ensure concurrent
reconciliation of Statement of Expenditures and Audited Statement of Accounts.
[Sl. No. 8 of Appendix-II, Para No. 202 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

28
Action Taken
In all cases the statement of expenditure(s) are reconciled with the Audit Certificate.
However, the Audited statement of account include expenditure as grant released by
SACS to various NGOs and other implementing agencies and also include unsettled
advances, as the accounts are maintained on the cash basis system. However, the
actual expenditure against these grants and advances is included in the SOEs during
the particular quarter it actually occurs. This time lag between release to actual
expenditure ultimately leads to variation between the figure of expenditure included in
the Audit Certificate and SOE and expenditure claimed as reimbursement as per SOE
submitted by the SACS.
Reconciliation of accounts has been completed upto 2004-05 for the expenditure
incurred by all SACS including 3 Municipal Corporations. The grants released till
2003-04 have been settled by NACO and grants for 2004-05 are being settled by PAO
in due course. For 2004-05, UC for 35 SACS have been issued. This exercise has been
accomplished by conducting two campaigns, one at Chandigarh in the month of
May, 2005 and another at Bangalore in November, 2005.
     Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee note that out of the total grant of Rs. 566.05 crore (including the
opening balance) released by NACO during 1999-2000 to 2002-03, the Societies had
utilized Rs. 443.93 crore i.e. 78 per cent. While 17 State AIDS Control Societies in
1999-2000, 19 Societies in 2000-01, 15 Societies in 2001-02 and 12 Societies in 2003-04 had
utilized more than 70 per cent of the grants released, 9 Societies in 1999-2000 and 2000-01,
10 Societies in 2001-02 and 21 Societies in 2002-03 could not utilize even 50 per cent of
the grants released to them. The Committee further note that as on 31st December,
2004, an amount of Rs. 19.19 crore was lying unutilized with SACS. Poor utilization of
grants by the SACS over the years reflects the sordid state of affairs prevailing in the
SACS. Non-utilisation of funds by Societies led to slippage in the targets fixed under
the various components and as a consequence NACP suffered to a great extent in
achieving its avowed objective of containing the HIV/AIDS in the country. The
Committee, while deprecating the failure of SACS in utilization of funds, expect NACO
to identify the reasons therefore with a view to taking suitable corrective steps to
ensure that there is proper and full utilization of funds by SACS. NACO also needs to
periodically monitor the functioning of SACS in relation to their performance for
achievement of targets set in a time bound manner.
[Sl. No. 11 of Appendix-II, Para No. 205 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The suggestions included in the observations have been noted for compliance.
However, as already clarified in the earlier replies, during the term of NACP-II the

29
obligation of Rs. 1155 crore to be supported by World Bank as a soft loan could not be
met during the 5 years of the Project due to constrained budgetary resources. Due to
this fact, this Project had to be extended upto 31.03.06. The total commitment of World
Bank was SDR 140.82 million (US $ 191 million) and the commitment has been fully met
by claiming reimbursement of expenditure for the SOEs.
The primary reason for poor utilization of grant by the SACS was administrative
bottlenecks and delays. Delays in finalizing Revised Estimate results in releases towards
the end of the Financial Year and unspent balances. Rs. 19.19 crore lying unutilized
with SACS as on 31st Dec., 2004 was due to late sanction of release of funds in the end
of October, 2004 amounting to Rs. 15 crore.
To avoid these lapses certain corrective measures have been undertaken as under:—
(1) There was a lot of scope of improve the supervision of the work of the
SACSs. Hence regular meetings were held on a quarterly basis with the
Project Directors and with the SACS Programme Officers to ascertain the
difficulties and during the performance reviews barriers to utilisation of
funds were identified and removed.
(2) In the North Eastern States, due to the lack of adequate trained manpower
the utilisation of funds has been weak and hence technical assistance in the
form of a Regional Office is being set up which will not only supervise the
work but also provide capacity building of the personnel of the SACS.
(3) The existing manpower available in the SACS needed to be supplemented
at times for specific tasks such as mapping of high risk populations,
evaluations of NGOs, needs assessments etc. technical assistance was
availed from the RCHSA to fill up the gaps.
(4) Monitoring and Evaluation were identified to be a weak link and the
computerised management information system was developed to ensure
that all the reporting units reported in a standardized format regularly.
(5) The development of the Annual Action Plan to the SACS was crucial for
ensuring the effective utilisation of funds. Timely submission of the proposed
Action Plans and the drawing up of agreed action plans before the start of
the financial year itself helped in planning the expenditure ahead by the
SACS.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
NACO guidelines provide that NGOs involved in the implementation of the
programme should contribute atleast 10 per cent of the total project cost.

30
The contribution can be in the form of infrastructure or staff or any other contribution
in kind or cash. However, the Committee are constrained to point out that the records
of some State/Municipal AIDS Control Societies revealed that 113 NGOs in Andhra
Pradesh, one NGO in Punjab and all the NGOs in Manipur did not contribute the
prescribed amount. The Committee are surprised to note that inspite of the non-
contribution of the requisite percentage by the NGOs, the Andhra Pradesh State AIDS
Control Society had been releasing grants to the NGOs leading to excess release of
Rs. 29.90 lakh. Audit has also pointed out an instance where a Society had flouted the
guidelines of NACO by involving an NGO in the implementation of project on Targeted
Inventions for groups at high risk which had not completed registration for a minimum
period of three years. The Committee may be apprised about the precise reason as to
why SACS of Andhra Pradesh continued to release grants to the various NGOs when
they did not contribute the 10 per cent of the project cost. It is also not clear as to
whether any action was taken by NACO in this connection. The Committee are of the
firm opinion that NACO should impress upon the SACS that the fund be released after
conforming to the rules. Further, the performance of NGOs should also be periodically
monitored and those found to be indulging in misappropriation of funds should be
black-listed and debarred from participating in the activities of NACP.
[Sl. No. 12 of Appendix-II, Para No. 206 of 19th Report of PAC  (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
To ensure proper use of the funds and lend a measure of accountability among the
NGO's, detailed costing guidelines for implementing the Targeted Intervention
Programme have been developed. As per these guidelines, participating NGOs’ are
required to contribute 10% of the budget with the option to calculate this contribution
in terms of the infrastructure, human resources and any other assets to be utilized for
project activity. This stipulation was to ensure their commitment to the program.
In case of Andhra Pradesh,  APSACS has furnished audit reports of NGOs for the
year 2000-2001 and 2001-02 wherein the cash contributions made by NGOs form a part
of the audit report. Contributions made in other forms like head office space, salary of
the project director etc. made in kind were not captured due to non-availability of data
during that time. Hence a shortage to the tune of Rs. 29 lakh was reported during the
AG audit. Since then  the data pertaining to the years from 2000-02 was collected and
compiled with respect to both cash and in kind contribution by way of audited
statements from NGOs which shows that the NGOs had made an excess contribution
of Rs. 11.25 lakh as against shortage of Rs. 29 lakh reported by CAG. Manipur SACS
has also categorically mentioned that the 10% contribution was realised from all NGOs
receiving grants during the period 2002-03. In the case of Punjab the NGO Indian
Society for Youth Development at Chandigarh had not made the 10% contribution in
either cash or kind. We have advised the Project Director Punjab SACS to initiate
action. The name of NGO in Tamil Nadu which not having three years of existence for
receiving projects funds could not be ascertained. The selection and funding of NGOs

31
is decentralized to the respective State AIDS Control Societies (SACS). Selection of
NGO's and release of grants requires the approval of the Executive Committee headed
by Secretary (Health) of the respective States. NGOs receiving funds are periodically
monitored through monthly reports, quarterly reports, half yearly visits and annual
evaluation reports. After every visit and evaluation the NGOs are also briefed thoroughly
about the deficiencies and the manner in which they should rectify  them. Partnerships
with NGOs not found to be functioning satisfactorily are terminated and the assets
created are recovered. In case of NGOs involved in criminal defalcation FIRs are lodged
with the Police and are blacklisted.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee are of the view that epidemiological categorization of State into
high, moderate and low prevalence will have serious repercussion. Such categorization
may lead to a false sense of complacency among the so-called low prevalence States
resulting in poor and tepid Governmental response even while the virus continues to
spread silently. While high prevalence States such as Tamil Nadu have managed to
attract lion's share of funding from NACO and set up quasi-Governmental State AIDS
Control Society that could receive funds directly from the Centre. On the other
hand, States such as Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh, which have been either less
motivated or less capable of demonstrating their need and capacity, have fallen behind.
Low prevalence States such as Bihar where the public health delivery system is in
urgent need of upgradation and expansion, funds they receive from NACO is insufficient
for them to upgrade their HIV preventive services. The impasse continues, pushing
'low' prevalence States into a vicious cycle of neglect leading to under reporting of
HIV/AIDS cases. Further, many States have reported low levels of HIV and some
States reported no cases of HIV/AIDS at all which appears to be far from the reality. A
probable explanation for this is States that have reported serious HIV/AIDS epidemic
are those that have tried to assess the magnitude of the epidemic as honestly as
possible, as most of them have better health infrastructure and hence are able to detect
more number of cases. There is no evidence to indicate that the rest of the States are
somehow 'different' or less vulnerable to HIV . The survey figures as projected by
NACO, therefore, may not be very accurate and the figure would raise substantially
once these States as well as private hospitals, clinics start reporting cases as honestly
as they could. The claim made by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare that there
had been a steep decline in the number of new HIV infections appears doubtful since
the Survey have not taken into account people with AIDS, presumbly numerous, but
dying of opportunistic infection like Tuberculosis. It is also quite possible that the
number of Sentinel Surveillance sites where high risk people, for example STD Clinic
patients, intravenous drug users and sex workers were tested may be same in 2003 and
2004. Further, the data collected appears to be inaccurate due to lack of better

32
representation from rural India, since a lot of patients (of sexually transmitted infections)
in rural areas go to private doctors and quacks and most village women deliver children
at home sidestepping the ante-natal and postnatal care centres. The Committee, further
recommend that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare may consider review of the
categorization of high, moderate and low prevalence States and an alternative approach
may be adopted/introduced which will goad all States into action in combating the
disease.
[Sl. No. 14 of Appendix-II, Para No. 208 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
During NACP-II, the country adopted epidemiological classification proposed by
UNAIDS/WHO, based on the HIV prevalence among ante-natal attendees and high
risk groups, which is in use in different countries. The purpose of this classification
was to identify and prioritize the intervention needs State-wise. Such classification
of States was helpful as it enabled focusing limited resources to those States which
accounted for over 70% of the cases. However for the reasons noted by the
Committee, under NACP-III classification of high and low prevalent areas is not State-
wise but district-wise. The 611 districts have accordingly been grouped into 4 categories
based on the level of risk. In UP and Bihar an additional 40 and 63 sentinel sites have
been established.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
Audit scrutiny revealed that Prevention of Parents to Child Transmission (PPTCT)
scheme had been implemented in only 74 out of 82 medical colleges and 15 out of
133 district hospitals of high prevalence States till January 2003. In response to
Audit observation, the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare submitted that as on
January 2005, 288 PPTCT centres are functioning in the country. Out of this, 238
are in high prevalence States and rest (50) are in low prevalence States. In high
prevalence States, all the Medical Colleges (85) and all District Hospitals (153) are
providing PPTCT services. In moderate/low prevalence States, out of 79 Medical
Colleges, 42 Medical Collges are providing PPTCT services. Rest of Medical
Colleges are in the process of starting PPTCT services. However, there has been a
steady increase in cases of infection of HIV/AIDS through parents to child
transmission, which rose from 0.72 per cent to 2.65 per cent which points to the
lack of proper implementation and monitoring of the programme. The Committee
need hardly emphasise that NACO ought to evolve suitable strategies for counselling
the HIV/AIDS infected parents about the ill effect of having an HIV infected child,
so as to arrest the spread of infection from parents to child.
[Sl. No. 16 of Appendix-II, Para No. 210 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

33
Action Taken
NACO has re-strategized HIV/AIDS service delivery by merging all the existing
PPTCT, VCTC and HIV-TB VCTCs. These centres are now called Integrated Counselling
and Testing Centres (ICTCs). It is proposed to ensure that these services are available
upto the 30 bed Community Health Centre level and in very highly prevalent districts
covering the primary health centres as well. Currently there are 2815 ICTC's. Of these
1680 are providing PPTCT services. Since the programme of providing PPTCT services
was taken up in 2004. 38.4 lakhs pregnant women have been tested upto July 2006 and
37,042 have been found HIV positive. About 50% of these mothers were provided with
prophylaxis treatment, saving large number of babies from getting HIV infection.
The increase in prenatal route of transmission among reported AIDS cases could be
attributed to accessibility to HIV Counselling and Testing Services to pregnant
women.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
Since in nearly 85 per cent of the cases, HIV is acquired through sexual transmission,
condom promotion is critically important in HIV prevention and control. The objective
of condom promotion programme is to ensure easy access to affordable and acceptable
condoms of good quality to promote safe sexual encounters. The Committee note that
the State AIDS Control Societies procure condoms from the Department of Family
Welfare and distribute them under the scheme for free distribution and social marketing.
The objective of condom promotion programme is to ensure easy access to condoms
of good quality at affordable price to promote safe sexual encounters. The Committee
note that the distribution of condoms by the Societies under free distribution scheme
increased from 524.38 lakh pieces in 1998-99 to 907.59 lakh pieces in 2002-03 and under
Social Marketing Scheme, it increased from 15.49 lakh to 90.39 lakh pieces. Although
the number of condoms distributed by the State AIDS Control Societies have increased
in absolute terms/over the years, the Committee are, however, surprised to note that all
societies were not involved in distribution of condoms. While Maharashtra and Mumbai
Societies had performed exceedingly well as they alone contributed 65 per cent under
the social marketing scheme, performance of other Societies was far from satisfactory.
The Committee are of the opinion that since SACS are the main implementing agencies
which have more direct contacts with the vulnerable section/potential high risk groups
of the Society, their role in the distribution of condoms is inevitable.
[Sl. No. 21 of Appedix-II, Para No. 215 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

34
Action Taken
Social Marketing of condoms among high risk groups under the National AIDS
Control Programme (NACP) is being promoted for about past six years.
The Condom programme in National AIDS Control Programme Phase I and II has
developed linkages with schemes for condom promotion implemented by Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare. During the NACP I and II, Targeted Interventions were
commenced for HIV prevention among the vulnerable populations at the highest risk
of HIV transmission. These interventions focusing on the vulnerable populations
primarily relied on the condoms under free supply scheme as majority of the vulnerable
populations do not have the ability to pay. The condoms distributed under the targeted
interventions programme have increased from 52.4 million pieces in 1998-99 to
90.7 million pieces in 1999-2000 and 230 million pieces by the end of  2004-05. The
increase in free condom distribution through Targeted Intervention programme may
be seen at table given below:
Table 1
Sl. Y ear No. of condoms made available through TIs
No. (Figures in million pcs.)
1. 2002-03 128
2. 2003-04 171
3. 2004-05 230
The social marketing of condoms have been done through the 15 Social marketing
organizations contracted by MOHFW. These organizations have been promoting the
subsidized condoms through retail channels in urban and rural areas. A State wide
rural marketing programme for condoms in UP implemented by SIFPSA (State
Innovations in Family Planning Project Services Agency) has resulted in increasing
the access to condoms from 18% to 42% of villages. The overall rural market for
condoms increased from 48 million in 2000 to 90 million in 2003 in UP. Besides community
based social marketing programmes have been implemented in priority districts of
Andhra Pradesh, MP, Bihar, Orissa and Jharkhand. Social marketing programmes aimed
at low income population has been done primarily by social marketing organizations.
The condom sales data in social marketing reported by SACS is only their direct social
marketing through NGOs. As NGOs are primarily involved in free distribution, their
social marketing sales component is low. The social marketing organizations are the
principal agents for social marketing and they get subsidized condoms and promotional
subsidy from MOHFW. Their condoms marketing initiative has been one of the major
condom programming linkage which NACO has been using for condom promotion.
The ORG retail audit (estimating the number of condoms purchased from commercial
retail outlets) estimates that nearly 10,00,000 outlets have sold over 700 million condoms
per annum.

35
The State-wise sale of condoms both commercial and social marketing and number
of outlets (chemists, grocery stores and general stores) are given in the following
tables:
Table 2
Condoms (total sale) = Commercial + Social Marketing (units in million pieces)
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
CONDOMS 825.1 817.1 813.6 729.1 700.4*
All India Social Mkt. 513.5 538.0 536.1 477.0 452.7
CONDOMS 199.9 187.1 160.5 143.1 135.4
North Zone Social Mkt. 125.7 128.2 98.0 84.3 83.3
CONDOMS 138.8 137.7 137.2 124.7 117.4
East Zone Social Mkt. 99.8 105.5 106.4 95.7 87.4
CONDOMS 155.0 145.4 131.9 115.5 119.8
West Zone Social Mkt. 81.9 77.3 71.1 62.6 67.6
CONDOMS 128.3 122.6 123.2 104.8 113.8
South Zone Social Mkt. 37.8 41.0 41.3 32.8 35.7
CONDOMS 119.3 113.2 90.4 75.5 74.7
Punjab Social Mkt. 82.8 86.8 58.0 45.5 46.0
CONDOMS 26.7 26.7 24.3 23.8 20.9
Haryana Social Mkt. 14.8 17.2 14.4 14.2 14.2
CONDOMS 33.0 28.4 29.4 29.9 28.8
Rajasthan Social Mkt. 22.2 19.3 21.1 20.3 19.9
CONDOMS 203.1 224.2 260.7 241.0 231.9
Uttar Pradesh Social Mkt. 168.3 186.1 219.3 201.6 178.7
CONDOMS 8.2 7.9 7.0 5.9 5.4
Assam Social Mkt. 3.1 3.6 2.8 2.1 2.1
CONDOMS 64.3 62.2 57.8 49.9 48.7
Bihar Social Mkt. 53.9 54.8 50.8 44.1 41.6
CONDOMS 16.5 16.2 20.2 15.3 14.3
Orissa Social Mkt. 12.1 13.0 17.6 13.3 12.2
CONDOMS 49.8 51.5 52.2 53.7 48.9
West Bengal Social Mkt. 30.7 34.1 35.2 36.2 31.4
CONDOMS 23.6 24.2 20.8 20.6 24.0
Gujarat Social Mkt. 8.1 9.0 7.8 8.3 10.0
CONDOMS 57.8 50.1 45.0 36.4 37.2
Madhya Pradesh Social Mkt. 36.3 33.6 29.8 25.5 26.4

36
CONDOMS 73.6 71.1 66.1 58.6 58.7
Maharashtra Social Mkt. 37.5 34.7 33.5 28.8 31.2
CONDOMS 41.3 35.6 38.4 35.4 40.6
Tamil Nadu Social Mkt. 9.1 10.3 10.8 8.9 10.3
CONDOMS 21.8 17.1 17.7 18.2 20.3
Karnataka Social Mkt. 5.1 4.2 5.5 5.4 6.3
CONDOMS 37.2 41.7 39.0 28.0 30.5
Andhra Pradesh Social Mkt. 20.1 23.4 18.7 11.8 12.7
CONDOMS 28.0 28.2 28.1 23.2 22.4
Kerala Social Mkt. 3.5 3.0 6.2 6.6 6.4
CONDOMS 20.9 22.0 19.4 15.3 15.5
Mumbai Social Mkt. 6.6 7.6 5.3 3.4 4.4
CONDOMS 13.1 11.5 12.0 11.4 12.4
Kolkata Social Mkt. 3.5 4.0 5.2 4.5 5.3
CONDOMS 20.9 18.7 16.4 13.9 11.0
Delhi Social Mkt. 5.8 4.9 4.5 4.2 3.2
CONDOMS 10.2 8.9 8.5 8.4 8.5
Chennai Social Mkt. 1.3 1.4 0.9 0.9 0.9
CONDOMS 5.1 5.2 5.0 5.6 6.6
Bangalore Social Mkt. 0.8 1.0 0.9 0.7 0.7
CONDOMS 5.3 7.1 8.1 6.7 8.7
Hyderabad Social Mkt. 1.1 1.8 2.0 1.3 1.8
*There is a decline in condom sale over the years more specifically in the social marketing segment
which constitutes major chunk of the total condoms sold in the country. This is primarily because
the current social marketing programme is through the traditional outlets which are more urban
centric. To reverse the trend focused interventions have been initiated in rural and high risk areas of
10 States namely: Uttar Pradesh, Maharashtra, Madhya Pradesh, Kerala, Gujarat, West Bengal,
Orissa, Uttaranchal, Andhra Pradesh and Tamil Nadu
.
Table 3: Number of condom stores (Traditional outlets including chemists, grocery
shops and general stores)
NACO has developed a challenging programme for condom promotion wherein it
estimated that over the next five years the number of outlets selling condoms will be
expanded to 3 million and the sales of social marketing condoms will increase from the
current level of 0.5 billion to 2.0 billion. During this period the supply of free condoms
will be continued for those who have the least ability to pay. It is estimated the number
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005

37
of free condoms distributed will increase from present level of 0.8 billion to 1.0 billion
during the next five years.
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
All India (Urban+Rural) 913286 959799 1020373 1014093 1029284
Punjab 69272 67706 66819 68407 68724
Haryana 21517 21724 27019 27947 30636
Rajasthan 27599 28093 30444 36171 29409
Uttar Pradesh (erstwhile) 302419 312427 347173 352220 357242
Assam 17614 18234 25945 25268 24243
Bihar (erstwhile) 102696 106364 117714 103584 100117
Orissa 37563 53472 38574 37671 27319
West Bengal 75894 78004 77293 75862 88634
Gujarat 31236 38474 35360 36291 39124
Madhya Pradesh (erstwhile) 45200 40136 49773 46703 61083
Maharashtra 43674 44931 48820 49693 50591
Andhra Pradesh 27451 31691 30443 29137 31768
Karnataka 24141 21137 27414 34059 28305
Kerala 33312 35859 35807 31290 28294
Tamil Nadu 44430 52861 51472 48516 52274
Delhi 9268 8686 10303 11274 11521
Mumbai 10080 11123 10513 10815 12423
Kolkata 16786 16078 16500 15544 18706
Chennai 7898 9969 8766 10000 10805
Hyderabad 2283 2870 2843 3821 3310
Bangalore 3854 4637 4283 5915 5257
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee also found that during the year 2000-01, NACO had earmarked
distribution of 3.30 million pieces of Deluxe Nirodh under the social marketing scheme,
but the scheme failed to take-off as NACO could not purchase condoms required for
distribution under the scheme. No reasons were furnished by NACO for its failure to
procure condoms. Audit scrutiny of the social marketing scheme of condom, further
revealed that 140 Condom V ending Machines (CVMs) costing Rs. 9.81 lakh in Himachal
Pradesh. 20 CVMs in Chandigarh and 34 CVMs costing Rs. 3.30 lakh in Haryana were
inoperative since 1998, June 1999 and March 1997 respectively for different reasons.
Out of total 385 CVMs purchased by Punjab at a total cost of Rs. 22.61 lakh, 230 CVMs

38
were found to be non-functional as of May 2003. The Committee are not aware whether
the machines are operational or not. Against the background that 85 per cent of the
cases of HIV/AIDS is acquired through sexual intercourse the non-functioning of a
number of such machines for a considerable period is nothing but inexplicable and
exhibits callous and negligent approach of the concerned authorities in this regard.
The Committee recommend that the matter may be enquired with a view to identify the
reasons for poor implementation of the social marketing scheme during 2000-01. It also
need to be enquired whether the purchased machines were faulty or were allowed to
remain inoperative. Government should fix accountability on the persons responsible
for these lapses. The Committee also recommend that NACO should lay down realistic
targets for distribution of condom under the scheme and periodically review the progress
made by SACS in this regard. More condom vending machines should be installed and
kept operative in all important public places such as red light areas. Railway Stations,
Bus Stations, important traffic intersection points in all metros and major cities and
also on all National and State Highways for the use of Commercial Sex Workers.
Truckers, Men Having Sex with Men (MSM) and other high risk and vulnerable groups.
[Sl. No. 22 of Appendix-II, Para No. 216 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
During the year 2000-01, Social Marketing Organizations contracted by MOHFW
have played the lead role in operationalising the social marketing programmes in various
States of India. The condoms were supplied directly by MOHFW to SMOs as the
subsidy mechanism is administered by MOHFW.
To complement the already ongoing initiatives through SMOs of MOHFW,
3.3 million pieces of Deluxe Nirodh under the social marketing scheme of NACO was
aimed for social marketing through NGOs. However as these NGOs were hitherto
providing the condoms free, they faced stiff community resistance when the priced
social marketing condoms were launched. The SACS were also not equipped with a
marketing infrastructure and field sales force for retail marketing of condoms.
The social marketing organizations procured condoms from MOHFW and have
been doing the marketing through their field networks in all the states. One of the major
channels which social marketing organizations use for distribution has been the retail
shops comprising of chemists, paan shops, general stores etc. The social marketing
initiatives were promoting condoms at subisidised prices and the ORG retail audit for
2000 and 2003 estimates the social marketing sale at 512 million and 535 million
respectively. This indicates significant volume of condom sales under social marketing
scheme in collaboration with MOHFW. Some of the large social marketing programmes
for condoms in UP adopted "dual protection messaging" whereby condoms were
promoted for family planning and HIV/STI prevention.
The vending machine was one of the innovations attempted to create access to
condoms easily, while also providing privacy.
Regarding CVMs installed in Chandigarh in 1999, they were put up by AIDS
Prevention Society of India (APSI) which had requested SACS Chandigarh to provide

39
list of suitable locations. They did not receive any funds from Chandigarh State AIDS
Control Society. In Haryana, the State AIDS Control Society has filed a case against
the supplier firm in the consumer court which is in process. Punjab and Himachal
Pradesh have been asked to further ascertain the facts regarding non-functioning of
CVMs.
For expanding access to condoms through vending machines. NACO and MOHFW
has jointly devised a scheme in 2004-05 for installing 11,025 machines in high risk areas
and high fertility districts. The Condom Vending Machines have been procured through a
global tender and have been installed in locations identified by State AIDS C ontrol
Societies. These locations include red light areas, railway stations, bus stands, public
toilets, cinema theatres etc. Currently 11,025 machines are installed in 42 high prevalence
districts of Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, A.P. and Maharashtra and 25 high fertility districts of
Uttaranchal, UP, Bihar and Jharkhand. These machines have sold 14 million condoms
during Jan.—Aug. 2006. Hindustan Latex Limited has appointed Condom Vending Machine
(CVM) caretakers for maintaining and supplying condoms to the machines and this will
ensure that all the machines are regularly maintained. NACO is planning implementation
of another 10,000 vending machines along the highway, public toilets, bars etc. A study
has been conducted recently by the M/S IMRB showed that 80% of the CVMs installed
were in vending condition, 95% of them were found in clean surroundings. 60% of the
users feel that CVM provides anonymity and will ensure 'safe sex'.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee are informed that  NACP aims to promote condom use in not less
than 90 per cent of the population in high risk categories like Commerical Sex
Workers. Behavioural Surveillance Survey (BSS) by ORG shows that only 57 per
cent of the brothel based female sex workers and 46 per cent non-brothel female
sex workers reported consistent condom use with paying clients. Further, only 21.3
per cent of brothel based and 20.2 per cent non-brothel based Commercial Sex
Workers reported consistent use of condoms with non-paying clients. The
programme also strives to provide good access to condoms by ensuring that 75 per
cent of the population can access condoms within 30 minutes from their residence.
However, BSS revealed that the proportion of respondents who had reported that it
would take them less than 30 minutes to obtain a condom varied considerably amongst
States. Except Delhi (66.4 per cent), Kerala (74.2 per cent) and Punjab (71.5 per cent),
accessibility to condoms by the respondents of other States was poor. In rural areas
except Kerala (73.7 per cent) and Delhi (66.7 per cent), all other States reported poor
accessibility to condoms. The Committee recommend that NACO should launch a
vigorous and sustained campaign in cooperation with respective State Governments,
V oluntary Organisation/Non-Governmental Organisations etc. among Female Sex
Workers—both brothel and non-brothel based to sensitise  them about the lurking
danger of HIV infection in the event of non-use of condoms by their clients, both

40
paying and non-paying. Adequate number of condoms vending machines should be
set up in all Red Light Areas and all such places where sex workers solicit customers.
Apart from propagation of condom use in high risk group, NACO should make efforts
to popularize condom use as a safest sex method and to inculcate it as a regular sex
habit amongst the non-risk groups and people at large whenever they enter into sex
with any persons other than his/her regular partner.
[Sl. No. 24 of Appendix-II, Para No. 218 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The condom promotion initiatives have been strengthened in NACP-II. The free
condoms are distributed in Targeted Interventions while social marketing programmes
focus on promoting condoms at subsidized prices through retail channel. These
initiatives have resulted in increased access availability and use of condoms by the
populations at the highest risk of HIV transmission. The recently conducted Behavioural
Surveillance Survey among the high risk population estimated that the condom use
during last sex with client increased from 76% in 2001 to 87.3% in 2006. Besides, the
consistent use in sex with clients during the last one year has also increased from
50.3% in 2001 to 72.9% in 2006. This indeed shows the increase in condom acceptability
in the high risk population.
The access building initiatives of NGOs have been complemented with social
marketing programmes reaching out to non-chemist outlets in high risk areas. Condom
promotion campaigns in high risk areas have been implemented in high prevalence
States of  Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, A.P., Maharashtra and North Eastern States. This
has resulted in increasing the condom access within 30 minutes from the residence
from 49.6% in 2001 to 79.9% in 2006. The BSS study comparison indicates the success
of ongoing condom promotion approaches and scaled up efforts are being planned in
NACP-III for promoting condom use in every sex act with the risk of HIV/STI
transmission.
NACO conducts sustained campaigns through the media for promotion of condoms.
These campaigns promote triple benefits of condom use i.e. protection from HIV, STI
and unwanted pregnancy and have featured celebrities like Rahul Dravid. Social
Marketing Organisations (SMOs) also have been implementing collaborative social
marketing programmes with NGOs for enhancing use of condoms among the population
at risk.
To make condom available round the clock and in privacy, Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare, NACO has installed 11025 Condom Vending Machines (CVMs) in
different parts of the country (may please refer to Action Taken in para 216).
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]

41
Recommendation/Observation
Another area of concern is the close link between HIV and Sexually Transmitted
Diseases (STD). To control the spread of HIV/AIDS, it is essential to strengthen the
STD control programme at every level with a view to effectively tackle HIV/AIDS.
The Committee note that in 1992, the STD Control Programme was integrated with
NACP. Various studies are stated to have indicated that HIV infection could be
contained by effective and strong STD control strategies. The quality of STD services
and their expansion. Therefore, assume paramount importance. During NACP-I as
against the target of 372 STD clinics, NACO had strengthened 504 Government
STD clinics all over the country to provide services to STD patients. However the
pace of strengthening of STD clinics in NACP-II has been rather slow. Out of 339
additional STD clinics proposed to be strengthened in Phase-II, only 90 (27 per
cent) could be strengthened as of March, 2003. What is more disturbing is the fact
that NACO could not furnish State-wise details of the 594 STD clinics that have
been strengthened as of March, 2003. Moreover, the physical target of 757 STD
clinics, only 674 STD clinics were provided with financial support by NACO duirng
the Financial Year 2003-2004. Audit Scrutiny of STD clinics with reference to
districts in the country, as per Census 2001, revealed that districts ranging between
7 and 75 per cent in the States/Union Territories did not have STD clinics at any
level i.e. district hospitals, medical college hospital or taluk/sub-divisional level.
The Committee are not satisfied with the progress made so far by NACO in
strengthening STD clinics and recommend that NACO should take up steps to
strengthen all STD clinics in various parts of the country. The Committee desire that
a revised target for provision of STD clinics be laid down with a view to ensuring that
every region/part of the country, particularly the target/vulnerable areas are fully
covered. Such STD clinics should be provided with necessary financial support by
NACO and operationalised expeditiously.
[Sl. No. 25 of Appendix-II, Para No. 219 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
NACO provides financial support to the State AIDS Control Societies for STD
Clinics as recurring fund every year for STD drugs, laboratory reagents and
consumables and non-recurring fund for purchase of equipment.
As on August 2006, 845 STD Clinics have been provided financial assistance
from NACO. The target of having at least one STD Clinic functioning in each district
and Government run medical college in all States has since been achieved. At sub-
district levels that is, at the Community Health Centres and Primary Health Centres,
treatment of STDs is being strengthened in collaboration with Reproductive and
Child Health Programme. Under this collaboration, drugs and training of health
personnel for treating STDs and RTIs will be provided to CHCs and PHCs. With this
collaboration, while RCH program will be able to address the routine needs of the
general population, NACO will focus on the needs of high risk groups and bridge
populations, working through the NGO's/CBO's and truckers associations etc.

42
NACO has finalized a training module and also standard operating procedures for
STD treatment. Due to the stigma attached to this disease and the relatively poor
privacy and confidentiality available in public facilities, most patients prefer to seek
treatment in private clinics. Keeping this in view, NACO is now working on a strategy
to identify the private providers that could range from medically qualified to quacks
and local healers to train them in syndromic management of STD's and thereby expand
access to safe and reliable treatment. Besides, this continuous surveillance for
monitoring drug resistance for common STIs will be strengthened so as to regularly
update the syndromic protocol adopted for STI clinic.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee are surprised to find that a study by senior faculty members of
Medical Colleges of respective States/Union Territories at the behest of NACO to
assess functioning of STD clinic has revealed that the attendance of patients at most
of the STD clinics was poor. The poorly performing States were Punjab, Haryana,
Rajasthan, Madhya Pradesh and Manipur. While Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, West
Bengal and Uttar Pradesh had more than 50 patients a day, most other States had less
than 10 patients per day. One third of the clinics in 23 States/UT surveyed, were not
located in accessible places. Adequate space for STD clinics was reported from only
about 44 per cent of the clinics. Fifty per cent of the clinics reported inadequate space
for laboratories. Availability of proper instruments, especially for female patients was
reported by only 33 per cent of the clinics. Further, the clinics lacked trained manpower
at all levels—doctors, nurses, laboratory technicians, counsellors and para medical
staff. Only 33 per cent of the clinics had trained medical personnel. Sixty six per cent of
the clinics were manned by untrained para medical personnel. Further only 56 per cent
of the clinics had STD specialists. 17 per cent had gynaecologist and 31 per cent had
a general duty officer as its in-charge. The Committee regret to observe that on one
hand, the target laid down for setting up of STD clinics in Phase-II has not been
achieved and on the other hand, the existing STD clinics lack proper infrastructure
facilities, doctors, nurses, laboratory technicians, counsellors and para medical staff
etc. Obviously, the functioning of the STD clinics in the country has not been given
the serious attention it deserves. This is despite the fact that studies over the years
have revealed a close relationship between HIV and STD. The failure on the part of the
concerned Authorities in this direction is nothing but regrettable. The Committee,
therefore, recommend the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare in association/
cooperation with respective States AIDS Control Societies should thoroughly review
the functioning of STD clinics in its entirety. The Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
should allocate/earmark more funds for upgradation of these clinics by providing them

43
with state-of-art diagnostic tools, techniques and other equipment so that they become
hub centres for detecting and diagnosing cases of HIV/AIDS. In view of the direct link
between STD and AIDS, the Committee are of the view that there should be greater
synergy between NACO and State Medical Departments in combating HIV/AIDS.
[Sl. No. 26 of Appendix-II, Para No. 220 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Health being a State subject, it is for State Governments to provide personnel and
infrastructure for STD clinics. It is a fact that States have never accorded this speciality
any importance. Worse, in view of the stigma attached, STD clinics are often clubbed
with dermatology, stifling the professional development of this speciality. Since STD
treatment is critical to the containment of the HIV infection, NACO has provided
financial support to the STD units in medical colleges and district hospitals, with
varied levels of success as observed by the Committee.
In light of the above, the revised strategy of STD treatment consists of :
* NACO will continue to technically and financially support the STD clinics
in medical colleges and district hospitals.
* Partner with the RCH program for providing access to syndromic treatment
of STD's in all primary health facilities.
* Map and work with the private providers of STD treatment and bring them
to follow national guidelines and protocols.
* Regional centres for monitoring drug resistance surveillance have also been
identified to continuously improve STD services and at the State levels,
Task Forces on STDs are being constituted to provide SACS with technical
guidance.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee is inclined to conclude that there is an urgent need to launch vigorous
mass campaign at National level by involving State Governments. NGOs, VOs,
Panchayats and other local bodies to raise the awareness level among the masses in
general and rural in particular. NACO in cooperation with various cultural groups/
organizations NGOs, VOs, etc. should therefore, formulate programmes for rural masses,
such as songs, street shows, stage plays, puppet shows, film shows, photo exhibitions,
group discussions and sensitisation workshops to raise the awareness level among
the people regarding prevention of HIV/AIDS etc.
[Sl. No. 28 of Appendix-II, Para No. 222 of 19th Report of PAC  (14th Lok Sabha)]

44
Action Taken
National AIDS Control Organisation conducts campaigns from time to time to
generate awareness and promote safe behaviours. These campaigns are conducted
through mass media including radio, television and print and inter-personal
communication channels such as street plays, folk shows, group meetings, puppet
shows, film shows and sensitization workshops. In addition, hoardings with
messages on HIV/AIDS have been erected and information panels installed at
strategic locations. Exhibitions are also organized during Health Melas, fairs and
other public gatherings. The communication priorities are defined to address the
overall programme objectives while keeping the local needs in mind. Different
States conduct Communication Needs Assessment (CNA) studies to ascertain
communication gaps and vulnerability factors so that local and rural masses can be
reached more effectively.
Panchayati Raj Institutions and other local organizations/groups including NGOs,
CBOs, SHGs have been associated in such campaigns. Advocacy initiatives in the
past have ranged from Parliament to Panchayat levels. To integrate the national effort
with local institutions, a National Convention of Zilla Parishad Presidents and city
Mayors was organized August 2006 and efforts are on to mainstream HIV/AIDS
prevention programme into the functioning of Panchayati Raj Institutions and Urban
Local Bodies.
The States conduct mass compaigns at the State level. Some of the mass mobilization
campaigns with high success include AASHA (AIDS Awareness sustained Holistic
Action) in Andhra Pradesh in which 1,60,000 volunteers were trained across villages
for carrying HIV/AIDS messages to the community. The programme created structural
framework at grassroot level. Another programme namely "Goonj" in Punjab, Haryana
and Chandigarh aimed at mass mobilization focusing on youth seeking commitments
from thousands of youth to spread the messages on HIV/AIDS.
To reach the media dark areas especially in the rural India, considerable emphasis
has been made on Inter-personal Communication. The units of Song and Drama Division
and Directorate of Field Publicity are used extensively to reach population otherwise
inaccessible through mass media. The units organize various films shows, puppet
shows, nukkad nataks, stage shows, street plays, folk songs and various other methods
to address the issue of HIV/AIDS. Family Health Awareness Campaigns have also
been organized to mobilize people. State AIDS Control Societies and NGOs organize
interactive orientation and sensitization workshops with various stakeholders and key
population including PRIs, health care providers, school teachers, media out of school
youth etc. To reinforce and sustain communication initiatives, Red Ribbon Clubs are
being established in schools and colleges.
With the expansion of electronic media, it has also been widely used to reach rural
masses. The Kalyani Health Programme on Doordarshan supported by NACO has
special episodes on HIV/AIDS. The programme has been very well received and many
of the villages have even formed Kalyani Health Clubs. NACO also produces
programmes namely "Jeevan Hai Anmol" and "Let's Talk AIDS" broadcast on
174 stations of All India Radio across the country in 24 languages. Partner organizations

45
have also conducted such activities. NACO in association with BBC-WST and Prasar
Bharati has aired two serials "Jasoos Vijay" and "Haath Se Haath Mila" on Doordarshan
both focusing on HIV/AIDS messages through docu-drama.
With the constitution of National Council on AIDS chaired by Hon'ble Prime Minister,
efforts are on to mainstream HIV/AIDS programmes into various Ministries/
Departments, public and private sector, CBOs, NGOs, FBOs and media (may please
refer to para 244, Sl. No. 50).
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
Another disquieting feature is the revelation by second round of Behavioural
Surveillance Survey-Rural. (February-June 2002) conducted by Dalal Consultant and
Engineers Ltd. which revealed that in Tamil Nadu misconception about treating HIV/
AIDS patients persisted even among doctors. Out of 600 respondents 22 per cent
among allopathic doctors and 5 per cent among indigenous practitioners were not
willing to treat HIV/AIDS cases, although 35 per cent of them had actually been trained
in handling HIV/AIDS cases. The survey also revealed that 32 per cent among the
masses knew that persons suffering from STD have a higher chance of contracting
HIV/AIDS. The level of knowledge about linkages between STD and HIV across the
country was also very low i.e. 21 per cent. In addition to creating general awareness
among the masses about the prevention of HIV/AIDS, the Committee feel that it is
essential to sensitize the doctors, nurses, laboratory technicians, counsellors and
para medical staff and public that HIV/AIDS is not contagious/communicable disease
and HIV patients deserve more sympathetic and humane treatment by one and all.
[Sl. No. 29 of Appendix-II, Para No. 223 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The sensitization of the health staff is an integrated component of the National
AIDS Control Programme where special sessions are held for adopting infection control
practices for reducing stigma and discrimination by the health care providers. Beside
this the special training of about 180000 registered private practitioners is being arranged
by Clinton Foundation emphasizing the above issues. During 2003-04, 2004-05 and
2005-06  582781, 112936 and 106005 health personal were trained respectively.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organization's O.M.
No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated  November 2006]

46
Recommendation/Observation
Imparting the right knowledge to young people on how to protect themselves
against HIV/AIDS and to empower them with the skill to adopt a responsible lifestyle
is an important component of NACP to check the growing prevalence of HIV/AIDS.
Under Phase-I, 17 States and UTs had implemented a programme on HIV/AIDS education
in schools. Since the programme was not implemented in a uniform and systematic
manner and did not cover all the schools in the States/UTs, a National Plan was stated
to have been developed which aimed at integrating HIV/AIDS education programmes
in the schools in suitable and cost effective manner. NACB decided in July, 1999 that
all the schools in States/Union Territories would be covered in a phased manner in a
period of five years i.e. by 2004. However, from the rapid assessment of Schools AIDS
Programme conducted by NACO during January, 2003 it was noticed that the
programme had not been initiated in the States of Jharkhand and Haryana. NACO
could not furnish the exact number of schools covered in Maharashtra and put the
number in the range of 2000-3000. In Uttar Pradesh and Punjab not a single school had
been covered. The coverage of schools under the programme in other States was poor
and ranged between 1 percent and 59 percent except in the State of Andhra Pradesh
(100 percent), Kerala (84 percent) and Nagaland (85 percent). The Committee have
been given to understand that the variation in implementations of the Schools AIDS
Education Programme in States are largely due to varying levels of commitment to the
programme; degree of collaboration with the Department of Education; and available
resources and capacity. The Committee express their serious concern over the tardy
implementation of the Schools AIDS programme and calls for a thorough review/
revamp especially in view of reports that 50 percent new cases of HIV/AIDS are found
in the age group of 15 to 24. Though HIV/AIDS is now a part of National curriculum
frame-work, only Southern States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala and in
Northern States only Himachal Pradesh have so far integrated HIV/AIDS in the Schools
curriculum through SCERT. The Committee expect that the remaining States would
complete the process of integration of HIV/AIDS in their school curriculum
expeditiously so that the students would be able to decide about the difference between
wrong information and correct information about HIV/AIDS. Syllabus on HIV/AIDS
should be carefully drawn keeping in view the sensitivity of the problem. Since several
studies have shown that students who were made aware of sexually related issues are
far more circumspect and cautious in their behaviour, it is therefore, highly desirable
that School AIDS Programme should be carried out uniformly and effectively throughout
the country. The Committee would also like NACO to evolve a suitable programme to
educate youth on HIV/AIDS through non-formal education. To achieve this desired
objective the Ministry of Human Resource Development and respective State
Government should be closely involved at all levels.
[Sl. No. 30 of Appendix-II, Para No. 224 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
1. Initially the School AIDS Education Programme was spearheaded by SACS across
the country through NGOs. Following the programme review and secondary

47
assessment of HIV prevention programme in schools (2003-04), the leadership for
steering the programme was shifted from State AIDS Control Societies (SACS) to
Department of Education. The primary purpose was to (a) upscale the implementation
of the programme, (b) ensure quality transition in the classroom, and (c) ensure long
term sustainability of the programme.
2. After consistent advocacy and follow-up by NACO with MHRD, a National
Action Plan was developed by MHRD during 2005-06 on HIV Prevention Education
among young people with the following key objectives:
I. Covering 100% secondary and senior secondary schools.
II. Integration of skills based age—appropriate HIV Prevention Education into
the curriculum of classes IX-XII.
III. Integration of HIV Prevention Education components in in-service/pre-
service teachers training.
IV . Developing linkages with adult education to reach out of school children
under Adolescence Education Programmes with a view to equip over
10 million adolescents leaving the school system every year.
V. Incorporating measures to prevent stigma and discrimination against
learners/students and educators and ensure access to life skills education
for HIV prevention into education policy.
Against the above, so far out of 1,44,409 government  secondary and senior
secondary schools in the country, an estimated 93,848 secondary and senior secondary
schools, as on March 31, 2006, have been covered. Under this programme from each
schools two teachers and two students (peer educators) have been provided five day
training on HIV/AIDS & life skill education. State-wise coverage is given below:
Andamans 63 Goa 60 Maharashtra 12171
A.P . 12000 Gujarat 7625 Manipur 403
Arunachal 204 Haryana 3050 Meghalaya 641
Assam 2900 H.P . 889 Mizoram 514
Bihar 3000 J&K 892 Nagaland 620
Chandigarh 122 Jharkhand 1032 Orissa 2765
Chhattisgarh 300 Karnataka 8341 Pondicherry 198
Dadra 24 Kerala 2600 Punjab 1200
Daman 30 Lakshadweep 0 Rajasthan 4623
Delhi 1100 M.P. 6402 Sikkim 161
T N 9244 T ripura 118 U.P. 300
Uttaranchal 1756 W.B. 8500 Total: 93848

48
1. 22 States have, so far integrated content on HIV/AIDS in text books and
progress is underway to integrate/review content on HIV prevention and
life skill development in the remaining States.
2. NCERT, NCTE, NIOS, CBSE and State Department of Education are primarily
involved in the process of curriculum integration based on the National
Tool kit developed by NACO and MHRD jointly after numerous
consultations with different wings of Education Department. MHRD has
constituted two committees for content analysis of school textbooks,
teacher education material, adult literacy programme and Mahila Samakhya
from the point of view of adolescence education including HIV/AIDS and
life skills development. Based on the review undertaken so far:
n Adolescence Education components reflected in the National Curriculum
Framework 2005 developed by NCERT.
n National Institute of Open Schooling (NIOS) has integrated HIV/AIDS
content up to the secondary level and efforts are on to integrate the
content in higher secondary education by March 2007.
n Content Analysis of teaching learning material by Council of Boards
of Secondary Education (COBSE) and Central Board of Secondary
Education (CBSE) is in the process.
n Development of model syllabus by Indira Gandhi National Open
University for B.Ed. courses is underway.
3. As part of the National AEP plan for reaching out-of-school youth who
are not covered through formal education such as linkages and integration
of HIV Prevention Education with literacy primers, open and distance
education, continuing education programme, Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA)
and Mahila Samakhya have been taken up such as:
n Adult Literacy Education content are analyzed and reviewed to ensure
uniform content on HIV/AIDS and life skills education.
n Department of Adult Education has directed Population and
Development Education Cell, State/Regional Resource Centres to focus
on building awareness and provide linkage of services among their
beneficiaries in the age group of 15-35 years on HIV/AIDS.
4. Further efforts are being made to consolidate the existing activities with
MHRD and work on following proposed activities:
I. Consolidate ongoing initiatives.
II. Constitute Red Ribbon Clubs with a minimum membership of 30-40
students in every school and college over a period of two years.
III. Establish Youth Friendly Information Centres in all the 468
Universities.
IV . Constitution of Mahila Samakhya Red Ribbon Clubs in 60,000 villages.

49
V. Constitute HIV/AIDS cell in all student/teachers unions to assist in
dissemination on HIV messages.
VI. Make one question on HIV/AIDS compulsory in all board exams (CBSE/
ISCE).
VII. Establishment of a dedicated HIV/AIDS cell in MHRD to implement
programme activities.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
With a view to raise the awareness level regarding HIV/AIDS in rural and slum areas
and other vulnerable groups and to make people aware of the services available under
the public sector for management of Reproductive Tract Infection (RTI)/STD and to
facilitate early detection/treatment of RTI/STD cases by utilizing the infrastructure
available under primary health care system, five rounds of Family Health Awareness
Campaign (FHAC) are stated to have been conducted across the country during the
period April 1999 to March 2003 for which Rs. 109.41 crore was released. Since FHACs
held between May 1999 to February 2002 failed to attract not even 20 percent of the
targeted population, it is therefore, obvious that FHAC have failed to achieve the
desired objective. The Committee feel that benefits of any programme/scheme even if
well conceived does not accrue to the beneficiaries if such scheme are not properly
planned and effectively implemented. It is therefore, essential that implementation of
the scheme are given the requisite attention.
[Sl. No. 31 of Appendix-II, Para No. 225 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Family Health Awareness Campaign (FHAC) was introduced as a pilot project in the
National AIDS Control Programme in 1999-2000 with the objective of increasing
awareness and providing treatment for reproductive tract infection/sexually transmitted
infection. The campaign was carried out from 1999-2000 to 2003-2004 and 2005-2006 in
rural areas especially covering the marginalized population. As per the community
based STI survey conducted at the National Level in 2003 it was observed that STI
prevalence in the community is about 6% among adult populations. Considering the
disease load of STI in the community, FHAC campaigns have treated large number of
STI patients beside increasing the awareness among the rural masses. As a result of
this campaign in 2003-04, 54.29 lakh persons were referred and 48.32 lakh treated
indicating the positive outcome of the campaign.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO dated November 2006]

50
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee note that as against 3.80 lakh health care workers target to be
trained, only 1.64 lakh (43 per cent) were trained as of March 2003. While the percentage
of workers trained in HIV/AID counselling was 99 per cent in Goa. 85 per cent in
Pondicherry, 84 per cent in Uttar Pradesh, 76 per cent in Orissa and 70 per cent in
Haryana, it was very low at 16 per cent in Gujarat, 5 per cent in Punjab, 27 per cent in
Rajasthan, 20 per cent in Tripura and less than one per cent in Uttaranchal. The
Committee cannot but over emphasize the need for proper training of supporting and
ancillary staff for the effective implementation of the HIV/AIDS control programme.
NACO should therefore formulate a comprehensive programme for imparting training
to all healthcare workers, counsellors and volunteers of HIV/AIDS in every district of
the country and undertake it in a time-bound manner.
[Sl. No. 33 of Appendix-II, Para No. 227 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
For comprehensive Human Resource Development, a comprehensive training plan
has been developed under NACP. The plan includes capacity building of personnel
engaged in public sector in prevention, control diagnosis & management of
HIV/AIDS. Currently there are 2815 ICTCs' all over the country, having two counsellors
& one laboratory technicians each. Till date, 5630 counsellors & 2815 lab technicians
have been trained using approved guidelines. Out of these ICTC’s there are 502 exclusive
PPTCT centres. In these centres, in addition to counsellors and lab technicians.
5 Medical Officers have also been trained from each centres. In the ART centre training,
200 medical officers, 100 counsellors and lab technicians will be trained by October
2006. This is in addition to training of private practitioners being undertaken by Clinton
Foundation & Indian Academy of Paediatrics. Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation and
AIDS Alliance are also undertaking training of health professionals.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee note that as of December 2002, there were 1832 licensed/registered
blood banks in the country of which only 940 (685 district level blood banks. 255-major
blood banks) had been modernized by NACO till March 2003. It was observed that out
of the 125 blood banks modernized by NACO, as of March 2003 in Phase-II, 75 blood
banks were yet to be licensed. The details of districts remaining uncovered as of
March 2003 were not available with NACO. While 84 districts did not have modernized
blood banks. 44 districts did not have even blood banking facilities. The Committee
regret to observe that despite NACO's financial assistance to all the State AIDS Control
Societies, the objective of establishing atleast one modernized blood bank in each
district by 2002 remained unachieved. What is more disturbing is the revelation by

51
NACO that many of the blood banks modernized by them in Phase-II were yet to be
licensed, while licenses of some of the Blood Banks modernized in Phase-I might have
been withdrawn/cancelled due to non-adherence to the laid down conditions. It is
incomprehensible as to how NACO had modernized and continued to provide financial
assistance to those blood banks which were either not been licensed or whose license
had been withdrawn/cancelled by Drug Controller of India. Similarly, in 17 cases, there
were variations between the figures supplied by NACO, and the State AIDS Control
Societies in respect of blood banks modernized. Audit scrutiny of records of SACS
further revealed that several blood banks were not functional/fully functional due to
various reasons such as non-supply of equipment, idling of equipment due to non-
receipt of licence for want of repair and non-renewal of licences etc. The Committee are
distressed over the sorry state of affairs prevailing in the country with regard to
setting up of blood banks, their licencing and modernization etc. Since there is a strong
co-relation between HIV and blood transfusion, it is of paramount importance that all
the blood banks of the country are modernized and duly licenced so that they provide
safe blood devoid of any possible HIV/AIDS virus etc. The Committee recommend
that Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should set up a High Level Committee to go
into the entire gamut of functioning of blood banks in the country and suggest measures
for their modernization and proper functioning so that they are geared up to meet the
challenges posed by AIDS. The Committee further recommend that Ministry of Health
and Family Welfare should take serious cognizance of cases in which NACO had
given financial assistance to blood banks which were either not licenced or whose
licence had been cancelled and punitive action should be taken against those found
guilty. NACO should also ensure adequate supply of diagnostic tools and test kits in
all blood banks to enable them to function smoothly. Private blood banks should be
subjected to stringent quality control checks by the agencies authorized by Government
and stringent punitive action be taken against the blood banks which are functioning
without proper license.
[Sl. No. 34 of Appendix-II, Para No. 228 of 19th Report of PAC  (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
In November 2005, DCG (I) has reported that there are 2177 licensed blood banks
operating in the country. Out of these 2177 NACO has modernized and supporting
1230 blood banks in Government and V oluntary/Charitable sector. The remaining
 947 licensed blood banks are in Private Hospitals and Private Commercial sector.
Presently, except for 39 newly formed districts in States of Bihar, UP, Chhattisgarh,
Jharkhand, Kerala, Karnataka, Uttaranchal and Mizoram, all districts in the country
have at least one NACO supported licensed blood banks functioning. These 39 newly
formed districts have been taken up for NACO support to facilitate the establishment
of blood banks in these districts by providing support for minor civil works, equipments
and training of personnel to be placed in these blood banks. Since in some of the
districts even Districts Hospital buildings does not exist, SACS have been asked to
establish in that event at least a Blood Storage Centre to be made functional by the end
of the current financial year 2006-07. The physical target of establishing 20 major blood

52
banks, 80 district level blood banks, 10 model blood banks and 42 component separation
units have been achieved during NACP-II.
As observed by the Committee, the objective of establishing at least one modernised
blood bank in each district remained unachieved on account of creation of new districts.
Under the modernisation scheme, NACO provides only one time equipment grant,
while the physical infrastructure in the hospital and the manpower including Blood
Bank Medical Officers, support staff except one Laboratory Technician has to be
provided by the State Government. Subsequently, the concerned hospital applies for
licence and once licensed. They are included in the list of providing annual recurring
grant as per the approved pattern of assistance under the National AIDS Control
Programme.
Further in regard to providing support to those blood banks which were either not
licensed or whose license have been withdrawn, it is submitted that the recurring grant
is provided only on the basis of number of licensed blood banks in the respective State
as reflected in the Annual Action Plan every year.
All the 80 blood banks taken up under modernization were provided with equipment
along with an in-built annual Maintenance Contract for NACP-II period (1999-2005)
to ensure that all equipments are kept in working condition. The Joint Director/Deputy
Director (Blood Safety) in each of the State during their supervisory visits makes a
check list of the inventory of equipment, their current status etc., for taking immediate
action to ensure that sustained functioning of these equipments.
As far as the regulatory framework is concerned, the Drugs Controller General
(India) with its authorization to State Drug Authorities are the Competent License
Approving Authorities and the licence for functioning of the blood banks is issued
by these functionaries. At times, due to shortage of manpower all the pending blood
banks may not be taken up for renewal in a fixed time frame. However, all possible
efforts are made to ensure that once licensed, the renewal of license is given by the
State Drug Authorities without disrupting the functioning of the existing blood banks.
To ensure stringent controlled checks in Private Blood banks, the representative of
State Drug Authority conducts a detailed inspection and subsequent visits before
granting/renewing the license to such blood banks. The recent amendments in the
Drugs and Cosmetics Rules have authorized State Blood Transfusion Councils in
each of the State and the subsequent grant/renewal of license is issued only subject
to recommendations of the State Blood Transfusion Councils.
According to the report provided by each State AIDS Control Society, all the
blood banks modernized by NACO in their respective States/UTs are licensed. A
Joint Director/Deputy Director level officer incharge of the Blood Safety programme
and ancillary staff of State AIDS Control Society are frequently monitoring the
inventory of blood bank equipments provided by NACO. The State AIDS control
Society is carrying out Annual Maintenance Contract for these equipments to ensure
maintenance of all the equipment provided under modernization scheme. However,
the regulatory framework of granting a license or renewing of the license lies with
Drugs Controller General (India) and State Drug Authorities who are being reminded
from time to time to provide feedback of their inspection results to NACO.

53
NACO has constituted National Blood Transfusion Council (NBTC) as a high level
Committee as a body to be the policy making body agency and to oversee the
functioning of Blood Transfusion Services in the country.
Government is taking initiatives through IEC on improving voluntary blood donation
and organizing voluntary blood donation camps through blood banks to improve the
voluntary blood donation in the country. In 2005, 53.2% of the blood units were
collected from voluntary blood donors. To carry out all the mandatory tests of each
donated units, NACO is providing annual recurring grants to State AIDS Control
Societies for consumables and diagnostic kits to all public and voluntary/charitable
sector blood banks supported by NACO. The State AIDS Control Societies are keeping
record of the status of blood banks being supported by NACO and their licensing
status and update these records from time to time.
Sd/-
 Secretary/ Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee are informed that during March 2000, NACO initiated a feasibility
study on prevention of mother to child transmission in 11 institutions located in
5 high prevalence States of the country. The short course regimen of azidothymidine
(AZT) antiretroviral drug was used in this feasibility study. The second phase of this
feasibility study was started in October 2001 using a single dose of Nevirapine to
both mother and child to prevent mother to child transmission. The actual
implementation of PPTCT of HIV was to be completed by April and July, 2002 in
Medical Colleges and District Hospitals respectively in high prevalence States and
by September 2008 in Medical Colleges in low prevalence States. The Committee note
that training had been completed and service delivery started in 74 out of 82 Medical
Colleges in high prevalence States. However, training had not been completed in 24
per cent district hospitals and service delivery started in only 11 per cent district
hospitals in high prevalence States.  The Scheme is yet to be implemented in Medical
Colleges of low prevalence States. While expressing their concern over the poor
implementation of PPTCT component the Committee desire that the same should be
revamped/reviewed by NACO so as to make it more effective and target oriented. The
scheme should be broad based so as to cover all the District Hospitals and Medical
Colleges in the country. The Committee would also like the Government to shed its
complacency in implementation of various schemes in low HIV/AIDS prevalence States
and direct NACO to take these States seriously with a view to avoiding the spread of
HIV infection in the country.
[Sl. No. 35 of Appendix-II, Para No. 229 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The PPTCT programme is an important component of the programme as considering
the 27 million pregnancies taking place every year, and with 1% HIV positivity there
will be 2 lakhs and 70 thousand positive mothers. As per the available literature, only

54
30% of the mothers will deliver a positive child i.e. to say 70-90 thousand. In order to
contain the delivery of the positive children, the PPTCT programme is being scaled up
and therefore services will be available at all health facilities of the country. The year
wise progress of PPTCT services is shown in reply to para 226.
Prevention of Parent to Child Transmission (PPTCT) Services is now being delivered
through ICTCs. There are 2815 ICTCs across the country. These ICTCs provide
counselling and testing services as well as Navirapine prophylaxis services. During
the year 2005-06 a total of  10,19,304, 7,70,895,6,18,388, 60,975 and 7,653 women were
registered, counselled tested for HIV infection, found HIV+ve and given Navirapine
prophylaxis.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
 Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO dated November 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
In December 2002, the Ministry of Health announced a policy  where under blood
donors found to be HIV positive would be told of their infection and will be asked to
seek confirmation test and counselling. However, due to their utter dismay the Committee
found that NACO continues to follow its existing policy of giving results only to those
who ask for it. The Committee are of the firm view that non-disclosure of HIV status
mandatory to all HIV infected persons could lead to situation where such persons
would be unknowingly spreading the diseases to uninfected persons. Since HIV virus
can remain asymptomatic for three to twelve years till it reaches the final stage of AIDS,
the directive of the Ministry would enable the person to get proper treatment at the
right time. The Committee recommend that NACO should immediately comply with the
above directive of the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare and accordingly issue
necessary instructions to all SACS, District Hospitals, STD clinics in this regard for
strict compliance. NACO should also intensify efforts to detect the infection during
'window period'— time gap between contracting of infection and becoming sero-
positive, so that it would enable early detection of HIV/AIDS virus and help the
persons take necessary preventive steps to mitigate the disease.
[Sl. No. 36 of Appendix-II, Para No. 230 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
On the basis of the recommendations of the Parliamentary Standing Committee the
issue of revealing HIV status was placed as an agenda in the 16th Governing Body
meeting of National Blood Transfusion Council (NBTC). The members of the NBTC
suggested that sero-reactive donor must have access to counselling and testing facilities
in the large volume blood banks to know their HIV status. In order to ensure that all the

55
major blood banks in the country should be equipped with the facilities for counselling
and confirmatory testing one post of counsellor to be created in all major blood banks
in the country. In smaller blood banks with less work load, a strong linkage has to be
developed with the existing V oluntary Counselling and Testing Centre. Based on these
recommendations the matter was placed in the 26th meeting of the National AIDS
Control Board held on 4th October 2006. The National AIDS Control Board has approved
the proposal of placing one counsellor in all blood banks with blood collection of more
than 3000 units. Thus 347 blood banks have been identified where these facilities will
be available so that the HIV status of the blood donors can be revealed after counselling
and confirmatory tests. The remaining 883 blood banks with less than 3000 unit blood
collection every year will be linked to existing ICTC (Integrated Counselling and Testing
Centres).
 Sd/-
Secretary/
 Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November 2006)]
Recommendation/Observation
As a part of  low cost AIDS care activities National AIDS Control Board (NACB) in
August 1999 approved setting up community care centres for People Living with HIV/
AIDS (PLWHA) in those areas where HIV/AIDS infection was comparatively high. As
of March, 2003, NACO had established 37 community centres in various parts of high
and low prevalence States. Audit observed that there was a shortfall in establishment
of Community Care Centres in high prevalence States which ranged between 17 and 78
precent. The establishment of these centres in moderate and low prevalence states
was not keeping with the degree of prevalence of HIV/reported AIDS cases. While
three centres were established in Delhi where the reported number of AIDS cases were
the 766. States like Gujarat with 2474, Madhya Pradesh with 972, Uttar Pradesh with 845
and Chandigarh, Punjab and Haryana together with 1186 reported AIDS cases did not
have a single Community Care Centre. Further, the performance of the Community Care
Centres established till March, 2003 except Sahara Michaels Care Home, Delhi had not
been evaluated by any outside agency. Currently, 54 Community Care Centres are
being run across the country with the help of NGOs and are funded through State
AIDS Control Societies. The Committee recommend that with a view to have better
care and support to presons living with HIV/AIDS, NACO should set up more
Community Care Centres, on top priority basis, in all highly infected areas since
prevention and care are the keys to limiting the spread of HIV/AIDS. The Committee
are also of the view that the Government should enlist the support of Corporate
bodies, NGOs, VOs, Community Based Organizations and Civil Society at large in
setting up more Community Care Centres.
[Sl. No. 37 of Appendix-II,  Para No. 231 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

56
Action Taken
Low cost Community Care Centres are hospices for taking care of people living with
HIV/AIDS (at least 10 PLHAs). The Community Care Centres act as a bridge between
hospital, and home based care, and seeks to address the needs of HIV positive people.
Initially in NACP-II the Community Care Centres  were planned to be set up only in
high prevalence States and later the scheme was extended to other scheme. At present
122 Community Care Centres are being run across the country with the help of NGOs
and are funded through State AIDS Control Societies. The extension is given on the
annual basis at the end of project period of one year. CCCs are regularly monitored and
evaluated by SACS to ensure that they create the maximum impact. The external
evaluation is conducted by SACS in the third year of the programme as per guidelines.
NACO has conducted external evaluation of CCCs in March—May 2005 and the
report indicates that the Community Care Centres are performing as per the NACO
guidelines. CCCs require additional resources to function effectively and the
Organizations that can raise additional resources should be preferred. The guidelines
for CCCs needs to be revised for including certain aspects such as support for laboratory
facilities, services for children, training, transportation for cases etc.
 Sd/-
Secretary/
 Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November 2006)]
Recommendation/Observation
With a view to provide care and support to those infected by HIV/AIDS,
establishment of  Drop-in-Centre in all the States was invisaged in CACP-II. In December,
2001 National AIDS Control Board (NACB) approved setting up of 10 Drop-in-Centres
in every State to be run by registerd associations and networks of PLWHA. However,
against this approval, NACO had set up 3 Drop-in-Centres in Maharashtra, 1 in
Karnataka and 5 in Tamil Nadu. Evaluation of performance of these Centres had not
been conducted as of March, 2003. The Committee express their unhappiness over the
slow pace in setting up these Centres and recommend that NACO should hasten up
the process of establishing adequate number of  Drop-in-Centre in all the States/Union
Territories before completion of NACP-II.
[Sl. No. 38 of Appendix -II, Para No. 232 of 19th Report of PAC  (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As on date 84 Drop-in-Centres are functional in the country. In NACP-II the DICs
were planned to be set up only in six high prevalence States and then all States/Union
Territories have been asked to set up DICs by involving network of people living with
HIV/AIDS. Drop-in-Centres are for providing psychological and care support to PLHAs
and to ensure community participation in the programme. NACO got an external
evaluation of Drop-in-Centres conducted in March— May 2005. The Report indicated

57
that Drop-in-Centres were meeting the original objectives adequately as per the
guidelines and recommended further scaling up and observed that as the DICs attached
to PLHA networks performed better in serving the key objective of social support
through peers. Hence the greater involvement of PLHAs' is being encouraged and
PLHA networks linked with service providers such as hospitals and NGOs helps them
to manage.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated  November 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
Since Commercial Sex Workers are the most vulnerable and high risk group that is
prone to high exposure to HIV/AIDS, their rescue and rehabilitation assume vital
importance in control of HIV/AIDS. It is, therefore, imperative that an alternative
avocation is provided to the rescued Commercial Sex Workers which is suitable to
them. Unless this is done, there is every possibility that their economic condition
would rather force them to go back to their earlier profession and consequent exposure
to HIV. The Committee, therefore, recommend that NACO should devise an appropriate
Relief and Rehabilitation programme for all rescued Commercial Sex Workers inbuilt
into National AIDS Control Programme, so that the risk of spreading HIV/AIDS could
be minimized to that extent possible.
[Sl. No. 39 of Appendix-II, Para No. 233 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As per the validation report prepared on the basis of mapping studies there are an
estimated 8,31,677—12,50,115 Female Sex Workers in the country. For the relief and
rehabilitation programme for all rescued Commerical Sex Workers, linkages with shelter
homes of Ministry of Women and Child Development and Ministry of Social Justice
and Empowerment are being done. Mainstreaming the HIV/AIDS issues with these
departments would ensure increased relief and rehabilitation efforts. For rehabilitation
of Sex Workers, efforts are being made to develop Self Help Groups (SHGs) and
Community  Based Organisations (CBOs) so that Sex Workers are empowered enough
to take decisions for themselves. Such SHGs and CBOs have already been set up in
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, West Bengal and Kerala. In NACP-III the major focus
would be on implementing the Targetted Interventions through CBOs formed by High
Risk Groups (HRGs) including Sex Workers.
Notwithstanding the above, NACO has no organizational capacity to undertake
rehabilitation of Sex Workers with alternative livelihoods. The main focus of NACO is
to ensure that the infection is not transmitted to reverse the epidemic. Since poverty
and low empowerment are factors that make women vulnerable to sex, work, the Rural
Development Departments and the Department of Women and Child Welfare are being

58
addressed to intensify their efforts at poverty alleviation and women empowerment
programmes.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M.No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO,  dated  November 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
A host of Opportunistic Infections (OIs) such as Tuberculosis Candidiasis and
Diarrhoea can easily afflict/affect the person with full blown AIDS. Most of these
infections are curable, if effective therapy is initiated promptly. NACO under NACP-
II provides drugs for treating common opportunistic infections at district hospitals
through State AIDS Control Societies. However, The Committee are concerned to note
that out of total allocation of Rs. 18 crore by NACO for procurement of OIs drugs
during 1999—2003. Societies had utilized only Rs. 5.90 crore (33 per cent). This is
substantiated by the fact that some of the SACS such as Jammu & Kashmir, Goa,
Meghalaya, Uttaranchal, Jharkhand, Lakshadweep  and Chhattisgarh had not spent
any amount on procurement of these drugs. The Committee deprecate the negligent
attitude of SACS towards such an important component of the programme, where
human lives are at stake, and recommend that NACO should strictly ensure that all the
essential drugs are available in all the district level hospitals in adequate quantity and
distributed freely to the infected persons, without any difficulty.
[Sl. No. 40 of Appendix-II, Para No. 234 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It is a fact that OI management has been unsatisfactory. Since then a Technical
Expert Group was constituted and a protocol for management of Opportunistic
Infections (OIs) prepared. In order to ensure prompt and uninterrupted availability of
critical drugs, action has been initiated to Centrally procure drugs and directly supply
them to the ART centre, with a buffer stock maintained at SACS to meet additional
requirements. The drugs for OI have been divided into three categories:—
List A List B List C
Drugs  to  be supplied  by  the Drugs to be ''Available'' at ''Approved'' drug list (to be
Institution where ART centre centre (to be procured by procured  by  SACS/centre
is  located  (responsibility  of NACO  and  supplied  to as per requirement)
Institution/State/NRHM) ART centres)
1. Metronidazole 400 mg 1. Nitazoxanide 500 mg 1. Fluconazole IV 200 mg
2. Albendazole 400 mg 2. TMP-SMX DS 160/800 mg 2. Acyclovir IV 250 mg
3. Ciprofloxacin 500 mg 3. Azithromycin 500 mg 3. Inj. Gancyclovir 500 mg

59
4. Prednisolone 10 mg  4. Fluconazole 150 mg 4. Cap. Gancyclovir 250 mg
 5. Fluconazole 400 mg 5. Itraconazole 200 mg
 6. Clotrimazole tubes 6. Clarithromycin 500 mg
 7. Clindamycin 300 mg 7. Ethambutol 800 mg
 8. Sulfadiazine 500 mg
 9. Inj Amphotericin B
500 mg
10.Acyclovir 400 mg
11.Cefotaxime 1g
12.Levofloxacin 500 mg
13.Cap. Amoxyclav 625 mg
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee note that at present research and development activities in the field
of vaccine development for HIV/AIDS are very limited in the country. With a view to
attract and encourage more and more pharmaceutical/Drugs/Biotech Companies to
undertake Research and Development activities for development of new vaccine and
life saving drugs for control of HIV/AIDS. Government should provide necessary
infrastructural facilities, fiscal and other incentives to Indian Companies/Research
Institutes to enable them to carry out research work either collectively among themselves
or by entering into collaboration with their counterparts in developed and developing
countries.
[Sl. No. 41 of Appendix-II, Para No. 235 of 19th Report of PAC)(14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The National AIDS Control Organization (NACO), Ministry of Health and Family
Welfare, Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) and International AIDS Vaccine
Initiative (IA VI) have entered into a tripartite agreement for developing and evaluating
vaccines ethically and adhering to complete transparency. The National AIDS Research
Institute (NARI), Pune of ICMR initiated a phase-I trial in February 2005 of TgAACO9-
Adeno-Associated Virus (AAV) based vaccine. The second trial started in January
2006 at the Tuberculosis Research Centre (TRC) of ICMR with TBC-M4-Modified
V accinia Ankara (MVA) based vaccine. Till date no other Pharmaceutical/Biotech
Company has approached NACO with a proposal on vaccine development.
List A List B List C

60
The ICMR institutes are also evaluating the efficacy of microbicides for HIV
prevention. The ICMR has signed an agreement with Imperial College of Science,
Technology and Medicine UK to collaborate on scientific studies and clinical trials.
India is likely to host the next International Microbicides Conference to be held in
February, 2008.
All the first line dugs used under the National Programme have been procured from
domestic manufacturers competing against global tenders. A meeting was held under
the chairmanship of the Union Health Secretary on 10th August, 2006 with the Public
Sector Pharmaceutical Co. (IDPL, RDPL, HAL and KAPL) with a view to manufacture
first and second line ARV drugs by these companies. In pursuance of this meeting
RDPL & HAL have already started the manufacture of ART drugs.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
OM. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
For effective implementation of the NACP, NACO had sanctioned posts under
various cadres/categories in all State AIDS Control Societies. However, the Committee
observed that 50 per cent staff including a number of key posts such as JD/DD
(Surveillance), DD (STD), AD (Care), Monitoring and Evaluation Officer in 10 State
AIDS Control Societies have not been filled up thereby adversely affecting the
programme implementation. The Committee, recommend that NACO should take
immediate necessary steps to fill up all the posts lying vacant in different categories
more particularly the posts of Monitoring and Evaluation Officers, at the earliest.
[Sl. No. 44 of Appendix-II, Para No. 238 of 19th Report of PAC) (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The recruitment of staff for SACS is to be done through deputation from the parent
department or through contract.
As can be seen from the table given below out of the 38 State AIDS Control Societies
3 States have less than 10% vacancies. 22 States have 10-30% vacancies and the rest
13 have greater than 30% vacancies. Despite constant followup vacancies persist. In
some States such as Meghalaya, Orissa, Chhattisgarh, Goa low priority is accorded to
SACS and officers are not in position. Some other reasons are:
n High turnover due to promotions and transfers.
n Inadequate incentives for persons to join SACS on deputation.
n Poor remuneration offered by Govt. resulting in poor response from private
sector.

61
n Ban on appointments on new recruitment.
n Frequent transfers of Project Directors which lead to loss of direction.
A number of steps have been taken by NACO to ensure that the key posts in the
State AIDS Control Society are not left vacant. There are:—
(i) The National AIDS Control Board in its 23rd meeting held on 26th March,
2004 empowered AS&DB, NACO to consider and approve the proposal
submitted by the State AIDS Control Societies to relax experience prescribed
for the posts, which they are unable to fill on the basis of existing guidelines.
(ii) The Board has also given powers to AS & DG to consider and approve
proposals submitted by State AIDS Control Societies regarding filling up of
deputation posts on contract basis. This, however, is subjected to the
condition that such contractual appointments shall be valid for only one
year, to renew only with the prior approval of AS&DG, NACO.
(iii) The  National  AIDS  Control  Organization  has  also  issued  a  letter
No. T-11014/4/2004-NACO dated 24.3.2005 to all State AIDS Control
Societies, wherein it has been conveyed to SACS, that if they are unable to
fill a deputation post from among the State Govt. employees, even after
circulating the post on two occasions, they are free to fill the post on
contract basis with prior approval of NACO and subject to the conditions:
the qualification/experiences prescribed for such post shall be strictly
adhered to and the initial consolidated remuneration is fixed at the minimum
of the scale + dearness pay + allowance as applicable.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee note that NACO had appointed National Thermal Power Corporation
Limited (NTPC) on 13 September, 1999 as the procurement agent for procurement of
HIV test kits, equipment and certain drugs under the central component, AIDS Control
Societies are responsible for civil works, procurement of drugs and NGO services for
various activities. Audit scrutiny revealed that 155 out of 299 water baths, 177 out of
250 hot air ovens, 93 out of 100 incubation and 53 out of 100 distilled water equipments
purchased during 1997-98 in Phase-I remained uninstalled till June 2003 rendering
Rs. 51.64 lakh on their purchase infructuous. From the monthly progress Report submitted
to NACO by the National Thermal Power Corporation Limited (NTPC), it was noticed
that equipments worth Rs. 60.87 lakh purchased by NACO during Phase-II were lying
uninstalled. The Committee express their serious concern over the infructuous expenditure
due to non installation of various kinds of equipment resulting in loss to the National/
State exchequers and recommend that Ministry of Health and Family Welfare

62
 should conduct a thorough investigation into the matter with a view to fix accountability
on the officials found guilty. The Committee also recommend that in future the requisite
equipments should be properly estimated, timely ordered and installed so as to avoid
infructuous expenditure and financial loss to the exchequer. Suitable lessons should
be taken from the instant case.
[Sl. No. 45 of Appendix-II, Para No. 239 of 19th Report of PAC  (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
During NACP-I, procurement of equipment was handled by DGS&D, the deficiencies
in supply were notified for remedial action in terms of the contracts under which these
supplies were received. The status of action taken by DGS&D on defaulting suppliers
could not be ascertained. This matter is being pursued with the DGS&D.
Regarding equipments lying uninstalled/unutilised costing Rs. 60.87 lakh purchased
for NACO through the NTPC during NACP-II the matter relates to the purchase
of -40°C and  -80°C deep freezer refrigerators from M/s. Nuaire USA. 42 Nos. of -80°C
at a contract value of Rs. 1,14,74,114+AMC of Rs. 16,27,400 and 42 Nos. of -40°C at a
contract value of Rs. 1,05,43,781 + AMC of Rs. 16,27,400. Letter of credit was opened
on 10th October, 2000 and funds were released deducting 10% of the bid value as
guarantee for installation and the refrigerators had been received and were also installed
in some sites in India. On 20th July, 2001 a complaint was received that the freezers
supplied by M/s. Nuaire are not microprocessor control but solid state control system
and not in accordance with the technical specifications. This was enquired into by the
NTPC and found to be correct. The supplier contested the claim. NTPC encashed the
5% performance security and did not pay the 10% balance outstanding to the company.
In the meantime the manufacturer had installed quite a few machines. Efforts to install
the equipment has got caught in legal wrangles. As per legal advise the contracts have
been terminated and action would be initiated on arbitration proceedings against
M/s Nuaire, U.S.A. (the original supplier).
Close monitoring of procurement is being done periodically at procurement agency
level as well as at NACO in order to avoid recurrence of such events.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee note that for effective monitoring and evaluation of the programme,
each State/Municipal AIDS Control Society was required to appoint a Monitoring and
Evaluation Officer. However, it had been noticed by Audit that 17 (45 per cent) out of
35 Societies had no Monitoring and Evaluation Officer. NACO stated that Societies where
there are no Monitoring and Evaluation Officer, the Joint Director in charge of Surveillance
along with Statistical Assistant perform the monitoring and evaluation functions. The
Committee express their serious concern over non-appointment of M & E

63
Officers by several Societies. They are of the view that since monitoring and evaluation
is an important and continuous activity involving periodical appraisal of the progress
made in achievement of the targets laid down under various components of the
programme, any adhocism with respect to such an important activity would have an
adverse impact on the functioning of the programme. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that NACO should advise all the Societies to appoint Monitoring and
Evaluation Officer without any further delay.
[Sl. No. 46 of Appendix-II, Para No. 240 of 9th Report of PAC  (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Monitoring and Evaluation teams have been set up in 25 AIDS Control Societies of
the States/UTs. State/Municipal AIDS Control Societies. To build their capacities in
monitoring, four Orientation Workshops were organized in August-September, 2006
along with regional review meetings, to enhance their knowledge and develop skills in
use of Computerized Management Information System.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
A contract for consultancy services was signed in November 2000 by NACO and
ORG Centre for Social Research to design and develop a Computerised Management
Information System (CMIS)/institutional framework for objective concurrent monitoring
and evaluation which includes assessment of the status of project implementation and
performance of the National AIDS Control Programme at National and State level.
Though CMIS was to be made operational within two months from the date of signing
of the contract i.e., by January, 2001, however, it was made operational in all the
Societies was poor. Reports from all the societies had never been received during
November, 2001 to April 2003. Further, evaluation of information generated from CMIS
had not been conducted so far. The Committee cannot but depreciate the indifference
and lackadaisical approach adopted by various SACS in submitting Reports to CMIS
as result of which the various objectives laid down under CMIS remain unfulfilled. The
Committee recommend that NACO should instruct all SACS to submit their Reports
periodically to CMIS so that the information furnished by them can be analysed. The
Committee also recommend that NACO should take stringent punitive action against
those SACS which do not submit their Report in time.
[Sl. No. 47 of Appendix-II, Para No. 241 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

64
Action Taken
Development of a fully functional computerised MIS required procurement and instalment
of computer hardware, development of application software, recruitment of Monitoring &
Evaluation Officer, Statistical Assistants and Data Entry Operators and their training. The
States took almost one year to get all inputs required for a functional CMIS.
During regional review meetings, several deficiencies were identified which are
limiting the use of CMIS up to desired levels. These include lack of M&E unit at the
district level, lack of connectivity between reporting units, SACS and NACO and sub-
optimal use of CMIS in analysis and use of information in monitoring. This has improved
reporting by States to nearly 60%.
Since 2003, there has been a gradual increase in the proportion of reporting units
who are using CMIS.
NACO has since taken up the subject with SACS in quarterly review meetings and
organised re-orientation training programme of M&E Officers and other staff on CMIS,
analyze the data and use in monitoring various activities of NACP.
Further NACO is under process of developing a user-friendly, robust, web-based
CMIS for an effective on-line data management system. This system would have an
integrated system to monitor programme related activities, financial status of
implementing agencies and logistic management of ARV drugs, laboratory test kits etc.
Standard reporting formats, monitoring indicators and dashboard have been worked
out under NACP-III. This system will facilitate easier performance based budgeting
and release of fund.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated    November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee are of the considered view that since HIV/AIDS is a multidimensional
problems affecting socio-economic development of the country, impinging on various
economic and social sectors of Governmental and Non-Governmental activity, the
fight against it should be multi-pronged and multi-disciplinary in approach. The control
of HIV/AIDS had been taken up exclusively as a Centrally Spo nsored Scheme i.e.
through NACP-I & II and the role of State Government appears to be rather
peripheral in the implementation of NACP. Keeping in view the magnitude of the
problem posed by HIV/AIDS, the fight against this dreaded disease has to be
multi-pronged for which Governments at all levels—National, State and lo cal  need
be involved.  The Committee also note that disparities exist among different States
with regard to their fight against AIDS while States which have been categorized as
high prevalent States viz. Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra etc. have taken
up the battle against AIDS seriously, rest of the States which fall either under the

65
category of moderate or low prevalence have been complacent. The Committee,
therefore, recommend that in order to make the fight against HIV/AIDS, a truly mass
movement of National level. Government of India should actively indulge Governments
at all levels viz. State Governments and local bodies such as Panchayats, Municipalities
etc. irrespective of the degree of prevalence of HIV/AIDS should be initiated. Since the
prevalence of AIDS varies from State to State and given the socio-cultural differences,
that exist among different States, each State should be given freedom to devise and
formulate their own HIV/AIDS Control Programme in keeping with the broad National
objectives.
[Sl. No. 50 of Appendix-II,  Para No. 244 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
National AIDS Control Programme is implemented through the 38 State AIDS Control
Societies developed to ensure strong ownership of the HIV/AIDS prevention and
control. As  the prevalence of the epidemic and its implications vary from State to
State, the State Governments devise their own strategies and action plans for tackling
the disease keeping the national objectives in view. For smooth flow of funds to the
programme and for greater functional autonomy, the State Governments have already
adopted the Society model by forming State AIDS Control Societies with proper
representation of NGOs, experts in the field and organizations of people living with
HIV/AIDS.
More focused interventions were implemented and intensive awareness
campaigns were taken up in the high prevalence States of Andhra Pradesh,
Maharashtra, Tamil Nadu, Karnataka, Nagaland and Manipur to check the spread
of HIV infection as over 70% of the infections are in these States. However, the
programme is being strengthened to ensure effective response to the epidemic in
other States classified as moderate prevalence, highly vulnerable and vulnerable
States. It is planned to saturate the 4 million high risk groups such as Commercial Sex
Workers, Men Having Sex with Men & Injecting Drug Users, as estimated 12 million
highly vulnerable population namely migrants and truckers and a large number of
young women and men in the general community who constitute 40% of the country's
population with the prevention messages. Accordingly, the number of Targetted
Interventions (TIs) will be increased to 2100 and collaborative efforts are being made
to reach young people through other departments and ministries and voluntary
networks.
In order to reiterate the Government's commitment to prevent the spread of HIV and
to facilitate a strong multi-sectoral response to combat it effectively National Council
on AIDS (NCA) headed by the Hon'ble Prime Minister of India has been constituted.
It comprises of 31 key ministries and the Chief Ministries of three high prevalence
States, one moderate prevalence State and three highly vulnerable States. The council
also consists of representatives from the civil society including NGOs, Positive people's
networks and the private sector.

66
The functions of NCA are:
n To mainstream HIV/AIDS issues in all Ministries and departments by
considering it as a development challenge and not merely a public health
problem.
n To lead the multi-sectoral response to HIV/AIDS in the country with
special reference to youth and the work force.
n To review the inter-sectoral commitments.
Under ongoing inter-sectoral partnership on mainstreaming, NACO has been
collaborating with M/o Education, Labour, Youth Affairs & Sports, Panchayati Raj,
Women & Child Development, Road Transport & Highways, Social Justice &
Empowerment, Rural Development and Defence etc.
A summary of mainstreaming efforts taken by above departments is as below:
1. So far 93,000 secondary and senior secondary schools have been covered
under the co-curricular activities of National Adolescence Education
Programme implemented by Department of Education.
2. 32 VCTCs are at present functional in the hospitals run by Ministry of
Railways and more than 828 PLHAs provided ART in 5 ART centers run
by railways.
3. NACO supported 30 workshops held to build capacity of 313 staff
members of NGO partners and nearly 52,633 drug addicts were counselled
on HIV/AIDS through 200 NGOs in collaboration with Ministry of Social
Justice & Empowerment.
4. In collaboration with Ministry of Women & Child Development around
75,000 Anganwadi workers were trained in different States.
5. Labour department has trained approximately 3000 industrial managers,
trade union leaders and employees of labour department in work place
interventions. 263 education officers of CBWE are trained as trainers on
HIV/AIDS 2,31,532 workers were sensitised during 2005 (organised and
un-organised sector) and 35 STD clinics, 35 VCTCs, 10 Blood Banks are
functioning with NACO support.
6. A cell on HIV/AIDS has been set up in National Highways Authority of
India, Ministry of Shipping, Road Transport and Highways and efforts are
being made to strengthen coverage of truckers along the stretch of 65000
KM (Highways).
7. Defence Ministry supports 10 STD clinics, 13 VCTC/PPTCT centres, ART
in all major hospitals and modernisation of 17 Modern Blood Banks with
technical support of NACO.
8. Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports has launched quiz and outreach based
YUVA (Youth Unite for Victory against AIDS) campaign through their youth
organization across the country in June, 2006.

67
9. A national convention of Zilla Parishad Presidents and city mayors was
organized by Parliamentary Forum of HIV/AIDS in collaboration with NACO,
M/o Health & Family Welfare, M/o Panchayati Raj. M/o Urban Development
and UNAIDS in August 2006 and efforts are on to mainstream HIV/AIDS
prevention programme into the functioning of Panchayati Raj Institutions
and local bodies.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee understand that a number of steps have been taken by the State of
Tamil Nadu in fighting the dreaded disease of HIV/AIDS which have yielded
encouraging results. As a result of sustained effort of Tamil Nadu State AIDS Control
Society in cooperation and coordination with AIDS Prevention and Control Project,
the State made significant achievements in AIDS prevention and care. Some of the key
features of the success story of Tamil Nadu are behavioural changes such as increase
condom use, reducing the vulnerability of people to the risk of infection and effort to
offer affordable ARV treatment of people living with HIV/AIDS etc. The USAID funded
AIDS Prevention and Project in Tamil Nadu launched in 1995, has been another success
story acclaimed for its effective Targetted Interventions approach and research and
survey activities like the Annual Behavioural Sentinel Surveillance surveys and the
survey to estimate the community prevalence of HIV/AIDS. While appreciating the
measure taken by the Tamil Nadu Government, the Committee are of the firm opinion
that Ministry of Health & Family Welfare should study them in detail so as to circulate
to all the States and impress upon them to replicate the efforts of the Tamil Nadu
Government which would eventually help to contain and combat the spread of HIV/
AIDS to a large extent.
[Sl. No. 51 of Appendix-II, Para No. 245 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The recommendations of the Committee have been noted. An indepth analysis of the
TN data was also undertaken by leading epidemiologists which showed that HIV prevalence
in women aged 15-24 years in southern States fell from 1.7% to 1.1% in
2000-04. There was no significant decline in the prevalence in nothern States. The findings
have vindicated the efficacy of the NACO strategy. Best practices and interventions taken
up in Tamil Nadu are accordingly being replicated in other States also.
Sd/-
Secretary/
 Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated   November, 2006]

68
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee are of the considered view that the problem of AIDS is fast assuming
an epidemic proportion in North Eastern Region and is qualitatively different from
other parts of the country especially that of high prevalence States such as Andhra
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra and Karnataka. The spread of HIV/AIDS in this
particular region is largely on account of Intravenous Drug Use (IDU) where over 25 to
30 per cent of the youth population are reported to be HIV positive. The Committee feel
that in view of the international dimension to the problem of AIDS in this region on
account of illicit drug trafficking from across the borders from Laos, Myanmar and
Thailand making youth of this region susceptible to drug addiction, there is an urgent
need for having a separate dispensation to control and combat HIV/AIDS in the
North-Eastern region. They, therefore, recommend that with a view to giving special
focus to this region the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare may examine the feasibility
of setting up 9 separate body/agency exclusively for North-Eastern States to oversee
the implementation and monitoring of special programme for HIV/AIDS control.
[Sl. No. 52 of Appendix-II, Para No. 246 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
NACO has already initiated action to establish a sub-office of NACO as a Regional
Resource Centre at Guwahati to monitor the implementation of the programmes, enhance
capacity building and strengthen the management of the AIDS Control Programme in
the North-Eastern States. It is expected that the sub-office will be operationalized by
the end of this year.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]

CHAPTER  III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM THE
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation/Observation
The review conducted by Audit relates to National AIDS Control Programme
covering all State/Municipal AIDS Control Societies (SACS/MACS) and National AIDS
Control Organisation in Delhi for the period 1998-99 to 2002-2003. The principal objective
of this review was to ascertain the impact of various components of the programme
such as utilization of funds released and accounting; efficacy of priority Targeted
Interventions for groups at high risk; the Information, Education and Communication
Programme; adequacy of training programmes; functioning of blood banks and Sexually
Transmitted Diseases Clinics; adequacy of procurement procedures; utilization of
equipments; achievement of targets and impact evaluation; and monitoring and
evaluation procedures.
[Sl. No. 5 of Appendix-II, Para No. 199 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Statement of fact. No comments.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated  November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
Targeted Interventions (TIs) are globally perceived as the most effective strategy
for arresting the spread of HIV/AIDS. It focuses on the strategy to prevent HIV infection
and transmission among the groups who tend to involve in “High Risk Sexual
Behaviour". The activities of TIs are designed basically to inform, educate and counsel
the marginalized and vulnerable sections of populations, which are at high HIV risk
and provide them with preliminary care and support so that they move towards
behaviour change and healthy living practices. Intervention with High Risk Groups
(HRGs) that are at the core of HIV transmission can greatly reduce the spread of HIV
into the general population. Directing HIV prevention efforts among these groups
(with high rate of partner-change, whether sexual or needle-sharing partners) is proven
cost effective strategy as it has the multiplier effect of preventing many subsequent
69

70
rounds of infections amongst the general population. Such High Risk Groups broadly
include Commercial Sex Workers (CSWs), Injecting Drug Users (IDUs), Men having
sex with Men (MSM), truckers, migrant workers, etc. Targeted Interventions among
these groups involve multipronged strategies such as behaviour change,
communication, counselling, health care, treatment for STD and creating demand for
and making provision of condoms, along with other activities that can help create
enabling environment for behavioural change.
[Sl. No. 17 of Appendix-II, Para No. 211 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Committee has reiterated the strategy followed by NACO and therefore as
such, no follow up action is required.
Sd./-
  Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
As mentioned earlier in the Report, the tenure and level of diffusion of the HIV/
AIDS in India indicate that we are accelerating towards a dangerous inflex point,
Growing exponentially, HIV/AIDS is different from every other major infectious diseases
where new cases grow or decline slowly. In the absence of a vaccine or a cure, prevention
is the most effective strategy to control HIV/AIDS. Since majority of population in
India is still uninfected, it becomes essential to not only raise awareness levels but
also bring about behavioural changes through Information, Education and
Communication (IEC) activities. Phase-II of NACP seeks to attain an awareness level
of not less than 90 per cent among the youth and others in the reproductive age group.
According to the Baseline Surveillance Survey, 2001, 76 per cent of the respondents
surveyed at the National level were aware of HIV/AIDS. The percentage ranged between
40 and 98 in the 22 States surveyed by ORG-Centre for Social Research. While States
like Andhra Pradesh, Goa, Himachal Pradesh, Kerala, Manipur and Punjab recorded an
awareness level  of  more than 90 per cent, States like Bihar (40.3 per cent), Gujarat
(55 per cent), Madhya Pradesh (56 per cent), Uttar Pradesh (51 per cent) and West
Bengal (58 per cent) recorded poor awareness of HIV/AIDS. Eighty nine per cent of
respondents in urban areas were aware of HIV/AIDS while 72 per cent of respondents
in rural areas were  aware of HIV/AIDS. The rural-urban disparities were rather prominent
in the States of Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, West Bengal, Gujarat, Bihar, Assam,
Orissa, Rajasthan and Sikkim. Male-female respondents exhibited similar trends in
awareness levels. As regards awareness of transmission of HIV/AIDS through sexual
contact, the survey revealed that 71 per cent of the respondents at the National level
were aware of the mode of tranmission.  The level of awareness was 85 per cent in

71
urban areas and in rural areas it was 67 per cent. The survey further revealed that only
47 per cent among the general population, 66 per cent among the Commercial Sex
Workers and only 68 per cent clients of female sex workers were aware of the methods
of prevention of HIV/AIDS. A sizeable proportion of the general population in almost
all State harbours many misconceptions about the spread of HIV.
[Sl. No. 27 of Appendix-II,  Para No. 221 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The provisional results of BSS 2006 indicate improvement in comparison to BSS
2001 (covering about 97000 respondents in the age group of 15-49) regarding most of
the parameters related to awareness, mode of transmission and knowledge about HIV/
AIDS prevention. Another independent study conducted in 17 States and covering
22,800 respondents, by BBC-WST in 2005 also showed improvement in awareness
levels. The Table below gives a comparative picture of the awareness levels at different
points in time:
     Indicator BSS 2001 BBC-WST 2004 BSS 2006
Awareness 89.1% 90% 92.4%
level among
urban population
Awareness 72.3% 82% 81.2%
among rural
     population
Sd/-
 Secrtary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]

CHAPTER  IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HAVE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE
AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation/Observation
Under NACP, State/Municipal AIDS Control Societies are to submit their Annual
Action Plans to NACO three months prior to the commencement of the next Financial
Year so that they could be approved and allocation of funds be made on time. The
Committee are dismayed to note that till 2002-03, none of the SACS/MACS had
submitted their Annual Action Plan on time. Inordinate delays in submission of Annual
Action Plan by SACS resulted in their belated approval which in turn affected the
proper utilization of funds and as a consequence there were considerable unspent
balance lying with the SACS/MACS at the end of the year. This also affected the
targets set in respect of some programmes like strengthening of Sexually Transmitted
Diseases (STD) clinics, Voluntary Counselling and Testing Centres (VCTCs), training
etc. The Committee regret to observe the inordinate delay in submission of Annual
Action Plan by various SACS and desire that in future NACO should strictly ensure
that Annual Action Plans are submitted by all SACS/MACS within the stipulated time
frame. For this purpose, the matter needs to be taken at regular intervals with the State
Governments at the appropriate levels to impress upon SACS/MACS for the timely
submission of Annual Action Plans.
[Sl. No. 9 of Appendix-II,  Para No. 203 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Annual Action Plans of all the societies are finalized within the 1st quarter of that
financial year and funds released during the 1st quarter of that financial year.
The procedure adopted by NACO for timely submission of Annual Action Plan by
SACS/MCACS has already been submitted in a written note to PAC.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated  November 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
On the basis of the Annual Action Plans received from Societies, NACO makes
component-wise allocation of funds to the Societies which, in turn, report expenditure
72

73
through quarterly Statement of Expenditure (SOE). The Committee note that while the
expenditure on the component Preventive Interventions for General Community
exceeded the indicative percentage of the total outlay, the expenditure on low cost
AIDS care and inter-sectoral collaboration fell far short of the indicative outlay. This is
substantiated by the fact that in case of preventive interventions for the general
community, the indicative cost (per cent) of total outlay as per Project Appraisal Document
(PAD) was 33.7 per cent and against this the expenditure were 51.07 per cent (1999-
2000), 42.67 per cent (2000-01), 55.19 per cent (2001-02) and 49.99 per cent (2002-03)
whereas in case of low cost AIDS care the allocation was 14.1 per cent of indicative
cost (per cent) of total outlay and against this the expenditure were 3.53 per cent (1999-
2000), 1.84 per cent (2000-01) 3.26 per cent (2001-02) and 5.29 per cent (2002-03). The
Committee, recommend that Ministry should identify the bottlenecks responsible for
low expenditure of fund in the low cost AIDS care and in Inter Sectoral Collaboration
components and take necessary steps for stepping up the expenditure and also
periodically monitor progress made by SACS on these components so that the targets
set under these components are achieved. NACO should also identify the thrust areas
requiring special attention and step up monitoring expecially in planning, management
and implementation of other components under NACP.
[Sl. No. 10 of Appendix-II,  Para No. 204 of 19th Report of PAC  (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Low Cost AIDS care include the establishment of  Community Care Centres, Drop in
Centres, and treatment for Opportunistic Infections (OIs). These services are made
available to address the medical, psycho-social and care & support needs of people
living with HIV & AIDS. Initially the provisioning of these services were focused in the
six high prevalent States and after 2001-02 expanded to other States. As on date
122 Community Care Centres, 84 Drop in Centres are functional in the country. Treatments
for Opportunistic Infections (OIs) are being provided through the Community Care
Centres and ART Centres. SACS have been encouraged to develop positive networks
so that the services made available through these centres are extended to the neediest.
The services of People Living with HIV and AIDS (PLW As) are being utilized as
positive speakers for reducing the stigma and discrimination in the community.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated  November 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
As indicated earlier, there are an estimated 5.14 million HIV cases in the country
based on Sentinel Surveillance 2004. According to the reports submitted by various
States/Union Territories to NACO, the cumulative number of HIV/AIDS cases stood at
96086 in 2004. The Committee note with serious concern that there had been a

74
continuous rise in the number of HIV/AIDS cases reported since 2001. During the
years 1999-2000, 2000-01 and 2001-02 there had been an increase of 60 per cent,
80 per cent and 69 per cent respectively of the AIDS cases in the country. NACO has
attributed the rise in AIDS cases to more and more people coming for treatment in
public sector hospitals and also increase in the number of hospitals providing such
services. At the same time, NACO has conceded that the statistics available with them
may not be accurate as many of the AIDS patients may still not have the access to
public sector hospitals and that there may be many more number of unreported AIDS
cases in the country. The Committee feel that due to certain reasons like social stigma
attached, complacency and lack of awareness some of the patients may not be going
to public/private hospitals for treatment. Obviously, such patients do not for a part of
the survey conducted by NACO. The Committee, therefore, recommend that with a
view to arrive at an accurate and reliable database on AIDS patients/HIV cases in the
country, the Sentinel Survey must be broad based so as to capture the scope and
extent of the epidemic prevalent in rural areas and also in highly populated and large
States such as Uttar Pradesh and Bihar. The Government, therefore, should explore all
the possible avenues that survey conducted in this regard are as far as possible
scientific and accurate, since the data base on AIDS plays a very important role in
fixing realistic targets and also in formulating the plan and programme for combating as
well as containing the spread of HIV/AIDS in the country. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that Government should undertake a fresh sentinel surveillance based on
Systematic and scientific approach so as to arrive at an accurate and fairly reliable data
base on HIV/AIDS.
[Sl. No. 13 of Appendix-II,  Para No. 207 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The observations of the Committee have been noted and various activities for
strengthening the existing surveillance system have been submitted in the reply on
para 195. Besides this, the reporting of AIDS cases and deaths is carried out by
passive surveillance and not by active search of cases. Further, the diagnosis of HIV
infection/AIDS is only possible with laboratory tests. Therefore, the reporting of
AIDS cases and deaths will improve as access to integrated counselling testing services
expand.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO,  dated  November 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The sources of infection of AIDS can be broadly divided into five categories,
namely sexual transmission,  parents to child transmission, blood and blood products.
intravenous drug users and others. The Committee note that in 86 per cent of AIDS
cases, the sexual route remains the most probable source of infection. Another probable

75
source of infection is parents to child transmission which rose from 0.72 per cent in
2000 to 2.65 per cent in 2003.  The Committee observe that though the transmission of
AIDS through blood and blood product has come down from 7.79 per cent in
March 1999 to 2.79 per cent in March 2003, the number of cases in absolute terms have
however been increasing and the target of keeping it below 1 per cent still remains to
be achieved. The Committee are given to understand that NACO have taken a number
of steps to ensure that every unit of blood is mandatorily tested for HIV, Syphilis,
Malaria and Hepatitis (B&C) before the unit is transfused to patients, test kits are
provided free of cost to the Blood Banks that are supported by it and the quality of
testing is assured by Nation-wide External Quality Assurance System (EQAS).
Professional blood donors have been banned and a number of activities are being
undertaken to augment voluntary blood donation in the country. Steps are also being
taken to orient the prescribers of blood towards  appropriate clinical use, so that blood
is transfused only when it is absolutely essential and the right quantities of blood
components are used. The Committee while taking note of the steps taken by NACO to
reduce the risk of transmission of AIDS through blood, recommend that NACO should
redouble their efforts to achieve the target of keeping the number of AIDS cases
infected through blood transmission to 1 per cent.
[Sl. No. 15 of Appendix-II,  Para No. 209 of 19th Report of PAC  (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
To ensure safety of blood and blood products in various blood transfusion centres
in the country, NACO has undertaken several steps as listed below:—
n For the modernization of blood banks and component separation facilities
one time equipment grant and yearly recurrent grants as per the approved
Pattern of Assistance are provided.
n Structured training on blood transfusion is being provided at 17 identified
centres all over the country for improving the capacity of the staff working
in the blood banks.
n During the year 2006, it has been planned to conduct 147 trainings sessions
in identified training institutions based on the training requirement of States/
UTs.
n Provision made for setting up of Blood Storage Centres to take care of
requirement of low volume of Blood in remote/rural settings.
n To augment the proportion of voluntary blood donation. 45,000 voluntary
blood donation camps are being organized by various organizations like
Indian Red Cross Society, Rotary Club, Indian Medical Association State
branches. During the year 2005, 53.2% of the blood units were collected
through voluntary blood donation.
n NACO has conducted five regional workshops and one orientation workshop
in each of the State on ‘Rational use of Blood’ to appraise them of the

76
appropriate clinical use of blood and blood products. The Standard Operating
Procedures for blood banks functioning have been developed and are in
place including testing protocols to ensure efficiency in testing of
transfusion transmissible infections (TTIs).
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated  November 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee noted that as of September, 2004, 933 TIs are being implemented
across the country. However, the data relating to coverage of target population by
these TIs was not available with NACO. Though the Ministry claimed that there has
been notable increase in terms of coverage of vulnerable population through TI, yet,
50 per cent of the population is still to be covered. The Committee therefore, desires
that efforts need to be stepped up to bring the uncovered population under the ambit
of TI Programme. NACO should also ensure regular reporting by SACS regarding
progress made by them in implementation of TI programmes through Computerised
Management Information System (CMIS). Further the definition of High risk group
needs to be broad based so as to include more vulnerable groups such as new recruits
of Army and Para-military forces, Army troops separated from families, troops deployed
in foreign countries, uniformed forces and their families which are prone to high risk
and which need inter-sectoral participation in prevention of HIV/AIDS. The Committee
cannot but over-emphasize, the need to ensure that vulnerability and risk should form
the basis of planning and programme implementation for prevention and control of
HIV/AIDS especially in the backdrop of CIA's National Intelligence Council prediction
that the number of AIDS cases in India will surpass every other country and it may
have as many as 20 to 25 million AIDS cases by 2010.
[Sl. No. 18 of Appendix-II, Para No. 212 of 19th Report of PAC  (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As on August 2006, a total of 1088 TIs are being implemented by NGOs/ CBOs
across the country. Of these 325 are exclusively focused on the three High Risk Groups
(CSW,  IDU and MSM). Besides NACO assisted programmes, the Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation is also supporting an estimated 150 NGO's for TI interventions. In addition
to the 3 HRGs. IT’s are also taken up for covering bridge populations such as truckers,
migrant workers, prison inmates, street children etc. covering population groups who
have high vulnerability to getting this infection.
Though the armed and para  military forces are not categorized as high risk, very
high priority has been and is continued to be provided to them.
In 2003, nation wide mapping exercise was undertaken to assess the population of
HRG's in the country. This exercise has not only provided information on the probable

77
number but also points of concentration. This information is now being further refined
and used for upscaling to ensure saturation under the NACP III. Lack of funds during
NACP II, inadequate capacity among NGO's and SACS and legal hurdles and social
stigma related to the HRG's in particular MSMs' were the main factors for lower coverage.
Table below provides the estimated size and coverage of High Risk Groups together
by NACO and Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation through Targeted Interventions
programme are given below:
Sl. High No. Estimated Estimated Percent
No. Rise of Size Coverage Coverage
Groups TI's
1. Sex W orkers 8,31,677 (—) 5,88,777 55%
12,50,115
2. IDUs 96,463 (—) 1,02,344 53%
1,89,729
3. MSM 23,52,113 1,46,397 6.0%
4. Male sex workers 2,35,213
The TIs reporting format on CMIS has been revised to incorporate the suggestions
made by various stake holders. Monitoring and Evaluation division of NACO conducted
five regional workshops for streamlining the CMIS reports on TI. The objective is to
monitor the progress of TIs and simultaneously giving the feed back to the NGOs
implementing TIs. The reporting has improved from 35% in December 2004 to 54.3% in
August 2006. SACS officials conduct monitoring appraisals of TIs on regular basis
and give feed back to NGOs/CBOs. Project Support Units (PSUs) have been established
in nine states for building the capacity of NGOs/CBOs which has also contributed to
improved reporting and monitoring. Under NACP III all SACS will be provided with
the PSU's as the experience has been extremely positive.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO,  dated November 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee note that a National Targeted Intervention Evaluation Programme
was conducted by Sexual Health Resource Centre in partnership with NACO during
2003 in 54 TIs spread across 17 States to assess the average quality of different
elements of TIs viz. Condom Promotion, STD component, Behavioural Change
Communications (BCC)., Enabling environment, Needs assessment proposal,
Development, Baseline study and project Management. The study found the average
quality of the elements of TIs to be in range of 21 to 41 per cent and the average quality
of TIs in the country logged at a poor 37.8 per cent. The study revealed that the inputs
(training and funding) provided by States AIDS Control Societies were much below
that what was needed and that the average quality of TIs needed to be enhanced if

78
they are to deliver the expected results.  The Committee express their concern over the
poor quality of different elements of TIs due to which the Programme could not achieve
the desired results. The lackadaisical approach adopted by State AIDS Control Societies
and NACO in this regard is nothing but regrettable. They are of the opinion that
NACO should promptly identify the weaknesses with a view to taking suitable corrective
steps to make TIs more effective and result oriented. Further, the Government ought to
take the co-operation of NGOs. VOs, Community Based Organisations, the target
community and the Civil Society at large to make TI programme a truly mass movement.
[Sl. No. 19 of Appendix-II, Para, No. 213 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
During 2003-04 NACO undertook two external evaluation studies of TI projects in
22 States. The findings and recommendations of the evaluation studies were:—
n TIs have a critical role in reducing spread of the epidemic and therefore,
interventions must focus on groups at highest risk (CSW, MSM, IDU) and
saturate their coverage.
n Capacity building of NGOs and SACS should be further strengthened as
the number of training (2.67/intervention/year) is inadequate and number of
training days (6.63/intervention/year) is low.
n Issues related to financial flows to the NGOs should be addressed to reduce
delays (91 days) and low volume of funds (Rs. 5.44 lakhs).
n Quality of implementation should be improved.
For generating a better focus on the Core groups (CSW, MSM, IDU), NACO through
national consultations (held in year 2004-05) has revised the costing guidelines for
Targeted Intervention Projects. This helped in scaling up of the TI programme for
saturating the coverage of Core groups. All SACS have developed plans for saturating
the coverage of Core groups. The Targeted Interventions among CSWs have been
increased from 147 in 2003 to 186 in 2006; the IDU interventions have increased from
39 in 2003 to 114 in 2006 and 19 Interventions among MSM in 2003 to 30 in 2006. The
geographically scattered population of CSWs, MSM and IDUs are also being covered
through 416 composite interventions. NACO has set up Project Support Units (PSUs)
in nine States to facilitate the scaling up of  TIs, building capacity of NGOs and
improving the quality of services. The PSUs have developed a year-wise training/
capacity building action plan for each project staff (Project Coordinators, Out Reach
Workers, Counsellors, Accountants and  Peer Educators), for the themes (CSWs,
MSM,  IDUs, Truckers, Migrants) and the number of training days have been worked
out. The training modules for each category has been compiled and shared with all the
SACS for taking up the training programme. Technical Resource Group for each theme
(CSWs, MSM, IDUs, Truckers, and Migrants) has been developed to provide technical
guidance and assistance for improving the quality of the programme. In order to
address the delay in release funds to NGOs by SACS, the finance managers have been
sensitized on regular basis. The volume of funding has been improved from Rs. 5.44
lakhs to an average of Rs. 10.00 lakhs. The quality of services such as Syndromic Case

79
Management of STIs, Condom Promotion etc. is being improved upon as the cost for
treating: seed money for Social marketing of Condoms etc. has been incorporated in
the revised costing guidelines. The monitoring of NGO activities is being carried out
on the monthly and quarterly basis and the monitoring frame work has been developed
to include increased condom use, reduction in multi partner exchange (sex & needle),
higher treatment seeking behaviour among HRGs. The internal evaluation of TIs is
being conducted on half yearly and annual basis to strengthen the quality of the TI
programme.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee note that under Project Implementation Plan (PIP) mapping of high
risk areas was to be conducted by all Societies to identify the size and number of target
groups, their risk behaviour and their environment. This process enables to locate the
size of high risk population where TI projects can be implemented. As on October, 2003
barring Lakshadweep, Meghalaya, Haryana and Goa all State AIDS Control Societies
have undertaken the programme of detailed mapping of the vulnerable population
which was at different stages. The mapping exercise is stated to be over in all States
and 33 mapping reports of major SACS are available with the Government barring
reports from States of Chhattisgarh, Rajasthan, Orissa, Lakshadweep and Dadra &
Nagar Haveli which are being finalized. The Committee, recommend that NACO should
finish the mapping exercise of the remaining States at the earliest so as to have a
complete and reliable data relating to high risk population.
[Sl. No. 20 of Appendix-II,  Para No. 214 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Mapping of the High Risk Groups (i.e. Sex Workers, Men who have sex with men,
Injecting Drug Users, Truckers and Migrants) has been completed in all the States to
identify location and size of HRGs. These studies were commissioned by each State
AIDS Control Societies (SACS) between years 2001-2004 through various research
agencies of national repute. The mapping exercise was completed in Haryana, Goa,
Meghalaya & Lakshadweep in 2004-05 and the reports are available with NACO. The
re-validation of all such mapping data has also been carried out at national level in
2005-06 to consolidate the estimated size and estimated sites of HRGs and the report of

80
which is available with NACO. Following estimates have been generated out of
mapping exercise:—
Sl. No. High Risk Groups Estimated Size
1. Sex W orkers 8,31,677—12,50,115
2. IDUs 96,463—1,89,729
3. MSM 23,52,113
4. Male sex workers 2,35,213
5. Truckers 5-6 million
The States which have mapping information more then three years old are revisiting
the mapping exercise to update the mapping information. In the Annual Action Plan for
year 2006-07 Rs. 219.51 lakh has been allocated to 16 SACS for undertaking an exercise
to update the data.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
A Behavioural Surveillance Survey (BSS) was conducted by ORG Centre for Social
Research on behalf of NACO in the year 2001 to assess the availability and accessibility
of condoms. At the National level, the data suggests a fairly high level of condom use
awareness but with marked regional variations. Punjab and Himachal Pradesh had
more than 95 per cent awareness levels, while Delhi, Haryana, Goa, Jammu and Kashmir
and Kerala had an awareness level ranging between 85 and 95 per cent. Except
Andhra Pradesh (84.7 per cent), the Southern States had awareness figures below 75
per cent. While awareness of condoms in urban areas of the country was fairly high
(90.4 per cent), it was relatively low in rural areas particularly in States of Assam (69.5
per cent), Bihar (64.8 per cent), Karnataka (64.8 per cent), Madhya Pradesh (69.8 per
cent), Maharashtra (67.2 per cent), Orissa (61.2 per cent), other North Eastern States
(62 per cent) and Tamil Nadu (67.6 per cent). The Committee recommend that the
awareness about safe sex should be spread more effectively especially in the rural
areas by using all available fora such as Gram Sabhas etc. and by conducting Health
Mela etc. Training for elected members of Gram Panchayats and Women Self Help
Groups on issues related to AIDS should be imparted so as to bring about an attitudinal
change and awareness among rural masses to fight against HIV/AIDS. Perhaps the
spread of awareness should be more in and around targeted areas of high risk and
vulnerable groups and for this SACS should be involved. With a view to have a wider
reach amongst the television viewers, the electronic medium should be used to the
maximum extent possible in prevention of HIV/AIDS. The Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare in co-ordination with Ministry of Information & Broadcasting should
make efforts to make it mandatory for all the Satellite Channels to telecast condom
advertisements compulsorily during prime time.
[Sl. No. 23 of Appendix-II,  Para No. 217 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

81
Action Taken
The provisional results of BSS conducted during 2006 showed improvement in the
awareness level of general population from 76.1% during 2001 to 84.6% in 2006. The
condom use with last non-regular sex partner has also increased from 49.3% to 66.1%.
National AIDS Control Organization has extensively utilized Satellite Channels for
promotion of condoms. For greater visibility and to reach a large number of viewers of
these channels the insertion of these advertisements were planned by considering the
following facts such as scheduling strategy, high frequency and impact and message
recall and acceptability. As per the telecast time available, NACO had judiciously
scheduled its 70% video spots during prime time, 20% in prime News Channels and
10% in popular programmes in the afternoon slot to reinforce the viewership.
Considering the popularity and a large number of viewership of the Cable and
Satellite Channels, in the current financial year (2006-07), NACO has proposed to
release advertisements in the Cable & Satellite Channels focusing on Condom
Promotion, address vulnerabilities of youth, women and services.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated,  November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
With the objective of tracking the geographical spread of HIV infection in the
country and providing referral services for its diagnosis during the initial phase of the
programme, Government had established 62 Sero-Surveillance Centres and nine referral
centres. These centres were advised to function as V oluntary Counselling and Testing
Centres (VCTCs). During 1998-99, 69 additional HIV testing Centres were sanctioned
as V oluntary Blood Testing Centres to promote V oluntary Counselling and Testing
(VCT). These centers were renamed as VCTC. NACO decided in 2001-2002 to expand
the VCTC upto district hospital level throughout the country, giving priority to six
high prevalence States (Tamil Nadu, Maharashtra, Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka, Manipur
and Nagaland). As on 31st March, 2003, 543 (90 per cent) had been established in
various States/UTs, which are located in Medical College Hospitals and District
Hospitals as against the sanction of 600 VCTCs for the financial year 2002-2003. The
Committee note that though the districts providing VCTC facility were 85 per cent in
high prevalence States, in moderate and low prevalence States, 52 per cent of districts
still remain uncovered. Audit scrutiny of record revealed that a number of Counselling
and testing Centres were either non-functional or not fully functional due to non-
appointment of Counsellors, laboratory technicians, non-supply of equipments and
kits and non-availability of trained personnel. The Committee are concerned to note
though NACO had nearly achieved the targets set for establishing VCTCs, but the
scheme remained non starter due to poor functioning of VCTCs. They, therefore,
recommend that NACO should ensure that all the existing VCTCs are made fully
functional at the earliest by providing adequate number of trained technical manpower,

82
latest equipments and medical kits etc. The Committee further note that though the
overall percentage of people who were imparted pre-test counselling had shown an
increasing trend, the percentage remained low i.e. in the range of 6 to 30 per cent in
some Societies. The Committee desire that NACO should instruct all State AIDS Control
Societies to offer pre-test counselling to all persons before they are tested for HIV as
this would ensure that the affected persons gain confidence for living a normal life
without believing in myths and misinformation about HIV/AIDS. The Committee are
also of the opinion that the testing of HIV should shift from 'voluntary' to 'routine'
which means regular HIV test for every person accessing the health care system.
[Sl. No. 32 of Appendix-II, Para No. 226 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
NACO has now re-strategized HIV-AIDS service delivery by merging all the existing
PPTCT, VCTC and HIV-TB VCTCs. These centres will now be called as Integrated
Counselling and Testing Centres (ICTCs). The ICTCs will provide services to all the
needy clients' viz. ANC, RTI, STI, HIV-TB etc. The approach is likely to enhance the
coverage of HIV/AIDS related services to the needy clients. The total number of
existing ICTCs are 2815 of which PPTCT services are being provided in 1880 centers.
The year-wise progress and performance of ICTCs services in the country is shown
below. It is also proposed to open an additional 250 centres in the current financial
year.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated  November, 2006]

83
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee note that in the current scenario where prices of Anti-Retroviral
Therapy drugs are quite exorbitant and beyond the reach of common man, there is an
urgent need to develop an alternative drug which is cost effective through Indian
systems of medicine like Ayurveda, Unani and Siddha apart from Homoeopathy. The
Committee, therefore, recommend that Ministry of Health and Family Welfare should
sponsor a special Research and Development (R&D) Project for developing an
Indigenous drug through all branches of Indian System of Medicine (ISM) and
Homoeopathy which is not only cheaper but also can act as an effective substitute for
Anti-Retrovirals Therapy, if not a total cure from the infection. The Committee also
recommend that the Government should be vigilant against unscrupulous persons
claiming to have invented a cure for HIV/AIDS through magic herbs. The Committee
are of the view that if need be the Drugs and Magic Remedies Act should be suitably
amended so as to provide stringent punishment to unscrupulous persons taking
advantage of the misery of HIV infected persons and defrauding them of huge sums of
money. A mass awareness campaign should also be launched by the Government to
make people aware of the dangers of usage of such medication by unqualified persons
indulging in quackery.
[Sl.No. 42 of Appendix-II, Para No. 236 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
NACO examines the claims of products developed by the Indian System of Medicine
like Ayurveda, Unani and Sidha through ICMR for efficacy. At present, we are supporting
vaginal microbicides study-PRANEEM polyherbal formulation at NARI, Pune and
also ARV activity in western Himalayas Plants by the Institute of Himalayan Bio-
Resources, Palampur, Himachal Pradesh. The technical core committee for research
has also recommended testing of drug Receptol. AYUSH drugs are also being tested
through Homeopathic and Ayurvedic Medical Council. NACO is supporting a study
of Jyoti Amritum a herbal product for its efficacy.
The Government is developing standards of care in ART services and once these
are finalized, the ART centres in Govt. sector, PSUs and non-government sector will be
accredited. A drug resistance committee has been constituted at NACO to look into all
issues related to primary drug resistance and development of secondary drug resistance
while on ART. A multi-media approach has been planned to make people aware about
ART services in the country and discourage them to resort to any untested treatment.
In the absence of any provider regulations and enforcement machinery at the State
level, NACO is finding it difficult to take any action against quacks and unscrupulous
persons exploiting the gullibility of patients by promising them cure.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated  November, 2006]

84
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee are of the opinion that the research and development work that is
being carried out in India and rest of the world should have a common meeting ground/
platform so that Research findings can be shared and correlated with each other with
a view to arrive at a possible solution to combat this dreaded disease which is
threatening the very existence of the mankind. The Committee therefore, recommend
that the Ministry of  Health and Family Welfare should establish a Research agency in
this regard to monitor the research work that is being carried in India and all over the
world with view to developing vaccines and cheap life saving drugs for control of HIV/
AIDS.
[Sl.No. 43 of Appendix-II, Para No.  237 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) is involved in various research activities
relating to HIV/AIDS. Some of the studies being undertaken are as follows:—
1. Study of Incidence of HIV and Risk factors.
2. Development of effective vaginal microbicides.
3. Development of an AIDS vaccine.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated  November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee note that the National AIDS Committee (NAC) acts as the high level
deliberative body to oversee the performance of NACO and provide overall policy
direction and to forge multi-sectoral collaborative efforts and enable the participating
organizations to mobilize their overall administrative network for the various intervention
projects. The National AIDS Committee is required to meet as often as possible but at
least once in a year. The Committee are dismayed to note that NAC had not met since
2001 and no meeting had been held during the last three years. The Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare could not furnish any plausible reasons for not holding any
meeting by NAC during the past few years. They further note that there had been an
inordinate delay on the part of the Ministry in submission of proposal for convening
the meeting, which is inexplicable. Given the alarming situation in the country posed
due to emergence of AIDS as a major killer disease on account of rapid spread of HIV
virus, the response of NAC to the problem to say least is very casual and negligent.
Failure of National AIDS Committee to meet even once during the past few years
exposes the hollowness in the claim made by the Government that it is making serious
efforts to combat the dreaded disease. The Committee expect that in future, NAC
would meet as frequently as they could and at least once in six months to review the

85
overall implementations of the programme and progress made under various components
of the NACP.
[Sl. No. 49 of Appendix-II, Para No. 243 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The National AIDS Committee headed by the Minister of  Health & Family Welfare
comprises of 23 officials, 6 Members of  Parliament and 32 non-officials. It is supposed
to meet once a year. During the last 13 years of its existence six meetings of the NAC
were held viz. 15th February, 1993, 11th October, 1994, 26th March, 1996, 3rd January,
1997, 5th October, 1998 and the 9th May, 2001. This was last re-constituted on
21st November, 2003. The problems faced were the frequent changes in the leadership
and the time required for the incumbent Chairman to make an assessment and call for
a meeting. With the change in the membership of  Parliament the representatives from
the Parliament had to be re-nominated along with the changes suggested for non-
official members. This used to take a considerable amount of time. In the meantime,
considering the requirement of a much larger multi-sectoral support from all Ministries
the National AIDS Council headed by the Prime Minister, with the Health & Family
Welfare Ministers as Vice Chair and inclusive of 31 Ministers, 7 Chief Ministers,
15 officials was created on 21st November and the first meeting was held on the
16th February, 2006. The ambit of the Council was to mainstream HIV/AIDS issue in all
Ministries and Departments by considering it as a development challenge and not
merely a public health problem. In addition it was also to lead the multi-sectoral response
to HIV/AIDS in the country with special reference to youth and workforce. It is now
being felt due to overlapping ambits, the National AIDS Committee would probably be
wound up.
Sd/-
Addl. Secretary &
Director General NACO.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated 21 December, 2006]

CHAPTER  V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERVATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
Recommendation/Observation
The alarming spread of the killer disease viz. Acquired Immuno Deficiency Syndrome
(AIDS) and increasing number of persons infected by it has thrown an unprecedented
challenge to humanity. The problem of AIDS has ceased to be a mere health problem
and has now acquired dimensions, which perhaps have very few parallels in the history
of mankind. India's nearly two decades old epidemic is estimated to be largest in the
South and Southeast Asian Region and the second largest in the world. According to
National AIDS Control Organisation (NACO), there are 5.14 million HIV infected men,
women and children in India, although the figures have been contested by various
Non-Governmental Organisations and International Agencies. Independent
assessments by the United States' National Intelligence Council predict that at the
present rate of spread, about 25 million people in India would be HIV infected by the
year 2010. The UNDP Human Development Report (2003) places the figure at
110 million infections by 2025, with a 13 years reduction in life expectancy from the
present 61 years. No wonder that India is said to be sitting on a Human Immuno
Deficiency Virus/Acquired Immuno  Deficiency Syndrome (HIV/AIDS) "Time Bomb".
The Committee feel that the Ministry should examine the desirability of conducting a
fresh survey of HIV/AIDS infected people especially in the context of many NGOs' and
International Bodies' pointing out the inadequacies in the country's Sentinel Surveillance
network and with a view to arriving at correct figures as far as possible regarding the
number of people infected with HIV positive. This help the Government to realize the
challenge ahead for conceiving realistic and effective programme and targets for different
components of the programme.
[Sl. No. 1 of Appendix-II, Para No. 195 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The spread of HIV/AIDS in the country is regularly tracked by conducting the
annual sentinel surveillance. Sentinel surveillance started with 180 sentinel sites in
1998 and by 2005, increased to 750 sentinel sites located in different population groups.
During 2006, another 434 additional sentinel sites have been established particularly in
the northern and central part of the country for filling gaps, and ensure coverage of
high risk population sites and every district in the country. In order to ensure the
quality of the surveillance, both in terms of data collection and laboratory procedures,
five regional institutes and 10 national reference laboratories have been identified to
technically support the States and provide continuous monitoring and supervision
during the process of surveillance. Also, a National Expert Committee under the
86

87
Chairmanship of Director General, ICMR and consisting among others experts from
the WHO as well as UNAIDS provides technical expertise and approves the surveillance
data findings and also provide estimations. The nodal agencies that support the National
AIDS Control Organization in this work are the National Institute of Health and Family
Welfare and National Institute of Medical Statistics.
In addition to the regular surveillance sentinel system, during the current year, for
the first time HIV infection has been included in the National Family Health Survey that
is conducted every five years by the Indian Institute of Populations Sciences (IIPS)
under this population based data blood samples of about 125,000 adult population in
the entire country are being analyzed for the HIV infection. Further a specialized
Integrated Behavioural and Biological Survey (IBBS) is also being carried out in
173 districts of high prevalence States covering about 30,000 high risk population. The
data generated from other sources such as the Integrated Counselling and Testing
Centres and blood banks are also being analysed. The results of all these specialized
activities will be available by the early part of 2007 and should be able to provide a far
more accurate picture of the prevalence and incidence of HIV in the country.
Sd/-
Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
A National Performance Review was to be carried out by National AIDS Control
Board (NACB) in accordance with terms of reference satisfactorily to IDA. However, the
Committee regret to note that no review of NACP had been carried out by NACB during
the period 1998-1999 to 2002-2003. NACO stated that there did not seem to be a need for
a separate National Performance Review/Performance and Expenditure Annual Report
(PEAR) since performance of all Societies was reviewed during Project Directors meetings
and at the time of finalization of Annual Action Plans. The Committee consider the reply
of NACO as untenable since a National Performance Review was required to be conducted
in accordance with the terms of reference satisfactory to the IDA has been prescribed in
the scheme of prevention and control of HIV/AIDS. The Ministry of Health & Family
Welfare had subsequently informed the Committee that since its inception in 1992.
NACB had met on 24 occasions till date and had discussed different facets of the
programme specially major policy issues such as approval of annual action plans of
implementing agencies, introduction of Anti-Retroviral Therapy (ART), social marketing
of condoms, family health awareness campaigns and implementation of National Blood
Policy etc. The Committee recommend that the Ministry of Health & Family Welfare may
examine the feasibility of conducting a National Performance Review so as to assess the
functioning of NACP-I & II and the deficiencies/shortcomings that may come to their
notice should be taken into cognizance while conceiving NACP-III.
[Sl. No. 48 of Appendix-II, Para No. 242 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]

88
Action Taken
The programme is being monitored closely using CMIS, review meetings and field
visits by officers from NACO and SACS. Quarterly review meeting of SACS are held
on a regional basis for in-depth assessment of each component of each State. Regular
weekly meetings are taken by Additional Secretary & DG, NACO to identify problems
and progress on each issue and action points identified during the meetings. An
Independent Evaluation of NACP has been finalized to be carried out by a consortium
consisting of IIHMR, Jaipur, IIM Kolkata and John Hopkins University, Baltimore
(USA). The study is scheduled to be undertaken during the current financial year.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl. Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
Recommendation/Observation
An analysis of the performance of various components of the National AIDS Control
Programme—both Phase I & Phase II revealed that the programme had achieved
limited success due to various reasons such as failure in generating sufficient awareness
among the masses; under-utilisation of funds; no-reconciliation of accounts; absence
of adequate infrastructure facilities; lack of adequate quantity of drugs and trained
manpower; non-completion of mapping exercise for identification of Target Groups;
ineffective Targeted Interventions Programme; failure of NACO to procure and
distribute enough condoms, inadequate number of STD clinics, modernized blood
banks and voluntary counselling and testing centres in every district of the country
etc. and non-assessment of the impact of various components of the programme due
to failure of the National AIDS Committee to meet after 2001. Keeping in view the
above factors, the Committee, recommend that NACO should immediately get the
NACP-I & II evaluated by an independent agency so as to assess the constraints/
bottlenecks and other problems in implementation of the programme and to suggest
measures for effective implementation of all the components of the programme.
[Sl. No. 53 of Appendix-II, Para No. 247 of 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The study of "Independent Evaluation of NACP" is being undertaken by a
consortium consisting of three leading institutes viz. IIHMR, Jaipur, John Hopkins
University, USA and IIM, Kolkata. The IFD has already concurred for the study. It is
expected that the report will be submitted by the end of March 2007.
Further, World Bank has also reviewed the programme through field visit and an
extensive review of the documentation of SACS and NACO. The World Bank

89
assessment is given in the Implementation Completion Report (ICR). The implementation
of NACP-II has been rated as satisfactory.
Sd/-
 Secretary/
Addl.Secretary/Joint Secretary.
[Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, National AIDS Control Organisation's
O.M. No. G-25011/5/2005-NACO, dated November, 2006]
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
17 January, 2008 Chairman,
27 Pausa, 1929 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

PART II
MINUTES OF THE SIXTEENTH  SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE (2007-08) HELD ON 9TH JANUARY , 2008
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1630 hrs. in Committee Room "D",
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Kirip Chaliha
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri K.S. Rao
5. Shri Mohan Singh
6. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
7. Shri Kharabela Swain
8. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
9. Prof. P.J. Kurien
10. Shri Janardhana Poojary
11. Dr. K. Malaisamy
12. Shri Ravula Chandra Sekar Reddy
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Brahm Dutt — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
Representatives of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Shri A.N. Chatterji — Director General (P A)
2. At the outset, the Chairman, PAC welcomed the Members to the sitting of the
Committee. Thereafter, the Committee took up for consideration of the following draft
Reports:—
(i) Action Taken Report on 19th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to
"National AIDS Control Programme";
(ii) Action Taken Report on 38th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to
"Performance Audit of Department of Ayurveda, Yoga & Naturopathy, Unani,
Siddha and Homoeopathy (AYUSH)";
90

91
(iii) Action Taken Report on 40th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to
"Management of Projects relating to Utilisation & Conservation of Soil and
Water Undertaken by Institutes of ICAR"; and
(iv) Action Taken Report on 43rd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha) relating to
"Performance Audit of Sarva Shiksha Abhiyan (SSA)".
3.  After taking up the Draft Reports one by one, the Committee adopted these Draft
Reports with some verbal changes and authorised the Chairman to finalise and present
the same to Parliament in the light of factual verification by the Audit.
The Committee then adjourned.