23
REVIEW OF NORMS FOR
RE-APPROPRIATION
OF FUNDS
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2005-2006
TWENTY-THIRD REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

TWENTY-THIRD REPORT
PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
REVIEW OF NORMS FOR
RE-APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
(DEPARTMENT OF EXPENDITURE)
Presented to Lok Sabha on  22.12.2005
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 22.12.2005
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2005/Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka)

PAC No. 1802
Price: Rs. 32.00
© 2005 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India
Press, Minto Road, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  (2005-2006) . . . . . . . . . . . (iii)
INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . (v)
REPORT. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
APPENDICES
I-II. Notes received from the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Expenditure) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
III. Statement of Observations and Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . 23
PART-II
Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee held on
12th December, 2005.. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25

COMPOSITION OF PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2005-2006)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Dr. M. Jagannath
5. Shri R. L. Jalappa
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Brajesh Pathak
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Dr. R. Senthil
10. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
12. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
13. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
14. Shri K.V . Thangkabalu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri R. K. Dhawan
18. Dr. K. Malaisamy
19. Shri V . Narayanasamy
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
21. Shri Jairam Ramesh
22. Prof. R. B. S. Varma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S. K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman of Public Accounts Committee having been authorised by the
Committee to submit this Report on their behalf, do present this Twenty-third Report
(Fourteenth Lok Sabha) on "Review of norms for Re-Appropriation of funds".
2. Pursuant to Fiscal Policy strategy statement laid by Finance Minister before
Parliament under Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2003, the Ministry
of Finance (Department of Expenditure) had submitted proposals seeking approval of
the Public Accounts Committee for review of norms for re-appropriation of funds.
3. According to the Ministry, these proposals were finalized in consultation with
the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
4. The Committee considered and approved the proposals submitted by the
Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) at their sitting held on 12th December,
2005. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the Report.
5. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report and have also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix-III to the
Report.
6. The Committee would like to place on record their appreciation of the assistance
rendered to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
13 December, 2005 Chairman,
22 Agrahayana, 1927 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

REPORT
REVIEW OF NORMS FOR RE-APPROPRIATION OF FUNDS
Re-appropriation of funds
A grant or appropriation for disbursements is distributed by Sub-heads or standard
objects under which it is accounted. The competent executive authorities can approve
re-appropriation of funds between primary units of appropriation within a grant or
appropriation before the close of the financial year to which such grant or appropriation
relates. Re-appropriation of funds should be made only when it is known or anticipated
that the appropriation for the unit from which funds are to be transferred will not be
utilized in full or that unspent provision can be affected in the unit of appropriation.
2. All re-appropriations which would have the effect of increasing the budget
provision by Rs. 1 crore or more under a sub-head should be made only with the prior
approval of Secretary (Expenditure) even if the amount re-appropriated is within
25 percent of the provision covered under the limit governing re-appropriation.
Expenditure on "New Service/New Instrument of Service"
3. Government have prescribed financial limits for different categories of
expenditure beyond which any additional expenditure constitutes "New Service/New
Instrument of Service" and requires prior approval of Parliament. The term New  Service
refers to the expenditure arising out of a new policy decision not brought to the notice
of Parliament earlier, including a new activity or a new form of investment. Likewise,
relatively large expenditure arising out of an important expansion of an existing activity
has been termed as a New Instrument of Service.
4. Under the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, 2003
and Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Rules, 2004, a Fiscal Policy Strategy
Statement was laid in the Parliament by Finance Minister on 26th February, 2005 wherein
several initiatives in Public Expenditure Administration were proposed to be
implemented. One of the initiatives proposed is as under:—
"A review of norms governing re-appropriation will be carried out and specific
proposal will be placed before the Public Accounts Committee for consideration
with a view to giving the Ministries/Departments greater flexibility in managing
their departmental budgets with concomitant incentives and disincentives".
5. Accordingly, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) submitted
a note seeking approval of the PAC for the proposals to review the norms for
re-appropriation of funds pursuant to Fiscal Policy strategy statement laid by FM
before Parliament under Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2003. The
Note is reproduced in Appendix- I of this Report.
1

2
6. In their note, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) have stated
that the provisions of the Rule 10 and Government of India Decisions (GIDs) issued
there under have been revisited and the following proposals have been made in this
regard:—
“(i) According to the existing provisions, all re-appropriations, which have
the effect of increasing budget provision under a sub-head by Rs. 1 crore
and more, require approval of Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry of Finance.
It is proposed that this limit of Rs. 1 crore or more, which was delegated
way back in 1990, may be enhanced to Rs. 5 crore or more. This would in
effect mean that re-appropriation of funds under a sub-head below Rs. 5
crore can be made by the Administrative Ministries/Departments without
the approval of this Ministry (i.e. M/o Finance).
(ii) In view of their committed nature of expenditure, it is prposed to give full
powers to Administrative Ministries/Departments for augmenting the
provisions for the heads, Salary, Wages, Pensionary Expenses, Medical
Expenses and Rent, rate and Taxes through re-appropriation, provided the
approved ceiling of the Grant is not exceeded and re-appropriation does
not involve transfer of funds from Capital to Revenue and Plan to Non-
Plan sections of the Grant or vice-versa. It is also proposed to delegate full
powers to Ministries/Departments to re-appropriate funds from the head
salary for augmentation of head salary across the schemes (sub-heads)
within a grant, which under extant orders require approval of this Ministry
[Presently, any re-appropriation from the head Salary (even to the head
salary) requires prior approval of this Ministry].
(iii) Budget Division, Department of Economic Affairs vide its OM No. 7(15)-
B (RA)/82 dated 13.4.1982 had laid down guidelines for New Service(NS)
Service refers to the expenditure arising out of a new policy decision,
not brought to the notice of Parliament earlier, including a new activity
or a new form of investment. Likewise, relatively large expenditure arising
out of an important expansion of an existing activity has been termed as
a New Instrument of Service (A copy of OM is enclosed). Annexure to
this OM prescribes the financial limits for NS/NIS in two categories viz.
(a) limits upto which expenditure can be met by re-appropriation of savings
in a Grant subject to it being reported to Parliament (b) limits beyond
which prior approval of Parliament is required for the expenditure. As it
was felt that the flexibility on re-appropriation of funds to be delegated
under the revised norms may not in actual practice, be available to the
Administrative Ministries unless the financial limits for obtaining
approval of Parliament under NS/NIS are revised, it is proposed to
enhance/revise these limits as per column 2a and 3a of the Statement
enclosed herewith at Flag ‘A’ ”.

3
7. According to the Ministry, existing limit in case of re-appropriations and New
service/New Instrument of Servicement upward revision in the light of normal increase
in price index and inflation.
Justification for the review
8. At the instance of the Committee, the Ministry have explained as under as to
why the need for such a review arose:—
"Presently, though the administrative Ministries have been given full powers
for re-appropriation under Schedule IV of delegation of Financial Power Rules
(DFPRs), 1978, exercise of these powers by the Administrative Departments
is subject to the various restrictions imposed under Rule 10 of these Rules
and the Government of India Decisions (GIDs) issued thereunder. Some of
these limits/restrictions imposed under the above rule-like the existing limit of
'Rs. 1 crore or more' for proposals requiring approval of Secretary (Expenditure)
[mentioned in  para  2(i) of our OM ibid], and the norms for "New Service
(NS)/New Instrument of Service (NIS)" [mentioned in para 2 (iii) of our letter]
were delegated/framed way back in 1990 and in 1982 respectively. These
limits merit upward revision in the light of normal increase in price index and
inflation since then.
While, the upward revision of limits of NS/NIS, as recommended, would
ensure that Administrative Ministries have greater flexibility/accountability
in the delegation of powers for re-appropriation, dicipline of meaningful and
realistic budgeting would be maintained, and the original objective of the
budgeted scheme would not be substantially altered by the exercise of
delegated powers without prior approval of the Parliament.In the revised
limits, powers of administrative Ministries have been rationalized and recast
as per contemporary requirements.
Furthermore, it has been observed that with the imposition of various
restrictions under Rule 10 ibid and GIDs issued thereunder, Ministries are
required to seek approval of this Department even for re-appropriation of
funds for their 'committed' liabilities viz. expenditure towards Salary, Wages,
Pensionary Charges, Medical Expenses and Rent Rate and Taxes. As the
expenditure on these heads is of 'committed' nature, it has been proposed to
give full powers of re-appropriation to Administrative Departments for
expenditure towards these heads, within the budgeted amount placed at their
disposal."
9. In their subsequent note, (Appendix-II) submitted to the Committee, the
Ministry have justified the proposed norms by stating that these are intended to give
greater delegation of authority and flexibility to the Administrative Ministries in
managing their departmental budgets and their financial affairs.
Proposed benefits of the proposal
10. According to the Ministry, the delegation through the proposed revised
norms is not in view of any irregularities noticed under the existing norms, but is in fact

4
aimed at enabling Administrative Department in having efficient management of their
departmental budgets with a view to improving the quality of implementation, and
enhancing the 'efficiency' and 'accountability' of delivery mechanism through quicker
decision making. It is also intended to reduce references to the Ministry of Finance on
matters affecting day to day routine affairs so that expenditure control is enforced
through scales of expenses and budgetary ceilings rather than getting involved in
micromanagement of the departmental affairs. Greater delegation would also imply
greater responsibility to manage the affairs within the budget with consequent greater
accountability.
11. According to the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure ), the
proposed revised norms, have been finalized after consulting various Ministries, and
after obtaining the concurrence of Office of C & AG.
12.The proposal of the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure ) was
considered by the Committee at their sitting held on 12th December, 2005. The Committee
also heard the views of the officers of the C&AG on the subject. The ADAI informed
the Committee that while formulating the said proposals, their views on the subjects
were sought by the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure) which have been
suitably incorporated therein. The Committee then considered and approved the
proposals.

5
OBSERVA TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS
13. The Committee have been given to understand that a Fiscal Policy Strategy
Statement was laid before the Parliament by the Finance Minister on 26th February,
2005 under Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement Responsibility and Budget Management
Act, 2003. Pursuant to this, the Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure)
have sought approval of the PAC for revision of norms for re-appropriations of
funds.The proposals inter-alia include that the limit of Rs. 1crore or those for re-
appropriation of funds under various sub-heads of the Grant, which require approval
of Secretary (Expenditure), may be enhanced to Rs. 5 crore or more. Also, full powers
are sought to be delegated to the Ministries/ Departments to re-appropriate funds
from the head 'Salary' for augmentation of head 'Salary' across the schemes (sub-
heads) within a grant. It is further proposed that financial limits for obtaining approval
of Parliament under New Service/New Instrument of Service may be enhanced/revised.
14. The Ministry have explained that there is an imperative need for such a
review in view of inflation and price rise since 1990s. According to the Ministry, the
proposed norms are intended to give greater delegation of authority and flexibility to
the Administrative Ministries in managing their departmental budgets and their
financial affairs. The revised norms are stated to be aimed at enabling Administrative
Departments in having efficient management of their departmental budgets with a
view to improving the quality of implementation, and enhancing the 'efficiency' and
'accountability' of delivery mechanism through quicker decision making. It is also
intended to reduce references to the Ministry of Finance on matters affecting day to
day routine affairs so that expenditure control is enforced through scales of expenses
and budgetary ceilings rather than getting involved in micro-management of the
departmental affairs. Greater delegation would also imply greater responsibility to
manage the affairs within the budget with consequent greater accountability.
15. As these proposals have been finalized after consulting various Ministries
and obtaining the concurrence of the Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of
India, and there is adequate justification and need therefor, the Committee are in
agreement with the proposed revision in the norms for re-appropriation of funds. At
the same time, the Committee would like to impress  upon the Ministry of Finance
(Department of Expenditure) to devise an effective mechanism for proper and continuous
monitoring of the revised norms in order to ensure strict adherence to the same by
each and every Ministry/Department. The Committee also expect the Financial
Advisors of all the Ministries/Departments to ensure that there is no violation in
implementation of the said revised norms for re-appropriation of funds and any
slackness in complying with the said norms is strictly dealt with.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
13 December, 2005 Chairman,
22 Agrahayana  1927 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

APPENDIX  I
Note received from m/o Finance (Deptt. of Exp.)
F.No. 1(4)/E.II(A)/05
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
****
New Delhi dated 30th August, 2005
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
SUBJECT: Review of norms for re-appropriation of funds pursuant to Fiscal Policy
Strategy Statement laid before Parliament under Fiscal Responsibility and
Budget Management Act, 2003.
*******
Under the Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management (FRBM) Act, 2003
and Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Rules, 2004,  a Fiscal Policy
Strategy Statement was laid in the Parliament by FM on 26th February, 2005 wherein
several initiatives in Public Expenditure Administration were proposed to be
implemented (reference para 13 of the Statement). One of the initiatives proposed is as
under:
"A review of norms governing re-appropriation will be carried out and specific
proposal will be placed before the Public Accounts Committee by Sept., 2005
for consideration with a view to giving the Ministries/Departments greater
flexibility in managing their departmental budgets with concomitant incentives
and disincentives."
2. The norms regulating re-appropriation (i.e. transfer of funds from one primary
unit of appropriation to another such unit) are given in Rule 10 and Government of
India Decisions (GIDs) issued there under, of Delegation of Financial Power Rules
(DFPRs), 1978. Pursuant to the Statement mentioned in para 1 above, the provisions
of the above Rule and GIDs have been re-visited and the following proposals are now
submitted for consideration of the PAC:—
(i) According to the existing provisions, all re-appropriations, which have
the effect of increasing budget provision under a sub-head by Rs. 1 crore
and more, require approval of Secretary (Expenditure), Ministry of Finance.
It is proposed that this limit of Rs. 1 crore or more, which was delegated
way back in 1990, may be enhanced to Rs. 5 crore or more. This would in
effect mean that re-appropriation of funds under a sub-head below
Rs.5 crore can be made by the Administrative Ministries/Departments
without the approval of this Ministry (i.e. MoF).
6

7
(ii) In view of their committed nature of expenditure, it is proposed to give full
powers to Administrative Ministries/Departments for augmenting the
provisions for the heads, Salary, Wages, Pensionary Expenses, Medical
Expenses and Rent rate and Taxes through re-appropriation, provided
that approved ceiling of the Grant is not exceeded and re-appropriation
does not involve transfer of funds from Capital to Revenue and Plan to
Non-Plan sections of the Grant or vice-versa. It is also proposed to delegate
full powers to Ministries/Departments to re-appropriate funds from the
head salary for augmentation of head salary across the schemes (sub-
heads) within a grant, which under extant orders require approval of this
Ministry [Presently, any re-appropriation from the head Salary (even to
the head salary) requires prior approval of this Ministry].
(iii) Budget Division, Department of Economic Affairs vide its OM No. 7(15)-
B(RA)82 dated 13.4.1982 had laid down guidelines for New Service(NS)/
New Instrument of Service(NIS). As per the OM, the term New Service
refers to the expenditure arising out of a new policy decision, not brought
to the notice of Parliament earlier, including a new activity or a new form of
investment. Likewise, relatively large expenditure arising out of a important
expansion of an existing activity has been termed as a New Instrument of
Service (A copy of OM is enclosed). Annexure to this OM  prescribes the
financial limits for NS/NIS in two categories viz (a) limits upto which
expenditure can be met by re-appropriation of savings in a Grant subject
to it being reported to Parliament (b) limits beyond which prior approval of
Parliament is required for the expenditure. As it was felt that the flexibility
on re-appropriation of funds to be delegated under the revised norms may
not, in actual practice, be available to the administrative Ministries unless
the financial limits for obtaining approval of Parliament under NS/NIS are
revised, it is proposed to enhance/revise these limits as per column
2a and 3a of the statement enclosed herewith at Flag 'A'.
3. The above proposals have been framed in consultation with O/o
Comptroller &Auditor General of  India (C&AG) and have been approved by the
Finance Minister. It is requested that these proposals as stated in para 3(i), (ii) and in
columns 2a and 3a of the statement placed at Flag 'A' be placed before the PAC for its
consideration and approval.
sd/-
(Rubina Ali)
Under Secretary to the Govt. of India
Shri Ashok Sarin,
Director (PAC),
Room No. 415,
Parliament House Annexe,
New Delhi.

IMMEDIATE
No. F. 7 (15)-B (RA)/82
Ministry of Finance
Department of Economic Affairs
New Delhi, the 13th April, 1982
OFFICE  MEMORANDUM
SUBJECT: Revised guidelines on 'New Service'/'New Instrument of Service'
The financial limits to be observed in determining cases relating to 'New Service'/
'New Instrument of Service' prescribed in this Ministry's O.M.No. F. 8(60)-B/69 dated
the 27th July, 1970 have been reviewed in pursuance of the recommendations of the
Public Accounts Committee (Seventh Lok Sabha) in their 41st report. The revised
limits, which have been drawn up in consultation with the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India and have been approved by the Public Accounts Committee in their
70th report are annexed.
2. As the Ministry of Agriculture, etc. are aware, the term 'New Service', appearing
in article 115(I)(a) of the Constitution, has been held as referring to expenditure arising
out of a new policy decision, not brought to the notice of Parliament earlier, including
a new activity or a new form of investment. Like-wise, relatively large expenditure
arising out of important expansion of an existing activity is treated as a 'New Instrument
of service' which is a slight variant of the term 'New Service'. The basic principle is that
no expenditure can be incurred from the Consolidated Fund of India on a 'New Service'/
'New Instrument of Service' without prior approval of Parliament through a
Supplementary Grant. That is to say, the powers of Ministries/Departments to re-
appropriate savings available under some sub-head(s) in a Grant for meeting additional
requirements under other sub-head (s) within that Grant are subject to the aforesaid
limits. As any non-observance of these limits reflects laxity in financial control,
Ministries/Departments are requested to ensure strict adherence of these instructions
in examining proposals for augmentation of sanctioned provisions.
3. Where in an emergent case of 'New Service/'New Instrument of Service' it is
not possible to wait for prior approval of Parliament, the Contigency Fund of India can
be drawn upon for meeting the expenditure pending its authorisation by Parliament.
Recourse to this arrangement should normally be taken only when Parliament is not in
session. Such advances are required to be recouped to the Fund by obtaining a
supplementary. Grant in the immediately next session of Parliament. However, when a
Parliament is in session,  a Supplementary Grant should preferably be obtained before
incurring any expenditure on a 'New Service'/'New Instrument of Service'. That is to
say, recourse to Contingency Fund of India should be taken only in cases of extreme
urgency; in such cases the following procedure recommended by the Sixth Lok Sabha
Committee on Papers Laid on the Table in their 4th Report should be observed:
8
SERVER5\5162LS\5162LS 8

9
"As far as possible, before such withdrawal  is made, the concerned Ministery
may make a statement on the floor of the Lok Sabha for information giving
details of the amount and the scheme for which the money is needed. In
emergent cases, however, where it is not possible to inform the Members in
advance, the withdrawal may be made from the Contingency Fund and soon
thereafter a statement may be laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha for the
information of the Members".
It has been suggested by the Rajya Sabha Secretariat that the above procedure
may also be observed in Rajya Sabha.
4. The following checks may be observed by the Ministries/Departments to
ensure that any expenditure likely to attract limits of  'New Service'/'New Instrument of
Service' is not incurred by re-appropriation.
(i) A specific certificate should be recorded in each case involving
augementation of sanctioned provision by the IF/Budget Section of the
Ministry/Department on receipt of related proposals, to the effect that the
proposed augmentation attracts/does not attract limits of 'New Service'/
'New Instrument of Service'. Where the proposal is held to attract these
limits the procedure indicated in paragraphs 2 or 3 above depending upon
the circumstances of the case, have to be followed.
(ii) Subject to Paragraph 5 below, the Pay and Accounts Officers should examine
each expenditure sanction from the 'New Service/'New Instrument of
Service' angle, especially those involving investments, loans, grants-in-
aid, subsidies, new works, etc. All doubtful cases should be put up to the
Controllers of Accounts/Financial Advisers.
If in any exceptional cases, the expenditure, whether partly or fully on a 'New
service'/'New Instrument of Service' has been incurred inadvertently and this fact
comes to notice within the financial year, an advance from the Contingency Fund
should be obtained during the year itself to cover the expenditure already incurred as
also for the expenditure likely to be incurred before a Supplementary Grant for that
service becomes available.
5. Having regard to the volume of Government transactions it is not possible to
list out those which are not attracted by 'New Service'/New Instrument of Service'
limits. Broadly, however expenditure on normal activities  of Government (such as
normal administrative expenditure—including that resulting from reorganisation of
Ministries/Departments, holding of conferences, seminars, exhibitions, surveys,
feasibility studies etc., assistance to foreign Governments, contributions to international
bodies and transfers to State and Union Territory Governments) is not attracted by the
limits of 'New Service'/'New Instrument of Service'. Further, these limits are applicable
only to expenditure which is subject to Vote of Parliament.
6. It should be noted that additional expenditure to the extent mentioned in
column 2 of the annexed  statement can be met by re-appropriation, subject to report to
Parliament, only if savings are available in the relevant Grant; otherwise a Supplementary
Grant has to be obtained.

10
Report to Parliament should ordinarily be made through the ensuing batch of
Supplementary Demands and failing this by adding an Annexure in the Detailed Demands
of Ministry/Department for the ensuing year. Where possible a suitable mention of such
cases may be made in the Notes on Demands for Grants of the Ministry/Department.
Mere exhibition of augmented provisions in the Revised Estimates included in the
Demands for Grants will not be adequate to meet the requirement.
7. Where a doubt arises about the application of limits of 'New Service/'New
Instrument of Service', a reference may be made to the Budget Division for clarification.
8. A mention may also be made here about the 'New Service' Annexure which is
appended to the main Demands for Grants. The purpose of this Annexure is somewhat
different. It is intended to bring to the notice  of Parliament the details of new schemes
i.e. schemes for which the Budget includes provision for the first time so that these can
receive special attention of Parliament. These schemes are normally to be taken up
after the passing of Budget; the V ote on Account provisions are not intended to be
utilised therefor. In cases of urgency, expenditure on a 'New Service' during V ote on
Account period can, therefore, be incurred only by obtaining an advance from the
Contingency Fund in the manner recommended by the Sixth Lok Sabha Committee on
the Papers Laid on the Table, mentioned in paragraph 3 above. Such advances will be
resumed to the Contingency Fund on enactment of Appropriation Act in respect of
expenditure for the whole year.
Hindi version will  follow.
(M.D. PAL)
DIRECTOR (BUDGET)
To
 (1) All Ministries/Departments of the Government of India.
(2) Financial Commissioner (Railways), Financial Advisor (Defence), Financial
Adviser (Communications) and all other Financial Advisers.
(3) Finance Secretaries of Union Territory Administrations (Delhi, Chandigarh,
Andaman and Nicobar Islands, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Lakshadweep).
(4) Controller General of Accounts, Controller General of Defence Accounts
and Chief Controllers/Controllers of Accounts.
No. F. 7 (15)-B (RA)/82
Copy forwarded for information to:—
1. Lok Sabha Secretariat (PAC Branch)/Rajya Sabha Secretariat.
2. Comptroller and Auditor General of India and all Directors of Audit/
Accountants General.
3. Finance Secretaries of all State and Union Territory Governments.
                                                                                                                    sd/-
(O.P. KAPUR)
DEPUTY DIRECTOR (BUDGET)

11
Incorporated as GOI Decision No. 1 below Rule 10 of the DFA
ANNEXURE to O.M. No. F. 7(15)-B(RA)/82 dated 13.4.1982
Financial limits to be observed in determining cases relating to
'NEW SERVICE'/‘NEW INSTRUMENT OF SERVICE'
Limits upto which Limits beyond which
expenditure can be prior approval of
Nature of Transaction met by re-appro- Parliament is re-
priation of savings quired for expendi-
in a Grant subject to ture from the
 Report to Parliament Consolidated Fund
12 3
I. CAPITAL  EXPENDITURE
A: Departmental Undertakings.
(i) Setting up a new undertaking, or taking All cases
up a new activity by an existing
undertaking
(ii) Additional investment in an Above Rs. 50 lakhs Above Rs. 1 crore
existing undertaking but not exceeding
Rs. 1 crore
B: Public Sector Companies/Corporations
(i) Setting up of a new Company, or splitting up of All cases
an existing Company, or amalgamation of two
or more Companies, or taking up a new activity
by an existing Company
(ii) Additional investment in/loans to an
existing company
    (a) Where there is no Budget Provision Above Rs. 10 lakhs Above Rs. 20 lakhs
but not exceeding
Rs. 20 lakhs
(b) Where Budget Provision exists for
      investment and/or loans
Paid up Capital of the Company
Upto Rs. 1 crore Above Rs. 10 lakhs Above Rs. 20 lakhs
but not exceeding
Rs. 20 lakhs
Above Rs. 1 crore and Above Rs. 1 crore Above Rs. 2 crore.
upto Rs. 25 crore but not exceeding
Rs. 2 crore.
Above Rs. 25 crore and Above Rs. 5 crore Above Rs. 10 crore
upto Rs. 100 crore but not exceeding
Rs. 10 crore.
Above Rs. 100 crore Above Rs. 7.5 crore Above Rs. 15 crores
but not exceeding
Rs. 15 crore.

12
Note 1: In computing additional requirements for applying the above
limits, loan and capital investments, over and above the budget
provisions therefor, should be taken together.
Note 2: For additional fund requirements of term lending institutions
which are under the audit of the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India, the limits will be twice those specified above.
Where an institution does not have paid up capital, the limits
will be applied with reference to Central loans outstanding
against it at the end of the previous financial year.
Note 3: For financing projects under construction, within the approved
cost estimates already brought to the notice of Parliament,
augmentation of budget provisions beyond the monetary limits
prescribed above will be permissible subject to availability of
savings in the Grant. A report of such cases to Parliament will,
however, be necessary.
Note 4: Short term (working capital) loans, repayable within five years,
will not be treated as 'New Instrument of Service' but will
require to be reported to Parliament.
C: Port Trusts, Delhi Municipal Corporation,
Khadi and Village Industries Commission,
Tea Board and Coffee Board.
Loans: The limits prescribed for public sector
companies will apply with reference to
central loans outstanding against them at
the end of the previous financial year.
D: Private sector Companies/Private Institutions:
(i) Investments to be made for the first time All cases.
except in Units coming under Government
Management with the approval of Parliament.
(ii) Additional investments in or loans to an Above Rs. 50 lakhs Above Rs. 1 crore.
existing company/institution including private but not exceeding
sector units coming under Government Rs. 1 crore.
Management with the approval of Parliament:
Note 1: While applying these limits loans and capital investments are
to be taken together.
Note 2: In the case of loans to statutory and other public institutions
(other than those mentioned under item C above) substantially
financed by grants-in-aid from Government e.g. University
Grants Commission to Indian Institute of Technology and
joint sector enterprises, limits as applicable to private sector
companies/institutions should be applied.
Note 3: Where there is no Budget provision for investment/loans to a
company/institution, prior approval of Parliament will be
necessary for investment/loans exceeding Rs. 10 lakhs except
in the case of units brought under Government Management.
12 3

13
E: Expenditure on new Works (Land, Buildings Above Rs. 10 lakhs Above Rs. 50 lakhs
and/or Machinery) but not exceeding
Rs. 50 lakhs.
II. REVENUE  EXPENDITURE
F: Grants-in-aid to statutory and other public institutions:
(i) Institutions in receipt of grant-in-aid upto .. Rs. 10 lakhs
Rs. 1 crore
(ii) Institutions in receipt of grant-in-aid of .. 10% of the Budget
more than Rs. 1 crore. provision or Rs. 2
crores, whichever
less.
Note 1: These limits will apply with reference to moneys disbursed by
an individual Ministry/Department and not by the Government
as a whole.
Note 2: The above limits will also apply to institutions which are
substantially financed by grants-in-aid from Government and
to public sector undertakings in receipt of grants-in-aid.
Note 3: Where a lumpsum provision is made for providing grant-in-aid
under a particular scheme in the absence of institution-wise
break up at the time the provision is made, the aforesaid limits
will not apply to releases to such institutions within the budgeted
provision. The details will, however, be reported to Parliament.
G: Grants-in-aid to Private institutions other than
for export promotion Schemes
(i) Recurring .. Above Rs. 5 lakhs
(ii) Non-recurring .. Above Rs. 10 lakhs
Note 1: In the case of recurring grants exceeding Rs. 5 lakhs per annum
the financial implications should be reported to Parliament
where the grant is to be made for 2 years or more.
Note 2: The limits for non-recurring and recurring grants-in-aid will
apply with reference to moneys disbursed by an individual
Ministry/Department and not Government as a whole.
Note 3: Where a lumpsum provision is made for providing grant-in-aid
under a particular scheme in the absence of institution-wise
break up at the time the provision is made, the aforesaid limits
will not apply to releases to such institutions within the budgeted
provision. The details will, however, be reported to Parliament.
H: Subsidies and Grants under Export The budget provision should be split up as under:—
Promotionless Schemes.
(i) Product Promotion and Commodity
Development (this sub-head will accommodate
payments of  cash compensatory support on
all items of exports including textiles).
(ii) Grants-in-aid to Export Promotion and Market
Development Organisations (this sub-head
would accommodate grants to Export
12 3

14
Promotion Councils and other organisations
like Trade Development Authority, Indian
Institute of Foreign Trade, etc. for their
establishment expenditure as well as
developmental activities and also to recognised
export houses for specified export promotion
activities).
(iii) Export Credit Development (This sub-head
will  cover payments made to commercial banks
towards interest subsidy under the Export Credit
subsidy Scheme).
Limits for augmentation of total provision
under the Export Promotion Schemes:
Above Rs. 50 lakhs Above Rs. 2 crores
but not exceeding
 Rs. 2 crores.
I: Food subsidy Above Rs. 50 lakhs Above Rs. 2 crores.
but not exceeding
Rs. 2 crores.
J: Other subsidies .. Above Rs. 10 lakhs.
K: Payments against cess collections Limits as applicable to grants-in-aid to
statutory or public institutions will apply.
L: New Commissions or Committees .. Above Rs. 4 lakhs
 of Enquiry (total
expenditure)
M: Write off of Government loans Above Rs. 50,000 Above Rs. 1 lakh
but not exceeding (individual cases)
Rs. 1 lakh
(individual cases)
Note: This limit will also apply where it is decided to sanction grant
to a private institution/individual for repayment of loan.
N: Other Cases of Government expenditure Each case to be considered on merits.
O: P & T The aforesaid limits, including those relating
Railways to Works expenditure, will also apply to these
Defence Departments subject to considerations of
security in the case of Defence.
Note 1: For investment in Ordance Factories, the limit of Rs. 1 crore
mentioned in item A (ii) will be applicable with reference to
investment in all the factories as a whole.
Note 2: Civil Works, which do not form part of any project of the
departmental undertakings (Ordnance factories) should be
treated as ordinary Defence works. As such, prior approval of
Parliament will be necessary if the cost of individual works
exceeds Rs. 50 lakhs and in cases where the individual works
cost Rs. 10 lakhs or more but not exceeding Rs. 50 lakhs, a
report to Parliament will be required. A list of such works
should, however, be supplied to Director of Audit, Defence
Services.
12 3

15
Nature of transaction Limits upto which expenditure can be Limits beyond which prior approval of Parliament Remarks w.r.t. proposals
met by reappropriation of savings is required for expenditure from the in columns 2a and 3a.
in a Grant subject to report to Consolidated Fund
Parliament
(Existing) Limits proposed (Existing) Limits proposed after taking
after taking into into account views of
views of C&AG C&AG
12 2 a 3 3 a 4
I. CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
A. Department Undertakings
(i) Setting up a new undertaking ... ... All cases All cases No change from existing
taking up a new activity by an provision
existing undertaking
(ii) Additional investment in Above Rs. 50 Above Rs. 2.50 Above Rs. 1 crore Above Rs. 5 crore Limits being e nhanced
existing Undertaking lakhs but not crore but not to five times the existing
exceeding exceeding limits as per
Rs. 1 crore Rs. 5 crore. O/o C&AG's views.
B. Public Sector Companies/Corporations
(i) Setting up of a new Company, or ... ... All cases All cases No change from
splitting up of an existing Company, existing provision.
or amalgamation of two or more
Companies, or taking up a new
activity by an existing Company
(iii) Additional investment in/loans
to an existing company
(a) Where there is no Above Rs. 10 Above Rs. 50 lakhs Above Rs. 20 lakhs Above Rs. 1 crore Limits being e nhanced
Budget Provision lakhs but not but not  to five times the existing
exceeding exceeding lim its as per O/o C&AG's
Rs. 20 lakhs Rs. 1 crore views.

16
12 2 a 3 3 a 4
(b) Where Budget Provision
exists for investment and/
or loans
Paid up Capital of the Above Rs. 10 lakhs but Above Rs. 20 lakhs
Company Upto not exceeding
Rs. 1 crore Rs. 20 lakhs
(Proposed) Upto Rs. 50 crore 20% of appropriation Above 20% of appropriation Rationalisation proposed
already voted or already voted or Budget Division by redu-
Rs. 10 crore, which Rs. 10 crore, which even cing the number of
ever is less is less categories from 4 to 2 is
proposed to be acccepted.
Proposal also conforms
to C&AG's views (being
within 5 times)
Above Rs. 1 crore and Above Rs. 1 crore but Above Rs.. 2 crore
upto Rs. 20 crore not exceeding Rs. 2 crore
Above Rs. 25 crore and Above Rs. 5 crore but Above Rs.. 10 crore
upto Rs. 100 crore not exceeding Rs. 10 crore
Above Rs. 100 crore Above Rs. 7.5 crore but Above Rs. 15 crore
not exceeding Rs. 15 crore
(Proposed) Above Rs. 50 crore 20% of the appro- Above 20% of appro- Rationalisation
priation already priation already proposed Budget
voted or Rs. 20 voted or Rs. 20 Division by
crore, which ever crore, which ever reducing the number of
is less is less categories from 4 to 2 is
proposed to be accepted.
Proposal  also conforms
to C&AG's  views
(being within 5 times).
C. All bodies or authorities within
the administrative control/
management of Central
Government or substantially
financed by  the Central
Government.

17
Loans: Upto 10% of the appro- More than 10% over the Ceiling of Rs. 10 crore
priation already voted appropriation already has proposed as per
or Rs. 10 crore which- voted by Parliament O/o C&AG views.
ever is less or Rs. 10 crore which-
ever is less
Note:Where a lumpsum provision is
made for providing 'Loans' under a
particular scheme, the details of
substantial apportionment (10% of
lumpsum or Rs. 1 crore, whichever is
higher) should be reported to
Parliament. In the case of lumpsum
provision of loans to States, the State-
wise distribution should be reported to
Parliament.
D. Expenditure on new Works, Above Rs. 10 lakhs Above Rs. 50 lakhs Above Rs. 50 lakhs Above Rs. 2.5 crore Budget Division's
(land, Buildings and/or but not exceed- but not exceed- or above 10% of proposal which
Machinery) ing Rs. 50 lakhs ing Rs. 2.5 crore the appropriation conforms to O/o
or not exceed- already voted C&AG views is
ing 10% of the proposed to be
appropriation accepted.
already voted,
whichever is
less

18
12 2 a 3 3 a 4
II. REVENUE EXPENDITURE
E. Grants in aid to anybody
or authority All cases
Note: Where a lumpsum provision is
made for providing “grants-in-aid”
under a particular scheme, the
details of substantial
apportionment (10% of lumpsum
of Rs. 1 crore, whichever is higher)
should be reported to Parliament.
In the case of lumpsum provision
of grants to States, the State-wise
distribution should be reported to
Parliament.
F. Subsidies
(i) New Cases NEW ITEM — NEW ITEM All cases
(ii) Enhancement of provision NEW ITEM Upto 10% of the NEW ITEM More than 10% of the Ceiling of Rs. 10 crore
in the existing appropriation appropriation appropriation has been imposed
already approved already voted according to O/o
by the Parliament by Parliament C&AG’s views.
or Rs. 10 crore or Rs. 10 crore
whichever is whichever is
less less
Payments against cess Limits as applicable All cases
collections to grants-in-aid  to
 statutory  or public
 institutions  will apply
New Commissions or — — Above Rs. 4 lakhs Above Rs. 20 lakhs
Committees of Enquiry (total expenditure) (total expenditure)

19
G . Write off of Government Above Rs. 50,000 Above Rs. 50,000 Above Rs. 1 lakhs  Above Rs. 1 lakhs No change from
but not exceeding but not exceeding (individual cases) (individual cases) existing provision.
Rs. 1 lakhs Rs. 1 lakhs
(individual cases) (individual cases)
H. Other Cases of Government Each case to be considered on merits.
 expenditure
I. P & T The aforesaid limits, including those relating to Works The aforesaid limits, including those
Railways expenditure, will also apply to these Departments relating to Works expenditure, will also
Defence subject to considerations of security in the apply to these Departments subject to
case of Defence. considerations of security in the case of
Defence Services Estimates.

20
Note 1: For investment in Ordnance Factories, the limit of
Rs. 1 crore mentioned in Item A (ii) will be applicable with reference
to investment in all the factories as a whole.
Note 2: Civil Works, which do not form part of any project of the
departmental undertakings (Ordnance Factories) should be treated
as ordinary Defence works. As such, prior approval of Parliament
will be necessary if the cost of individual works exceeds Rs. 50
lakhs and in cases where the individual works cost Rs. 10 lakhs or
more but not exceeding Rs. 50 lakhs, a report to Parliament will be
required. A list of such works should, however, be supplied to
Director of Audit, Defence Services.
(Existing) Limits proposed after taking into account views of C&AG
Note 1: For investment in Ordnance Factories, the limit of Rs. 5
crore mentioned in Item A (ii) will be applicable with reference to
investment in all the factories as a whole.
Note 2: Civil Works, which do not form part of any project of the
departmental undertakings (Ordnance Factories) should be treated
as ordinary Defence works. As such, prior approval of Parliament
will be necessary if the cost of individual works exceeds Rs. 2.5
crore and in cases where the individual works cost Rs. 50 lakhs or
more but not exceeding Rs. 2.5 crore, a report to Parliament will be
required. A list of such works should, however, be supplied to
Director of Audit, Defence Services.

APPENDIX II
F.No. 1(4) E.II(A)/05
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
E.II (A) Branch
******
New Delhi, dated 9th November, 2005
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
SUBJECT: Revision of norms of re-appropriation pursuant to the Fiscal Policy Strategy
Statement presented to the Parliament under the FRBM Act, 2003 and the
Fiscal Responsibility and Budget Management Rules of 2004.
**********
The undersigned is directed to refer to Lok Sabha Secretariat's O.M. No. 24/1/1/
2005/PAC dated 28.9.2005 on the above subject, and to furnish the following information.
2. With regard to the justification for review of norms of re-appropriation, it is
stated that the proposed norms are intended to give greater delegation of authority
and flexibility to the administrative Ministries in managing their departmental budgets
and their financial affairs.
Presently, though the administrative Ministries have been given full powers for
re-appropriation under Schedule IV of  Delegation of Financial Power Rules (DFPRs),
1978, exercise of these powers by the administrative departments is subject to the
various restrictions imposed under Rule 10 of these Rules and the Government of
India decisions (GIDs) issued thereunder. Some of these limits/restrictions imposed
under the above rule—like the existing limit of 'Rs  1 crore or more' for proposals
requiring approval of Secretary (Exp.) [mentioned in para 2(i) of our OM ibid], and the
norms for "New Service (NS)/New Instrument of Service (NIS)" [mentioned in para 2
(iii) of our letter] were delegated/framed way back in 1990 and in 1982 respectively.
These limits merit upward revision in the light of normal increase in price index and
inflation since then.
While, the upward revision of limits of NS/NIS, as recommended, would ensure
that administrative Ministries have greater flexibility/accountability in the delegation
of powers for re-appropriation, discipline of meaningful and realistic budgeting would
be maintained, and the original objective of the budgeted scheme would not be
substantially altered by the exercise of delegated powers without prior approval of the
Parliament. In the revised limits, powers of administrative Ministries have been
rationalized and recast as per contemporary requirements.
Furthermore, it has been observed that with the imposition of various restrictions
under Rule 10 ibid and GIDs issued thereunder, Ministries are required to seek approval
of this Department even for re-appropriation of funds for their ‘committed’ liabilities
viz. expenditure towards Salary, wages, Pensionary Charges, Medical Expenses and
21
SERVER5\5162LS\5162LS 21

22
Rent Rate and Rent  Rate and  Taxes.  As the expenditure on these heads is of
‘committed’  nature, it has been proposed to give full powers of re-appropriation to
administrative departments for expenditure towards these heads, within the budgeted
amount placed at their disposal.
3. It may also be clarified here that the delegation through the proposed revised
norms is not in view of any irregularities noticed under the existing norms, but is in fact
aimed at enabling administrative departments in having efficient management of their
departmental budgets with a view to improving the quality of implementation, and
enhancing the 'efficiency' and 'accountability' of delivery mechanism through quicker
decision making. It is also intended to reduce references to the Ministry of Finance on
matters affecting day to day routine affairs so that expenditure control is enforced
through scales of expenses and budgetary ceilings rather than getting involved in
micro-management of the departmental affairs. Greater delegation would also imply
greater responsibility to manage the affairs within the budget with consequent greater
accountability.
4. As regards the issue of financial control (point iii), it is stated that as per the
Scheme of 'Integrated' Financial Adviser of the Department of Expenditure, the Financial
Adviser is responsible both to the administrative Ministry and to the Ministry of
Finance, and functions under the general guidance of the Finance Ministry. Therefore,
the procedure, guidelines and rules etc., issued from time to time by the Ministry of
Finance are required to be observed by him/her, while examining the re-appropriation
proposals/other proposals of the administrative Ministry/Department concerned. The
proposal to be considered under the revised norms also, as recommended by us,
would require the concurrence of the Financial Advisers of the administrative
Department concerned.
5. It may also be stated that the proposed revised norms, have been finalized
after consulting various Ministries, and after obtaining the concurrence of O/o C&AG.
6. This issue with the approval of Secretary (Expenditure)
                                                                                                              sd/-
(RUBINA  ALI)
Under Secretary to the Govt. of India.
Lok Sabha Secretariat,
[Kind attention: Ms. Anita B. Panda, Under Secretary]
Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.

APPENDIX III
OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
SI. Para Ministry/ Observations/Recommendations
No. No.  (Department)
12 3 4
1. 13 Finance The Committee have been given to understand
(Department that a  Fiscal Policy Strategy Statement was laid
of Expenditure) before the Parliament by the Finance Ministry on
26th February, 2005 under Fiscal Policy Strategy
Statement Responsibility and Budget
Management Act, 2003. Pursuant to this, the
Ministry of Finance (Department of expenditure)
have sought approval of the PAC for revision of
norms for re-appropriation of funds. The
proposals inter-alia  include that the limit of
Rs. 1 crore or those for re-appropriations of funds
under various sub-heads of the Grant, which
require approval of Secretary (Expenditure), may
be enhanced to Rs. 5 crore of more. Also, full
powers are sought to be delegated to the
Ministries/Department to re-appropriate funds
from the head ‘Salary’ for augmentation of head
‘Salary’ across the schemes (sub-heads) within a
grant. It is further proposed that financial limits
for obtaining approval of Parliament under New
Service/New Instrument of Service may be
enhanced/revised.
2. 14 Finance The Ministry have explained that there is an
(Department imperative need for such a review in view of
of Expenditure) inflation and price rise since 1990s. According to
the Ministry, the proposed norms are intended to
give greater delegation of authority and flexibility
to the Administrative Ministries in managing their
departmental budgets and their financial affairs.
The revised norms are stated to be aime at enabling
Administrative Departments in having efficient
management of their departmental budgets with a
view to improving the quality of implementation,
23
SERVER5\5162LS\5162LS 23

24
and enhancing the 'efficiency' and 'accountability'
of delivery mechanism through quicker decision
making. It is also intended to reduce references to
the Ministry of Finance on matters affecting day
to day reoutine affairs so that expenditure control
is enforced through scales of expenses and
budgetary ceilings rather than getting involved
in micro-management of the departmental affairs.
Greater delegation would also imply greater
responsibility to manage the affairs within the
budget with consequent greater accountability.
3. 15 Finance As these proposals have been finalized after
(Department consulting various Ministries and obtaining the
of Expenditure) concurrence of the Office of the Comptroller &
Auditor General of India, and there is adequate
justification and need therefor, the Committee are
in agreement with the proposed revision in the
norms for re-appropriation of funds. At the same
time, the Committee would like to impress upon
the Ministry of Finance (Department of
Expenditure) to divise an effective mechanism for
proper and continuous monitoring of the revised
norms in order to ensure strict adherence to the
same by each and every Minisitry/Department.
The Committee also expect the Financial Advisors
of all the Ministries/Departments to ensure that
there is no violation in implementation of the said
revised norms for re-appropriation of funds and
any slackness in complying with the said norms
is strictly dealt with.
12 3 4

MINUTES OF  THE FIFTEENTH SITTING  OF  THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2005-2006)  HELD  ON 12TH   DECEMBER,  2005
The Committee sat from 1630 hrs. to 1735 hrs. on 12th December, 2005 in Room
No."139", Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Dr. K. Malaisamy — in the Chair
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Madan Lal Sharma
4. Shri Brijbhushan Sharan Singh
5. Dr. Ramlakhan Singh
6. Kunwar Rewati Raman Singh
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Additional Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
5. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Under Secretary
OFFICER OF THE OFFICE OF THE COMPTROLLER AND AUDITOR GENERAL OF INDIA
1. Shri U. Bhattacharya — ADAI (RC)
2. Shri A.K. Thakur — DG of Audit
3. Shri Roy S. Mathrani — Pr. Director (AB)
4. Shri R.K. Ghose — AG(Audit), Delhi
25
SERVER5\5162LS\5162LS 25

26
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
**** **** ****
REPRESENTATIVES OF DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
**** **** ****
REPRESENTA TIVES OF DEP ARTMENT OF EDUCATION, GOVERNMENT OF NCT OF DELHI
**** **** ****
2. As the Chairman (PAC) was unwell and could not attend the sitting, the
Committee chose Dr. K. Malaisamy to act Chairman for the sitting.
3. At the outset, the acting Chairman, welcomed the Members and the Audit
Officers to the sitting of the Committee. The Chairman informed the Members that
pursuant to Fiscal Policy strategy statement laid by FM before Parliament under Fiscal
Responsibility and Budget Management Act, 2003 the Ministry of Finance (Department
of Expenditure ) has submitted a note seeking approval of the PAC which included
proposals for review of norms for re-appropriation of funds. The Chairman further
informed that these proposals were finalised  by the Ministry in consulation with the
Office of C&AG of India.  ADAI (RC) informed that Office of C&AG had already
examined aforesaid proposals for review of norms for re-appropriation of funds and
their comments/views had been incorporated in the Ministry's proposal.
The Committee then took up for consideration the Memorandum prepared by
the Secretariat explaining inter-alia the proposals submitted by the Ministry as also
need and justification therefor. After some deliberations the Committee approved the
proposals submitted by Ministry of Finance (Department of Expenditure).
4 . **** **** ****
5 . **** **** ****
6 . **** **** ****
(The Committee then adjourned.)
MGIPMRND—5162LS—27-2-2006.