1
DELAY IN OPERATIONAL
DEPLOYMENT OF IMPORTED
SYSTEMS AND DELAY IN
DEVELOPMENT-CUM-PRODUCTION
OF A SYSTEM
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE
2004-2005
FIRST REPORT
FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

FIRST  REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2004-2005)
(FOURTEENTH LOK SABHA)
DELAY IN OPERATIONAL DEPLOYMENT
OF IMPORTED SYSTEMS AND DELAY IN
DEVELOPMENT-CUM-PRODUCTION OF
A SYSTEM
Ministry of Defence
[Action Taken on 22nd Report of Public Accounts Committee (13th Lok Sabha)]
Presented to Lok Sabha on................................
Laid in Rajya Sabha on ......................................
LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI
December, 2004/Agrahayana, 1926 (Saka)

PAC No. 1752
Price: Rs. 54.00
© 2004 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok  Sabha (Eleventh Edition) and Printed by the Manager, Government of India Press,
Minto Road, New Delhi.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF  THE  Public  Accounts  Committee  (2004-005)...................................(iii)
INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I Report....................................................... ................................. 1
CHAPTER II Observations/Recommendations which have been accepted
by Government ..................................................................... 7
CHAPTER III Observations/Recommendations which the Committee do
not desire to pursue in view of the replies received from
Government........................................................................... 21
C
HAPTER IV Observations/Recommendations in respect of which Replies
of Government have not been accepted by the Committee
and which require reiteration ................................................ 27
C
HAPTER V Observations/Recommendations in respect of which
 Government have furnished interim replies ......................... 28
PART II
 Minutes of the Third Sitting of Public Accounts Committee
 (2004-2005) held on 28.9.2004.............................................. 124
APPENDIX
Observations and Recommendations .................................. 126

COMPOSITION  OF  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS  COMMITTEE
2004-2005
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Vacant *
3. Shri Ramesh Bais
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Dr. M. Jagannath
6. Shri Raghunath Jha
7. Shri Ashok Kumar Rawat
8. Shri Magunta Sreenivasulu Reddy
9. Dr. R. Senthil
10. Shri  Madan Lal Sharma
11. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
12. Dr. Ram Lakhan Singh
13. Kunwar Revati Raman Singh
14. Shri K.V. Thangka Balu
15. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
17. Shri R.K. Dhawan
18. Dr. K. Malaisamy
19. Shri V . Narayanasamy
20. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
21. Shri Jairam Ramesh
22. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri P.D.T.  Achary — Additional Secretary
2. Shri S.K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
4. Shri Jadumani Baisakh — Assistant Director
*Shri A.R. Antulay resigned from the membership of the Committee  w.e.f.  27 August, 2004.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee having been authorised by the
Committee to present this Report on their behalf, do present the First Report on action
taken by Government on the recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee
contained in their 22nd Report (13th Lok Sabha) on “Delay in Operational Deployment
of Imported Systems and Delay in Development-cum-Production of a System”.
2.  This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee at
their sitting held on 28th September, 2004. Minutes of the sittings form Part II of the
Report.
3.  For facility of reference and convenience, the observations and recommendations
of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the Report and have
also been reproduced in a consolidated form in Appendix to the Report.
4.  The Committee place on record their appreciation of the Assistance rendered to
them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor- General of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA
27 October, 2004 Chairman,
5 Kartika, 1926 (Saka) Public   Accounts Commmittee.

CHAPTER  I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with the action taken by Government on the
Observations\Recommendations contained in their 22nd Report (13th Lok Sabha) on
paragraphs 21 and 39 of the Report of  the Comptroller and Auditor-General of India for
the period ended 31 March 1995 (No. 9 of 1996), Union Government (Defence
Services— Air Force & Navy) relating to “Delay in operational deployment of
imported systems” and “Delay in development -cum-production of a system.”
2.  The 22nd Report which was presented to Lok Sabha on 24 July 2001 contained 17
Observations\Recommendations. The action taken notes have been received in
respect of all Observations\recommendations and these have been broadly categorized
as follows:
(i) Observations\Recommendations which have been accepted by Government:
Paragraph Nos. 7.1-7.3, 7.6-7.7, 7.12-7.14, 7.16-7.17
(ii) Observations\Recommendations which the Committee do not desire to pursue
in view of the replies  received from Government:
Paragraph Nos. 7.4-7.5, 7.8-7.11
(iii) Observations\Recommendations in respect of which replies of Government
have not been accepted by the Committee and which require reiteration:
Paragraph No. 7.15
(iv) Observations\Recommendations in respect of which Government have
furnished interim replies:
3.  The action taken notes furnished by the Ministry of Defence have been
reproduced in the relevant chapters of this Report. The Committee will now deal with
the action taken by the Government on some of their Observations\Recommendations.
- NIL -
Delay in Submission of Action Taken Notes
4.  As per the prescribed procedure, the Ministry of Defence were required to
furnish the requisite Action Taken Notes on the observations\recommendations
contained in the 22nd Report of PAC within six months of presentation of the Report
i.e. by 23 January, 2002.  In the instant case, despite constant follow-up, the Action
Taken Notes were only furnished by the ministry on 3 February, 2004 i.e. after a
lapse of more than two years. It may be mentioned here that the Committee in their
original Report had taken strong exception to the slackness on the part of the ministry
in responding to draft audit paragraphs as well as abnormal delay in furnishing the
desired information on the subject. The Committee had therefore recommended that

2
the Ministry of Defence should entrust specific responsibilities to designated nodal
officers in the respective Departments so as to ensure that audit paragraphs and
follow - up action thereon is processed, coordinated and responded to properly and
expeditiously within the stipulated time frame. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry
stated that necessary instructions were issued to all concerned on 23 April, 2002
emphasizing the urgency to expedite Action Taken Notes. The Committee however,
regret to note that despite issuance of instructions there was recurrence of delay in
the action taken stage also obviously the system in place is still found to be lacking
and needs further refinement. Taking a serious note of the prevalent state of affairs,
the Committee urge the Ministry to strengthen their monitoring mechanism in
order to ensure that the laid down procedures and instructions issued from time to
time are followed scrupulously by the authorities concerned and any aberration thereto
be looked into with a view to fixing responsibility. The Committee trust that the
Ministry would initiate appropriate measures to obviate recurrence of such delays in
future.
Deficiencies/Irregularities in Procurement of Electronic Warfare System
(Sl. Nos. 2, 3, 4, 12 and 15-Paragraphs 7.2, 7.3, 7.6, 7.12 and  7.15)
5. The Government concluded two contracts in 1979 and 1985 respectively with a
foreign firm ‘A’ for procurement of five Electronic Warfare System (EWS) to meet
operational requirement of  Navy. In their 22nd Report while deploring the questionable
manner in which the case was made out for import of the EWS in disregard to its
indigenous development, the Committee had opined that the whole system of projecting
defence requirements of the Navy, their import and contract management warranted a
thorough overhauling to ward off such incidents in future. The Committee’s examination
also revealed several irregularities/disquieting aspects in the execution of the contract
with the firm.
Taking note of the fact that proper spadework was not done prior to selecting the
supplier, the Committee concluded that the selection of the firm ‘A’ for import in
question was almost pre-determined. The Committee were concerned to observe that
the preferential treatment given and undue indulgence shown to the foreign firm over
indigenous endeavours ultimately cost the exchequer dearly in terms of cost and time
overrun besides impinging upon the supreme concern of national security. While
expressing their grave anxiety in the matter and leaving it to the Government to explore
as to whether it was feasible to take punitive action against the guilty officials at this
distant point of time, the Committee had desired that the Ministry should evolve
foolproof institutional mechanism for entering into finalising the defence deals. The
Committee were astonished to find that the Ministry signed the second contract in
June 1985 with the same firm for procurement of three more EW Systems despite being
well aware of the fact that there had been abnormally long delay on the part of the firm
in successful installation  and commissioning of the systems contracted in 1979, failure
on their part in fulfilling its contractual obligations and the need for advanced system
in view of the technical advancement in the field during that period. The Committee
had concluded that the decision to award the second contract to the firm for the same
system was taken under influence/pressure without proper scrutiny and at the grave

3
risk to, and detriment of, national security. While viewing with grave concern and
anxiety the vulnerability of defence procurements to extraneous considerations, the
Committee had desired that all such strategic defence procurements should be examined
threadbare invariably by a core group of users and professionals before taking a
decision as to the necessity and modalities of the procurement.
6. The Committee had further observed that the imported EW systems were the
technology of Seventies and by the time these systems were made operational, more
than a decade’s time had past and thus were outdated not only in terms of technological
advancements but also in terms of their life span which was around twleve years and
half. The Committee were unable to comprehend as to why and for what consideration
the Ministry kept on procuring the systems which had become technologically
obsolescent. While observing that the whole deal reflected a murky state of affairs at
the prevalent time, the Committee had expressed serious apprehension whether any
remedial and corrective action was taken in the Ministry of Defence to ensure
transparency in deals and to safeguard the supremacy of national security.
7. Taking note of the irregularities in the contracts entered into with the foreign firm,
the Ministry had decided in 1994 to conduct a special internal audit and fix responsibility.
But the Committee were surprised to find that the formal order for internal audit was
not given till January 1996. As regards making available the findings of the Economic
Investigation Bureau (EIB) to the Committee, the Ministry pleaded non-availability of
records. The non-availability of relevant records and findings of EIB only added to the
worst apprehension of the Committee that there was a definite design to shield the
guilty. The Committee had therefore desired that the findings of the EIB should be
made available to them including the follow up action taken to prevent recurrence of
such grave incidents in future.
8. As regards reviewing the Defence Procurement System, the Ministry of Defence
in their Action Taken Note inter-alia stated:
“As part of the implementation of the report of the Group of Ministers on reforming
the National Security System, new defence procurement management structures
and systems were set up in the Ministry of Defence (MoD)  vide MoD order No.
17179/2001-Def.Secy.1C/2001 dated 11 October 2001 and No SA/01/104/2001
dated 10 September 2001. In order to implement the provisions laid out in the
new defence procurement management strucutures and systems, the procedure
for Defence Procurement laid down vide MoD ID No 1 (1)91/PO (Def) dated 28
February 1992 was revised. The Defence Procurement Procedure-2002 (DPP-
2002) came into effect from 30 December 2002 and was applicable for procurements
flowing out of ‘Buy’ decisions of Defence Acquisition Council. The scope of the
same has been enlarged to include procurement flowing out of ‘Buy and Make
through Imported TOT’ decision as well. The revised procedure is called the
Defence Procurement Procedure—2002 (Version Jun. 03). A similar procedure
covering ship building activities is also being examined. The defence procedure
of ship building activity is being steered by Seceretary, Defence Production and
Supplies and is presently being vetted by all sections of the Ministry of Defence
involved in ship building activities.”

4
9. On the question of selection of the foreign firm ‘A’ and the import of the entire
system, the Ministry in  their Action Taken Note submitted that a high powered technical
team consisting of representatives from Defence Electronics Research Laboratory
(DERL) and Navy visited five companies in Italy, Holland and UK, who were willing to
export the system/sub-system/technology. Quoting from the report of the Technical
Team, the Ministry stated that the system proposed by the company in Holland and
one of the companies in UK could meet the technical requirements of the Navy in the
Electronic Support Measures (ESM) only, but technology used was not very cost
effective. It was stated that the Electronic Counter Measure system of that company
was found to be inferior. According to the Ministry, based on these considerations,
the team concluded that the offered system was the most cost effective system which
were available at that time and to meet operational requirements in the time frame
projected by the Navy. Regarding action taken against guilty officials and evolving
foolproof institutional mechanisms for entering into and finalising Defence deals, the
Ministry in their Action Taken Note explained:
“At this distant point of time, it may not be possible to initiate action against
any individual. However, to obviate such reoccurrence a comprehensive
defence procurement procedure has been promulgated, which is periodically
reviewed for high value/high technology procurements. Such proposals are
reviewed by Technical Oversight Committee (TOC) especially nominated to
ensure that the trials, trials evaluation, compliance of Quality Requirements
(QRs) and selection of vendors have been done as per the prescribed
procedures. In addition, for all acquisition proposals in excess of Rs. 300
crores and any other recommended by the Defence Procurement Board (DPB)
a panel of Eminent Persons Group (EPG) having experience and expertise in
defence procurement is constituted by the Raksha Mantri. The EPG examines
whether all prescribed process and procedures have been followed. This process
is undertaken after contractual negotiations have been finalised but before the
contract is concluded. These procedures have been  implemented to bring
transparency in defence procurement.”
10. Apprising the Committee about the measures taken to ward off import of
technologically outdated system, the Ministry in their Action Taken Note stated as
follows:
“To discount induction of technologically obsolescent systems, Defence
Procurement Board (DPB) has a Technical Wing in which the Technical Manager,
Maritime & System (TM/M&S) is responsible for induction of state-of-art EW
technology into the Navy. The Defence Procurement Procedure, ensures that
technologically obsolescent system do not get inducted into the services. As
part of the defence procurement procedure, Request for Proposals (RFPs) initiated
by the Service Headqurters are scrutinised and vetted by the TM(M&S) staff.
The TM and its staff comprises of experts from the three services with vast
experience in their respective fields of specialisation. The Part II of the RFP,
incorporates aspects of staff qualitative requirements that describe technical
parameters for the proposed equipment in clear and unambiguous  terms. Therefore

5
there exist a provision in the Defence Procurement Procedures to specify one’s
requirements, this would ensure that only state-of-art technology is
inducted.”
11. On the issue of Conducting Special Internal Audit in the matter of import of EW
system in question and fixing responsibility, the Ministry have regretted the delay in
giving formal order for the same. According to the Ministry, the Controller of Defence
Accounts (CDA), Navy carried out a special audit and its report was analysed and
found to have corroborated the known facts. The Committee have been informed that
no individual has been held accountable for any wrong doing at any stage. As regards
findings of the Economic Investigation Bureau (EIB), the Ministry stated that they had
received no adverse Communication from EIB and efforts were being made to obtain
the Report from them.
12. The Government concluded two contracts with a foreign firm ‘A’ in 1979 and
1985 respectively for procurement of five Electronic Warfare Systems (EWS) to
meet operational requirments of Navy. In their earlier Report, the Committee found
several glaring irregularities/deficiencies in the execution of  the contract by the
Ministry of Defence. These broadly included, lack of proper spadework in selection
of the supplier, preferential treatment and undue indulgence shown to the firm,
questionable procurement of technologically obsolescent EW systems and above all
inaction on the part of the Ministry of Defence to probe into the matter with a view to
fixing responsibility. Having regard to the fact that the import, contract in question
dated back to early eighties, the Committee thought it prudent to leave the matter to
the Government to explore the feasibility of taking any punitive action against the
guilty officials for various acts of omission and commission. Focusing their attention
on the macro aspect of the case with a futuristic outlook for obviating such grave
incidents, the Committee  had inter-alia recommended that the whole system of
projecting defence requirements of the Navy, their import and contract management
warranted a thorough overhauling to ward off such incidents in future. While viewing
with grave concern and anxiety the vulnerability of defence procurements to extraneous
considerations, the Committee further desired that all such strategic defence
procurements should be examined threadbare invariably by a core group of Users and
professionals before taking a decision as to the necessity and modalities of the
procurement. The Committee also urged upon the Ministry to evolve foolproof
institutional mechanisms for negotiating and finalising defence deals with a note of
transparency so as to safeguard the national security.
As regards fixing responsibility for the reported irregularities in the instant
case, though the Ministry of Defence had decided in 1994 to conduct  a speical
internal audit, the formal order for instituting the same was not given till January
1996. The Committee in their earlier Report had expressed strong dissatisfaction
over the delay in probing into the matter. The Ministry in their Action Taken Note
have now regretted the delayed issuance of formal order. According to them, the
Controller of Defence Accounts, Navy (CDA) carried out a special audit and the
report submited by them had corroborated the known facts, However, according to the
Ministry, no individual was held accountable for any wrong doing at any stage.

6
Pertinently, an outside agency i.e. Economic Investigation Bureau (EIB) also enquired
into the case. The Committee are perturbed to find that the Ministry are yet to obtain
a report from EIB. What is further disquieting to note is the fact that even without
obtaining the Report from EIB, the Ministry chose to inform the Committee that EIB
did not observe any irregularity in the case. The Ministry owe an explanation to the
Committee for this unusual act. The Committee desire that the Ministry should
obtain  a copy of the report from EIB expeditiously and submit the same to the
Committee alongwith a copy of the special audit report submitted by CDA (Navy).
In respect of corrective and remedial action taken to obviate recurrence of such
cases, the Ministry stated that a comprehensive defence procurement procedure has
been promulgated with effect from June 2003, which is periodically reviewed for high
value/high technology procurements. According to the Ministry, these procedures
have been implemented to bring transparency in defence procurement. The
Committee welcome the measures taken in the direction of structural and systemic
refinements in the defence procurement management and trust that the envisaged
objective behind this rejuvenated procedure will be observed and implemented in
letter and spirit in the best interest of defence preparedness and supreme concern of
national security.
The Committee have been informed that a similar procedure covering shipbuilding
activities was also being examined in the Ministry of Defence. The Committee desire
that a copy of the approved procedure may be furnished to them in due course.

CHAPTER  II
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS  WHICH  HA VE  BEEN  ACCEPTED  BY
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Electronic Warfare System is a most sophisticated modern technique that
plays key role in the present day strategic warfare scenario. An Electronic Warfare
System (EWS) consists of three interdependent elements viz. (i) Electronic Support
Measure (ESM), (ii) Electronic Counter Measure (ECM); and (iii) Electronic Counter-
Counter Measure (ECCM). The effective life-span of an electronic equipment is
considered to be about twelve and half years. Any delay in installation of an EW
system on the ship reduces the exploitable life of the system by the period of delay.
The import of EW system is never considered a preferable option because it always
poses a possible threat of the operational characteristics being passed on to the
potential adversaries by the foreign supplier. The Committee believe that in order to be
successful in the area of EW techniques, it is essential that indigenous efforts are
made for designing, developing and productionising of the EW systems closely related
to the country’s operational plans and usage patterns.
[Sl. No. 1 Appendix II Para 7.1 of Twenty-second Report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The effective life span of Electronic Warfare equipment is counted with its installation
on board a ship. Any delay in the installation of an EW system on a ship does not
reduce the exploitable life of the system by the period of delay. The concept of shelf
life is not applicable to an EW system. The four numbers of INS-3 (Integrated Naval
System) and the indigenised Ajanta system continue to be operationally exploited till
today. It is pertinent to note that INS-3 systems were installed in the 80’s on the ships.
Import option is resorted to only in case of non-availability of indigenous systems.
All security measures are taken to ensure that the operational characteristics are not
compromised.
The Ministry of Defence concurs with the observations of the PAC that to be
successful in the area of EW techniques, it is essential that indigenous efforts are
made for design, development and production of the EW systems. These efforts need
to be in tandem with the country’s operational plans and tactical needs. However, at
the stage when INS-3 was inducted in the Navy the indigenous capability was not
available.The import served to help and build indigenous capability. The technologies
in this field are often emerging, proprietary and available only with the developed
7

8
countries. Indigenous effort in the field of EW technology, is a protracted and iterative
effort. The delays in the indigenous  efforts, therefore, necessitate imports. In order
to build indigenous capability, project “Ajanta” was sanctioned in 70s for
development of  shipborne EW system was linked to this procurement. In 1995,
naval Indigenous Electronic Warfare Programme ‘Sangraha’ has been approved which
envisages development/production of five main variants of Electronic Warfare
Systems, viz. Kite, Eagle, Homi, Porpoise and Ellora for fitment on aircraft, submarines
and ships. DLRL/DRDO undertook the development and the production agency is
M/s. BEL, Hyderabad. Development activities of all systems except Homi and Ellora
has been completed, ESM system fitted on board helicopters has already been
productionised and inducted into the Navy in Nov. 2001. The prototype of Eagle to
be fitted on aircraft has been tried out successfully and 10 in numbers are under
production. Porpoise ESM for submarines and Homi ESM for aircraft are under
production and the production models for both would be ready for installation and
trial in end March 03. Lab demonstration of Ellora was held in September 02 and
production of the first model is expected in Oct. 03. For the future a 15-year perspective
EW plan has also been prepared by the Navy and forwarded to DRDO so as to
enable our in-house R&D organisations to decide what we can make and what we
have to import. These perspective plans are projected to the Defence Acquisition
Council, which would approve these plan and take a decision on indigenous
production or import of planned equipment/systems.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. H11013/20/2001/D (Parl.) dated 30 Jan 04]
Recommendation
The Committee observe that the Naval Headquarters based on threat assessment,
had projected an immediate requirement of three EW Systems for installation on the
first three ships of “Project-A” with the fitment schedule of July 1981, July 1982 and
July 1983 respectively. The Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO)
had offered that the requirement of the Navy could be met through indigenous
development and that they were capable of developing an EW system to meet the
requirements. The Committee find that a Technical Committee had examined this proposal
and a decision was taken on 10th January, 1978 to clear the “Project-A” and review the
progress in January, 1979. The Committee are surprised to note that contrary to the
recommendation of the Technical Committee as well as the decision taken in the meeting
held on 10 January, 1978 for review of the “Project-A” in January, 1979  the project was
reviewed in April 1978 itself i.e. just after three months and the delivery schedule fixed
earlier was preponed to November, 1980. The Committee further observe that while
placing the letter of intent, the preponed date was further advanced by one month i.e.,
October, 1980. The Ministry could not adduce any justification for advancement of
delivery made from July, 1981 to October 1980 while by their own admission made
before the Committee, the system was required for the Frigate which was to be
commissioned between 1983 and 1985. The assertion made before the Committee that
the Navy was in a position to meet effectively the enemy’s threat even without
depending upon the imported EWS renders questionable the case made out for import
of EW Systems in extraordinary haste. While deploring the questionable manner in

9
which the deal was struck, and refraining from making any comment at this distant
point of time, the Committee strongly feel that the whole system of projecting Defence
requirements of the Navy, their import and contract management warrants a thorough
overhauling to ward off such incidents in future.
[(Sl. No. 2 Appendix II Para 7.2 of Twenty-second Report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action taken
The EW systems were meant to be installed on frigate class of ships that were due
to be commissioned between 1983 and 1985. The ship building process is a long and
tedious affair. A ship’s design caters for the equipment, which is likely to be fitted in it.
The design is worked out, finalized and intimated to the ship building yard well in
advance. Thereafter, each compartment of the ship is built to specification of the
equipment, which would be installed in it. Therefore, the equipment fit is decided well
in advance so as to ensure that the ship is designed and built for effective usage of
each compartment. It would be extremely difficult to fit any equipment especially an
EW suite into any compartment of the ship. An EW system also consists of antenna
and associated peripherals, which are located only at certain specific places on the
ship mast and superstructure. All the EW equipment is installed well in advance of the
commissioning of the ship. Records do not indicate the reason for preponement of
delivery schedules of equipment. However, it may be inferred that the decisions to
install the EW equipment were based on status of ship building activity and the
cardinal dates projected by the shipyard.
As part of the implementation of the report of the Group of Ministers on reforming
the National Security System, new defence procurement management structures and
systems were set up in the Ministry of Defence(MoD) vide MoD order No 17179/2001-
Def. Secy/IC/2001 dated 11 October 2001 and No. SA/01/104/2001 dated 10 September
2001. In order to implement the provisions laid out in the new defence procurement
management structures and systems, the procedure for Defence Procurement laid
down vide MoD ID No 1(1)91/PO(Def) dated 28 Feb. 1992 was revised. The Defence
Procurement Procedure-2002 (DPP-2002) came into effect from 30 Dec. 2002 and was
applicable for procurements flowing out of ‘Buy’ decision of Defence Acquisition
Council. The scope of the same has been enlarged to include procurements flowing
out of ‘Buy and Make through Imported TOT’ decision as well. The revised procedure
is called the Defence Procurement Procedure-2002 (Version Jun. 03) and is placed at
ANNEXURE I for information. A similar procedure covering shiphuilding activities is
also being examined. The defence procedure for ship building activity is being steered
by Secretary, Defence Production and Supplies and is presently being vetted by all
sections of the Ministry of Defence involved in ship building activities. Once the
procedure is finalised/approved, a copy of the procedure would be forwarded to the
PAC and the audit authorities.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. H11013/20/2001/D (Parl) dated 30 Jan. 04)]

10
Recommendation
The Committee observe that in view of the short time frame, DLRL was advised to
supply EW system for the first “Project-A” ship by resorting to import of necessary
sub-systems and developing the rest indigenously. The team deputed abroad for the
purpose of identifying the sub-systems expressed their favourable opinion about the
system of a particular foreign firm. The Ministry failed to furnish convincing
explanation as to what prompted the team to recommend import of the whole system
rather than the sub-systems. What has caused serious concern to the Committee is the
manner in which the foreign firm was selected for the purpose of import of the system.
Having regard to the fact that further attempt was not made by the Ministry/Navy to
identify other manufacturers/suppliers in the global market, proper exercise was not
undertaken to verify the technical and production capabilities of the firm, efforts were
not made to assess the earlier track record of the firm, measures were not taken to
ensure that the specifications as well as the quality of the requisite equipments would
be met by the firm and that due efforts were not made to ensure fulfilling of the
contractual obligations by the firm, the Committee came to an inescapable conclusion
that the selection of a particular foreign firm was almost pre-determined. The fact that
the Naval authorities firmly stuck to the short-frame given to DLRL while liberally
revising the delivery schedule of the foreign vendor only reinforces their conclusion
about the predetermined selection of the foreign firm. The Committee are pained to
observe that the preferential treatment given and undue indulgence shown to the
foreign firm over indigenous endeavors ultimately cost the exchequer dearly in terms
of the cost and time overrun besides impinging upon the supreme concern of the
national security. While expressing their grave anxiety in the matter and leaving it to
the Government to explore as to whether it would be feasible to take punitive action
against the guilty officials at this distant point of time; the Committee would like the
Government to draw suitable lesson and to evolve foolproof institutional mechanisms
for entering into and finalizing the Defence deals.
[Sl.No. 3 Appendix II Para 7.3 of Twenty-second Report of PAC
(Thireenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
At the time of project sanction, it was planned to procure (import) some of the
critical sub assemblies/sub systems and develop the rest indigenously in order to
meet the delivery schedule envisaged at that period of time. A high powered technical
team consisting of reps. from DLRL and Navy visited five companies in Italy,  Holland
and UK, who were willing to export the system/sub-system/technology. Electronic
Warfare system are of intelligence gathering nature and very few foreign companies
are allowed by their governments to export the system and technology. This was the
period when tremendous development was taking place in the field of computers and
these companies were at an advance stage of integrating their systems. During the
visit the Team observed some of the complex problems being faced by the European
firms, who had been in this field for much longer period in system realization and
system integration both in Hardware as well as Software.

11
Witnessing the complexity of the task involved and the available timeframe, the
team recommended import of first system with participation of DRDO for “Know-how”
transfer in respect of system interface and system integration phase. Such a
participation was to help the DRDO lab to study some of the critical design aspect and
learn from the experience of others in this field. From the report of the high powered
Technical Team, it is observed that the system proposed by the company in Holland
and one of the companies in UK were technically not considered because of their very
large and bulky antenna system and very high reaction time to a threat. Another
company of UK could meet the technical requirements of the Navy in the ESM section
only, but technology used was not very cost effective. In addition, the ECM system of
that company was found to be inferior. Based on these considerations, the team
concluded that the offered system was the most cost effective system which were
available at that time and to meet operational requirements in the timeframe projected
by the Navy.
At this distant point of time, it may not possible to initiate action against any
individual. However, to obviate such reoccurrence a comprehensive defence
procurement procedure has been promulgated, which is periodically reviewed for high
value/high technology procurements. Such proposals are reviewed by Technical
Oversight Committee (TOC) especially nominated to ensure that the trials, trials
evaluation, compliance of QRs and selection of vendors have been done as per the
prescribed procedures. In addition, for all acquisition proposals in excess of Rs. 300
crores and any other recommended by the Defence procurement Board (DPB) a panel
of Eminent Persons Group (EPG) having experience and expertise in defence procurement
is constituted by the RM. The EPG examines whether all prescribed process and
procedures have been followed. This process is undertaken after contractual
negotiations have been finalised but before the contract is concluded. Para 33 to 43 to
Annexure I refers. These procedures have been implemented to bring transparency in
defence procurement. The Defence Procurement norms and procedures have been
made available on the web site of the Ministry.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. H11013/20/2001/D (Parl) dated 30 Jan. 04)]
Recommendation
Despite  being well   aware of the fact that there   had been abnormally long  delay
on the part of the firm in successful installation and commissioning   of the systems
contracted in 1979, failure on the part of the firm in fulfilling   its contractual  obligations
and the need for technically advanced  systems in view of the technical advancement
in the field during    that period, the Committee are astonished that the Ministry signed
the second Contract in June 1985 for procurement of  three more EW systems with the
same firm. Evidently, the testimony of the Ministry of Defence that Indian Navy   had
other   Electronic Warfare(EW)  equipments in its inventory to mitigate any emerging
threat  from adversaries and the failure of the same firm to supply defect-free system
and the abnormally long time taken by it to rectify the defective system establish
beyond  any shadow of doubt that the decision to award second contract to the same
firm for the same system was taken  under undue  influence/pressure without proper
scrutiny and at the grave risk to, and detriment of, national security. While viewing
with grave concern and anxiety the vulnerability   of defence procurements to estraneous

12
considerations, the Committee desire that all such strategic  Defence procurements
should  be examined  threadbare    invariably by  a core group of users and
professionals before taking a decision as to the necessity and modalities of the
procurement.
[Sl.No. 6 Appendix II Para 7.6 of Twenty-second Report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
NHQ  had submitted an EW Plan, under which 10 EW  systems were envisaged for
different platforms. This  requirement was expected to be met through five indigenous
and five imported systems. The  options available at that juncture were various European
countries, the U.S.  and possibility of indigenous production. The  equipment   from
USA  was not available due to their proximity with one of  our  potential adversaries at
that time.   The indigenous equipment  was also not available. In order to maintain
commonality of equipment on the same class of ships, the contract for additional 3
systems were signed with the same firm.
The countering of threat with available means/technology is always feasible.
However this results into higher casualties, lesser reaction time for forces and
uneconomic  usage of own units. Better technology enhances the cost  of war for the
adversary and economizes on own cost   in terms of number of units, equipment,
manpower etc.  MOD’s  testimony  regarding availability of EW systems to mitigate the
threat was made  in this context.
A three tier Defence Procurement Organisation consisting  of the Defence
Acquisition Council, Defence Procurement Board   and Defence Production Board has
been set up to take a coordinated view   of defence Procurements.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. H 11013/20/2001/D (Parl) dated 30 Jan. 04]
Recommendation
The Committee observe that the foreign vendor not only  badly delayed the delivery
of the system but also took abnormally long time extending upto 7 years in installation
of the systems on ships. The Committee wonder as to how the Ministry would reconcile
their own information  furnished at one place that the ships were  available at the time
of actual delivery  and that the delay  in  installation was mainly attributable  to delayed
ships building  activities. The Ministry failed to furnish any tangible ground for
necessitating  import when the ships according to them, were still under the building
process. While deploring the lackdaisical   assessment of import requirement, the
Committee recommend the Ministry to evolve  an institutionalized   system so that
Defence requirements are projected on actual   need basis and also to invariably
incorporate a specific    clause in all future contracts to the effect that in case of delayed
delivery  by the supplier, the cost of  the Contract will be reduced by a  certain
percentage  besides the option of foreclosure or rescinding of the contract.
[Sl.No. 7 Appendix II Para 7.7 of Twenty-second Report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Saha)]

13
Action Taken
The EW equipment  is generally installed during the ship  building process and not
after the ship is built. This optimizes space considerations on a ship and facilities
better usage of limited space on naval ships.  So far as the assessment of the import
requirement is concerned, these were  the inputs available  at that time:—
(a) Indigenous Equipment  was not  available. The indigenous development of
EW system had got delayed.
(b) There was an option clause in the existing contract of imported system.
(c) The  imported system was technically  evaluated and had been cleared for
induction.
(d) The EW  systems were to be made available during the stage of construction
of the frigate ships.
(e)  Induction of the imported system from  the same source would  result  into
standardization, thereby  easing maintenance and support infrastructure.
(f) Fresh evaluation and import of another system  at that stage would  have led
to further  delays and was undesirable.
A three tier  defence Procurement Organisation consisting of the defence Acquisition
Council, Defence Procurement Board and Defence Production Board has been set up
to streamline defence procurement. A copy of MoD No. 13984/2001/Def Secy/IC/2001
dated 24.8.2001 is ANNEXURE-IV
In case of delays, the contracts have  a standard provision for levy of Liquidated
Damages (upto the value of 5% of undelivered systems)  and termination with provision
for return of  advance payments with  interest in case delays are not  acceptable to the
Buyer. In case of termination for default, there is  a provision for  supplier being liable
to pay the extra amount in case  of purchase from another source at a higher price.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. H11013/20/2001/D (Parl) dated 30 Jan. 04]
Recommendation
The Committee  further observe that the imported EW  Systems were the technology
of seventies and by the time these systems were made operational  by the vendor,
more than a decade’s  time had past. Thus, these systems  had almost become   outdated
not only in terms of technological advancements which   had taken place but also in
terms of their  own life span which was around twelve years and half. Surprisingly, the
Ministry as well as the Naval authorities did not  ponder over this crucial issue. The
Defence  Secretary while deposing   before the Committee  categorically admitted that
these systems bought from the foreign firm contained the technology of the 70s  and
that there had been rapid   developments since then. The   Committee are unable to
comprehend as to why and for what consideration the Ministry kept on procuring
the systems which had become   technologically   obsolescent. Indubitably,  the whole

14
deal reflects a murky state of affairs at the prevalent time and the Committee have  little
knowledge as to whether any remedial and corrective action  has been taken in the
Ministry of Defence to ensure  transparency in Defence deals and to safeguard the
supremacy  of national security.
[Sl.No. 12 Appendix II Para 7.12 of Twenty-second Report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
To discount induction of technologically obsolesent systems, Defence Procurement
Board (DPB) has a Technical Wing in which the Technical Manager, Maritime & System
(TM/M&S) is responsible for induction of state of art EW technology into the Navy.
The Defence procurement procedure, ensures that technologically obsolescent system
do not get inducted into the services. As part of the defence procurement procedure,
Request for Proposals (RFPs) initiated by the Service Headquarters are scrutinised
and vetted by the TM (M&S)  staff. The TM and  its staff comprises of experts from the
three services with vast experience in their  respective fields of specialisation. The Part
II of the RFP,  incorporates aspects of staff qualitative  requirements    that describe
technical parameters for the  proposed  equipment in clear and unambiguous   terms.
Therefore there exist  a provision in the   Defence Procurement.  Procedures to specify
ones requirement, this would ensure that only state of art technology   is inducted.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. H11013/20/2001/D (Parl) dated 30 Jan. 04]
Recommendation
The Committee observe that the preliminary work for development of an
indigenous EW system was cmpleted by DLRL in May 1978 itself at a cost of Rs 94.50
lakh but the real development commenced from January 1982. The committee observe
several disquieting features in regard to indigenous, development such as delayed
placement of letter of intent, early review of the indigenous project in April 1978
instead of January 1979, delayed sanction of the project and earmarking of substantial
portion of the sanctioned funds for the imported system. The Committee would like all
these aspects, responsible for rolling back the indigenous development of the projects,
to be looked into dispassionately in the context of overall Defence preparedness of the
country in times  to come.
[Sl. No. 13 Appendix II Para 7.13 of Twenty-second Report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
 While it is correct that the preliminary work for development was completed by
DLRL in May 78, however, the first development model of “Ajanta” was offered by
DLRL to Indian Navy for trials in July 1988. The philosophy of this project was based
on import and indigenous development. The delay in start of development activity
was due to quantum increase in FE rates and inflation leading to increase in price of

15
import element of the sanction amount, thus leaving negligible amount for progressing
indigenous activity.
Inherent uncertainty in R&D activity is part of the system. This becomes
more severe when the basic building block of electronic components and material are
not indigenously available and have to be relied on foreign manufacturers under their
export controls. If due to the fear of inherent uncertainties, the projects are not taken
up, the index of self-reliance will not grow at all. Also the technical competence in
military systems will not build up which will show on technical evaluation of imported
systems too. Because Ajanta was taken up technical competence in EW field increased
enabling DRDO to undertaken SANGRAHA programme for Navy. Funds in this case
have been sanctioned to DRDO in advance. As far as the present indigenous EW
programme, SANGRAHA is considered, it is a major programme by the DRDO, which
caters for naval EW systems in all the three dimensions-air, subsurface (under water)
and surface. There are five different types of EW suites being inducted under this
programme. To address all issues relating to timeframe for development/delivery and
sanctioned cost, monitoring boards have been constituted at each level of induction
and are chaired by appropriate heads of organisation. The Sangraha indigenous EW
project has four tiers for monitoring. These are as follows:—
(a) Sangraha Management Board (Development).  This board is chaired by the
prime development agency of DRDO i.e. DLRL and besides various other
issues, it looks into timely development of the EW systems. The board meets
once in two months.
(b) Sangraha Management Board (Production). The nodal directorate of the user
service headquarters chairs this board. This board also meets once in two
months and addresses all  issues relating to the user including timely delivery
of EW systems and meeting of all system specifications for user satisfaction.
(c) Sangraha Executive Board. This board is chaired by a PSO viz., Deputy Chief
of Naval Staff. The board meets every quarter and addresses also issues
relating to development, delivery, cost, etc. of indigenous EW systems. The
board has member from the development agency. DRDO headquarters, user
agencies, production agency, MoD, DRDO, qualification authorities, etc.
(d) Sangraha Apex Board.  This board is the highest monitoring board and is
chaired by SA to RM. The members of the board include  Defence Secretary,
Secretary Defence Finance, Secretary Defence Production and supplies, the
Vice-Chief of Naval Staff, Deputy Chief of Naval Staff, besides all production,
development and user agencies. The board meets half yearly and takes decision
on all issues relating to induction of indigenous naval EW systems.
  The various monitoring boards have delegated powers approved by the CCS to
monitor progress of indigenous EW systems and address delays in the programme
and take necessary corrective actions. Therefore, the induction of indigenous EW
systems today is being monitored periodically and at appropriate levels in the Defence
Ministry to quantify timeframes for indigenous induction in the Defence Procurement
Procedure is not viable because each project in itself encompasses induction of

16
different type of technology, number of systems and each induction calls for specific
R&D effort. All efforts are made by the empowered monitoring boards to ensure
development and production in the sanctioned cost and timeframe. Wherever, additional
costs are incurred beyond the sanctioned cost, such increase in finances are approved
by the Competent Financial Authority by taking up each case separately. Thus, the
cost, timely development/delivery of indigenous EW system to the user are being
addressed by the Ministry  of Defence. Review mechanism for all sanctioned  DRDO
project is instituted from the initiation of the project, so that cost and time over runs are
avoided.
To strengthen the existing structure of Project Review and monitoring so that  cost
and time over runs are avoided, the Ministry has issued instructions vide MoD.
Department of Defence Production and Supplies, Office Memorandum No. 3(1)/2001/
D(S-11) dated 17 July 03 and a copy of the letter is enclosed as ANNEXURE III. The
following has been explicitly stated in these instructions:—
(a) Review of DRDO Projects. There shall be biannual review of all major  projects/
programs by the respective  Vice-Chiefs. Review reports shall be submitted to
DGR&D and the respective Chiefs.
(b) Monitoring of Staff Projects
(i) There shall be regular monitoring of Staff projects by specially constituted
Steering Committees. These Steering Committees shall be chaired by
nominated PSOs and co-chaired by the associated CCR&D.
(ii) Most major projects and programs especially those jointly funded by
DRDO and the Services, have multi-tier monitoring structures with the
Apex Committee being chaired by SA to RM and the Executive Committees
chaired by Vice or Depute Chief.
The goal of DPP 2002 (version June 03) is to achieve self-reliance in defence
equipment. Electronic Warfare (EW) is one of key thrust area of the Defence Research
and Development Organisation (DRDO). Cases for import of EW systems are not put
up to the SA to RM prior to initiating the induction process. It is only when SA to RM
clears the import, the induction of EW system through import is initiated. Therefore
preferential treatment of import over indigenisation is unlikely with the promulgation
of DPP 2002 (version June 2003).
[Ministry of Defence O.M. H11013/20/2001/D(Parl) dated 30 Jan. 04]
Recommendation
The model of EW system developed by DLRL was evaluated for a period of about
two years and a letter of intent was placed only in 1985 with a PSU for manufacture of
the systems. The first indigenous model was delivered much after the schedule time
without furnishing any cogent explanation for the delay. Curiously, the installation
and commissioning  of the indigenously developed system consumed much more time
and the removal of defects noticed in the system after installation took still  a longer
time. The Ministry even failed  to furnish vital information like the dates  on which the
ships had actually become available for the purpose of installation and commissioning

17
of indigenous EW systems and also the dates of the actual commissioning of these
systems on the ships. The Committee would like to be apprised of the dates of the
indigenously developed EW systems, the dates of their commissioning on the ships,
slippage in the prescribed schedule, deficiencies noticed in the functioning of these
systems, the time taken in removal of defects and the status report on the operation of
these systems on ships so that the issues  could be examined further in the right
perspective.
[Sl. No.14 Appendix II Para 7.14 of Twenty-second Report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The approval for the indigenously built Ajanta system was accorded in 1978. The
Ajanta system’s demonstration under controlled conditions in the laboratory was
conducted in 1986. The prototype model of the Ajanta system was an integrated
system consisting of both the ESM and ECM subsystems. It was installed and trial
evaluated from 1986—88. There were eleven systems initially inducted. These eleven
systems were of two types. The Ajanta (P) Mk I consisted of the ESM system. Where
as the Ajanta (I) Mk I, consisted of both the ESM and ECM systems. The Navy
inducted 7 Ajanta (P) and 4 Ajanta (I) systems.
The details of these 11 Ajanta systems, from the time they were dispatched from
BEL, Hyderabad to its installation and successful commissioning are enumerated in
the table  below. It is pertinent to mention that the installation of the system caters for
fitment  on the ship, checking the correctness of the installation and its correct interfacing
with other systems onboard. The successful commissioning involves performance
trials, which are undertaken in harbour, and under field conditions at sea with various
consorts, that includes other ships, aircraft and submarines. The details on the dates
of commissioning and Installation schedule are as follows:—
System/Ship Dispatched Installation Commissioning
From BEL (Successful trials at sea)
1 2 3      4
Ajanta P/Kuthar Feb 1990 Jun 1990 Jan 1996
Ajanta P/Khukri Jul 1990 Dec 1990 Mar 1997
Ajanta P/Kirpan Jun 1992 Nov 1994 Mar 1997
Ajanta P/Khanjar Mar 1991 Dec 1991 Apr 1997
Ajanta P/Viraat Sep 1991 Dec 1991 Jan 1996
Ajanta P/Subhadra Aug 1992 Sep 1994 Oct 1995
Ajanta P/Kuthar Nov 1992 Jun 1999 Sep 1999
Ajanta I/Dunagiri Mar 1992 Nov 1993 Apr 2001
Ajanta I/Himgiri Mar 1992 May 1995 May 1997

18
Ajanta I/Udaigiri Mar 1990-ESM Jan 1991 Jun 1993
Sep 1990-ECM
Ajanta I/Rajput Mar 1993 Nov 1998-ESM Feb 2001
Jul 1999-ECM
In the table above, the installation column indicates the date when the sytem was
physically installed on board the particular ship. The installation of an EW system is
completed, once the system is fitted and the necessary cabling is undertaken.
The commissioning column in the table, above indicates the date when the system
finally cleared all observations that were made during HATs and SATs.
EW system HATs are taken up only when the air-conditioning, ventilation, power
supply and integration with other onboard ship systems such as gyro, chaff, radars,
action information  organisation, tactical display etc. is completed.
Once the system clears HATs, the system is checked at sea with various consorts
that include other ships, aircraft and submarines. Each EW system caters for definite
frequency coverage. Therefore, consorts having emitters (radars) in those  frequencies
are to be made available for the SATs.
The availability of many requirements is critical for successful commissioning of an
EW suite. However, non-availability of a resource can severely hinder the
commissioning of an EW suite. The non-availability of resources could be due to
various reasons. Therefore, to make a statement that slippage of definite time period
and a definite time was taken to rectify the defect in each of the eleven Ajanta fitted
ships would be extremely difficult.
The difference in the commissioning  column and installation column in the table
above could be indicative of the time taken for the system to clear each and every
aspect of the acceptance trials. However, such an inferred time period would not reflect
the factual delay and the time taken to rectify defects. Since the delays could have
been caused due to other related issues and not necessarily due to the problems
encountered in Ajanta systems. Numerous other issues related to ship building
activities, non-availability of sensors, non-availability of platforms for trials, problems
in power supply, problems with  air-conditioning, change in refit schedules, operational
status of the ship, limited manpower and expertise with BEL, concurrent requirements,
non-availability  of imported components, sanctions etc. could have caused the delay
and effected early  rectification of observed defects. Therefore at such a late time, it
would be rather difficult to explicitly state the delays in schedule and the time taken to
remove defects.
To conclude, slippage  would have occurred in the prescribed  schedule and to
remove defects. However, Ajanta being the first indigenous effort in EW undertaken
by a PSU with relatively negligible experience, such delays should be considered as
part and parcel of own indigenous R&D effort. It is stated that all elevan  Ajanta
12 3 4

19
systems that were inducted are operational and are performing satisfactorily. Efforts to
implement corrective measures have been made in the present EW project ‘Sangraha’
being undertaken by DRDO.
[(Ministry of Defence O.M. H1101 3/20/2001/D(Parl) dated 30 Jan 04)]
Recommendation
Yet another intriguing aspect that came to the notice of the Committee was that the
Naval Headquarters agreed to waive off all penalties on account of failure of the
vendor in fulfilling the contractual  commitments though not competent to do so as
also agreed to by the Defence Secretary during oral evidence. The Committee are
further astonished to note that though the Naval Authorities had recommended  in
January, 1990 for withholding payments to the firm but surprisingly, the stand  was
reversed in September 1991 despite continuance of the defaults on the part of the firm
on various counts. For reasons not known, depsite clear breach of contractual
obligations by the vendor firm, the Naval Headquarters and  the Ministry refrained
conspicuously from taking action against  the defaulter firm within the ambit of the
contracts. The Committee would like to caution and emphasize that all authorities and
organizations under the Ministry of Defence are accountable to Parliament through
the Ministry of Defence and as such it is incumbent upon the Ministry to ensure that
all of them follow the prescribed financial  and administrative regimen.
[Sl. No. 16 Appendix II Para 7.16 of Twenty-second Report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry acknowledges the supremacy of the PAC and reassures the PAC that
the prescribed financial and administrative regimes were followed  at all stages.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. H11013/20/2001/D(Parl) dated 30 Jan 04]
Recommendation
The Committee are dismayed to observe studied slackness on the part of the Ministry
in responding draft Audit Paras. On being asked to explain, the Ministry regretted the
delay in sending reply to the draft audit Paragraph and assured the Committee that
they would ensure timely remedial action on audit paras. The Committee are further
constrained to express their displeasure over the inordinate delay in furnishing replies
to post evidence questionnaire on the subject forwarded to them in October 1997.
Taking the assurance of the Ministry to extend prompt and all possible cooperation in
right perspective the Committee would like the Ministry of Defence to entrust specific
responsibilities relating to audit paras of Comptroller and Auditor General of India
(C&AG) and follow up thereon to designated nodal officers in the respective
Departments so as to ensure that the Audit Paragraphs as well as follow up action
thereon is processed, coordinated, and responded to properly and expeditiously within
the stipulated time frame.
[Sl. No. 17 Appendix II Para 7.17 of Twenty-second Report of PAC
 (Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]

20
Action Taken
Effort is made to send replies to Draft Audit Paras and Audit Paras, however, in view
of consultation required from a number of organizations and agencies and necessity of
scrutiny of very old records at a much later time frame, the process of information
gathering takes time. Notwithstanding the above, necessary instructions are being
issued regularly to emphasis the urgency to expedite ATN. Copy of instructions is
placed at ANNEXURE  II.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. H11013/20/2001/D (Parl) dated 30 Jan 04]

CHAPTER  III
OBSERV A TIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE DO NOT
DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES RECEIVED FROM
GOVERNMENT
Recommendation
The Committee observe that the written replies furnished by the Ministry in regard
to selection of firm and the answer given by the Defence Secretary on the same
question during evidence are mutually contradictory. While the Ministry categorically
denied that any global tender were invited, the Defence Secretary clearly stated in
evidence that “tenders were floated”. The Committee would like the Ministry of Defence
to reconcile both the averments to set the record straight so that the matter is again
considered by the Committee in a factually correct perspective at a later stage.
[Sl. No. 4 Appendix II Para 7.4 of Twenty-second Report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
Electronic Warfare Systems are of intelligence gathering nature and very few foreign
companies are allowed by their governments to export the system and technology.
Discussions were held with the five companies who agreed to export the system/sub
system/technology, if selected. Accordingly, a delegation also visited these companies,
short listed the company which was found to be most suitable. The statement made by
Defence Secretary during the oral evidence may have been made in the context that the
firm was selected out of five possible suppliers on technical grounds.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. H11013/20/2001/D (Parl) dated 30 Jan 04]
Recommendation
The Committee observe that the Government had concluded a contract on 18 June
1979 initially for procurement of one System. Subsequently, order was placed for
procurement of second system from the same firm on 18 October, 1980. The Ministry
failed to furnish any convincing reply as to why they did not consider it prudent to
watch the operational viability of the first EW System before placing order for the
second one with the same firm. The Committee are, therefor, unable to comprehend as
to why the Ministry went for import of two systems when it was internally persuaded
not to import the complete system. The Committee would like to know precisely the
considerations, which weight with the Ministry to import two systems simultaneously.
[Sl. No. 5 Appendix II Para 7.5 of Twenty-second Report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
21

22
Action Taken
At the time of the decision to import the second system, following inputs were
available to the decision makers:—
(a) Indigenous Equipment was not available. The development of indigenous
EW system, “Ajanta” had got delayed.
(b) There was an option clause in the existing contract of INS-3 that allowed the
benefit of 5% price discount on the purchase of the second system.
(c) The INS-3 system was technically assessed by a Technical Team and had
been cleared for induction.
(d) The EW systems were to be made available during the stage of construction
of the frigate ships.
(e) Since import of second system was inevitable, the only option was to buy
another INS-3 system or initiate import of a system from another source,
Induction of the INS-3 system would result into standaridization, thereby
easing maintenace and support infrastructure.
(f) Fresh evaluation and import of another system at the stage would have led to
further delays and increased the logistics problems due to different inventory.
Therefore at that Juncture, if decision had not been taken for import of the EW
system, the 2nd and 3rd frigate ships would have been without an EW system.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. H11013/20/2001/D (Parl) dated 30 Jan. 04]
Recommendation
The Committee observed that the EW systems had to successfully go through
three types of tests namely , Factory Acceptance Tests (FATs), Harbour Acceptance
Tests (HATs) and Sea Acceptance Tests (SATs) before proving its worthiness. The
Committee were informed that the foreign supplier had prescribed the conditions in
which Factory Acceptance Tests (FATs) were to be carried out. This proposal was
vetted and approved by the Navy. During the FATs, reportedly no major defects were
noticed and the Indian team deputed for the purpose had declared the systems snag
free. The Committee, however, observe that the FATs were conducted in the conditions
which had no co-relation with those of the place of actual installation. As a result, all
the systems failed abysmally by developing major defects when these were installed
on ships. Far from satisfied with the explanation that the atmospheric conditions on
board a platform cannot be simulated in the laboratory, the Committee are rather of the
firm view that had FATs been conducted with due exercise of care and caution by the
Indian team, atleast the major defects would not have escaped undetected at that
stage.
[Sl. No. 8 Appendix II Para 7.8 of Twenty-second Report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]

23
Action Taken
In view of the observations made by the Committee it is now implemented that all
Electronic Warfare (EW) systems being inducted in the Navy undergo a standard
procedure for acceptance. Performance verification of EW systems is undertaken in
three stages. These three stages are as follows:—
(a) Stage I-FATs
(b) Stage II-HATs
(c) Stage III-SATs
The three stages for acceptance of EW systems are inter linked and only when a
system clears a particular stage, it is assessed in the next subsequent stages. In case,
a system fails in a particular stage, the defects/observations made during that stage
are rectified prior to progressing ahead in the acceptance chain.
FATs is the first stage in the acceptance process of EW systems and are conducted
in OEM premises. The basic purpose of FATs would be to conduct a series of tests,
which are performed in a controlled environment with test equipment that enables to
perform quantitative analysis to verify the system performance. Hence, in FATs the
designed technical specifications are checked.
The HATs will be conducted in harbour on board the ship. The purpose of HATs
would be to verify that after shipment, the system is in operational status and has been
properly installed and interfaced to other on board equipment/systems. The HATs
tests would be mainly qualitative in nature.
The SATs are undertaken at sea and during the SATs, the overall system performance
would be ascertained in a predefined operational scenario, where in other ships,
submarine and aircraft participate. Thus, the three stages of system performance
verification have been inter-linked.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. H11013/20/2001/D (Parl) dated 30 Jan 04]
Recommendation
The Committee further observe that though the deficiencies were brought to the
notice of the vendor immediately but the vendor took almost five to six years to remove
the deficiencies. During the period, the systems could not be made  fully operational.
The inordinate delay made by the vendor in making the systems operational reduced
proportionally the life span of the systems. Surprisingly, no tangible action was taken
by the Ministry to persuade the vendor to remedy the defects early. The Committee
observe that the exploitable life of the Systems was virtually reduced from its normal
life of twelve and half years to 4,5,9 and five and half years for systems I, II, III and IV
respectively. Further, the Ministry have failed to explain as to what action was taken by
them in terms of article 14.5 of the contract which provided for reduction in contract
price in case of reduced utility. The Committee would like to know the precise action

24
taken, if any, by the Ministry against the officials for not invoking the appropriate
clause of the Contract in this regard.
[Sl. No. 9 Appendix II Para 7.9 of Twenty-second Report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Navy was not keen to accept any deviations and insisted upon the system
meeting all technical and interfacing specifications. Therefore, the system took additional
time in clearing SATs, which affected the exploitable life of the systems. Timely invoking
clause 14.5 of the contract could have redeemed the situation. However, at this distant
point of time, it may not be possible to initiate any action against the concerned
officials. To obviate such reoccurrence, provisions have been made in DPP 2002 where
in regular reviews of contract implementation involving representatives of concerned
organisations are undertaken. Such reviews are carried out as frequently as necessary
but atleast once every quarter to ensure timely remedial/corrective action. Para 48 of
Annexure 1 refers.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. H 11013/20/2001/D(Parl) dated 30 Jan 04]
Recommendation
From examination of material on record, the Committee gather that escalation in the
cost of the Contract was as a result of the terms and conditions of the contract whereby
70 per cent escalation had been made permissible. Obviously, the terms of the contract
were not drawn by the Ministry with commensurate care leading to heavy additional
payment owing to disadvantageous cost escalation clause. Taking note of the grave
neglect of duty, gross inability and incompetence of officials entrusted with the crucial
task of contract drawing and negotiation as well as contract management to its final
discharge, the Committee would like to be apprised of the punitive as well as remedial
action taken to ward off such incidents.
[Sl. No. 10 Appendix II Para 7.10 of Twenty-second Report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The data given by the Ministry of Defence in its reply to the cost of the Contract X,
System I&II erroneously reflected the paid amount in “Rupees”, as paid in was “Dollars”.
The correct data as under:
Contract X Systems I & II
System I _ Rs 41698110.19 (US $4069424.27)
System II _ Rs 44530158.66 (US$3740900.0)
The price escalation formula agreed to by the Price Negotiation Committee (PNC) is
placed at annexure, It is seen that escalation is not 70% but only 70% of the actual
escalation was to be paid. Comparison of Amount paid with the amount contracted

25
indicates that escalation actually paid worked to be around 10% per annum which is
70% of 15% inflation prevalent in Italy during those years. The Era of 70’s and 80’s was
highly  inflationary for both developed and developing world. The contracts were
drawn usually with a price escalation, as the price at the time of negotiation and the
price at the time of actual delivery used to defer considerably. However, where the
availability of the suppliers are limited in the world market who are ready to sell the
equipment to India, the best compromise was achieved and escalation was restricted
to 70% of Price increase of the figure worked out on the basis of the formula. The Price
Escalation Formula is as follows:
P
T = PB (0.1+0.2MF + 0.7LF)
M1 L1
Where:
PT = Total Price
PB = Basic Price on 31st December 1978.
MF = Final Cost indexes as referred to group 5 of Index No. established by Chamber
of Commerce of Milano and in force on the proper day of delivery or services
completion.
MI =  Initial material cost indexes referred to group 5 of Index No. established by
Chamber of Commerce of Milano and valid on 31
st December 1978.
LF = Final labour cost indexes referred to ANIE Bulletin in force on the proper day
of delivery or services completion.
LI = Initial labour cost indexes referred to ANIE Bulletin in force on 31 December
1978.
As a result of the above formula the total increase on the price of each of the
Equipment and services in Annexure 6 shall be calculated as follows:
PT - PB = PB (0.2MF + 0.7LF - 0.9)
MI LI
It is here agreed that only and not more than 70% (Seventy per cent) of the above
price increase will be paid by the Purchase to the Seller as its total compensation for
Price Revision Clause, under Sub Article C of the Article VI.
The amount to be paid to the Seller for Price Revision Clause on each equipment
delivered or service completed in addition to the basic price of such equipment or
service shall be as follows : Additional amount to be paid.
0.7P
B (0.2MF + 0.7 LF-0.9)
MI LI
Example follows:
Basic Price of example equipment = PB= 1000$

26
Provided that the price Revision Formula given PT = 1,150 $
The total increase of price is PT-PB = 150 $
The additional amount to be paid to the Seller under price Revision Clause on the
example equipment will be 0.7 X 150 = 105
[Ministry of Defence O.M. H11013/20/2001/D (Parl) dated 30 Jan 04]
Recommendation
The Committee are saddened to note that the Ministry  neither made an efforts to
persuade the vendor to fulfil  its contractual obligations nor invoked the provisions of
the contract to dissolve it even after serious slippages in the delivery of the systems.
Worse, even a belated initiation of the proposal in 1990 by the Ministry for consideration
of foreclosure of the contract was abandoned later on. The Ministry failed to furnish
any explanation for non-enforcement of the contract provisions aiming to safeguard
the interest of the purchaser. The examination of witness and the evidence on record
makes it amply clear to the Committee that the whole deal made with the foregin firm
was dictated by well entrenched and overriding interest rather than the dictates of
national security. The Committee would expect the Ministry to spill the beans at least
at this distant point of time so that those who undermined the paramount Defence
needs of the country stand exposed.
[Sl. No. 11 Appendix II Para 7.11 of Twenty-second Report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The contractual obligations related to FA Ts, deliveries, setting to work, HA Ts,
training were all met by the firm satisfactorily. The equipment took long time in clearing
SATs for various reasons including the fact that no deviation or shortcoming were
acceptable to the Navy/DRDO. The equipment were cleared in Sea Acceptance Trials
only when all observations were fully liquidated.
The foreclosure of the Contract was earlier considered at a period when firm's
response was tardy. This was also a period when the processing techniques and tools
were improving by the day with the advent of PC based processors. The firm,
M/s Selenia, also underwent corporate restructuring in the period where in it first
became M/s Alenia and then sold off few of its key activity areas. In 1990, the firm
stated that they would now be able to prove the systems in a time bound manner. Since
four systems were already in service, foreclosure of the contract, in respect of these
systems would not have served any purpose and the balance of convenience was in
going ahead with the implementation of the contract. The firm proved the four systems
in SATs during period 90-91.
The Contract has thereafter been foreclosed and import of last system decided
against. All Bank Guarantees, amounting to Rs 14.3 Crores, in FE, have been encashed.
On date, all four INS 3 systems are being operationally exploited.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. H11013/20/2001/D(Parl) dated 30 Jan 04]

CHAPTER  IV
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES OF
GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE COMMITTEE AND
WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation
Taking note of the irregularities in the contracts entered into with the foreign firm,
the Ministry had decided in 1994 to conduct a special internal audit and fix responsibility
but, surprisingly, the formal  order for internal audit was not given till January 1996.
The Committee outright reject the explanation, being explored one, given by Ministry
for the delay of two years in giving formal order for Special Internal Audit on  the
ground that “this was awaiting appropriate level approval”. On being asked to share
the findings of the Economic Investigation  Bureau (EIB) who had also enquired into
the matter, the Ministry pleaded non-availability of records. The non-availability of
relevant records and findings of the EIB only adds to the worst apprehension of the
Committee that there is a definite design to shield the guilty. The Committee  should,
therefore, like to be apprised of the findings of the EIB and the remedial follow up
action taken to prevent recurrence of such grave incidents in future.
[Sl. No. 15 Appendix II Para 7.15 of Twenty-second Report of PAC
(Thirteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry regrets the delay in giving formal order for Special Internal Audit.
The CDA (N) carried out  a special audit and its report has been analysed. The
special audit has corroborated the known facts. No individual has been held
accountable for any wrong doing at any stage.
The EIB has not observed any irregularity. This is stated based on the fact that the
Ministry has received no adverse communication from EIB to date. Efforts are being
made to obtain the EIB report. The PAC and Audit would be informed about the
findings of EIB in due course on receipt of the EIB report.
[Ministry of Defence O.M. H11013/20/2001/D (Parl.) dated 30 Jan., 04]
27

CHAPTER V
OBSERV ATIONS/RECOMMENDATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH GOVERNMENT
HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
NEW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
27 October, 2004 Chairman,
5 Kartika, 1926 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
-NIL-
28

ANNEXURE-I
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
[ACQUISITION WING (SECTT)]
DEFENCE PROCUREMENT PROCEDURE—2002
(VERSION JUNE 2003)
1. Defence Procurement Procedure (DPP-2002) was issued vide Ministry of
Defence ID No. 82/Dir.(Acq.)/02 dated 30 Dec., 2002. It  covered the procedure flowing
out of “Buy” decision of Defence Acquisition Council.
2. After careful consideration and detailed discussions in DPB, the procedure rela-
ting to procurement based on “Buy and Make through Imported Transfer of Techno-
logy” has been finalised.
3. DPP-2002 has, thereafter been revised to include “Buy and Make Through
Imported ToT Procedure” also. Standardised RFP and aspects of ToT have also been
included in the new procedure. The new procedure has been approved by RM. The
new procedure would be called Defence Procurement Procedure—2002 (Version June
2003) or DPP—2002 (Version June  03) and would be effective from  30 June, 2003. A
copy of DPP—2002 (Ver. June, 03) is annexed.
4. DPP-2002 stands superseded as all aspects pertaining to “Buy” decision have
been incorporated in DPP-2002 (Version June 03). The amplification notes to DPP-2002
issued vide MoD ID No 1638/SS(A)/2003 dated 30 June 2003, would however be
applicable to DPP-2002 (Ver. June 03) also.
Sd/-
(K. K.  KIRTY)
DIRECTOR
COAS Secy. (DP &S) Addl. FA(T) JS/AM(LS)
CNS Secy. (R &D) Addl. FA(V) JS/AM(M&S)
CAS Secy. (Def/Fin) Addl. FAs JS/AM(Air)
CISC SS(A) FM(Air) JSs
VCOAS AS(S) TM(LS)
VCAS AS(T) TM(M&S)
VCNS AS(DP&S) TM(Air)
FA(Acq)
MOD I.D. NO. 82/Dir(Acq)/02, dat. 30-6-2003.
Copy to : SO to Defence Secretary.
29

DEFENCE PROCUREMENT PROCEDURE—2002
(‘BUY’ AND ‘BUY AND MAKE THROUGH IMPORTED ToT’ DECISIONS)
(VERSION JUNE 03)
General
1. As part of the implementation of the report of the Group of Ministers on reforming
the National Security System, new defence procurement management structures and
systems were set up in the Ministry of Defence (MoD) vide MoD order No. 17179/
2001-Def Secy/IC/2001 dated 11 October, 2001 and No. SA/01/104/2001 dated 10
September 2001. In order to implement the provisions laid out in the new defence
procurement management structures and systems, the procedure for Defence
Procurement laid down vide MoD ID No 1(1)/91/PO (Def) dated 28 Feb., 1992 was
revised. The Defence Procurement Procedure—2002 (DPP-2002) came into effect from
30 Dec., 2002 and was applicable for procurements flowing out of “Buy” decision of
Defence Acquisition Council. The scope of the same has been enlarged to include
procurements flowing out of ‘Buy and Make through Imported ToT’ decision as well.
The revised procedure to be called as the Defence Procurement Procedure—2002
(Version June 03) is set out in the succeeding paragraphs.
Aim
2.  The primary objective of this procedure is to ensure expeditious procurement of
the approved requirements of the Armed Forces in terms of capabilities sought and
time frame prescribed by optimally utilising the allocated budgetary resources. While
achieving the same, it  will demonstrate the highest degree of probity   and public
accountability, transparency in operations, free competition and impartiality. In addition,
the goal of achieving self-reliance in defence equipment will be kept in mind.
Scope
3. The Defence Procurement Procedure-2002 (V ersion June 03) of  DPP-2002 (Version
June 03) will cover all capital acquisitions and Revenue purchases undertaken by the
MoD/Departments/Defence Services both from indigenous sources and ex-import.
CAPITAL    ACQUISITIONS
4. The procedure for Capital Acquisitions has been structured as under :—
(a) Acquisitions covered under the ‘Buy’  decision.
(b) Acquisitions covered under the ‘Buy & Make’ decision.
(c) Acquisitions covered under the ‘Make’ decision.
5. This document is however restricted to the  procedure for Capital Acquisitions
flowing out of the ‘Buy’ or ‘Buy and Make’ with Imported Transfer of Technology
(ToT) decision only, except procedure for shipbuilding, which will be covered
separately.
30

31
Linkage to Acquisition Plans
6. Proposals for acquisition of capital assets generally flow out from the Defence
Procurement planning process. This planning process will cover the long-term, medium-
term and short-term perspectives as under:—
(a) 15 year Long Term Perspective Plan (LTPP).
(b) 5 year Services Capital Acquisition Plan (SCAP).
(c) Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP).
7. Since the planning activities are applicable to acquisition cases involving an
outlay of Rs. 20 crores and above (with the year 2002 being the base year), the procedure
now laid down would be applicable to items costing Rs. 20 crores and above.
8. The planning process would be under the overall guidance of the Defence
Acquisition  Council, its decisions as approved by the RM will flow down for
implementation to the Defence Procurement Board (DPB).
Annual Acquisition Plan (AAP)
9. The Defence Procurement Board (DPB) will arrive at the annual requirement of
funds taking into account the acceptance of necessity by various entities of MoD for
the year ahead, carry overs,  operational exigencies and proposed changes in priorities
recommended by the SHQ by  30 September of each year. The details of these
requirements will be provided to Defence (Finance) for consideration while finalising
the budgetary projections and allocations. The AAP will be formulated by the respective
SHQ and approved by the DPB by 15 Apr. of the relevant Financial Year. The AAP
should be based on a two year acquisition cycle and cater for adequate cushion to
safeguard against surrender of funds.
10. The DPB may also carry out amendments in the Annual Acquisition Plan, if
considered necessary, on account of national security objectives, operational urgencies,
budgetary provisions or any  other exigency based on recommendations made by
SHQ/IDS/Department of Defence/Defence (Finance). The Acquisition Wing will process
all acquisition proposals incorporated in the ‘Annual  Acquisition Plan’ under the
overall guidance of the DPB.
ACQUISITIONS  COVERED  UNDER  THE  ‘BUY’  DECISION
General
11. Once a ‘Buy’ or ‘Buy and Make with Imported ToT’ decision has been taken by
the DAC, the acquisition process will involve a series of functions.
These are as follows:—
(a) Services Qualitative Requirements (SQRs).
(b) Acceptance of Necessity.
(c) Solicitation of offers.

32
(d) Evaluation of Technical offers by Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC).
(e) Field Evaluation.
(f) Staff Evaluation.
(g) Oversight by Technical Oversight Committee (TOC).
(h) Commercial negotiations by Contract Negotiation Committee (CNC).
(i) Oversight by Eminent persons Group.
(j) Award of contract/Supply Order(SO).
(k) Contract administration-and post-contract management.
 Services Qualitative Requirements (SQRs)
12. All Capital Acquisitions shall be based on Services Qualitative Requirements
(SQRs). The SQRs should lay down the users requirements in a comprehensive,
structured and concrete manner. It should, however, be ensured that the SQRs are
broad based yet realistic and cover all aspects of the system desired. The SQRs must
express the users  requirements in terms of functional characteristics and its formulation
must not prejudice the technical choices by being narrow and focussed.
13. The SQRs will be drafted by the user directorate at SHQ and circulated to all
concerned for obtaining their views/comments including other possible user
directorates, maintenance directorate, DRDO, DDP&S, DGQA/DGAQA, Directorate
of Standardisation etc. These agencies will also be represented on the Staff Equipment
Policy Committee for approving the SQR. Records in respect of QRs will be maintained
by the User Service(s). The QRs shall be prescribed in clear-cut terms and in full detail.
Wherever any standard specifications of foreign Governments etc. are found acceptable,
the precise specification number  and all related details in respect thereof should be
mentioned. SHQ may issue ‘Requests For Information (RFIs)’  in order to formulate
realistic SQRs.
14. The performance parameters given in the SQR should be verifiable and classified
as under:—
(a) Essential.  It is the minimum essential military requirements, corresponding
to the priority task or tasks to be performed by the system. Accordingly the
‘essential’ classification to a requirement must result from an indepth critical
analysis of the necessity of requirement.
(b) Desirable. All parameters other than essential will be classified as ‘desirable’.
This classification should be assigned to military requirements correspon-
ding to tasks that the system is intended to fulfil in an occasional way. The
non-production of a requirement classified as ‘desirable’  is not in itself
sufficient to bring into question the continuation of the procurement case.
15. Waiver of SQR Parameters. Waiver/amendment of essential  parameter of SQR
can be done by SHQ concerned before issue of Request For Proposal (RFP). Any

33
subsequent waiver/amendment will require approval of Raksha Mantri on
recommendations of DPB. Waiver/amendment of desirable parameters can be done by
the competent authorities in the SHQ.
Acceptance of Necessity
16. The SHQ will submit a Statement of Case justifying the full scope of acquisition.
The following aspects will be exmained for approving  the ‘Acceptance of Necessity’
(AON):—
 (a) Deficiency in case  of items already in use for which scales have been provided.
(b) Examination and validation of scales,  for arriving at the total  deficiency in
case of introduction of new  items including those being procured as ‘Sector
Stores’.
(c) The justification of introduction of new capital acquisitions in the context of
the approved force levels.
(d) The likely financial effect the time span involved.
17. In order to avoid delays in according ‘Acceptance of Necessities’, the respective
Additional Secretaries will hold a meeting  consisting of  the reps. of the Service Hqrs.
Defence (Finance) and the MoD to identify the issues requiring attention and ensuring
proper examination in a time-bound manner. The Additional  Secretary concerned will
sent the recommendations to Secretary (Def/Fin) for examination and
recommending approval of the competent authorities. The reference  to CCS at this
stage  would be on ‘as required’ basis, on the directions of RM.
Solicitation of Offers
18. Once the SQRs have been finalised, the sources of procurement of the
weapons system/stores shall be ascertained and short-listing of the prospective
manufactuers/suppliers carried out by the SHQ. The short-listed vendors  will be the
Original Equipment Manufacturers (OEMs)/Authorised V endors/Govt. sponsored
export agencies (applicable in the case of countries where domestic laws do not
permit direct export by  OEMs). In cases involving  ToT, the short-listing of the
vendors would take into account their ability to transfer requisite technology for
licence production. The list of short-listed vendors may be supplemented by Technical
Manager (TM) in Acquisition wing for which a  databank will be maintained in
Acquisition wing. Wherever possible, keeping the security  and other relevant aspects
in view, appropriate publicity may be given to the proposed  procurement with a view
to generating maximum competition.
19. The Technical  Manager  concerned, will issue the RFP to the short-listed
vendors with the approval of the Special Secretary (Acquisition), after ensuring that it
has been  vetted by all concerned agencies including Finance Manager, user,
procurement and maintenance directorates at SHQ, QA agency etc. In the cases  where
ToT is being sought  the Department of Defence Production and  Supplies (DDP&S),

34
Defence Research and Development Organisation (DRDO) and  nominated Production
Agency (PA) shall also vet the RFP. No addition to the  vendors will be allowed after
issue of RFP.
20. Solicitation of offers will be as per ‘single Stage-Two Bid System’. It will imply
that a ‘Request For Proposal’ (RFP) would be issued soliciting the Technical and
Commercial Offers together, but in two separate sealed envelopes. This system
safeguards against the possibility of vendor increasing his commercial offer consequent
to development of a single vendor situation after evaluation of technical offers.
21. Single Vendor Situation. Competitive  tendering would be the norms,  however,
situations may arise where recourse to single tender may become necessary. In such
cases, prior approval of Raksha Mantri will be taken as under:—
(a)  Acquisitions in excess of Raksha Mantri’s powers-Through DPB.
(b)  Acquisitions within Raksha Mantri’s powers-On file.
22. The RFP will be self-contained document that will enable vendors  to make offer
after consideration of full requirements of the acquisition. A stardardised RFP document
is attached as Schedule  I to this paper. This will be applicable for all acquisitions. It will
generally  consist of  four parts as under:—
(a) The first  part elaborates the general requirement of  the equipment, the
numbers required, the time frame for deliveries, the environmental parameters
for functioning, conditions of usage and maintenance, requirement for
training,  Engineering Support Package (ESP), and warranty/guarantee
conditions, etc. It specifies the prescribed procedure and last date and time
for submission of offers.
(b) The second part of the RFP incorporates the SQRs describing the technical
parameters of the proposed equipments in clear and unambiguous terms. The
‘essential’ and desirable’ aspects of the requirements will be clearly stated. In
case equipment  is being procured for the first time and needs to be evaluated,
the RFP includes the requirement of field evaluation on a “No Cost-No
Commitment” basis. In selected cases where it is proposed to utilise a matrix
for short listing of vendors for field evaluation and/or for field evaluation/
demonstrations, the same will be included in the RFP with the weightages
being indicated.
(c) The third part of the RFP outlines the commercial aspects of the procurement,
including clear statements on payment terms, Performance Guarantees,
Guarantees against warranty services to be performed by the supplier. It also
includes standard contract terms along with special contractual conditions, if
any.
(d) The fourth part of the RFP defines the criteria for evaluation and acceptance,
both in terms of technical and commercial contents. A format will be enclosed

35
for submission along with commercial offer to facilitate preparation of
Comparative Statement of Tenders (CST) and identification of L1 vendor.
Submission of incomplete format enclosed along with commercial offer will
render the offer liable for rejection.
23. In cases where TOT is involved, the RFP will include the requirement for licence
production under TOT. The RFP in such cases would spell out the requirements of
TOT depending  upon the depth of the technology which is required, and whose range
could cover technology for repair and overhaul; production from CKD/SKD kits and
production from raw material and components level. Aspects which are to be included
in the RFP in case production from CKD/SKD kits is envisaged are given at
Schedule II and the same in case of indigenous manufacture from raw material and
components level are given at Schedule III.
24. However, there may be occasions where it is not feasible to negotiate the TOT
simultaneously and to cater to such contingencies the RFP should clearly indicate that
Government reserves the right to negotiate TOT terms subsequently but that availability
of  TOT would be a pre-condition for purchase of the fully formed items. In these cases
the procedure to be followed for negotiating TOT would not have to be repeated or
started ab initio as it is a follow-up of the decision to purchase the selected equipment
after due process.
25. The offers received should be opened on the notified date/time, by the members
of a committee chaired by the Technical Manager, in the presence of the bidders or
their authorised representatives, as may choose to be present. The committee will
open the envelope containing the sealed Technical and Commercial offers. The
technical offer will be opened by the  committee and sent to SHQ for evaluation by a
Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC) and sealed envelope containing the
commercial bid will be sent to the Acquisition Manager, unopened. Offers which do
not  conform to the prescribed procedure for submission of offers as laid down in first
part of RFP or which are received after the last time for submission of offers  will not be
entertained.
Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC)
26. A TEC will be constittuted by the SHQ for evaluation of the technical bids
received in response of RFPs, with reference to the QRs, under an Officer from the
SHQ. It will include, apart from the representatives of the user service and maintenance
agency, representative of QA as deemed necessary. In case where TOT is involved,
TEC will include apart from representatives of the user service and maintenance agency,
representatives of PA, DRDO and QA, as deemed necessary. The TEC will examine the
extent  of variations/differences, if any, in the technical characteristics of the equipment
offered by various vendors with reference to the QRs and prepare a ‘Compliance
Statement’ short listing the vendor. The TEC may invite the vendors for technical
presentation/clarifications on technical issues. The Special Secretary (Acquisition)
will formally accept the report of the TEC on recommendations of the Technical
Manager. Wherever TEC recommends trials/procurement based on a single vendor/
deviation of essential parameters, sanction of DPB/Raksha Mantri (as applicable) will
be taken in accordance with the laid down procedure.

36
Field Evaluation (Trials)
27. Field Evaluation (Trials), if required, will be conducted by the User Service.
Field Evaluation will be conducted by the User Service on the basis of Standard
Operating Procedures (SOP) evolved by them. The short listed manufacturer of
the selected equipment shall be asked to send the desired units of the equipment/
weapon system to India for Field Evaluation. SHQ will formulate the Trials
Directive and constitute the T rials Team. The trial directive must specify the
fundamental point on which it wishes the assessment to emphasise  for validating
the ‘essential’ features. The validation of the support system and maintainability
trials integral to and complimenting the trial programme of the weapon system
should be held simultaneously, wherever feasible. Representatives of DRDO,
Quality Assurance (QA) agency may also be part of the field  evaluation, on as
required  basis, by the SHQ. A representative of the Acquisition Wing may also
participate in the field evaluation as an observer. The field evaluation shall be
conducted by the User in all  conditions where the equipment is likely to be
deployed, and a detailed Field Evaluation Report shall drawn up and sent to SHQ
for preparation of Staff Evaluation. Similar action would be taken in the cases
where Trials Teams are deputed abroad for evaluation purposes.
28. In certain conditions, the Acquisition Wing, particularly in cases
involving integration of Systems or sensitive equipment, can depute a
multi-disciplinary Technical Delegation abroad for evaluation and an
Empowered Committee for negotiation purpose. Both could be combined as a
multi-disciplinary Committee. The Technical Delegation should have
representatives from user service, Defence Research and Development
Organisation (DRDO), Maintenance agency, and Quality Assurance (QA) agency
on need basis. In addition, Acquisition and Finance Manager or their
representative will be included in the Empowered Committee. Evaluation matrices,
in all cases of major pu rchases, will be prepared by the SHQ concerned.
29. The field evaluation will normally be conducted on No Cost No Commitment
(NCNC) basis.
30. Field Evaluation (Trial) in India, in the manner suggested earlier, may not be
possible in all cases.
31. Where field evaluation may not be feasible, the possibility of conducting field
evaluation through computer simulation  should be explored. Field evaluation may be
dispensed with only after approval of the DPB on recommendations at appropriate
levels in the SHQ.
Staff Evaluation
32. Based on the methods of technical evaluation carried out as described in
paragraph 24 onwards, the SHQ will carry out a staff evaluation, which gives out the
compliance of the demonstrated performance of the equipment vis-a-vis  the SQR. The
staff evaluation will  analyse the field evaluation results and shortlist the equipment
recommended for introduction into service. The Staff evaluation will be approved by

37
the SHQ and accepted by Acquisition Wing. In cases involving waiver/amendment of
essential QRs, approval of Raksha Mantri will be taken prior to acceptance of staff
evaluation.
Technical Oversight Committee (TOC)
33. Technical Oversight Committee (TOC) provides expert oversight over the technical
evaluation process. Defence Secretary will constitute TOCs for selected acquisition
proposals in excess of Rs. 300 Crores and any other case recommended by the DPB. A
TOC will comprise of 3 members, one Service Officer, one DRDO scientist and one
representative of DPSU preferable not involved with that acquisiton. The TOC will be
tasked to see whether the trials, trail evaluations, compliance to QRs and selection of
vendors were done according to prescribed procedures. The Committee will have to
give its ruling, based on  a majority decision, within 30 days  and the absence of a
response will be deemed to be acceptance. The time limit of 30 days shall not be
extended on any ground. Technical Managers of the Procurement Division will
provide the secretarial support to the TOC and ensure availability of all inputs from
Deptt. of Defence/Acquisition Wing, Defence Finance and SHQ to the TOC. Should
the TOC have any queries, the Technical Manager will clarify these. Commercial
negotiation process will only commence after the TOC process is complete.
Commercial Negotiation Committee (CNC)
34. Acceptance of the recommendations of the Staff Evaluation/TOC will lead to
commercial evaluation of bids. The Special Secretary (Acquisition) will nominate a
CNC, normally with the Acquisition Manager concerned as Chairman. The CNC may
be set  up at  lower level also depending on the importance and value of procurement.
In some cases, where considered necessary, a Services officer may be nominated as
Chairman of the CNC with the prior approval of Raksha Mantri. The CNC would
normally include Acquisition Manager, Technical Manager, Finance Manager,
representatives from various Directorates at SHQ including user, procurement,
maintenance, contract management directorates, QA agency, as required. The
Commercial Negotiation Committee constituted in cases where transfer of technology
is required should have representative of the DDP&S, DRDO and PA. The concerned
organisations/agencies should ensure that their representatives in the CNC have
adequate background and authority to take a decision without any need to refer back
to their  organisation/agency. The CNC will carry out all processes from opening of
commercial bids till conclusion of contract. The sealed commercial offers of the
technically accepted vendors shall be opened by the CNC at a predetermined date and
time under intimation to vendors, permitting such Vendors or their authorised
representatives to be present. The bids of the competing firms shall be read out to all
present and signed by all members of the CNC.
35. It would be desirable to negotiate the licence production contract along with the
contract for the finished product. In cases where this is not feasible, the purchase
contract should include a clause wherein the vendor agrees to negotiate the licence
contract at a subsequent  date, thus obtaining a commitment from the vendor to part
with the TOT.

38
36. Tender evaluation will  involve recording and analysing the merits of each
tender. The  process will start with preparation of a ‘Compliance Statement’
incorporating the commercial terms offered in the RFP and that sought by the vendor(s),
analysis of the discordance and the impact of the same. A similar statement would be
prepared in regard to deviations noticed in the delivery schedules, performance
warranty, guarantee provisions, acceptance criteria, Engineering Support Package (ESP)
etc. Comprehensive analysis of the commercial offer will form the basis for subsequent
decisions.
37. The CNC will prepare a Comparative Statement of Tenders (CST) with a view to
evaluate the technically acceptable offers and determine the lowest acceptable offer
(L1 Vendor). It will also evolve methods for bench marking of price.
38. The CNC may hold internal  meetings to finalise the approach to be adopted by
them in conducting negotiations with the L1 Vendor and lay down a tentative timetable
for the proposed negotiations. Once a preliminary view has been taken by the CNC, it
will invite the representatives of the L 1 vendor for financial/contractual negotiations.
The CNC may require more than one round of negotiations with the L1 vendor.
Negotiation would have two basic objectives, achieving the most reasonable and
economical price, and obtaining the most favourable terms of contract, as near as
possible to the standard terms of contracts, for the Ministry of Defence.
39. The CNC should document the selection of vendor using a formal written re-
commendation report addressed to the relevant approval authority. The report must be
complete in all respect and comprehensibly elaborate the method of evaluation and the
rationale for the selection made. All CNC members should sign the recommendation
report, in the interests of probity and accountability, as evidence that they concur with
the process adopted and the ultimate selection made. Any dissenting view, including
the reasons for the same, should be documented.
40.  The report of the CNC should include:—
(a) A brief background to the requirement.
(b) Composition of the CNC.
(c) An explanation of the commercial evaluation process, selection criteria
and commercial evaluation matrices, if used.
(d) Brief description of different phases of the commercial negotiation process.
(e)  A summary of the recommendations.
Eminent Persons Group (EPG)
41. An ‘Eminent Persons Group (EPG)’ consisting of retired officials (around twelve
in number), having experience  and expertise in Defence Procurement would be
constituted by RM on recommendations from the Defence Secretary and Secretary
Defence (Finance). Defence Secretary, in consultation with Secretary Defence (Finance),
would nominate a panel of three persons from the EPG  to provide pre-contractual
‘Process and Procedures Audit’ for all acquisition proposals in excess of Rs 300 crore

39
and any other case recommended by the DPB. The panel so constituted will examine
whether all prescribed processes and procedures have been followed in the course of
commercial negotiations.
42. The panel of the EPG will commence its evaluation after contractual negotiations
have been finalised but before the contract has been concluded. The panel will have to
give its ruling, based on a majority decision, within 30 days and the absence of a
response will be deemed to be acceptance. The time limit of 30 days shall not be
extended on any ground.
43. Government will only finalise the contract after go ahead by the panel of the EPG
or after lapse of the 30 days  period given to it. Should  the panel have queries, these
will be clarified by the CNC. Should the panel of the EPG deny consent, the decision on
termination of negotiations will be taken by the CFA.
44. Secretary Defence (Finance) will set up a special ‘Internal Audit Team’ from the
internal resources of the ‘Controller General of Defence Accounts’ (CGDA) to assist
the EPG in its functioning. The team leader will be responsible to the head of the panel
and render support to it is its functioning by assisting in the  audit of processes and
procedures. Pending the constitution of such an “Internal audit T eam’ by secretary
(Def./Fin.) the EPG would be assisted by the Acquisition Wing.
Contract/Supply Orders
45. Acquisition Wing would evolve a standard Contract/Supply Order
document, which will be used as a guideline for contract/supply orders for all
acquisitions.
Inter Government Agreement (IGA)
46. In cases of large value acquisition and especially those requiring product
support over a long period of time it may be advisable to enter into a separate Inter
Government Agreement (IGA) (if not already covered under an umbrella agreement
covering all cases) with the Gov ernment of the country from which the equipment
is proposed to be procured after the requisite inter-ministerial consultation. Such
an IGA is expected to safeguard the interests of the Gov ernment of India and
should also provide for assistance of the foreign G ovt. in case the contract(s) runs
into an unforeseen problem.
Subsequent Procurement of already Contracted Equipment
47. In cases where there is an additional requirement of equipment/systems with an
estimated value of more than Rs. 20 crores, and for which orders/contracts have already
been placed in the past after necessary technical/field evaluation, the case will be put
up to DPB who may order either fresh field evaluation or obtain technical and commercial
offers or only commercial offers depending on the merits of the case. Similar decision
in respect of additional requirements having an estimated value upto Rs. 20 crores may
be taken by the Acquisition Wing.

40
Post Contract Review
48. Overseeing the effective implementation of every contract is as important as the
soundness of the negotiation procedure leading thereto. In this context, concerned
Acquisition Manager in the Acquisition Wing and an equivalent rank officer of the
concerned User Service shall undertake regular reviews of the Contract implementation,
involving senior representatives of the concerned organisations/agencies. Such
reviews shall be carried out as frequently as necessary but at least once every quarter,
to ensure timely remedial/corrective action. The nodal point for contract administration
and management, however, would be the SHQ concerned. The Acquisition Wing will
submit quarterly Contract Implementation Report (CIR) to the DPB. Over and above
such joint progress reviews, the contract management directorates at SHQ should
establish specified arrangements for the constant monitoring of the contract
implementation and promptly report any default/failure to the concerned Acquisition
Manager in the Acquisition Wing. Problems encountered in the operation of contract
will be reported to the Acquisition Manager. The directorates in the SHQ, accordingly
will work closely with Acquisition Wing and would be responsible for formally
declaring completion of contractual responsibilities and closure of a contract. The
concerned nodal officer in the SHQ shall draw up a clear time-frame for securing
rectification of default/defect and assess the financial implications thereof which may
justify being set off against payments due under the contract.
Equipment Induction Cells (EICs)
49. EICs will be raised for major projects on a case-to-case basis in Services HQ at
the discretion of Services HQ. The EICs will deal with the induction of major
equipments and help in planning  the  requirement of facilities essential for the
serviceability and maintainability aspect of Acquisition. The EICs will help the Defence
Procurement Board to move towards Life Cycle Cost Concept.
Processing of Procurement Cases
50. In order to cut down the delays in procurement of equipment and ensure that the
procurement system is more responsive to the needs of the Armed Forces, the
following steps need to be instituted:—
(a) DPB should issue guidelines to the Acquisition Wing giving out the broad
time frame for completion of different procurement activities. Major
deviations from this time frame should be brought to the notice of DPB for
necessary corrective measures.
(b) Once the statement of case is initiated by SHQ to MoD, consolidated
observations/clarifications sought up to and including the level of JS in MoD
and MoD (Fin.) be clarified in a across the table discussion and minutes of
the same recorded on file. This should be followed for all major procurement
stages to cut down the processing time.
(c)  A defence procurement network, electronically connecting all agencies
involved in defence procurement, to build up a data base and information
system, should be set up.

41
Procedure for Procurement from Countries having Strategic Partnership with
India
51. In certain acquisition cases, imperatives of strategic partnerships may
necessarily be the principle force determining the acquisition of a specific platform
or item. Such strategic partnership in based on diplomatic, political, economic,
technological and military relationships. For specific acquisition cases falling under
this category for which a single  vendor situation will necessarily emerge, case to case
decisions will be taken on the recommendations of the DPB and with the approval of
Raksha Mantri.
Deviations from DPP-2002 Version (June 03)
52. Any deviation from the prescribed procedure will be put up to Raksha Mantri
through DPB for approval.
Review
53. A review of the procedure would be undertaken by the DPB periodically. The
first such review would be undertaken two years after its coming into force.
CONCLUSION
54. DPP-2002 (Version June 03) should be read in conjunction with Fast Track
Procurement (FTP) Procedure for meeting urgent operational requirements of the
Services circulated under Ministry of Defence ID No. 800/SS (A) 2001 dated 28 Sep.
2001.
55. The procedure would be in supersession of the Procedure for Defence
Procurement issued under Ministry of Defence ID No. 82/Dir. (Acq.) dated 30 Dec. 2002.
The procedure will be applicable from 30 June 2003. The procedure will become applicable
to all fresh proposals initiated after this date flowing out of ‘Buy’ or ‘Buy and Make
with Imported TOT’ decisions of DAC.

SCHEDULE  I
(THIS RFP PROVIDES A STANDARDISED FORMAT FOR GUIDELINES. IT MAY
BE V ARIED DEPENDING ON USER REQUIREMENTS, TYPE/COMPLEXITY OF
EQUIPMENT/MACHINERY/ TEST EQUIPMENT AND OPERATIONAL
IMPERATIVES, SHQ MAY ALTER IT AS PER THEIR SERVICE
REQUIREMENTS)
Tele: File No:
Technical Manager———( Systems)
Room No. 306, North Hutments
Kashmir House, Rajaji Marg
New Delhi-110011
                       2003
To
REQUEST FOR TECHNICAL AND COMMERCIAL PROPOSAL FOR (GENERIC
NOMENCLATURE OF EQUIPMENT)
Dear Sir,
1. The Ministry of Defence, Government of India, intends to procure————
(generic nomenclature of equipment and qty.) This Request for Proposal (RFP) consists
of four parts as indicated below:—
(a) Part I. The first part consists of the general requirement of the equipment, the
numbers required, the time frame for deliveries, the environmental parameters for
functioning, conditions of usage and maintenance, requirement for training,
Engineering Support Package (ESP), and warranty/guarantee conditions, etc. It
includes procedure and last date and time for submission of offers.
(b) Part II. The second part of the RFP incorporates the aspects of SQRs describing
the technical parameters of the proposed equipment. The operational characteristics
and features that should be met by the equipment are elucidated at Appendix A. The
‘essential’ and ‘desirable’ parameters of the equipment have been stated. The Supplier
would be required to offer the equipment for field evaluation on a “No Cost— No
Commitment” basis. (A matrix for short listing of the equipment for field evaluation
and/or for field evaluation/demonstrations, along with weightages may be issued,
as applicable in selected cases ).
(c) Part III. The third part of the RFP consists of the commercial aspects of the
procurement, payment terms, performance guarantees, guarantees against warranty
services to be performed by the supplier. It also includes standard contract terms
along with special contractual conditions, if any.
(d) Part IV. The fourth part defines the criteria for evaluation and acceptance, both
in terms of technical and commercial contents. A format has been enclosed for
42

43
submission along with commercial offer to facilitate preparation of Comparative
Statement of Tenders (CST) and identification of L1 vendor. Submission of incomplete
format enclosed along with commercial offer will render the offer liable for rejection.
2. The Government of India invites responses to this request only from Original
Enquipment. Manufacturers/Authorised V endors/Government Sponsored Export
Agencies (applicable  in the case of countries where domestic laws do not permit direct
export by OEMs). The end user of the equipment are the Indian Armed Forces.
PART I : GENERAL  REQUIREMENTS
3. Year of Production. Supplies should be of latest manufacture, conform to the
current production standard and should have 100% of the defined life at the time of
delivery. Deviations if any should be clearly brought out by the vendor in the Technical
Proposal.
4. Delivery Schedule.  (The acceptable range of delivery schedule of the equipment
must be indicated clearly in the RFP. Option for the supplier to indicate earliest delivery
schedule must be given only in unavoidable cases).
5. Warranty. The goods supplied shall carry a warranty for— months/years
operational hours (not to be left blank)  from the date of acceptance or from date of
installation and commissioning, whichever is later. Draft Warranty Clause is given at
Appendix B.
6. Engineering  Support Package (ESP)/AMC (if required). After the specified
warranty period, the Indian technicians would be required to repair and maintain the
equipment during its exploitation. To enable this process, an appropriate ESP would be
required to be provided by the supplier. For this purpose, the general concept of repair
and maintenance of equipment followed by the Indian Army is given at Appendix C. The
information on Engineering Support Package that is required  to be provided as part of
Technical offer is enclosed at Annexures I to IV to Appendix C. ( if post warranty (AMC)
is also being sought from the OEM, the level of AMC required (with spares/without
spares/repair rate contract) must clearly be indicated. The details of AMC proposals
must be also submitted separately by the vendor with technical aspects being included
in the technical offer and commercial aspects being  included in the commercial offer.
The same will be taken cognisance of while deciding the L1).
7. In Service Life/Shelf Life.  The In Service Life/Shelf Life of the equipment (as
applicable) shall be stipulated in the offer (in case of shelf life the relevant storage
conditions should be clearly specified).
8.  Product Support. The vendor would be bound by a condition  in the contract,
that he is in a position to provide product support in terms of maintenance, materials
and spares for a minimum period of —Years. Even after the said mandatory period the
vendor would be bound to give at least two years notice to the Government of India
prior to closing the production line so as to enable a Life Time Buy of all spares before
closure of the said production line. The said aspect would also form an integral part of
the contract. All upgrades and modifications carried out on the equipment during the

44
next—years or during its life-cycle (as per requirement) must be intimated to the SHQ.
9. Training of Crew and Maintenance Personnel. (SHQ to give broad details of the
training sought).
10. Government regulations. It may also be confirmed that there are no Government
restrictions or limitations in the country of the supplier or countries from which sub-
components are bring procured and/or for  the export of any part of the system being
supplied.
11. Patent Rights.  The vendor has to confirm that there are no infringements of any
Patent  Rights in accordance with the laws prevailing in their respective countries.
12. Transfer of Technology (TOT).  (If applicable): The Govt. of India Ministry of
Defence is desirous of license production of (generic  name of equipment) under TOT.
Aspects of TOT  which are to be fulfilled by the vendor are given at Appendix— Govt.
.reserves the right to negotiate TOT terms subsequently but the availability of TOT
would be a pre-condition for purchase of the fully formed items. If negotiations for
TOT are not held as a part of the negotiations for equipment, then subsequent and
separate TOT negotiations will continue from the stage where the equipment has been
selected.
(The RFP in such cases would spell out the requirements of TOT depending upon
the depth of the technology which is required, and whose range could cover technology
for repair and overhaul; production from CKD/SKD kits and production from raw
material and components level. Aspects which are to be included in the RFP in case
production from (CKD/SKD) kits  is envisaged are given at Schedule II and the same in
case of indigenous manufacture from raw material and components level are given at
Schedule III. Care should be taken to spell out the selection criteria clearly. The
nominated Production Agency (PA) for the receipt of technology will be closely
associated in the preparation of RFP).
13. The Technical and Commercial Proposals should be sealed separately and
submitted together to the undersigned at the following address by—hours on —
Technical Manager (Land Systems)
Room No 306, North Hutments
As Applicable Kashmir House, Rajaji Marg
New Delhi-110011
Fax No: 23792414
14. The Technical Offer will be opened at —hours on —at the same venue as
indicated at para 13 above. The vendor or his authorized representative is welcome to
be present at the opening of the proposals. Necessary details may be sent a week in
advance to facilitate obtaining of security clearance.
15. The Technical Offer will be evaluated by a Technical Evaluation Committee
(TEC) to confirm that the equipment being offered meets the essential and desirable
parameters features as elaborated subsequently in this RFP at Appendix  A.Thereafter,
{

45
the vendor of the short listed equipment would be asked to provide the equipment
(—Nos.) for trial evaluation in India at ‘No Cost No Commitment’ basis.
16. For an equipment to be introduced in service it is mandatory that it successfully
clears all tests/trials/evaluations. The trial evaluation process comprises of the following
phases. (SHQ may amend this paragraph as required):—
(a) User Trials.
(b) Technical and Environmental Evaluation.
(c) Maintainability Evaluation Trial (MET).
(d) EMI/EMC Evaluation.
17. Commercial offers will be opened only of the vendors whose equipment is
shortlisted, after technical trials and evaluation. In other words, the equipment would
be required to be trial evaluated and found suitable prior to commencement of any
commercial negotiations (if trials are not proposed then the words ‘trials and’ may be
deleted).
PART II : TECHNICAL  PARAMETERS
18. Operational Characteristics and Features.  The broad operational characteristics
and features that are to be met by the equipment are elucidated at Appendix A. These
have been divided into ‘Essential’ and ‘Desirable’ parameters.
19. Technical offer. The Technical Offer must enable detailed understanding of the
functioning and characteristics of the equipment   as a whole and each sub-system
independently. It must include the performance parameters as listed at Appendix A and
any other information pertaining to the technical specifications of the equipment
considered important/relevant by you. The technical proposal should also include
maintenance schedules to achieve maximum life and expected life of each assembly/
subassembly (or LRU/SRU), storage conditions/environment condition  recommended
and the resultant guaranteed in-service/shelf life.
20. If there is any associated optional equipment on offer, that should also be
indicated separately along with the benefit that are likely to accrue by procuring such
option equipment. Should the vendor be contemplating any upgrades or modifications
to the equipment being offered the details regarding these should also be included in
the Technical Proposal.
21. Technical Details
(a) The technical details should be factual, comprehensive and include
specifications of the offered system/equipment against broad requirements
listed in Appendix A of RFP.
(b) Insufficient or incomplete details may lead to rejection of the offer. Mere
indication of compliance may be construed as incomplete information
unless system’s specific technical details are available in the offer.

46
22. The technical offer should have a separate detachable compliance table stating
specific answers to all the parameters as listed at Appendix ‘A’. It is mandatory to
append answers to al the parameters listed in Appendix ‘A’. Four Copies of the Technical
Proposal should be submitted, however only one copy of the commercial proposal is
required.
PART III : COMMERCIAL   ASPECTS
Commercial Offer
23. Commercial Offers will be opened only of those vendors, whose equipment is
short listed after staff evaluation. The Commercial Offer must be firm and fixed and
should be valid for at least 12 months from the date of submission of offer (period may
be amended, if required).
24. The Commercial Offers will be opened by a committee and if supplier desires he
may depute his representative, duly authorized in writing to be present at the time of
opening of the offers. Further negotiations will be made only with the lowest bidder
(L1), as determined by the committee. The date time and venue fixed for this purpose
will be  intimated separately after the evaluations are completed.
25. You are requested to take into consideration the Payment terms given at
Appendix D while formulating the Commercial Offers.
26. To assist the supplier in formulating the Commercial Proposal and to ensure that
all aspects are covered, a suggested format is given at Appendix E.
Additional Aspects
27. You are requested to confirm your willingness to provide the equipment for trial
evaluation in India on “No Cost No Commitment” basis when so requested. If you
consider that this is not practicable, alternative means of evaluation may be suggested.
However, Government of India reserves the right to reject your proposal if you are not
willing to provide the equipment for trial evaluation in India.
28. Quality Assurance. After the contract is negotiated, you would be required to
provide the Standard Acceptance Test Procedure (ATP) to the Director General of
Quality Assurance (DGQA) (or the concerned Quality Assurance agency as applicable)
for their approval. The DGQA  reserves the right to modify the ATP when necessary
and the equipment supplied by you would be accepted subject to evaluation and
clearance by the DGQA. You would be required to provide all test facilities at OEM
premises for acceptance inspection by the DGQA team as also train the team as per sub
para 1(e) at Appendix E.  The details in this regard will be coordinated during the
negotiation of contract.
29. Standard Clauses on Contract. The Government of India desires that all actions
regarding procurement of any equipment are totally transparent and carried out as per
established procedures. The supplier is required to accept our standard clauses
regarding agents/agency commission, penalty for use of undue influence, access to
books of accounts, arbitration and laws which would be incorporated in the contract.
The next of these clauses is at Appendix F.

47
30. Option Clause (As applicable). The format of option clause is placed at
Appendix G.
P ART IV : EVALUATION AND ACCEPTANCE CRITERIA
31. Evaluation and Acceptance Process
(a) Evaluation of Technical Proposals. The technical proposals forwarded by
the firms will be evaluated by a Technical Evaluation Committee (TEC). The
TEC will examine the extent of variations/differences, if any, in the technical
characteristics of the equipment offered by various vendors will reference to
the QRs and prepare a ‘Compliance Statement’ shortlisting the vendors. The
shortlisted vendors shall be asked to send  the desired units of the equipment/
weapon system to India for Field Evaluation in  varying climatic, altitude and
terrain conditions. A Staff evaluation will be carried out, which will give out
the compliance of the demonstrated performance of the equipment vis-a-vis
the requirements. The compliance would be determined only on the basis of
the essential parameters. the staff evaluation will analyse  the field evaluation
results and shortlist the equipment recommended for introduction into service.
(b) Evaluation of Commercial Proposals. The Commercial proposals of the firms
whose equipment have been short listed after staff evaluation will only be
opened and a comparative statement will be prepared. Commercial offers
should be based on the premise that no advance payment would be made.
Comparison of offers will also be done on the same basis. The vendor quoting
lowest price (L1), as determined by Contracts Negotiation Committee (CNC),
would be invited for negotiations by CNC.
(c) Contract Conclusion/Placement of Order (As applicable).  The successful
conclusion of CNC will be followed by contract conclusion/placement of
order (As applicable).
Conditions under which this RFP is Issued
32. This RFP is being issued with no financial commitment and the Ministry of
Defence reserves the right to change or vary any part thereof at any stage. The
Government of India also reserves the right to withdraw the RFP should it be so
necessary at any stage.
33. Please acknowledge receipt.
Yours faithfully
(                     )

APPENDIX  A
(Refers to Paras 1, 15, 18, 19&21 of RFP)
OPERATIONAL CHARACTERISTICS AND FEATURES
1. This information would be different for various equipment. As such only the
guide lines for formulating this Appendix has been stated here. The information provided
here flows from the GSQR and must contain the following:—
(a) The purpose for which this equipment is needed or in broad outline the
capabilities that are needed. For example in the case of WLR.
“The WLR should be able to provide accurate location of enenmy guns,
mortars and rocket launchers (in all types of terrain) to enable own fire
delivery means to engage them effectively. In addition it should also provide
location of own shell burst to enable correction of fire.”
(b) Technical Parameters. All technical parameters listed in the GSQR in terms of
size weight, performance, operating environment, power, torque,
preservation, utility life, storage, shelf  life etc., should be specified for the
following levels:—
(i) Essential Levels.
(ii) Desirable Levels.
(c) Additional Features. If any, should also be explained.
2. Based on above guide lines, this Appendix should be formulated very carefully
for each type of equipment.
48

APPENDIX B
(Refers to Para 5 of RFP)
DRAFT WARRANTY  CLAUSE
(To be amended as per requirement and no blanks to be left)
1. The seller warrants that the goods supplied under this contract conform to
technical specifications prescribed and shall perform according to the said Technical
Specifications.
2. The seller warrants for a period of—months/years/operational hours from the
date of acceptance of stores by Joint Receipt Inspection Team or date of installation
and commissioning whichever is later, that the goods/stores supplied under this
contract and each component  used in the manufacture there of shall be free from all
types of defects/failures.
3. If within the period of warranty, the goods are reported by the Buyer to have
failed to perform as per the specifications, the Seller shall either replace or rectify the
same free of charge, maximum within 45 days of notification of such defect received by
the Seller, provided that the goods are used and maintained by the Buyer  as per
instructions contained in the Operating  Manual. Warranty of the equipment would be
extended by such duration. Record of the down time would be maintained by user in
log book. Spares required for warranty repairs shall be provided free of cost by Seller.
The Seller also undertakes to diagnose, test, adjust, calibrate and repair/ replace the
goods/equipment arising due to accidents by neglect or misuse by the operator or
damage due to transportation of the goods during the warranty period, at the cost
mutually agreed to between the Buyer and the Seller.
4. Seller hereby warrants that necessary service and repair back up during the
warranty period of the equipment shall be provided by the seller and he will ensure that
the downtime is within—% of  the warranty period.
5. If a particular equipment/goods fails frequently and/or, the cumulative down time
exceeds 20% of the warranty period,  the complete equipment shall be replaced free of
cost by the Seller within a stipulated period of 45 days of receipt of the notification
from the Buyer. Warranty of the replaced equipment  would start from the date of
acceptance by the buyer/date of installation and commissioning.
6. In case the complete  delivery of Engineering  Support Package is delayed beyond
the period stipulated in this contract, then the Seller undertakes that the warranty
period for the goods/stores shall be extended to that extent.
49

APPENDIX C
(Refers to Para 6 of RFP)
REPAIR AND MAINTENANCE PHILOSOPHY
Note: (The Repair and Maintenance Philosophy is only indicative and pertains
to a particular service. SHQ concerned may amend this as per their
requirement. No blanks to be left.)
1. The various levels of repairs are explained in succeedings paras. (However, all
levels may not be applicable  to all types of equipment. As such the type of  repair
facility required for the equipment for which  the RFP is being issued should be stated
clearly by modifying the succeeding paras.)
Unit Repairs
2. These are repairs carried out with in the unit holding this equipment with tools
generally held within the unit or supplied by the manufacturer with each equipment or
as per scaling of 1:10 or any other scaling recommended by the manufacturer as per
population held in the unit.
3. These pertain to cleaning, lubrications, minor repairs and replacement of
components and minor assemblies that can be carried out in field without any
sophisticated  tools or test equipment.
4. For carrying out such repairs, the manufacturer is required to provide the
following:—
(a) Table of Tools and Equipment (TOTE) with each equipment including
operators manual.
(b) Scaling of special tools and spares as explained at para 2 above including
Maintenance manual.
 Field Repairs
5. These are repairs carried out in the field by technicians specially trained for this
purpose and where the required special tools and spares have to be provided. These
repairs comprise replacement of major assemblies and other components beyond the
scope of unit level repairs. Normally a field work shop that carries out such repairs
looks after three to four units holding the said equipment.
6. The manufacturer is required to provide the following:—
(a) Quantity and specification of spares that need to be stocked for a population
of —equipment.
(b) Special Maintenance  Tools and  Test Equipment that needs to be provided to
50

51
each such field work shop. (The total number of such facilities would also
have to be stated based on deployment  pattern of the concerned equipment
to carryout total costing).
(c) All necessary technical literature.
(d) Misc. aspects, if any ( viz. All necessary technical literature).
Intermediate Repairs
7. These are extensive or special repairs carried out for  a few  equipment in the field
to reduce the down time. (Include this only if applicable for the equipment being
procured and state the action required  from the manufacturer).
Based Repairs
8. The Indian army would like to avoid dependence on the manufacturer in terms of
factory repair. Thus all repairs including repairs to components, sub-assemblies and
overhaul of the complete equipment are carried out by this facility.
9. Depending on the population of the equipment, one to five such facilities may be
established in India for this  purpose (The actual No. would have to be stated for
costing). The manufacturer is required to provide the following:—
(a) All Special Maintenance Tools, jigs, fixtures and test equipment for carrying
out repairs up to component level.
(b) Quantity and specification of spares, sub-assemblies as per population
expected to be maintained.
(c)  Oils and lubricants necessary for overhaul.
(d) All necessary technical  literature.
(e) Calibration facilities for test equipment.
Manufacturers Recommended List of Spares (MRLS)
10. Based on the explanation given above, you are requested to provide MRLS to
sustain the equipment for a period of ——years for various levels of repair as per
format given at Annexure I to this Appendix. You will be required to provide this both
with Technical and Commercial proposals.
11. While with the commercial proposal, the actual costs of each component/spare
will be provided, in the case of Technical Proposal these will be reflected as Low Cost/
Medium Cost/High Cost. A guideline for this purpose is as under:—
(a) Low cost. Less than 2% of the unit cost of the equipment/sub-system.
(b) Medium cost. 2 to 10% of the unit cost of the equipment/sub-system.
(c) High cost. Greater than 10% of the unit cost of equipment/sub-system.

52
12. If the complete equipment comprises a number of different sub-systems, for eg.
it is coming mounted on a vehicle or is provided with a stand for mounting  or is
inclusive of a generator or an air conditioner or has a sight, MRLS must be provided
seprately for each sub-system.
Special Maintenance Tools and Test Equipment
13. This is to be formulated in a similar manner as explained for MRLS. A suggested
format is given at Annexure II to this Appendix and is to be included in both Technical
and commercial proposals. The cost column may be left blank in the Technical
Proposal.
Technical Literature
14. The details of technical literature to be supplied with the system should be listed
as per the suggested format at Annexure 3 to this Appendix. This should be provided
with both Technical  and Commercial Proposals. The cost column may be left blank in
the Technical Proposal.
Miscellaneous Aspects (Applicable only when trials are required)
15. In cases where the equipment is required to undergo trials, the equipment will
also be put through Maintenance Evaluation Test (MET). Based on this evaluation
and in consultation with the supplier, the MRLS may be required to be refined. Under
such eventually, the supplier will be asked to submit a fresh commercial proposal for
MRLS before commencement  of price negotiations.
16. During user trials it may be brought out that the equipment is acceptable subject
to carrying  out certain modification/improvements. This will be referred to the supplier
to confirm his acceptance and also whether he needs to submit a frest commercial
proposal.
17. MET. This is carried with a view to facilitate provisioning  of effective engineering
support during life cycle of the equipment. This would involve stripping of the
equipment and carrying out recommended tests and adjustments  and establishing
adequacy of maintenance tools, test equipment and technical literature. To facilitate
this process the supplier is required to provide the following:—
(a) Technical Literature:
(i) User Handbook/Operators Manual
(ii) Design Specifications
(iii) Tech. Manuals
(aa) Part I. Tech. description, specifications, functioning  of various systems.
(ab) Part II. Inspection/Maintenance  tasks, repair procedures, materials
used, fault diagnosis and use of Special Maintenance  Tools (SMTs)/Special
Test Equipments (STEs).

53
(ac) Part III. Procedure assembly/disassembly, repair up to component
level, safety precautions.
(ad) Part IV. Part list with drawing reference and list of SMTs/STEs Test
Bench.
(iv) Manufacturers Recommended List of Spares (MRLS).
(v) Illustrated Spare Part List (ISPL).
(vi) T echnical Manual on STE with drawing reference.
(vii) Complete Equipment Schedule.
(viii) T able of Tools & Equipment (ToTE) & carried spares.
(ix) Rotable list, norms of consumption, mandatory/non mandatory spares
list for each system.
(b) One set of Gauges.
(c) One set of Special Maintenance Tools (SMTs).
(d) One set of Special Test Equipments (STEs).
(e) Presence of technical Rep. of the OEM during conduct of MET.
(f) Servicing Schedule.
(g) Condemnation limits.
(h) Permissive repair schedule.
(i) Packing specification/instructions.
(j) Design Specification.
(k) Any additional information suggested by the OEM.
18. Vendors quoting lesser ESP in terms of range and depth will have to make good
the deficiency. The vendors quoting  surplus  items in ESP should agree to buy back
the surplus ESP. The prices of individual items in the ESP should be indicated by the
vendor.
19. The following may also be noted:—
(a) The requirement of training and associated equipment must be clearly
specified in Part I or placed at a separate Appendix.
(b) The costs for aggregates and training must only be  indicated in the  commercial
proposal.
(c) Sufficiency clause in terms of installation material and spares should also be
included  (as suggested by the SHQ).

Annexure I to Appendix C
MANUFACTURER’S  RECOMMENDED LIST OF SPARES  (MRLS)
EQUIPMENT:_____________
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM):___________
Sr. Manufacturer’s Source of Nomen- Nos. fitted in one Illustrated Unit Recommended scale for 100 Total Cost Remarks
No. Part No. Supply clature equipm ent Spare Part cost equipment for two years
List (ISPL) Unit Field Intermediate Base Unit Field Intermediate Base
Reference Repair Repair Repair Repair Repair Repair Repair Repair
Total Cost
Notes: —
1. Maintenance spares/stores like lubricants, sealing compound, gases should be given separately  giving source of supply.
2. Spares for component repairs should  be included under the column of nodal repair & base repair as suggested By OEM.
3. In ‘Remarks’ column following information (if applicable) be given:—
(a) If an iteme has a shelf/operational life it be marked as ‘G’ and life indicated.
(b) Matching set of components be indicated.
(c) Item which can be locally manufactured should be marked ‘LM.’
(d) Items which can not be manufactured in India due to sophisticated  design/technology may be marked as ‘Sl’ special item.
(e) If a component/assembly is common to other similar equipment offered by OEM earlier these should be marked ‘CM’ and name of the equipment be
indicated.
4. MRLS should be drawn out of the ‘Part List’ of the equipment, which should be separately given as part of Technical Manual Pa rt IV .
5. If the main equipment  consists of other equipment then MRLS should  be prepared for them under proper heads.
6. MRLS be prepared as per the maintenance  concept of the customer (Appx. C).
7. Items provided along with the equipment as spares should also be included in MRLS.
8. Modules/Shop Replaceable Unit (SRU)/assemblies should be listed and their components should be included under them so as to r elate each item of spare to their
module/SRU/assembly.
9. Complete MRLS should be costed separately for Field, Nodal and Base repairs as it is required to be included as part of ‘Tota l costed Engineering Support
Package (ESP).’ OEM may give cost details in confidence to Price Negotiation Committee (PNC), but other details as above be pro vided during
Maintainability Equipment Trial (MET).
10. MRLS for test equipment should also be provided on the similar format.
54

55
Annexure II to Appendix C
LIST  OF  SMT/STEs,  JIGS,  FIXTURE   AND  INFRASTRUCTURE
EQUIPMENT:__________
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM):___________
Sl. Manufacturer’s Designation Unit Cost No. Required Brief R emarks
No. Part No. purpose
Unit Repair Field Repair Intermediate Base Repair
Repair
Notes:
1. Prepare separate sheet for each type of eqpt.
2. Specify in remarks column whether the Special Test Equipment (STE)/Special Maintenance Tools (SMT) can be used as general pur pose eqpt. on any other
kind of eqpt.
3. For Nodal Repairs/Base repairs quantity  required should be for repair of 10 equipment at a time.
4. If test eqpt. are commercially available  ex. India, the source of supply be specified.
5. Test eqpt. for calibrating the STEs should  be included in the list above.
6. Test eqpt. which are required to be provided by the customer should also be included in the list above.

Annexure III to Appendix C
TECHNICAL  LITERATURE
EQUIPMENT:
Original Equipment Manufacturer (OEM):
Sr . Technical Literature Unit Scale T otal Remarks
No. Cost for 100 cost
equipment
1. User Handbook/Operators Manual 100
2. Design Specifications
3. Technical Manual 40 each
(a) Part I.  Tech description, specification, functioning
of various Systems
(b) Part II.  Inspection/Maintenance tasks Repair
procedures, materials used, fault diagnosis and use of
Special Maintenance Tools(SMTs) Special Test
Eqpt. (STEs).
(c) Part III. Procedure assembly/disassembly, repair
up to component level, safety precautions.
(d) Part IV .
(i) Part list with drawing reference
(ii) List of SMT/STEs with Test Bench
4. Manufacturer’s Recommended List of Spares (MRLS) 10
5. Illustrated Spare Part List (ISPL) 600
6. Technical Manual on STE with drawing reference One per STE
7. Floppies on the above Tech. literature One Set
8. Any other (specify)
Total Cost
Notes: —1. In case any additional eqpt. is used their tech literature will be included.
2. Scale of Tech. literature is as per Government of India, Ministry of Defence, letter
No. PC to MF 62348/ESP/EME-LS/DS (Plg.) dt. 11 Jan. 88.
3. If certain technical literature is being provided free of cost if should be indicated in the
remarks column.
56

Annexure IV to Appendix C
TRAINING  AGGREGA TES
EQUIPMENT:
OEM:
Sr. Description of Training Aggregate Scale Unit Total Remarks
No. for 100 Cost Cost
Eqpt.
1. Complete Equipment 2
2. Sectionised Equipment 1
3. Shop Replaceable Units (SRU)/PCB/Modules/ One each
assemblies as under:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
4. Computer based trg. package based on interactive One set
multimedia to include:
(a) Full graphics, Animation test and sound
(b) Symptoms-jault corelation (expert system)
5. Training aids to include: One set
(a) Charts
(b) Slides
(c) Training Brochures
(d) Training Work models
(e) Blow up diagram of such system
(f) Video films
6.  Cost of training 06 operators and 08 technicians in country of OEM
7. Any other
Total Cost
57

APPENDIX  D
(Refers to Para 25 of RFP)
PAYMENT  TERMS
(NO BLANKS TO BE LEFT)
Terms of Delivery and Payment
1. The delivery of goods will be based on FOB/CIP/CIF___________ and
consigned to ___________(Port/Air Port) with the ultimate consignee as
__________________.
2. Payment.
(a) The vendor may formulate the Commercial Offers on the presumption that no
advance would be receivable. It would be open to the PNC when negotiating with L1
to discuss the question of advances as part of complete commercial negotiations.
(The other terms would be based on the terms for inspection (pre dispatch
inspection or Joint Receipt Inspection or both. This para will be formulated
accordingly based on the under mentioned guide lines. If pre dispatch inspection is
to be carried out, then certain percentage payment agreed is to be released. If only
JRI is contemplated, 5 to 10% of the amount should be held back and cleared only
after JRI. If installation is contemplated 5 to 10% of the amount should be held back
and cleared only after installation/commissioning).
Letter of Credit
3. The Letter of Credit shall be opened 30 days prior to intended delivey and shall be
valid for 90 days and shall allow payment against the presentation of the following
documents to the Bank:—
(a) Bill of Lading/Airway Bill (Original Copy).
(b) Commercial Invoice (Original Copy).
(c) Inspection Acceptance Certificate demonstrating compliance with the
technical specifications of the contractor to be issued by the beneficiary.
(d) Packing List.
(e) Certificate of Origin.
(f) Insurance documents (in case of CIF contracts).
Performance Bond/Warranty Bond
4. A Performance Bond of ____% of value of the Contract and a separate warranty
bond (as explained at Para 5 below) would be furnished by the supplier in the form of
58

59
a Bank Guarantee from a first class Bank duly confirmed by State Bank of India. The
Performance Bond should be valid for a period until three months from the date of
receipt of last consignment and should be furnished within ____ days of signing the
contract.
5. The goods supplied shall carry a warranty for ___ months and shelf life (or in
service life, as applicable) of _____ years from the date of delivery. Warranty Bond of
_______% value of the contract in the form of a Bank Guarantee from a first class Bank
and duly confirmed by State Bank of India will be furnished. The said Warranty Bond
shall be valid for three months beyond the warranty period agreed by the vendor.
Inspection
6. (This should be in consonance with para 2 above. Explain whether it is PDI or JRI.
If it is PDI, the supplier should intimate at least 45 days prior to the day when the eqpt.
is to be offered for PDI to enable our QA pers to report accordingly. If it is JRI, then
their rep. should be present and can be undertaken only when the eqpt. reaches the
concerned depot and the supplier will be informed of the date for JRI).
Liquidated Damages
7. In the event of the seller’s failure to have the stores delivered by the date/dates
specified in the contract, the Buyer may, at his discretion withhold any payment until
the whole of the stores have been supplied, and the buyer may also deduct from the
seller as agreed, liquidated damages and not by way of penalty the sum of 0.5% of the
Contract price of the undelivered stores for each and every week or part of a week for
which the stores have been delayed subject to a maximum of 5% of the value of
delayed stores, in case the delay in delivery is acceptable to the Buyer.

APPENDIX  E
(Refers to Paras 26 & 28 of RFP)
Commercial Offer
1. The Commercial Offer should be in the following format:—
Sr. Items Nos. Unit T otal Remarks
No. Required Cost Cost
(a) Unit cost of fully formed and/or semiknock
down and completely knock down kits for
the quantity being negotiated for.
(b) Cost of Transfer of Technology (Where
applicable).
(c) Cost of Manufacturers Recommended List
of Spares as per the format given at Annexure
1 to Appendix B.
(d) Cost of Special Maintenance Tools and
Special Test Equipment as per format given at
Annexure 2 to Appendix B.
(e) Cost of recommended period of training
excluding the cost of travel, boarding and
lodging separately for operators and mainte-
nance technicians and QA Representative.
(f) Cost of operators manual, technical literature
including illustrated spare parts List as per
Annexure 3 to Appendix B, in  English
Language.
(g) Details and cost of training aids such as
simulators, cut out models, films, charts etc.
as recommended by the supplier as per
Annexure 4 to Appendix B.
(h) The package cost of equipment/ammunition
 of various quantities. (Range of quantum of
equipment/ammunition be specified).
(j) Cost of Optional Equipment.
Note: The same may be amended by SHQ in consultation with MoD (Fin.) on a case to case basis
based on the requirement. It is recommended that warranty requirements, in service life and product
support requirements are specified in the RFP to put all vendor on an even platform. The various
heads may be carefully examined.  Any addition/deletion/amendment which materially changes the
LI may not be permissible at a later stage.
60

61
2. Following details should also be given in commercial offers:—
(a) Payment schedule.
(b) Delivery schedule that can be adhered to by the supplier with
reference to the date of signing of contract.
(c) V alidity of quotation. The prices should be firm and fixed and be valid
for one year from date of submission.
(d) Nomenclature of items which will be provided with each equipment
as Table of Tools and Equipment (ToTE) and whose cost is included
as per Sr. 1(a) above.

APPENDIX  F
(Refers to Para 29 of RFP)
STANDARD CLAUSES IN CONTRACT
LAW
1. The present Contract shall be considered and made in accordance to the laws of
Republic of India.
ARBITRATION
2. All disputes or differences arising out of or in connection with the present
Contract, including the ones connected with the validity of the present Contract or
any part thereof, shall be settled by bilateral discussions.
3. Any dispute, disagreement of question arising out of or relating to this Contract
or relating to construction or performance (except as to any matter the decision or
determination whereof is provided for by these conditions), which cannot be settled
amicably, shall within sixty(60) days or such longer period as may be mutually agreed
upon, from the date on which either party informs the other in writing by a notice that
such dispute, disagreement or question exists, will be referred to the Arbitration Tribunal
consisting of three arbitrators.
4. Within sixty (60) days of the receipt of the said Notice, one arbitrator shall be
nominated in writing by SELLER and one arbitrator shall be nominated by BUYER.
5. The third arbitrator, who shall not be a citizen or domicile or of the country either
of the parties of any other country unacceptable to any of the parties shall be nominated
of the parties within (90) days of the receipt of the notice mentioned above, failing
which the third arbitrator may be nominated by the President of International Chamber
of Commerce, Paris, at request of either party but the said nomination would be after
consultation with both the parties and shall preclude any citizen or domicile or any
country as mentioned. The arbitrator nominated under this Clause shall not be regarded
nor act as an umpire.
6. The Arbitration Tribunal shall have its seat in New Delhi or such other place in
India as may be mutually agreed to between the parties.
7. The Arbitration Proceedings shall be conducted in India under the Indian
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 and the award of such Arbitration Tribunal shall
be enforceable in Indian Courts only.
8. The decision of the majority of the arbitrator shall be final and binding on the
parties to this contract.
62

63
9. Each party shall bear its own cost of preparing and presenting its case. The cost
of arbitration including the fees and expenses of the third arbitrator shall be shared
equally by the Seller and the Buyer.
10. In the event of a vacancy caused in the office of the arbitrators, the party which
nominated such arbitrator, shall be entitled to nominate another in his place and the
arbitration proceedings shall continue from the stage they were left by the retiring
arbitrator.
11. In the event of one of the parties failing to nominate its arbitrator within 60 days
as above or if any of the parties does not nominate another arbitrator within 60 days of
the place of arbitrator failing vacant, then the other party shall be entitled after due
notice of at least 30 days to request the President of the International Chamber of
Commerce to nominate another arbitrator as above.
12. If the place of the third arbitrator falls vacant, his substitute shall be nominated
according to the provisions herein above stipulated.
13. The parties shall continue to perform their respective obligations under this
contract during the pendency of the arbitration proceedings except in so far as such
obligations are the subject matter of the said arbitration proceedings.
PENALTY FOR USE OF UNDUE INFLUENCE
14. The Seller undertakes that he has not given, offered or promised to give, directly
or indirectly any gift, consideration, reward, commission, fees brokerage or inducement
to any person in service of the Buyer or otherwise in procuring the contracts or
forbearing to do or for having done or forborne to do any act in relation to the obtaining
or execution of the Contract or any other Contract with the Government for showing or
forbearing to show favour or disfavour to any person in relation to the Contract or any
other Contract with the Government. Any breach of the aforesaid undertaking by the
seller or any one employed by him or acting on his behalf (whether with or without the
knowledge of the seller) or the commission of any offers by the seller or anyone
employed by him or acting on his behalf, as defined in Chapter IX of the Indian Penal
Code, 1860 or the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 or any other Act enacted for the
prevention of corruption shall entitle the Buyer to cancel the contract and all or any
other contracts with the seller and recover from the seller the amount of any loss
arising from such cancellation. A decision of the buyer or his nominee to the effect that
a breach of the undertaking had been committed shall be final and binding on the
Seller.
15. Giving or offering of any gift, bribe or inducement or any such act on behalf of
the seller towards any officer/employee of the buyer or to any other person in a
position to influence any officer/employee of the Buyer for showing any favour in
relation to this or any other contract, shall render the Seller to such liability/penalty as
the Buyer may deem proper, including but not limited to termination of the contract,
imposition of penal damages, forfeiture of the Bank Guarantee and refund of the amounts
paid by the Buyer.

64
AGENTS/AGENCY COMMISSION
16. The seller confirms and declares to the buyer that the seller is the original
manufacturer of the stores referred to in this contract and has not engaged any individual
or firm, whether Indian or foreign whatsoever, to intercede, facilitate or in any way to
recommend to the Government of India or any of its functionaries, whether officially or
unofficially, to the award of the contract to the Seller; nor has any amount been paid,
promissed or intended to be paid to any such individual or firm in respect of any such
intercession, facilitation or recommendation. The Seller agrees that if it is established
at any time to the satisfaction of the Buyer that the present declaration is in any way
incorrect or if at a later stage it is discovered by the Buyer that the Seller has engaged
any such individual/firm, and paid or internded to pay any amount, gift, reward, fees,
commission or consideration to such person, party, firm or institution, whether before
or after the signing of this contract, the Seller will be liable to refund that amount to the
Buyer. The Seller will also be debarred from entering into any supply Contract with the
Government of India for a minimum period of five years. The Buyer will also have a
right to consider cancellation of the Contract either wholly or in part, without any
entitlement or compensation to the Seller who shall in such event be liable to refund all
payments made by the Buyer in terms of the Contract alongwith interest at the rate of
2% per annum above LIBOR rate. The Buyer will also have the right to recover any
such amount from any contracts concluded earlier with the
Government of India.
ACCESS TO THE BOOKS OF ACCOUNTS
17. In case it is found to the satisfaction of the Buyer that the Seller has engaged an
Agent or paid commission or influenced any person to obtain the contract as described
in clauses relating to Agent/Agency Commission and penalty for use of undue influence,
the Seller, on a specific request of the Buyer shall provide necessary information/
inspection of the relevant financial documents/information.

APPENDIX G
(Refers to Para 30 of RFP)
OPTION CLAUSE
(NO BLANKS TO BE LEFT)
The Buyer shall have the right to place separate order on the SELLER on or
before..............(..........year from the date of this contract) for the main equipment, spares,
facilities or services as per the cost, terms and conditions set out in this contract. The
price of the system, spares etc. shall remain same till........year from the effective date of
the contract. Beyond this, cost will be escalated through application of the mutually
agreed escalation formula.
65

SCHEDULE II
(THIS PAPER LAYS OUT GENERAL GUIDELINES.  MAY BE AMENDED IN
CONSULTATION WITH  PA  AND OTHER AGENCIES INVOLVED
TO MAKE IT EQUIPMENT SPECIFIC)
Transfer of technology (ToT)
(CKD Kit Based)
1. Preamble
(a) ToT shall be provided to the designated production Agency.
(b) Technology used shall be current, State of art as used in the Contemporary
systems. (Critical technology aspects having bearing on ToT evaluation need
to be specified on a case to case basis).
(c) The ToT shall  be comprehensive, covering all aspects of design,
manufacturing know-how and detailed technical information which will enable
the Production Agency to manufacture, assemble, integrate, test, install and
commission, use, repair, overhaul, support and maintain the licence product
from CKD Kit. Design data  shall include the details that are needed to give
design disposition during production on deviation/concession, modify/
upgrade the licence product and substitute parts and systems of the licence
product as required by the certifying agency and the production agency.
(d) The OEM is required to provide the latest version of Configuration control
Document which will provide detailed break down of the product-structure in
terms of lower level sub-systems/assemblies/sub-assemblies/modules/detail
parts/PVBs/wiring diagrams etc. with their latest modification status.
(e) Vendor should submit an undertaking that he would provide & support
complete ToT for phased manufacture to the buyer or his authorized Indian
Organisation for the System and its sub-systems, modules, assemblies and
detailed parts/components.
(f) Vendor should submit an agreement that the buyer or his authorized Indian
Organisation reserves the right to approach directly the OEMs of the Sub-
Systems  for similar ToT agreements and that as Main Contractor he will
provide total support.
66

67
(g) ( To be included on as required basis) Vendor should submit a not to exceed
budgetary price for the Transfer of Technology covering the following
parameters:—
(i)  Licence fee
(ii) Documentation
(iii) T echnical Assistance
(iv) Training
(v) Materials
(vi) Spares
(vii) T ooling
(viii) Special Tools
(ix) S tandard Tools
(x) Ground Support & Test Equipment
(xi) Programme Management
Vendor may note that this not to exceed budgetary price will be used
forcommercial evaluation. V endor selected after technical & commercial
evaluation will enter into detailed contractual negotiations on various
aspects of the Transfer of Technology to the buyer or his authorized
Indian Organisation based on the never exceed budgetary quotes.
(h) It is likely that some of the assemblies/sub-assemblies/modules/PCBs used
in the realization of higher level assemblies/sub-systems and systems are
manufactured by the OEM’s vendors/sub-contractors either based on
Engineering documentation provided by the OEM or developed by the OEM’s
vendors/sub-contractors based on procurement specifications provided by
the OEM. Further, as a result of multiplicity of technologies involved and for
reasons for price competitiveness arising due to economies of scale, some of
the items used in the manufacture of licensed product may be brought out by
the OEM from vendors as ‘fully finished’ against the procurement
specifications provided by him.
(i) Although, not desirable, some of the components/process specifically
developed by the OEMs for use in the manufacture of licensed product may
be classified by them as ‘proprietary’ and not included within the scope of
ToT offered to the Production Agency.
(j) To bring  in a fair comparison between the ToT offered by various OEMs as
also to have a fair assessment of the depth of technology being transferred,
OEMs are required to identify each item (system/sub-system/assembly/sub-
assembly/module/detail parts/PCB etc.) in the product structure under the
following categories, as may be applicable and provide information on the

68
relative price for each of the items in the product structure as percentage of
product cost.
(i) Category-1. Items for which complete TOT i.e. Engineering and Manufacturing
documentation to enable the Production Agency carryout fabrication,
assembly and test of the item from CKD Kit level is being provided by the
OEM, may be classified under the head “CTOT”.
(ii) Category-2. Items which are manufactured by the OEM’s Sub-contractors
based on engineering documentation provided by the OEM and these
Engineering Documentation are being provided by the OEM to the Production
Agency, may also be classified under the head “CTOT”.
(iii) Category-3.
(aa) Items in respect of which development and manufacture by the OEM has
been sub-contracted to its vendors/sub-contractors based on only the
procurement specifications provided by him and the OEM is not in a position
to provide any additional technical information to the Production Agency
except the procurement drawings/specifications provided by him to his
vendors/sub-contractors, may be classified under the head Single V endor
“Sub-contract”. For the purpose of evaluating the depth of TOT, it will be
presumed that the TOT in respect of these items for indigenous manufacture
is not provided.
(ab) However, in case, the OEM in collaboration with his vendor/sub-contrator, is
able to provide the production Agency, maintenance Documentation, the
recommended list of spares for repair and overhaul as may be applicable and
maintenance training at vendor’s/sub-contractor’s premises, then such items
may be classified under the head ‘Limited TOT for maintenance support’ i.e.
“M-ToT”.
(iv) Category-4.
(aa) Items including catalogue/standard items sourced by the OEM against his
procurement specifications as ‘Fully Finished’, may be classified as “Bought
Out”. Evidently ToT for such items for indigenous manufacture will not be
available and the OEM will be able to provide only the procurement drawings/
specifications. OEM has to ensure the availability of  such items or its
equivalents during the life cycle of the product. However, in respect of some
of the selected items in this category, if the OEM, in collaboration with his
vendor, is able to provide the Production Agency documentation for
maintenance, recommended list of spares for repair and overhaul as may be
applicable and maintenance training in the vendor’s premises, then such
items may also be classified under the head ‘limited TOT for maintenance
support’ i.e. “M-ToT”.
(ab) OEM shall ensure periodical review of obsolescence, study of the Bill of
Items (BOIs) and provide a retrieval scheme during the life span of the product.

6969
(v) Category-5. Some of the items for which the ownership of Design and
Manufacturing Documentation is available with the OEM, but the OEM is
not willing to transfer the technology to the Production Agency may be
classified under the head ‘Proprietary’ items. The list of such items shall be
far and few and generally restricted to components/processes specifically
developed by the OEM for the licensed product. No item in the product
structure which is critical either from the technology point of view or from the
point of view of significant value addition or which constitutes a significant
relative percentage of the product cost (say > 10%), will be acceptable under
the head “Proprietary items” Further, at any stage during the life cycle of the
Product, if the OEM intends to discontinue the production of Proprietary
items, the complete technical documentation in respect of these items available
with the OEM or his sub-contractors will be passed on to the Production
Agency to enable indigenous manufacture or establish alternative routes of
meeting the requirement.
(l) The OEMs have to ensure that the depth of Technology being transferred
shall enable the Production Agency achieve value addition commensurate
with a minimum 30% of the relative cost of the licensed Product through
indigenous manufacture.
(m) No single sub-system/assembly/sub-assembly which constitutes more than
10% of the cost of Licensed product, shall be without TOT option to the
Production Agency. In case, such a sub-system/assembly belongs to the
‘bought out’ category, then the OEM as a prime bidder of the licensed product
shall bid in consortium with the concerned vendors with separate ToT proposal
for which items included in the bid directly from the relevant vendor. The bid
for supplied/TOT in such a case shall be evaluated as an integrated composite
proposal.
(n) OEM shall assist the production agency and take the lead to obtain
maintenance related ToT to the maximum extent possible in respect of items
covered under category 3 and 4, from his vendor/sub-contractors.
2. Evaluation of ToT
(a) In the technical bid, the depth of ToT being provided will be evaluated for
comparison purpose as given below:—
(i) Relative Percentage of cost of Category 1 items Not less than
(individual & composite)  30% (After
(ii) Relative Percentage of cost of Category 2 items excluding the
(individual & composite) Corresponding
CKD Kit Cost)
 (iii) Relative Percentage of cost of Category 3 items Not more than 25%
(individual & composite
}

7070
(iv) Relative Percentage of cost of Category 4 items Not more than 25%
(individual & composite)
(v) Relative percentage of cost of Category 5 items Not more than 15%
(individual & composite)
(b) Total percentage of (i) to (v) should be 100%.
(c) Bids of Vendors with relative percentage of cost of items manufactured
indigenously based on ToT minus CKD Kit cost being higher than the minimum
specified 30% during the IM Phase will only be considered further for
commercial evaluation.
3. Phased Manufacturing Programme
(a) Based on the phased TOT absorption planned by production agency,
quantity—will be supplied as Fully Finished during Phase-O, quantity—as
SKD Kit during Phase-1, and quantity—as CKD Kit during Phase-2 Illustrative
phase definitions are given below:—
(i) Phase-0. Shall be based on supply of Fully Assembled and tested product
by the OEM.
(ii) Phase-1. Shall be based on supply of semi Knocked Down (SKD) Kits
provided by the OEM. The Semi Knocked Down Kit will consist of sub-
systems, assemblies, sub-assemblies, modules etc. assembbled and tested
by the OEM and/or his vendors/ sub-contractors. The Production Agency
will perform the final level assembly and testing of the product.
(iii) Phase-2. Shall be based on supply of Completely Knocked Down (CKD)
Kits provided by the OEM in the form of unassembled Bill of Materials.
CKD Kit may include certain components/ sub-assemblies Commercially
available “Off the Shelf” (COTS) from multiple vendors as fully finished
items. Production Agency will carry out assembly and test of individual
PCBs/ Modules/ Sub-assemblies/ Assemblies/ Sub-systems etc. from
component level and then carry out final assembly and testing of the
product.
(b) The timeframe for completion of supplies by the OEM for various Phase of
manufacturing is provided at Annexure 1. Conformance of the vendor to the
time schedule provided in Annexure I will be one of the important Evaluation
Criterion and the bids of OEM’s not meeting the time schedules are liable to
be rejected.
(c) OEM shall provide complete configuration of SKD and CKD Kits to the
Production Agency to realize the Fully Finished Product. CKD Kits required
to meet the spares requirement may be furnished separately. The OEM shall
also provide estimated man-hours required for various stages of fabrication,
assembly and test to realize the Licensed Product from SKD Kit during
Phase-1 and CKD kit during Phase-2.

7171
(d) OEM shall permit the production agency to sub contract components/
assemblies to sub contractors of production agency is able to procure
components/subassemblies/test equipment directly from OEM’s
subcontractors/vendors.
4. Itemised Price List (IPL). The OEM shall provide Itemised parts list in the Technical
Bid and itemized price list (IPL) totaling to end product unit cost in Commercial Bid.
Man  hours required during various phases of manufacture to realize the fully finished
product shall also be provided. The prices of components,  fabricated parts, standard
items, bought out items, Proprietary items as may be relevant shall be provided for
various phases of manufacturing programme. The list shall include the source of
supply of compoents, standard items, BOLs and the TOT shall include authorization
to production agency to procure these items directly from the sources without going
through OEM. (While this information may be possible for less complex
products, it may not be possible if the itemized price list is very voluminous e.g.
aircraft to be manufactured under TOT. Therefore this para of the draft procedure
may have to be suitably modified on a case to case basis).
5. Supply of Documentation.
(a) The TOT Documentation to be provided by the OEM shall be in English
language and include documentation under the following heads:— (In case
of procurement from Russian vendors, they may be asked to quote translation
charges separately to enable the production agencies to decide whether to
undertake the translation themselves or to seek the English version of the
documentation from the vendor).
(i) Engineering documentation.
(ii) Software documentation
(iii) Manufacturing documentation.
(iv) T est documentation.
(v) Technical manuals.
(vi) General documentation including Company standards, National and
International standards and specifications.
(vii) Additional documentation for repairs center.
(viii) Illustrated parts catalogue.
(ix) Design data—stress, fatigue, performance, qualification, environmental
test, life (calendar/total/overhaul), where applicable.
(x) Source identification for BOIs and subcontracted items; standard parts
consumables etc.
(xi) Spares parts lists and price catalogue for O,I, and D level maintenances.

7272
(xii) Recertification/requalification test plan, series test, special category test
due to change in venue of manufacture where applicable.
(xiii) “red band” units, calibration stands where applicable.
(xiv) quality procedures, plans, ESS, special tests during production other than
ATP.
(xv) Data on reliability—FMECA, MTBF, MTBO, MTBUR,  MTBR.
(b) The details/definition of Documentation to be provided by the OEM under
the above heads is enclosed at Annexure 2.
(c) The OEM is required to furnish ‘Compliance Statement’ in respect of each
type of detailed documentation requirement listed at Annexure 2. Non-
Compliance by the OEM against any of the documentation requirements
depending upon its criticality will have an adverse bearing in the evaluation
of ToT proposal.
(d) The documentation to be supplied by the OEM shall be that which is used by
the OEM or it sub contractors for the purpose of manufacturing, assembly
and testing of the licensed product from CKD Kit in their Plant. The OEM will
ensure completeness and exhaustiveness of the documentation for the
purpose and work to be performed by the Production Agency for
manufacturing, assembling, testing, installation and commissioning,
maintenance and overhaul of the licensed product in his plant. Wherever
approval of certification agency is relevant, approved documents will be
provided. Certification standards as far as possible will be relevant MIL specs
or as mutually agreed with the User’s certification Agency.
(e) Documentation as detailed in Annexure 2 to enable the Production Agency
procure, manufacture, operate and maintain the SMTs, STEs, Tools, Jigs and
Fixtures required for the FF/SKD/CKD manufacturing phase, shall be provided.
Wherever software is used, details of the software as per documentation
listed  at Annexure 2 including source Code shall be provided.
(f) The OEM shall also provide the data in respect of MTBF, MTBO, MTBR, and
Reliability of the product being offered.
6. Product Upgrades. Technical data including relevant Documentation update in
respect of any modifications/improvements/upgrades undertaken by the OEM in the
licensed product during the entire life cycle of the product/licence Agreement shall be
provided to the Production agency at no additional cost during the entire life cycle of
the product.
7. Training.
(a) as part of TOT, Industrial Training required by the Production Agency to
relies the Fully Finished Product from SKD and CKD kit during various
manufacturing phases and for providing component level maintenance support
to the Customer shall be provided by the OEM. The Industrial Training shall

7373
be in English language, comprehensive, covering all aspects of design,
Manufacture, software, installation and commissioning, system integration
and checkout, and component level maintenance of the product down to
sub-assembly, modules and PCB level. Apart from classsroom training
covering the critical aspects, due emphasis will be given to on-the job training.
(b) All aspects of software are to be comprehensively covered during the software
training module with a view to enable Production Agency’s software Engineers
undergoing training to acquire skills in the use, maintenance and update of
the software.
(c) Industrial Training shall be in OEM’s plants and/or in the plants of its sub-
contractors, associates, principals and subsidiaries as the case may be. OEM
shall ensure that such training is organized at the time when OEM has the
product under production in its plant or in the plant of its vendors.
(d) OEM shall provide complete details of Industrial Training programme which
will include scope, location, number of trainees and the duration for each
phase of training in terms of instructor man weeks. Such Industrial Training
programme shall be mutually agreed upon between OEM and Production
Agency.
(e) Details of the training shall be sub-divided into batches with the date of start
for each batch, duration of training etc, as will be agreed upon by OEM and
Production Agency subject to over all training schedule. Operation and
Maintenance training for end user shall also be provided.
(f) Details of Industrial and user Training programme recommended by the OEM
shall be provided as an annex to the technical proposal. OEM shall provide
details regarding the training aids and simulators required at the production
agency and at user locations. Long term training of production agencies at
the design departments of OEMs shall also be included to give a complete
exposure to them on design practices of OEM. This will help in design liaison
support including/upgrade Mods/Troubleshooting/concessions during the
entire life cycle of the product.
8. Technical Assistance. As part  of ToT, OEM shall provide requisite technical
assistance to the production agency during the phased manufacturing programme of
the product in India. The details of such technical assistance considered necessary by
the OEM shall be provided as an annex to the technical proposal. The total Technical
Assistance package shall be in number of man weeks spread over number of missions.
OEM shall provide question/answer service and modification advices during the life
cycle of the product at no additional cost.
9. Special Maintenance Tools (SMTs) and Special Test Equipment (STEs).
(a) OEM  shall provide complete technical data of the SMTs and STEs used in
the Production assembly, test and Maintenance of Product. This information
shall also include the data for manufacture and maintenance of the SMTs and
STEs. Details on manufacturing hours and cost details are to be provided.

7474
(b) Details of special category test (recertification, production series testing)
along with test rig/test set up shall also be provided. Wherever software is
used, details of the software including Source Code  shall be provided.
(c) OEM shall provide details of calibration and periodicity of calibration in
respect of SMTs and STEs Details of master tester and associated special
facilities required for this purpose (with source of supplies) will be  provided
by the OEM.
10. Consumables.  List of consumables required for the manufacture/maintenance
of product along with cost, source details and life data shall be provided.
11. Special Technologies/Processes. The OEM shall mention in the ToT proposal
about special technologies and special coatings and treating processes along with
details of plant and machinery/running cost etc. vis-a-vis  specific components/
assemblies. For identifying the augmentation needs to plant and machinery available
with the production agency, if required vendor specialists shall visit production agency
before submission of technical and commercial bid.
12. Product Support. OEM shall ensure that the product support including supply
of spares and management of obsolescence for the life of the product (minimum 20
years) shall be available to the production agency/its customer. OEM shall  also provide
a proposal for transferring the complete product support to the production agency in
a phased manner.
13. Commercial  Proposal. The commercial proposal should be submitted in a
separate sealed cover.
14. Transfer of Technology (ToT). OEM shall provide commercial offer for providing
complete Know-How and documentation for the manufacturing of product from FF,
SKD, CKD Kits, Industrial Training and Technical Assistance and the required rights,
licenses and authorization to manufacture, use and sell the product. For the Industrial
Training and Technical Assistance phase, man week rate for providing training/technical
assistance in OEM’s own plant (s) or in India may be separately provided.
15. Supplies
(a) FF. SKD and CKD Kits. OEM shall provide itemized price list for supply of
FF, SKD, CKD Kits inclusive of the production mortality used by the OEM
during manufacture of product in its plants: Itemised price break-up upto
component level it to be .provided at the time of signing of the TCA.
(b) SMTs, STEs, Tools, Jigs and Fixtures. OEM shall also provide complete list
with itemised prices for SMTs, STEs, Tools, Jigs and fixtures required for the
SKD, CKD and IM manufacturing phase and ‘O’ level, ‘I’ level and ‘D’ level
maintenance  of PRODUCT by the User/Customer.
(c) Bought Out/Outsourced/Subcontracted items. OEM shall provide the
complete list of items, which are bought out/outsourced/subcontracted for
use in the manufacture of PRODUCT along with intemized prices and details
of the sources for procurement. Authorization for direct procurement by the

7575
production agency from these sources shall be given so that no development
cost or NRE charges are incurred. In case where suggested sources decline
to supply the components/materials, OEM shall suggest alternate sources
for the procurement of suitable equivalent components/materials.
(d) Life Cycle Cost. OEM shall provide the estimated LIFE CYCLE COST of the
product and the basis thereof. Factors such as operational hours/year, MTBF,
requirement of maintenance spares, mandatory replacements during preventive
maintenance schedules etc. may be considered for arriving at life cycle cost.
(e) Spares. The OEM shall provide itemized price list of spares required as per
three levels of maintenance of  PRODUCT as follows:—
(i) ‘O’ level: —set per— —(product) (total————
product) (set ) at field units:
(ii) ‘I’ level :— set each for a group of ——(product)(———sets for ———
(product) at Intermediate levelof  maintenance; and
(iii) ‘D’ level: ————set for ———(product) at Depot level maintenance.
(iv) OEM should assist the production agency for indigenisation of spares
and also provide equivalent NATO Code wherever applicable.
16. Payment Terms. OEM shall provide the terms of payment for all supplies
including ToT  forming part of its commercial proposal. Specimen Format for providing
Prices is at Annexure 3. [alternatively MoD Standard paymentTerms applicable to
such RFP’s may be specified]
17. Delivery Schedule. OEM shall provide complete schedule for transfer of
documentation, providing of Industrial Training and Technical Assistance, supply FF,
SKD, CKD, Kits, Spares, SMTs, STEs, Tools, Jigs and Fixtures to match the overall
delivery requirement for manufacture and supply of FF product by the Production
Agency. The Documentation  for a specific phase shall be provided one months prior
to the commencement of training for that phase to enable the trainees study
documentation prior to the training. Specimen format for providing delivery schedule
is at Annexure 1.
18.  Liquidated Damages.  OEM shall undertake to complete its obligations in
accordance with the contractual delivery schedule. For delay in delivery of FF, SKD,
CKD Kits, spares, SMTs and STEs and delays in the implementation  of PMP caused
by or attributable to the OEM, the production agency shall be entitled to claim of
liquidated damages.
19. Warranty.
(a) Documentation: OEM shall warrant that the documentation supplied shall be
identical, complete and of equal quality as the documentation used by him in
its own activities and shall be accurate and complete for manufacturing,
assembling, integrating and testing of the product and shall provide updates
including MoDs/improvements during the life cycle of the product/tenure of
the Licence Agreement.

7676
(b) Material/equipment/kit supply: Items supplied should be free from any defects
arising from faulty material, design or workmanship and should be guaranteed
for quality/satisfactory performance for a period of minimum 24 months
calendar months from the date when the stores are delivered to Production
Agency. During this warranty period, defects arising from faulty material,
design or workmanship, shall be remedied by OEM at his own cost. If it
becomes necessary, the OEM should replace any defective portion of the
goods or replace the material/equipment as a whole without any additional
cost to production Agency.
20. Infringement. OEM shall indemnify and protect at its own cost, the production
agency in respect of cost/claims/legtal claims/liabilities arising from third party claim
with regard to the existence of any patent or intellectual & industrial property right of
any such parties in India or from other countries.
21. Performance Guarantee. OEM shall guarantee the performance of the product
to design specifications at the production agency/end customer locations.
22. Validity. The proposal will be kept valid for acceptance for a minimum period
of——months from the date of submission (as per the main RFP document).
23. Cross Reference of para Wise Technical Bid to Commercial Bid. This should
be made available by OEM in the price bid.
24. Technical Collaboration Agreement(TCA). After the PNC is concluded, the
OEM shall enter into a detailed Technical Collaboration Agreement (TCA) with
Production Agency incorporating mutually agreed terms and conditions.

ANNEXURE  1
SPECIMEN  FORMAT  FOR  PROVIDING  DELIVERY  SCHEDULE
DELIVERY  SCHEDULE
No Description Qty. Month Remarks
After
Effective
Date
1. Documentation transfer in lots for each phase*
2. Training including final assembly of SKD/CKDs
to FF (for each phase)
3. Operation & Maintenance course training
4. Test Equipment delivery
5. First system FA T and delivery
6. Spare Parts delivery (O’ Level Spares)
7. Spare parts delivery (1’ Level Spares)
8. Spare parts delivery (‘D’ Level Spares)
9. Test Equipment delivery for SKD and CKDs
10. SKD Kits delivery (  Kits per month)
11. CKD Kits delivery   (  Kits per month)
* Documentation for each phase shall be supplied one month prior to start of training of that phase .
  
77

ANNEXURE 2
DOCUMENTATION DETAILS TO BE PROVIDED BY OEM
1. Engineering Documentation
(a) Product Network Structure.
(b) Parts List.
(c) Part electrical Lists.
(d) Part Drawings.
(e) Assembly drawings.
(f) Cable looking diagram including its part list, connectors and end  preparation
details.
(g) Configuration Control; Document.
(h) Stress Reports (static/fatigue), performance reports, type test schedule/
records, type test certificate.
(i) For Coils and Transformer: Winding details, mechanical drawing, purchased
parts specification, details for special processes, moulding tools etc.
(j) Drawings of castings/forgings with material details, vendor information, heat
treatment details.
(k) Details of vendor items specifically developed by the OEM for the Licensed
Product.
(l) For PCB Cards: Schematics, General Assembly drawings, Assembly
instructions, SMD location processing files including CAE/CAM files.
(m) Engineering Change proposals covering details of modifications.
(n) Wiring List and details including schematics of sub-assembly/modules/
drawers/racks.
(o) List of components where traceability records are important.
(p) Details of environment tests carried out on equipment and its sub-systems.
(q) With respect to FPGAs the following details are required:
ACTEL or SRAM (depending on the manufacture) design files and the
complete schematic with I/o details-in the form of a timing diagram of sim  files
78

7979
2. Software Documentation
(a) Software Requirement Specification.
(b) Interface design document.
(c) Software Change proposals.
(d) Firmware support manual for embedded software.
(e) Software environment/tools including third party procurements.
(f) Software Test procedure.
(g) Software user Manual.
(h) Software installation procedure including user settings of pass words, site
specific data and any customization code/key or encryption.
(i) IV & details (independent verification & validation).
3. Manufacturing Documentation.
(a) Details of B/FPGA programming and testing with co-ordinate details or
placement Programming file (fuse file in the standard format), Programming
platform Configuration- tools and associated version control document,
verification document with check sum details.
(b) Process Sheets including details of special processes and finishes as may
be applicable.
(c) Complete set of drawings for tooling, jigs and fixtures as may be applicable.
(d) Photographs of wiring harness/bundling level.
(e) List of shop consumables with details of specifications, source of
procurements, data on shelf life.
(f) Assembly tree/sequence, assembly process sheets including assembly
settings and checks, assessment to be made, matching sub assemblies,
markings.
(g) Any special manufacturing facilities to be set up indicating plant and
machinery, test equipment and their vendor details and cost.
(h) Estimated man-hour requirements for assembly and testing at sub-system
level.
(i) Inspection stages, quality plan, details of inspection equipment, gauges
etc.
(j) Calibration procedrues for inspection equipment, gauges, heat treatment
& process equipment (furnace/baths).
4. Test Documentation
(a) Factory Test specification, procedure and acceptance test specification,
procedure for PCBs modules and equipment with detail instructions on

8080
test set up, user of test and/or simulation equipment and software, execution
of test with recording of results.
(b) Complete set of drawings for manufacture of test jigs including ATE fixtures,
programmes as applicable.
(c) Complete set of drawings for special to test equipment. This will include
manufacturing details as well as software documents.
(d) Special category test details (recertification, production series testing,
quality assurance testing.
(e) “Red band” units, calibration procedures for test rigs/equipment.
5. Technical Manuals
(a) User hand book detailing operational use of equipment.
(b) User hand book detailing operational use of equipment.
(c) Installation and commissioning manual
(d) Technical description of PCB, Modules, drawers, racks, etc., with details of
block diagram, schematic general assembly drawing, timing details, PROM
etc.
(e) Maintenance Manual covering.
(f) Permissible wornout dimension limits, acceptance test procedure and
acceptance limits of overhauled product.
(g) Repair/salvage schemes, mandatory replacement parts.
(h) Periodic maintenance.
(i) Trouble shooting and fault diagnosis manual. Testing and repair procedure
for faulty PCBs upto component level and Peripheral equipment received
from the customer. Overhauling manuals including details tests, adjustment,
calibration tuning etc., for all levels of equipment.
(j) Structural Part list for complete equipment.
(k) Recommended Spares List, Site supply and depot stocking.
(l) The Maintenance Manual shall cover the product for which the file of
drawings/documents are given as well as all vendor items which are part of
Licensed Products.
6. General Documentations (including Standards and Specifications)
(a) Standard inspection method (inward goods in-process and final
acceptance).
(b) Process standards/procedures.
(c) Workmanship standards/procedures.

8181
(d) Quality standards/procedures including incoming inspection procedures,
quality manuals.
(e) General procedures as may be applicable.
(f) Qualified Vendor Lists as may be applicable.
(g) Standard tools, jigs and fixtures as may be applicable.
(h) Company standards.
(i) ISO 9001 certification of OEM, vendors & subcontractors/ISO 14000
certification.
7. Additional Documentation. Repair centre documents including details of Test
Instruments, jigs, fixtures etc., for the End User.
8. Documentation shall be provided in the form of hard copy, in microfilm/microfisch
and magnetic media, including that required for making copies of technical manuals as
specified by the customer. Documentation shall be provided in English Language.

ANNEXURE 3
SPECIMEN FORMATS FOR PROVIDING PRICES INFORMATION
1. TOT
No. Item Price Remarks
(a) Know-how and documentation USD— Payment shall be subject to
deduction of taxes in India as
per Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreement in accordance with
the following schedule
(depending on the product,
various stages of payments
should be included without
indicating the quantum of
payment):—
1. Stage 1.—
2. Stage 2.—
3. Stage 3.—
4. —  —
— —
— —
82

8383
No. Item Price R emarks
(b) Training
(a) Industrial Training covering USD—*
 all aspects for TOT at OEM’s Instructor
 facility. man day/
week rate
(i) FF Phase Upto—trainees Max.
—Working days/week
(ii) SKD Phase Upto—trainees Max.
—Working days/week
(iii) CKD Phase Upto—trainees Max.
—Working days/week
(iv) Training on design liaison Upto—trainees Max.
 design practices, design disposition
 on concessions/deviation.
(b) Operational/Field Maintenance Upto—trainees and—
Training Customer trainees Max.
(i) — working days/week in-and Upto—trainees and—
Customer trainees Max.
(ii) — working days/week in India
(c) Technical Assistance in OEM’s USD—*(Man Maximum
Plan to be availed as required  day/week
 rate)
No. of manweeks—
spread over
No. of mission
TOTAL
*Minimum mandatory Training and Technical Assistance which can be provided at
no additional cost to be indicated.

8484
2. Cost of  FF. SKD and CKD Kits, Spares and SMT/STES.
Item Unit Qty. T otal Remarks
Price in Price in
USD USD
(a) ____________-system
(a) Fully Finished System
(b) SKD Kits
(c) CKD Kits
(b) Spares
(a) ‘O’ Level
(b) ‘I’ Level
(c) ‘D’ Level
(c) SMT’s/STE’s*
(a) Test Jigs/Software for ‘O’
 level maintenance
(b) Test Jigs/Software for ‘I’
level maintenance
(c) Test Jigs/Software for ‘D’
 level maintenance
(d) Test Jigs and software
for manufacture under TOT
*Excluding Standard Test Equipment
TOTAL
3. Itemised SKD Kit Price.
Part No. Description Qty. Price in USD
4. Itemised CKD Kit Price.
Part No. Description Qty. Price in USD

8585
5.  List of Special Maintenance Tools (SMTs) and Special Test Equipment (STEs)
Part Description Model MFR. Qty. Price Remarks
No. in USD
(a) SMTs and STEs required for Maintenance
(b)  TOT Test Equipment
6. List of Single Source Vendor Assemblies/Components and Proprietary Items
Components P/N Price in USD V endor
(a)  Single Source Vendor items
(b) Proprietary Items
7. Spares
(a) ‘O’ Level spare parts List:(__________________set per_____________)
No. Item Description Qty. per set Item Price in Total price in
 USD USD
Total
(b) ‘I’ Level spare parts List:(____________________set per_______________)
No. Item Description Qty. per set Item Price in Total price in
USD USD
Total
(c) ‘D’Level spare parts List:(____________________set per_______________)
No. Item Description Qty. per set Item Price in Total price in
 USD USD
Total

SCHEDULE III
(THIS PAPER LAYS OUT GENERAL GUIDELINES MAY BE AMENDED IN
CONSULTATION WITH PA AND OTHER AGENCIES INVOLVED TO
MAKE IT EQUIPMENT SPECIFIC).
Transfer  of  Technology  (ToT)
(IM Kit Based)
1. Preamble.
(a) ToT shall be provided to the designated production Agency.
(b) Technology used shall be current, State of art as used in the Contemporary
systems. (Critical technology aspects having bearing on ToT evaluation need
to be specified on a case to case basis).
(c) The ToT shall be comprehensive, covering all aspects of design,
manufacturing know-how and detailed technical information which will enable
the Production Agency to manufacture’ assemble, integrate, test, install and
commission, use repair, overhaul, support and maintain the license product.
Design data shall include the details that are needed to give design disposition
during production on deviation/concession; modify/upgrade the licence
product and substitute parts and systems of the licence product as required
by the certifying agency and the production agency.
(d) The OEM is required to provide the latest version of Configuration Control
Document which will provide detailed break down of the product structure in
terms of lower level sub-systems/assemblies/sub-assemblies/modules/detail
parts/PVBs/wiring diagrams etc. with their latest modification status.
(e) Vendor should submit an undertaking that he would provide & support
complete ToT for phased manufacture to the buyer or his authorized Indian
Organisation for the System and its sub-systems, modules, assemblies and
detailed parts/components.
(f) Vendor should submit an agreement that the buyer or his authorized Indian
organisation reserves the right to approach directly the OEMs of the Sub-
Systems for similar ToT agreements and that as a Main Contractor he will
provide total support.
86

8787
(g) (To be included on as required basis) Vendor should submit a note to exceed
budgetary price for the Transfer of Technology covering the following
parameters:—
(i) License fee.
(ii) Documentation.
(iii) T echnical Assistance.
(iv) Training.
(v) Materials.
(vi) Spares.
(vii) T ooling.
(viii)  Special Tools.
(ix) S tandard Tools.
(x) Ground Support & Test Equipment.
(xi) Programme Management.
Vendor may note that this not to exceed budgetary price will be used for
commercial evaluation. Vendor selected after technical & commercial evaluation
will enter into detailed contractual negotiations on various aspects of the Transfer
of Technology to the buyer or his authorized Indian Organisation based on the
never exceed budgetary quotes.
(h) It is likely that some of the assemblies/sub-assemblies/modules/PCBs used
in the realization of higher level assemblies/sub-systems and systems are
manufactured by the OEMs vendors/sub-contractors based on Engineering
documentation provided by the OEM. It is also likely that some of these
assemblies/modules/PCBs are developed by the OEMs vendors/sub-
contractors based on procurement specifications provided by the OEM and
therefore their engineering/manufacturing documentation file may not exist
with the OEM. Further, as a result of multiplicity of technologies involved
and for reasons for price competitiveness arising due to economies of scale,
some of the items used in the manufacture of licensed product may be brought
out by the OEM from vendors as ‘fully finished’ against the procurement
specification provided by him.
(i) Although, not desirable, some of the components/process specifically
developed by the OEMs for use in the manufacture of licensed product may
be classified by them as ‘Proprietary’ and not included within the scope of
ToT offered to the Production Agency.
(j) To bring in a fair comparison between the ToT offered by various OEMs as
also to have a fair assessment of the depth of technology being transferred,
OEMs are required to identify each item (system/sub-system/assembly/sub-
assembly/module/detail parts/PCB etc.) in the product structure under the

8888
following categories, as may be applicable and provide information on the
relative price for each of the items in the product structure as percentage of
product cost.
(i) C ategory-1 . Items for which complete ToT i.e. Engineering and
Manufacturing documentation to enable the Production Agency carryout
fabrication, assembly and test of the item from raw material/ lowest
component level is being provided by the OEM, may be classified under
the head “CTOT”.
(i) Category-2. Items which are manufactured by the OEM’s Sub-contractors
based on engineering documentation provided by the OEM and these
Engineering Documentation are being provided by the OEM to the
Production Agency, may also be classified under the head “CTOT”.
(iii) Category-3.
(aa) Items in respect of which development and manufacture by the OEM
has been sub-contracted to its vendors/sub-contractors based on only
the procurement specifications provided by him and the OEM is not in
a position to provide any additional technical information to the
Production Agency except the procurement drawings/specifications
povided by him to his vendors/sub-contractors, may be classified under
the head Single Vendor “Sub-contract”. For the purpose of evaluating
the depth of ToT, it will be presumed that the ToT in respect of these
items for indigenous manufacture is not provided.
(ab) However in case, the OEM in collaboration with his vendor/sub-
contractor, is able to provide the Production Agency, Maintenance
Documentation, the recommended list of spares for repair and overhaul
as may be applicable and maintenance training at the vendor’s/sub-
contractor’s premises, then such items may be classified under the
head ‘Limited ToT for maintenance support’ i.e. “M-ToT”.
(iv) Category-4.
(aa) Items including catalogue/standard items sourced by the OEM against
his procurement specifications as ‘Fully Finished’, may be classified as
“Bought Out”. Evidently ToT for such items for indigenous manufacture
will not be available and the OEM will be able to provide only the
procurement drawings/specifications. OEM has to ensure the
availability of such items or its equivalents during the life cycle of the
product. However, in respect of some of the selected items in this
category, if the OEM, in collaboration with his vendor, is able to provide
the Production Agency documentation for maintenance, recommended
list of spares for repair and overhaul as may be applicable and
maintenance training in the vendor’s premises, then such items may
also be classified under the head ‘limited ToT for maintenance support’
i.e. “M-ToT”.

8989
(ab) OEM shall ensure periodical review of obsolescence, study of the Bill
of Items (BOIs) and provide a retrieval scheme during the life span of
the product.
(v) Category-5. Some of the items for which the ownership of Design and
Manufacturing Documentation is available with the OEM, but the OEM is
not willing to transfer the technology to the Production Agency may be
classified under the head ‘Proprietary’ items. The list of such items shall
be far and few and generally restricted to components/processes
specifically developed by the OEM for the licensed product. No item in
the product structure which is critical either from the technology point of
view or from the point of view of significant value addition or which
constitutes a significant relative percentage of the product cost (say 10%),
will be acceptable under the head “Proprietary items”. Further, at any
stage during the life cycle of the Product, if the OEM intends to discontinue
the production of Proprietary items, the complete technical documentation
in respect of these items available with the OEM or his sub-contractors
will be passed on to the Production Agency to enable indigenous
manufacture or establish alternative routes of meeting the requirement.
(l) The OEMs have to ensure that the depth of Technology being transferred
shall enable the Production Agency achieve value addition commensurate
with a minimum 60% of the relative cost of the licensed Product through
indigenous manufacture.
(m) No single sub-system/assembly/sub-assembly which constitutes more than
10% of the cost of Licensed product, shall be without ToT option to the
Production Agency. In case, such a sub-system/assembly belongs to the
‘Bought Out’ category, then the OEM as a prime bidder of the licensed product
shall bid in consortium with the concerned vendors with separate ToT proposal
for which items included in the bid directly from the relevant vendor. The bid
for supplied/ToT in such a case shall be evaluated as an integrated composite
proposal.
(n) OEM shall assist the production agency and take the lead to obtain
maintenance related ToT to the maximum extent possible in respect of items
covered under category 3 and 4, from his vendor/sub-contractors.
2. Evaluation of ToT.
(a) In the technical bid, the depth of ToT being provided will be evaluated for
comparison purpose as given below:
(i) Relative Percentage of cost of Category 1 items
(individual & composite) not less than 60%
(ii) Relative Percentage of cost of Category 2 items
(individual & composite)
}

9090
(iii) Relative Percentage of cost of Category 3 items
(individual & composite)
(iv) Relative Percentage of cost of Category 4 items
(individual & composite)
(v) Relative Percentage of cost of Category 5 items} not more than 15%
(b) Total percentage of (i) to (v) should be 100%.
(c) Bids of Vendors with relative percentage of cost of items manufactured
indigenously based on ToT being higher than the minimum specified 60%
during the IM Phase will only be considered further for commercial evaluation.
3. Phased Manufacturing Programme.
(a) Based on the phased ToT absorption planned by production agency,
quantity—will be supplied as Fully Finished during Phase-o, quantity—as
SKD Kit duing Phase-1, quantity—as CKD Kit during Phase-2 and quantity—
as IM Kit during Phase-3. Illustrative phase definitions are given below:—
(i) Phase-0.  Shall be based on supply of Fully Assembled and tested product
by the OEM.
(ii) Phase-1.  Shall be based on supply of Semi Knocked down (SKD) Kits
provided by the OEM. The Semi Knocked Down Kit will consist of sub-
systems, assemblies, sub-assemblies, modules, etc assembled and tested
by the OEM and /or his vendors/sub-contractors. The Production Agency
will perform the final level assembly and testing of the product.
(iii) Phase-2.  Shall be based on supply of Completely Knocked Down (CKD)
Kits provided by the OEM in the form of unassembled Bill of Materials
CKD Kit may include certain components/sub-assemblies Commercially
available “Off The Shelf” (COTS) from multiple vendors as fully finished
items. Production Agency will carry out assembly and test of individual
PCBs/ Modules/ Sub-assemblies/ Assemblies/ Sub-systems etc. from
component level and then carry out final assembly and testing of the
product.
(iv) Phase-3.  Shall be based on supply of proprietary items [IM Kit] by the
OEM. Production Agency will perform procurement of all the components/
raw materials, and carry out complete fabrication, assembly and testing of
the product from raw materials/ component stage through various stages
of manufacture.
(b) The time frame for completion of supplies by the OEM for various Phases of
manufacturing is provided at Annexure 1. Conformance of the vendor to the
time schedule provided in Annexure 1 will be one of the important Evaluation
Criterion and the bids of OEM’s not meeting the time schedules are liable to
be rejected.
(c) OEM shall provide complete configuration of SKD, CKD and IM Kits to the
Production Agency to realize the Fully Finished Product. CKD Kits required
to meet the spares requirement may be furnished separately. The OEM shall
}
not more than 25%

9191
also provide estimated man-hours required for various stages of fabrication,
assembly and test to realize the Licensed Product from SKD Kit during Phase-1,
CKD Kit during Phase-2 and IM kit during Phase-3.
(d) OEM shall permit the production agency to sub contract components/
assemblies to sub contractors of production agency/ agencies. ToT shall be
such that the production agency is able to procure components/
subassemblies/raw material/test equipment directly from OEM’s
subcontractors/vendors.
4. Itemised Price List (IPL) .  The OEM shall provide Itemised parts list in the
technical Bid and itemized price list (IPL) totaling to end product unit cost in Commercial
Bid. Man hours required during various phases of manufacture to realize the fully
finished product shall also be provided. The prices of raw materials, components,
fabricated parts, standard items, bought out items, Proprietary items as may be relevant
shall be provided for various phases of manufacturing programme. The list shall include
the source of supply of raw material/components, standard items, BOIs and the ToT
shall include authorization to production agency to procure these items directly from
the sources without going through OEM. (While this information may be possible for
less complex products, it may not be possible if the itemized price list is very voluminous
e.g. aircraft to be manufactured under ToT. Therefore this para of the draft procedure
may have to be suitably modified on a case to case basis).
5. Supply of Documentation.
(a) The ToT Documentation to be provided by the OEM shall be in English
language and include documentation under the following heads:— (In case
of procurement from Russian vendors, they may be asked to quote translation
charges separately to enable the production agencies to decide whether to
undertake the translation themselves or to seek the English version of the
documentation from the vendor).
(i) Engineering documentation.
(ii) Software documentation.
(iii) Manufacturing documentation.
(iv) T est documentation.
(v) Technical Manuals.
(vi) General documentation including Company standards, National and
International standards and specifications.
(vii) Additional documentation for repairs centre.
(viii) Illustrated parts catalogue.
(ix) Design data-stress, fatigue, performance, qualification, environmental test,
life (calendar/ total/ overhaul), where applicable.
(x) Source identification for BOIs and subcontracted items; standard parts
consumables etc.

9292
(xi) Spares parts lists and price catalogue for O,I, and D level maintenances.
(xii) Recertification/requalification test plan, series test, special category test
due to change in venue of manufacture where applicable.
(xiii)  “Red band” units, calibration stands where applicable.
(xiv) Quality pocedures, plans, ESS, Special tests during production other than
ATP.
(xv) Data on reliability—FMECA, MTBF, MTBO, MTBUR, MTBR.
(b) The details/definition of Documentation to be provided by the OEM under
the above heads is enclosed at Annexure-2.
(c) The OEM is required to furnish ‘Compliance Statement’ in respect of each
type of detailed Documentation requirement listed at Annexure-2. Non-
Compliance by the OEM against any of the documentation requirements
depending upon its criticality will have an adverse bearing in the evaluation
of ToT proposal.
(d) The documentation to be supplied by the OEM shall be that which is used by
the OEM or it sub-contractors for the purpose of manufactuing, assembly
and testing of the licensed product in their Plant. The OEM will ensure
completeness and exhaustiveness of the documentation for the purpose and
work to be performed by the Production Agency for manufacturing,
assembling, testing, installation and commissioning, maintenance and overhaul
of the licensed product in his plant. Wherever approval of certification agency
is relevant, approved documents will be provided. Certification standards as
far as possible will be relevant MIL Specs or as mutually agreed with the
User’s Certification Agency.
(e) Documentation as detailed in Annexure-2 to enable the Production Agency
procure, manufacture, operate and maintain the SMTs, STEs, Tools, Jigs and
Fixtures required for the FF/SKD/CKD manufacturing phase, shall be provided.
Wherever software is used, details of the software as per documentation
listed at Annexure-2 including Source Code shall be provided.
(f) The OEM shall also provide the data in respect of MTBF, MTBO, MTBR, and
Reliability of the product being offered.
6. Product Upgrades. Technical data including relevant Documentation update in
respect of any modifications/improvements/upgrades undertaken by the OEM in the
licensed product during the entire life cycle of the product/licence Agreement shall be
provided to the Production agency at no additional cost during the entire life cycle of
the product.
7. Training.
(a) As part of ToT, Industrial Training required by the Production Agency to
realise the Fully Finished Product from SKD, CKD and IM kits and for
provoding component level maintenance support to the Customer shall be

9393
provided by the OEM. The Industrial Training shall be in English language,
comprehensive, covering all aspects of design, Manufacture, software,
installation and commissioning, system integration and checkout, and
component level maintenance of the product down to sub-assembly, modules
and PCB level. Apart from classroom training covering the critical aspects,
due emphasis will be given to on-the-job training.
(b) All aspects of software are to be comprehensively covered during the software
training module with a view to enable Production Agency’s Software Engineers
undergoing training to acquire skills in the use, maintenance and update of
the software.
(c) Industrial Training shall be in OEM’s plants, and/ or in the plants of its sub-
contractors, associates, principals and subsidiaries as the case may be. OEM
shall ensure that such training is organized at the time when OEM has the
product under production in its plant or in the plant of its vendors.
(d) OEM shall provide complete details of Industrial Training programme which
will include scope, location, number of trainees and the duration for each
phase of training in terms of instructor man weeks. Such Industrial Training
programme shall be mutually agreed upon between OEM and Production
Agency.
(e) Details of the training shall be sub divided into batches with the date of start
for each batch, duration of training etc, as will be agreed upon by OEM and
Production Agency subject to over all training schedule. Operation and
Maintenance training for end user shall also be provided.
(f) Details of Industrial and user Training programme recommended by the OEM
shall be provided as an annex to the technical proposal. OEM shall provide
details regarding the training aids and simulators required at the production
agency and at user locations. Long term training of production agencies at
the design departments of OEMs shall also be included to give a complete
exposure to them on design practices of OEM. This will help in design liaison
support including/ upgrade Mods/ Troubleshooting/ concessions during
the entire life cycle of the product.
8. Technical Assistance.  As part of ToT, OEM shall provided requisite technical
assistance to the production agency during the phased manufacturing programme of
the product in India. The details of such technical assistance considered necessary by
the OEM shall be provided as an annex to the technical proposal. The total Technical
Assistance package shall be in number of man weeks spread over number of missions.
OEM shall provide question/ answer service and modification advices during the life
cycle of the product at no additional cost.
9. Special Maintenance Tools (SMTs) and Special Text Equipment (STEs).
(a) OEM shall provide complete technical data of the SMTs and STEs used in
the Production assembly, test and Maintenance of Product. This information
shall also include the data for manufacture and maintenance of the

9494
SMTs and STEs. Details on manufacturing hours and cost details are to be
provided.
(b) Details of special category test (recertification, production series testing)
along with test rig/test set up shall also be provided. Wherever software is
used, details of the software including Source Code shall be provided.
(c) OEM shall provide details of calibration and periodicity of calibration in
respect of SMTs and STEs. Details of master tester and associated special
facilities required for this purpose (with source of supplies) will be provided
by the OEM.
10. Consumables.  List of consumables required for the manufacture/maintenance
of product along with cost, source details and life data shall be provided.
11. Special Technologies/Processes.   The OEM shall mention in the ToT proposal
about special technologies and special coatings and treating processes along with
details of plant and machinery/running cost etc. vis-a-vis specific components/
assemblies. For identifying the augmentation needs to plant and machinery available
with the production agency, if required vendor specialists shall visit production agency
before submission of technical and commercial bid.
12. Product Support.   OEM shall ensure that the product support including supply
of spares and management of obsolescence for the life of the product (minimum
20 years) shall be available to the production agency/its customer. OEM shall also
provide a proposal for transferring the complete product support to the production
agency in a phased manner.
13. Commercial Proposal.  The commercial proposal should be submitted in a
separate sealed cover.
14. Transfer of Technology (ToT). OEM shall provide commercial offer for providing
complete Know-How and documentation for the manufacturing of product from FF,
SKD, CKD Kits and IM phase, Industrial Training and Technical Assistance and the
required rights, licenses and authorization to manufacture, use and sell the product.
For the Industrial Training and Technical Assistance phase; man week rate for providing
training/technical assistance in OEM’s own plant(s) or in India may be separately
provided.
15. Supplies
(a) FF, SKD and CKD and IM Kits. OEM shall provide itemized price list for
supply of FF, SKD, CKD and IM Kits inclusive of the production mortality
used by the OEM during manufacture of product in its plants: Itemised price
break-up upto component level is to be provided at the time of signing of the
TAC.
(b) SMTs, STEs, Tools, Jigs and Fixtures. OEM shall also provide complete list
with itemised prices for SMTs  STEs, Tools, Jigs and Fixtures required for the
SKD, CKD and IM manufacturing phase and ‘O’ level, ‘I’ level and ‘D’ level
maintenance of Product by the User/Customer.

9595
(c) Bought Out/Outsourced/Subcontracted Items. — OEM shall provide the
complete list of items, which are bought out/outsourced/subcontracted for
use in the manufacture of PRODUCT along with itemized prices and details of
the sources for procurement. Authorization for direct procurement by the
production agency from these sources shall be given so that no development
cost or NRE charges are incurred. In case where suggested sources decline
to supply the components/materials, OEM shall suggest alternate sources
for the procurement of suitable equivalent components/materials.
(d) Life Cycle Cost.—OEM shall provide the estimated LIFE CYCLE COST of the
product and the basis thereof. Factors such as operational hours/year, MTBF,
requirement of maintenance spares, mandatory replacements during preventive
maintenance schedules etc. may be considered for arriving at life cycle cost.
(e) Spares.—The OEM shall provide itemized price list of spares required as per
three levels of maintenance of PRODUCT as follows:—
(i) ‘O’ level:____ set per___ {product} (total ___ {product} sets) at field
units:
(ii) ‘I’ level:___set each for a group of {product} (___ sets for __ __
{product}) at Intermediate level of maintenance; and
(iii)  ‘D’ level: ____ set for____ {product} at Depot level maintenance.
(iv) OEM should assist the production agency for indigenisation of spares
and also provide equivalent NATO code wherever applicable.
16. Payment Terms. OEM shall provide the terms of payment for all supplies
including TOT forming part of its commercial proposal. Specimen Format for Providing
Prices is at Annexure 3. [Alternatively MoD Standard Payment Terms applicable to
such RFP’s may be specified]
17. Delivery Schedule.  OEM shall provide complete schedule for transfer of
documentation, providing of Industrial Training and Technical Assistance supply FF,
SKD, CKD Kits, Spares, SMTs, STEs, Tools, Jigs and Fixtures to match the overall
delivery requirement for manufacture and supply of FF product by the Production
Agency. The Documentation for a specific phase shall be provided one month prior to
the commencement of training for that phase to enable the trainees study documentation
prior to the training. Specimen format for providing delivery schedule is at Annexure
1.
18. Liquidated Damages.  OEM shall undertake to complete its obligations in
accordance with the contractual delivery schedule. For delay in delivery of FF, SKD,
CKD IM Kits, Spares, SMTs and STEs and delays in the implementation of PMP
caused by or attributable to the OEM, the Production agency shall be entitled to claim
of liquidated damages.
19. Warranty.
(a) Documentation: OEM shall warrant that the documentation supplied shall be
identical, complete and of equal quality as the documentation used by him in

9696
its own activities and shall be accurate and complete for manufacturing,
assembling, integrating and testing of the product and shall provide  updates
including Mods/improvements during the life cycle of the product/tenure of
the Licence Agreement.
(b) Material/equipment/kit spupply: Items supplied should be free from any
defects arising from faulty material. design or workmanship and should be
guaranteed for quality/satisfactory performance for a period of minimum 24
months calendar months from the date when the stores are delivered to
Production Agency. During this warranty period, defects arising from faulty
material, design or workmanship, shall be remedied by OEM at his own cost.
If it becomes necessary, the OEM should replace any defective portion of the
goods or replace the material/equipment as a whole without any additional
cost to production Agency.
20. Infringement. OEM shall indemnify and protect at its own cost, the production
agency in respect of cost/claims/legal claims/liabilities arising from third party claim
with regard to the existence of any patent or intellectual & industrial property right of
any such parties in India or from other countries.
21. Performance Guarantee. OEM shall guarantee the performance of the product
to design specifications at the production agency/end customer locations.
22. Validity. The proposal will be kept valid for acceptance for a minimum period
of______ months from the date of submission (as per the main REP document).
23. Cross Reference of Para Wise Technical Bid to Commercial Bid. This should
be made available by OEM in the price bid.
24. Technical Collaboration Agreement (TCA) .After the PNC is concluded, the
OEM shall enter into a detailed Technical Collaboration Agreement (TCA) with
Production Agency incorporating mutually agreed terms and conditions.

ANNEXURE 1
SPECIMEN FORMATS FOR PROVIDING DELIVERY SCHEDULE
DELIVERY SCHEDULE
No. Description Qty Month Remarks
After
Effective
Date
1. Documentation transfer in lots for each
phase.*
2. Training including final assembly of
SKD/CKDs to FF (for each phase)
3. Operation & Maintenance course training
4. Test Equipment delivery
5. First System FAT and delivery
6. Spare Parts delivery (‘O’ Level Spares)
7. Spare Parts delivery (‘I’ Level Spares)
8. Spare Parts delivery (‘D’ Level Spares)
9. Test Equipment delivery for SKD and CKDs
10. SKD Kits delivery (— kits per month)
11. CKD Kits delivery ( —kits per month)
12. IM Kits delivery ( —kits per month)
*Documentation for each phase shall be supplied one month prior to start of training of that phase .
97

DOCUMENTATION DETAILS TO BE PROVIDED BY OEM
1. Engineering Documentation.
(a) Product Network Structure.
(b) Parts List.
(c) Part Electrical Lists.
(d) Part Drawings.
(e) Assembly Drawings.
(f) Cable looking diagram including its part list, connectors and end preparation
details.
(g) Configuration Control; Document.
(h) Stress Reports (static/fatigue), performance reports, type test Schedule/
records, type test certificate.
(i) For Coils and Transformer: Winding details, mechanical drawing, purchased
parts specification, details of special processes, moulding tools etc.
(j) Drawings of castings/ forgings with material details, vendor information heat
treatment details.
(k) Details of vendor items specifically developed for the Licensed Product.
(l) For PCB Cards: Schematics, General Assembly Drawings, Assembly
instructions, PCB blank documents, Drilling Drawings, Punch tape and master
film complete with Gerber data, SMD location processing files including CAE/
CAM files.
(m) Engineering Change proposals covering details of modifications
(n) Wiring List and details including schematics of sub-assembly/modules/
drawers/racks.
(o) Bill of Materials and Ordering Specification with vendor addresses including
OEMS specifying MIL grade details.
(p) Details of all non-MIL Grade components and their screening procedures.
(q) Full technical details of ASICS and Hybrid Microcircuits including
manufacturing documents.
(r) Full technical details of Proprietary Items if any (including manufacturing
documents).
ANNEXURE 2
98

9999
(s) List of components where traceability records are important.
(t) Details of environment tests carried out on equipment and its sub-systems.
(u) With respect to FPGAs the following details are required.
(v) ACTEL or SRAM (depending on the manufacture) design files and the
complete schematic with i/o details—in the form of a timing diagram of sim
files.
(w) Material data sheets—chemical composition/mechanical-properties-for all
metallic/non-metallic materials and consumables.
2.  Software Documentation
(a) Software Requirement Specification.
(b) Interface design document.
(c) Software Product Specification including Source code with comments.
(d) Interface design document.
(e) Software Change proposals.
(f) Firmware support manual for embedded software.
(g) Software environment/tools including third party procurements.
(h) Software Test procedure.
(i) Software User Manual.
(j) Software installation procedure including user settings of pass words, site
specific data and any customization code/key or encryption.
(k) IV & V details (independent verification & validation).
3. Manufacturing Documentation
(a) Operation sequence sheets.
(b) Details of B/FPGA programming and testing with co-ordinate detail for
placement. Programming file (fuse file in the standard format), Programming
Platform Configuration—tools and associated version control document,
verification document with check sum details.
(c) Process Sheets including details of special processes and finishes.
(d)  Complete set of drawings for tooling jigs and fixtures.
(e) Programme for production (e.g. NC tapes/ s/w as applicable).
(f) Photographs of wiring harness/bundling level.
(g) List of shop consumables with details of specifications; source of
procurements, data on shelf life.

100100
(h) Assembly tree/sequence, assembly process sheets including assembly
settings and checks, assessments to be made, matching sub assemblies
markings.
(i) Any special manufacturing facilities to be set up indicating plant and
machinery, test  equipment and their vendor details and cost.
(j) Estimated man-hour requirements for fabrication, assembly and testing at
sub-system level.
(k) Inspection stages, quality plan details of inspection equipment, gauges etc.
(l) Calibration procedures for inspection equipment, gauges, heat treatment &
process equipment (furnace/baths).
4. Test Documentation
(a) Factory Test specification, procedure and acceptance  test specification,
procedure for PCBs, modules and equipment with detail instructions on test
set up, use of test and/or simulation equipment and software, execution of
test with recording of results.
(b) Complete set of drawings for manufacture of test jigs including ATE fixtures,
programmes as applicable.
(c)  Complete set of drawings for special to test equipment. This will include
manufacturing details as well as software documents.
(d) Special category test details (recertification, production  series testing, quality
assurance testing).
(e) “Red band” units, calibration procedures for test rigs/equipment.
5. Technical manuals
(a) User hand book detailing operational use of equipment.
(b) Installation and commissioning manual.
(c) Technical description of PCB, Modules, drawers, racks, etc., with details of
block diagram, schematic general assembly drawing, timing details, PROM
etc.
(d) Maintenance Manual covering.
(e) Permissible wornout dimension limits, acceptance test procedure and
acceptance limits of overhauled product.
(f) Repair/salvage schemes, mandatory replacement parts.
Periodic maintenance.
(g) Trouble shooting and fault diagnosis manual. Testing and repair procedure
for faulty PCBs upto  component level and Peripheral equipment received
from the customer.

101101
(h) Overhauling manuals including details tests, adjustment, calibration tuning
etc., for all levels of equipment.
(i) Structural Part list for complete equipment.
(j) The Maintenance Manual shall cover the product for which the file of
drawings/documents are given as well as all vendor items which are part of
Licensed Product.
6. General Documentation (including Standards and Specifications)
(a) Standard inspection method (inward goods in-process and final acceptance.)
(b) Material/component and product standards including general fasteners and
consumables.
(c) Process standards/procedures.
(d) Workmanship standards/procedures.
(e) Quality standards/procedures including incoming inspection procedures,
quality manuals.
(f) General procedures.
(g) Qualified Vendor Lists.
(h) Standard tools, jigs and fixtures.
(i) Design standards/company standards.
(j) ISO 9001 certification of OEM, vendors & subcontractors/ISO 14000
certification.
7. Additional Documentation. Repair centre documents including details of Test
Instruments, Jigs, fixtures etc., for the End User.
8. Documentation shall be provided in the form of hard copy, in microfilm/microfisch
and magnetic media, including that required for making copies of technical manuals as
specified by the customer. Documentation shall be provided in English Language.

ANNEXURE 3
SPECIMEN  FORMATS  FOR  PROVIDING  PRICES  INFORMATION
1. TOT
Item Price Remarks
(a) Know-how and documentation USD— Payment shall be subject to
deduction of taxes in India as per
Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreement in accordance with the
following schedule (depending on
the product, various stages of
payments should be included
without indicating the quantum of
payment):
5. Stage 1.....
6. Stage 2.....
7. Stage 3.....
8. .....
(b) Training
(a) Industrial Training covering USD—
*Instructor man day/weekrate
all aspects for TOT at OEM’s facility. Upto—trainees Max
(i) FF Phase
— working days/week
(ii) SKD Phase working days/week
(iii) CKD Phase—working days/week Upto—trainees Max
(iv) IM Phase—working days/week Upto—trainees Max
(v) Training on design liaison, Upto—trainees Max
design practices, design Upto—trainees Max
disposition on concessions/
deviation.
(b) Operational/Field Maintenance
Training
(i) —working days/week in— Upto—trainees and—
and Customer trainees  Max
(ii) —working days/week in India Upto-trainees and—
Customer trainees  Max
102

103103
(c) Technical Assistance in OEM’s USD—* Maximum
Plant to be availed as required (Man day/
week rate) No. of manweeks—spread over
No. of mission
Total
*Minimum mandatory Training and Technical Assistance which can be provided at no additional
cost to be indicated.
2. Cost of FF SKD and CKD Kits, spares and SMT/STEs.
Item Unit Qty. T otal Remarks
Price in Price in
USD USD
(a) —System
(a) Fully Finished System
(b) SKD Kits
(c) CKD Kits
(b) Spares
(a) ‘O’ Level
(b) ‘I’ Level
(c) ‘D’ Level
(c) SMT’s/STE’s*
(a) Test Jigs/Software for
‘O’ level maintenance
(b) Test Jigs/Software for
‘I’ level maintenance
(c) Test Jigs/Software for
‘D’ level maintenance
(d) Test Jigs and Software for
manufacture under TOT
Total
*Excluding Standard Test
Equipment
Item Price Remarks

104104
3. Itemised SKD Kit Price
Part No. Description  Qty. Price in USD
4. Itemised CKD Kit Price
Part No. Description  Qty. Price in USD
5. List of Special Maintenance Tools (SMTs) and Special Test Equipments (STEs)
Part No. Description Model MFR. Qty. Price in USD Remarks
(a)  SMTs and STEs required for Maintenance
(b) TOT Test Equipment
6. List of Single Source Vendor Assemblies/Components and Propreitary Items
Components P/N Price in USD V endor
(a) Single Source Vendor items
(b) Proprietary Items
7. Spares
(a) ‘O’ Level spare parts list: —
No. Item Description Qty. per set Item Price T otal Price
in USD in USD
Total
(b) ‘I’ Level spare parts list: —
No. Item Description Qty. per set Item Price in USD Total Price
in USD in USD
Total
(c) ‘D’ Level spare parts list:  —
No. Item Description Qty. per set Item Price in USD Total Price
in USD in USD
Total

ANNEXURE II
MOST IMMEDIATE
AUDIT PARA
MINISTRY OF DEFENCE
Subject: Finalisation of Action Taken Notes on Pending Audit Paras.
C&AG have invited attention towards huge pendency and inordinate delays in the
submission of ATNs by the Ministries/Departments in respect of Audit Paras covered
under 105th Report of the PAC and other C&AG Reports, and have requested Ministries/
Departments for  ensuring that ATNs duly vetted by Audit are submitted to the Lok
Sabha Secretariat. The inordinate delay in furnishing ATNs by Ministry of
Defence continues to be a matter of serious concern with PAC. In case of unavoidable
delay in finalization of ATNs, extension of time may be sought in each case from PAC
indicating inter alia the reasons of delay. The Audit has also emphasized that the
Ministry or concerned organisation should point out failure of individuals and
deficiency in system to prevent delay in submission of ATNs in each case. It is,
therefore, requested that immediate steps may kindly be taken in Ministry of Defence
to finalise the ATNs pending in respect of Audit Paras and submit them to Monitoring
Cell of Ministry of Finance after duly vetted by Audit without further delay. Defence
Secretary had also emphasized the point in the last meeting convened by him on
5.12.2001.
Sd/-
(K. G .  GOEL)
Joint Secretary (ESW)
JS (G) —  In respect of Army & Air Force
JS (O) — In respect of ‘O’ Naval Wings
JS (AP) — In respect of Defence Procurement Board
JS (Trg.) & CAO)
JS (E)
JS (P&C)
JS (Coord.) — In respect of DDP&S
CCR&D — In respect of DRDO
Secy. BRDB
MOD I.D. No. 21(10)/2001/D(Coord.) dated the 23rd April, 2002
Dir. (Pen.), Dir. (Works), Dir. (Res.) for similar action
105

ANNEXURE III
NO. 3(1)/2001/D(S-II)
Government of India
Ministry of Defence
(Department of Defence Production & Supplies)
South Block, New Delhi
July 17, 2003.
OFFICE MEMORANDUM
Subejct: Rationalisation of DRDO Laboratories.
Consequent upon the acceptance of the recommendations of the Group of
Ministers on National Security regarding Rationalisation of DRDO Laboratories, the
Government had constituted a Group of Officers vide DDP&S OM No. 3(1)/2001/D
(S-II) dated 14.8.2001 to examine the issue and made its recommendations to the Defence
Minister for his consideration. The Group of Officers after due deliberations have
made their recommendations under three headings given here as under:—
1. DRDO Laboratories
2. Interaction between the DRDO and the Services
3. DRDO and Production Agencies
2. On the basis of these recommendations, the role and functions of DRDO
Laboratories is redefined with the establishment of new fora as given here under the
aforesaid three headings.
(1). DRDO Laboratories
(A) Clustering of laboratories in the same generic areas shall be formalised in
order to maximise interaction with laboratories with similar works and to
minimise duplication of work. These clusters would have Councils internal to
DRDO, Chaired by the DGR&D or CCR&D. These clusters will be for
 Aeronautical, Agricultural Sciences, Biosciences, Combat Engineering,
Computer Science, Electronic, Material Sciences, Missiles and Naval Sciences.
The details of these clusters are given in Appendix-IX.
The Terms of Reference for these Councils will be as follows:—
— To provide thrust to the development of the core technologies.
— To synergise the working of the labs in the cluster.
— To address common technological and project related issues.
— To address common techno-managerial issues.
The Council shall meet thrice a year.
106

107107
(B) It has also been decided to constitute 3 Integrated Research Councils (IRCs)
for Service Laboratories. The IRCs decided to be constituted are:—
(i) For agricultural and food sciences comprising of the following labs—
DFRL, FRL., DARL.
(ii) For Life and biosciences comprising of the following laboratories—INMAS,
DIPAS, DIPR, DEBEL, DRDE, DRLT
(iii) For high altitute engineering and logistics comprising of the following
labs—SASE; FRI, DIPAS, R&D (E), DMSRDE. The compostion of these
Councils has been given in Appendices I, II & III.
The Terms of Reference of the IRCs will be as follows:—
(i) To provide R&D direction to the requirement of users in short, medium
and long term in the respective area.
(ii) To recommend science and technological plans of the laboratories.
(iii) To monitor the progress in the area of interest and submit a report on the
same.
(iv) To make recommendations on the infrastructure and other managerial
requirements of the laboratories.
The IRCs will meet thrice a year and their recommendations will be sent to DG, R&D
for implementation.
2. Interaction between the DRDO and the Services
In order to ensure effective interaction between DRDO & Services, the following
has been decided:—
(a) Review of DRDO Projects
There shall be biannual review of all major projects/programmes by the respective
Vice-Chiefs. Review reports shall be submitted to DG R&D and the respective Chiefs.
(b) Monitoring of Staff Projects
(i) There shall be regular monitoring of Staff projects by specially constituted
Steering Committees as has already been done in most projects. These
Steering Committees shall be chaired by nominated PSOs and co-chaired by
the associated CCR&D.
(ii) Most major projects and programmes, especially those jointly funded by
DRDO and the Services, have multi-tier monitoring structures with the Apex
Committee being chaired by SA to RM and the Executive Committees chaired
by Vice or Deputy Chiefs.
(iii) Major programmes like LCA and Missiles have a Board structure with
sufficient Services representation.
(c) Defence R&D Panels
It has been decided to constitute the following five Defence R&D Panels:—
(i) Aeronautics R&D Panel

108108
(ii) Electronics R&D Panel (Radars, Communication & EW)
(iii) Electro Optics R&D Panel
(iv) Armament and Combat Engineering R&D Panel
(v) Naval Systems R&D Panel
The compostion of these R&D Panels has been given in Appendices IV , V, VI, VII &
VIII respectively.
The Terms of Reference for these R&D Panels shall be as follows:—
(i) To make recommendations on systems and technologies of interest and
requirement to the three Services, that could be developed indigenously.
(ii) to provide long-term vision to these laboratories and link services
Perspective Plans to DRDO technology development.
(iii) To dif ferentiate between high and low end technologies and identify
appropriate agencies to develop these technologies.
(iv) To identify appropriate agencies for design and production of items of low-
end technology and product improvement (Base Workshops, V endors
developed by OF and DGQA etc.)
The R&D Panels will meet thrice in a year. Their reports will be submitted to SA to
RM. After discussion in the Defence R&D Board, the final recommenations will be
presented to the Defence R&D Council.
3. DRDO and Production Agencies
It has been decided to constitute Management Councils for the clusters mentioned
against each for creating forums to improve interaction and create synergy between
the Prodcution Agencies and DRDO laboratories and to realistically implement the
concurrent engineering process of many of the DRDO Projects:—
Generic Area Clusters (DPSU/DRDO Lab./OF)
(i) Aeronautics — HAL, *ADA, ADE, GTRE
(ii) Armaments —OF, ARDE, HEMRI, TBRI
(iii) Combat Engneering —OF, BEML, CVRDE, VRDE, (R&D (Engrs.)
(iv) Communication —BEL (Bangalore & Panchkula) CAIR, DEAL
(v) EW/A vionics — BEL (Bangalore & Hyderabad), DLRL, DARE
(vi) Missiles — BDL, DRDL, RCL, ASI
(vii) Naval  BEL, NPOL, NSTL
(viii) Radar  BEL (Bangalore & Ghaziabad) LRDE
*Selected representatives from HAL Divisions and other labs can be invited depending upon the
agenda of MC meetings.
These Management Councils would act like mini Boards of Directors and
empowered accordingly except in the exercise of financial powers. These will be chaired
by the CMDs of the DPSUs and co-chaired by the nominated CCR&D and draw
membership from DPSUs, DRDO labs. Ordnance Factories and Services. There will be

109109
a Member-Secretary of the Management Councils, who will be nominated by the
CMDS/Chairmen of the DPSUs/OFB, as the case may be. The concerned DPSUs/OFB
will seek nomination on these Councils from the associated laboratories of DRDO &
Services and notify the Management Councils, indicating the powers to  be exercised,
which should be similar to the Board of Directors of the concerned DPSU/OFB.
The Management Councils shall address the following issues:
(a) Communication and interaction
(b) Technology transfer and obsorption
(c) Concurrent Engineering, production, schedules and priorities
(d) Development and documentation
(e) Selection of vendors
(f) Technology import by the Development Agencies (DAs) and PSUs
(g) Sharing of test facilities, trials and evaluation
(h) Product improvement and upgrades
3. DRDO will progressively focus on critical technologies in which expertise is
neither available in the country nor can be procured from alternate sources. The concept
of core/critical technologies will not be static but a dynamic one.
4. I order to provide secretarial support and an interface with the Services, an officer
of the rank of Brigadier will be deputed and placed on tenure basis with the DRDO on
the Naval model. The Service concerned will provide posts for the purpose.
5. The above arrangements for interaction/nationlisation would be reviewed after a
period of two years by the Group of Officers mentioned in para 1.
6. This issues with the approval of Raksha Mantri.
Sd/-
Joint Secretary to Govt. of India
Distribution
As per list enclosed:
1. Defence Secretary
2. SA to Rm
3. Secretary (Defence Finance)
4. vice Chief of Army Staff, Army Headquarters
5. Vice Chief of Naval Staff, Naval Headquarters
6. Vice Chief of Air Staff, Air Headquarters
7. DGOA/DGAOA
8. CMDs of all DPSUs
9. Chairman, OFB, Kolkata
Copy for information to:–
1. PS to RM/RURM/RRM
2. Sr. PPS to Secretary (DP&S)
3. PPS to Addl. Secretary (DP&S)
4. All Joint Secretaries in the MOD

APPENDIX I
IRC (FOOD AND AGRICULTURE)
Quarter Master General.......Chairman
CCR&D (MLS).....Co-Chairman
DGST
DG (Remote Vet. Corps.)
DG , Military Farms
Reps. from Army, Air Force and Navy
Rep., Defence Finance
Director, Life Sciences
Directors, FRL, DARL, DFRL and DRL (T)
Coordinator at the rank of a Brigadier— Member Secretary
110

APPENDIX II
IRC (BIOMEDICAL TECHNOLOGY)
DGAFMS — Chairman
CCR&D (MLS) — Co-Chairman
DGMS (Army) or Rep.
DGMS (Navy) or Rep.
DGMS (Air Force) or Rep.
DG (Recruitment)
DDMS, Northern Command
Director,
Institute of Aviation Medicine
Rep. of  Defence Finance
Director Life Sciences
Directors DIPAS, INMAS, DEBEL, DIPR, DRDE & DRL (T)
Coordinator at the rank of a Brigadier —  Member Secretary
111

APPENDIX III
IRC (HIGH ALTITUDE LOGISTICS AND ENGINEERING)
MGO — Chairman
CC R&D (ACE) — Co-Chairman
CC R&D (NLS)
GOC14 Corps.
E-in-C
ADG-QL
DDMS Northern Command
Rep. QMG (for high altitude food supply)
Rep., Defence Finance
Director of Materials
Director of Combat Vehicle & Engineering
Directors, R&D Engineers, SASE, FRL and DMSRDE
Coordinator at the rank of a Brigadier—Member Secretary
112

APPENDIX II
IRC (BIOMEDICAL TECHNOLOGY)
DGAFMS —  Chairman
CCR&D (MLS) — Co-Chairman
DGMS (Army) or Rep.
DGMS (Navy) or Rep.
DGMS (Air Force) or Rep.
DG (Recruitment)
DDMS, Northern Command
Director,
Institute of Aviation Medicine
Rep. of Defence Finance
Director Life Sciences
Directors DIPAS, INMAS, DEBEL, DIPR, DRDE & DRL (T)
Coordinator at the rank of a Brigadier – Member Secretary
113

APPENDIX IV
AERONAUTICS R&D PANEL
VCAS/DCAS — Chairman
CC R&D (Tech) — Co-Chairman
DCNS
DCOAS
AOM
Chairman HAL
Chief Executive CEMILAC
DGAQA
Dir. Aeronautics
Directors- ADE, GTRE, ADRDE, CABS, CASSA, DMRL and DARE
Coordinator at the rank of an Air Commodore—Member Secretary.
113

APPENDIX V
ELECTRONICS R&D PANEL
(RADARS, COMMUNICA TION & EW)
DCOAS (P&S) — Chairman
CC R&D (Electronics) — Co-Chairman
SO-in-C
Rep. of  DG Artillery
Rep. of  DGAD Arty.
Rep. of  DG (MF)
DCNS
DCAS
CMD, BEL
CMD, ITI
CMD, ECIL
DGQA (Electronics)/Rep.
DG DIA/Rep.
DG EME/Rep.
Director of Electronics
Directors - LRDE, DLRL, DEAL, CAIR, DARE, ADE and DTRL + MTRDC
SSTL(?)
SAG(?)
ANUPAG (?)
Coordinator at the rank of a Brigadier—Member Secretary
114

APPENDIX VI
ELECTRO OPTICS  R&D PANEL
DCOAS (P&S) — Chairman
CC R&D (Electronics) — Co-Chairman
DG (Infantry)
Rep. of DG(MF)
DCNS
DCAS
CMD, BEL
DGQA/Rep.
Dir. of Electronics
Directors — IRDE, LASTEC, SSPL, DLRL, MTRDC and RCI
Coordinator at the rank of a Brigadier — Member Secretary
115

APPENDIX VII
ARMAMENT AND COMBAT ENGINEERING  R&D PANEL
DCOAS (P&S) — Chairman
CC R&D (ACE) — Co-Chairman
DCNS
DCAS
E-in-C
Rep. of DG EME
Rep. of DG Infantry
Rep. of DG(MF)
Rep. of DGAD, Artly.
Rep. of DG(Artillery)
Member, OFB (Armaments)
CMD, BEL
DGA
Dir. Armaments
Director (Combat Vehicles & Engineering)
Directors — ARDE, IIEMRL, PXE, TBRL, DMRL, GVRDE, VRDE, R&D Engineers,
SASETBRI, ADRDI., and DIJ
Coordinator at the rank of a Brigadier — Member Secretary
116

APPENDIX VIII
NAV AL SYSTEMS R&D PANEL
COM — Chairman
CC R&D (MNS) — Co-Chairman
ACNS(P&P)
ACOM(IT&S)
DCOAS
DCAS
Directors—NPOL, NSTL and NMRL
SA to CNS
DNRD — Member Secretary
Coordinator at the rank of a Commodore — Member Secretary
117

APPENDIX  IX
CLUSTER OF DRDO LABS
Sl. No. Cluster Group Laboratories
1. Aeronautical ADE, GTRE CABS, CEMILAC, DARE,
ADRDE, CASSA
2. Agricultural Sciences FRL, DARL, DRL, DFRL
3. Armaments ARDE, HEMRL, PXE, TBRL
4. Bio-sciences DIP AS, DIPR, INMAS, DEBEL
5. Combat Engineering CVRDE, VRDE, R&D Engrs. SASE, DTRL
6. Computer Science ANURAG, ISSA, CAIR, SAG
7. Electronics DLRL, LRDE, DEAL, IRDE, MTRDC,
LASTEC, SPL
8. Material Sciences DMRL, DMSRDE, DRDE, DLJ, CEES
9. Missiles DRDL, RCI, ASL, ITR
10. Naval Sciences NPOL, NSTL, NMRL
118

ANNEXURE-IV
No. 13984/2001-Def Secy/IC/2001
Govt. of India
Ministry of Defence
New Delhi, dated the 24th Aug, 2001
ORDER
SUBJECT: Defence Procurement Organisation
The broad structures and systems to be established in the Ministry of Defence
(MoD) to deal with acquisitions on the Capital account, consequent upon the Group
of Ministers recommendations on ‘Reforming the National Security System’ has been
approved by the RM. The management structure and the roles & functions of the
Defence Procurement Organisation are detailed in the succeeding paragraphs of this
order.
Defence Acquisitions Council (DAC):
2. An overarching structure, the DAC, under the RM  with the following composition,
will come into force with immediate effect:—
Member: RRM
CDS (when appointed)
COAS
CNS
CAS
Defence Secretary
Secretary, DDP&S
Secretary, Defence R&D
Secretary Defence Finance
VCDS (when appointed)
Special Secretary — (Acquisition)
Member Secretary: DCDS (PP&FD)/DGDPS till appointment of
DCDS(PP&FD).
3. Secretariat. Defence Staff/DGDPS till establishment of Defence Staff.
4. The DAC will take following decisions in relation to the totality of new planning
process:—
(a) Give in principle approval to Capital acquisition in the Long Term Perspective
Plan (LTPP) covering a 15 year time span at the beginning of a Five Year Plan
119

period. (This approval will in particular identify the ‘Make’ projects in the
Perspective Plan where long gestation periods are involved).
(b) Give acceptance of necessity in principle to each Capital acquisition project
in excess of RM’s powers in the forthcoming Five Year Plan at least nine
months before the commencement of the first year of that Plan. This approval
will involve the identification of
Either - ‘Buy’ Projects (outright purchase)
Or - ‘Buy and Make” projects (purchase followed by licensed
production/indigenous development)
Or - ‘Make’ Projects (Indigenous Production and R&D)
(c) Monitor the progress of major projects on a feedback from the Defence
Procurement Board which is charged with setting out annual acquisition
plans.
5. In examining all these issues, the DAC will take adequate note of the provisions
relating to the remaining period of the Long-Term Perspective Plan and the impact of
those on the present decisions. The DAC will meet as required.
6. DAC decisions will flow down for implementation to Defence Procurement Board,
Defence Production Board and Defence R&D Board.
Defence Procurement Board (DPB)
7. The DPB is constituted as follows:
Chairman: Defence Secretary
Members: Secretary DDP&S
Secretary, D(R&D)
Secretary (Defence Finance)
VCDS/Coordinating DCDS ex Defence Staff till VCDS is appointed
VCOAS
VCNS
VCAS
Special Secretary (Acquisition)
Member Secretary: Financial Advisor (DPB)
DGQA/DGAQA will attend meetings as special invitees as required. DCOAS (P&S),
DCAS(Plans) and ACNS (Policy & Plans) will attend meetings related to their respective
Integrated HQs’ acquisition proposals. The Board may co-opt other PSOs and any
other persons(s) as required.
8. Secretariat. Finance Division of Acquisition Wing/DoD.
120121121

9. The DPB will oversee all activities related to acquisition on the Capital  account
in the Department of Defence flowing out of the ‘Buy’ and ‘Buy & Make’ decisions of
the DAG , Integrated Services HQs will exercise delegated powers w.r.t. Revenue
Account. The DPB will function as the body responsible for the coordination,
supervision and monitoring of the acquisition process and will also take decisions on
such procedural aspects of revenue purchases which are brought to its attention by
Members on the Board including such areas as processess and commissioning of
specialist studies etc. The DPB should meet as required to carry out these functions.
The major roles and functions of the DPB will be:—
(a) Set out  the annual acquisition plan for the three Services (based on approval
of the Five Years Capital Acquisition Plan by DAC) for incorporation in next
Annual Budget. The DPB will consolidate acquisition proposals to arrive at
the annual figure taking into account acceptance of necessity by various
entities of MoD including Integrated Services HQs for the year ahead, carry
overs, operational exigencies and proposed changes in priority. This process
is to be completed by 30 Sept. of each year.
(b) Carrying out such amendments in the annual plan as deemed necessary on
account of operational urgencies, budgetary provisions or any other
exigencies, based on recommendations made by Integrated Services HQs/
Defence Staff.
(c) Confirm/modify the inter-se and intra-se priorities of the acquisition
proposals of the Services and recommend modifications for approval by RM
in the pattern of resource sharing on the Capital account related to acquisition
of weapons, equipment and weapon systems among the Services based on
such exigencies as operational necessity, changes in priorities, pace of
expenditure etc. Recommendations for the inter-se prioritization will flow from
Defence Staff and for intra-se prioritization from respective Integrated Services
HQs.
(d) Accord approval/recommend the scales of authorisation and usages within
RM’s powers or those requiring approval of Ministry of Finance/CCS based
on projections from Integrated Services HQs and recommended by the
Defence Staff to the Board and from DoD/DDP&S to the Board.
(e) Monitor progress of major schemes and decide on creation of ‘Equipment
Induction Cells’ in Integrated Services HQs. for specific projects in
consultation with Integrated Services Headquarters.
(f) Accord approval for procurement on ‘Single Vendor’ basis for acquisition in
excess of Rs. 50 Crores based on recommendations from Integrated Services
HQs and comments of the Acquisition Wing. Other cases will be processed
on the present model.
(g) All QRs from Integrated Services Headquarters will be divided into ‘essential’
and ‘desirable’ categories. DPB will approve waiver/amendment of
essential QRs, both for acquisition and production, after suitable analysis  in
the Acquisition Wing, if so requested by the concerned Integrated Services
121

HQs. Waiver/amendments of ‘Desirable’ categories can be done by concerned
Headquarters before completion of technical evaluation by the Technical
Managers. Any subsequent modifications will be placed before DPB for
approval. All suggestions for waiver/amendment arising from DDP&S/DRDO
must  first flow for discussions at the Integrated Services HQs. after which,
concerned Integrated Services HQs may approach the DPB.
(h) Approve emergency purchases when necessary within RM’s delegated
powers.
(i) Examine proposals from the Acquisition Wing and Integrated Services HQs
and forward recommendations to Defence (Finance) for enhancement in
delegation of financial powers on the ‘Capital’ account relating to acquisition
of weapons, equipment and weapon systems. Such proposal after due
examination by Defence (Finance) will be put up for RM’s approval through
Defence Secretary.
(j) Perform any other functions as may be allotted by the DAC/RM from time to
time.
9. DPB will examine proposals from the Acquisition Wing regarding procurement
procedures and will make the necessary changes in the procurement process after
approval by RM.
10. The procurement process to be followed shall be as laid down in the Defence
Procurement Procedure of 1992, as amended from time to time.
Defence Production Board
11. The Defence Production Board is constituted as follows:
Chairman: Secretary DP&S
Members: Defence Secretary
Secretary, D(R&D)
Secretary (Defence Finance)
VCDS/Coordinating DCDS ex-defence Staff till VCDS
is appointed
VCOAS
VCNS
VCAS
Chairman, OFB
CMD, DPSU (as required)
Member Secretary: Director P&C in DDP.
DCOAS (P&S), ACNS (Policy & Plans) and ACAS (Plans)
and other PSOs will be co-opted, when required.
12. Secretariat. DDP&S
122

13. The Defence Production Board will oversee all activities related to indigenous
manufacture under the Department of Defence Production flowing from the ‘Buy &
Make’ and ‘Make’ decisions of the DAC covering those based on Import + ToT; ToT
(including limited indigenous R&D involvement in both public and private industries).
14. Price Negotiation for all ‘Buy and Make’ projects will be led by the Acquisition
Wing supported by DDP&S.
15. The Production Board will monitor progress of all Make projects and will revert
to the DAC with  recommendations relating to alterations of the original decisions
where so warranted.
16. The Defence Production Board will provide such planning and other support to
the Defence Acquisitions Council as will enable the DAC to arrive at the optimum
decision on Licensed Production. Transfer of Technology and ab-initio production/
development.
Acquisition Wing:
17. The DPB shall be assisted in its functioning by an Acquisition Wing in the DoD
to be headed by Special Secretary (Acquisition) reproting to the Defence Secretary.
SS(A) will be delegated such financial powers, within powers delegated to RM as
approved by the Ministry of Finance from time to time. He will discharge these
delegated powers with integrated financial advice from Financial Adviser (DPB).
18. Detailed order on management structure of the Acquisition Wing, financial
powers and other related issues will be issued  separately.
Sd/-
(Yogendra Narain)
Defence Secretary
Chairman COSC, COAS CNS, CAS
Secretary (DP&S), Secretary(DR&D), Secretary
Special Secretary (Acquisition) (Def/Finance)
Copy to All Additional Secretaries, Joint Secretaries, Directors/Deputy Secretaries/
DFAs/Under Secretaries in the Ministry of Defence
Copy for kind information to:RRM, Special Adviser (Defence)
123

PART-II
MINUTES  OF  THE  THIRD  SITTING  OF  THE  PUBLIC  ACCOUNTS
COMMITTEE  (2004-2005)  HELD  ON  28  SEPTEMBER,  2004
The Committee sat from 1600 hrs. to 1745 hrs. on 28 September, 2004 in Room
No. “139”, Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra — Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Ramesh Bais
3. Shri Khagen Das
4. Shri Raghunath Jha
5. Shri Brij Bhushan Sharan Singh
6. Shri Ram Lakhan Singh
7. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
8. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
9. Shri R.K. Dhawan
10. Shri V. Narayanasamy
11. Shri C. Ramachandraiah
12. Shri Jairam Ramesh
13. Prof. R.B.S. Varma
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Joint Secretary
2. Shri Ashok Sarin — Director
3. Shri N.S. Hooda — Under Secretary
4. Smt. Anita B. Panda — Under Secretary
Office of C&AG of India
1. Smt. Anusua Basu — ADAI
2. Dr. A.K. Banerjee — Director General
3. Shri Roy S. Mathrani — Pr. Director of Audit
124

2 . xxxx xxxx xxxx
3 . xxxx xxxx xxxx
4. Before the evidence, the Committee took up for consideration and adoption of
the following reports:—
(i) Action Taken on the recommendations contained in 22nd Report of PAC (13
Lok Sabha) relating to “Delay in Operational Deployment of Imported Systems
and Development-cum-Production of a System”.
(ii) xxxx xxxx xxxx
5. The Committee adopted these draft reports without any modifications/
amendments. The Committee authorized the Chairman to finalise the draft reports in
the light of changes suggested   by Audit through factual verification, if any, or
otherwise and to present the same to the Parliament.
6.        xxxx                  xxxx                      xxxx
7.        xxxx                  xxxx                      xxxx
The Committee then adjourned.
125

APPENDIX
OBSERV ATIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
Sl. Para No. Ministry/Deptt. Observations/Recommendations
No. Concerned
12 3 4
1 4 Defence As per the prescribed procedure, the Ministry of
Defence were required to furnish the requisite
Action Taken Notes on the observations/
recommendations contained in the 22nd Report
of PAC within six months of presentation of the
Report i.e. by 23 January, 2002. In the instant case,
despite constant follow-up, the Action Taken
Notes were only furnished by the Ministry on 3
February 2004 i.e. after a lapse of more than two
years. It may be mentioned here that the
Committee in their original Report had taken strong
exception to the slackness on the part of the
Ministry in responding to draft audit paragraphs
as well as abnormal delay in furnishing the desired
information on the subject. The Committee had,
therefore recommended that the Ministry of
Defence should entrust specific responsibilities
to designated nodal officers in the respective
Departments so as to ensure that audit Paragraphs
and follow-up action thereon is processed,
coordinated and responded to properly and
expeditiously within the stipulated time frame. In
their Action Taken Note, the Ministry stated that
necessary instructions were issued to all
concerned on 23 April, 2002 emphasizing the
urgency to expedite Action Taken Notes. The
Committee however, regret to note that despite
issuance of instructions there was recurrence of
delay in the action taken stage also and obviously
the system in place is still found to be lacking and
needs further refinement. Taking a serious note
of the prevalent state of affairs, the Committee
urge the Ministry to strengthen their monitoring
mechanism in order to ensure that the laid down
procedures and instructions issued from time to
time are followed scrupulously by the authorities
126

concerned and any aberration thereto be looked
into with a view to fixing responsibility. The
Committee trust that the Ministry would initiate
appropriate measures to obviate recurrence of
such delays in future.
2. 12 Defence The Government concluded two contracts with a
foreign firm ‘A’ in 1979 and 1985 respectively for
procurement of five Electronic Warfare Systems
(EWS) to meet operational requirements of Navy.
In their earlier Report, the Committee found
several glaring irregularities/deficiencies in the
execution of the contract by the Ministry of
Defence. These broadly included, lack of proper
spadework in selection of the supplier, preferential
treatment and undue indulgence shown to the
firm, questionable procurement of technologically
obsolescent EW systems and above all inaction
on the part of the Ministry of Defence to probe
into the matter with a view to fixing responsibility.
Having regard to the fact that the import contract
in question dated back to early eighties, the
Committee thought it prudent to leave the matter
to the Government to explore the feasibility of
taking any punitive action against the guilty
officials for various acts of omission and
commission. Focusing their attention on the
macro aspect of the case with a futuristic outlook
for obviating such grave incidents, the Committee
had inter-alia  recommended that the whole
system of projecting defence requirements of the
Navy, their import and contract management
warranted a thorough overhauling to ward off
such incidents in future. While viewing with grave
concern and anxiety the vulnerability of defence
procurements to extraneous considerations, the
Committee further desired that all such strategic
defence procurements should be examined
threadbare invariably by a core group of users
and professionals before taking a decision as to
the necessity and modalities of the procurement.
The Committee also urged upon the Ministry to
evolve foolproof institutional mechanisms for
negotiating and finalising defence deals with a
note of transparency so as to safeguard the
national security.
12 3 4
127

As regards fixing responsibility for the reported
irregularities in the instant case, though the
Ministry of Defence had decided in 1994 to conduct
a special internal audit, the formal order for
instituting the same was not given till January
1996. The Committee in their earlier Report had
expressed strong dissatisfaction over the delay
in probing into the matter. The Ministry in their
Action Taken Note have now regretted the
delayed issuance of formal order.  According to
them, the Controller of Defence Accounts, Navy
(CDA) carried out a special audit and the report
submitted by them had corroborated the known
facts. However, according to the Ministry, no
individual was held accountable for any wrong
doing at any stage. Pertinently, an outside agency
i.e. Economic Investigation Bureau (EIB) also
enquired into the case. The Committee are
perturbed to find that the Ministry are yet to
obtain a report from EIB. What is further
disquieting to note is the fact that even without
obtaining the Report from EIB, the Ministry chose
to inform the Committee that EIB did not observe
any irregularity in the case. The Ministry owe an
explanation to the Committee for this unusual act.
The Committee desire that the Ministry should
obtain a copy of the report from EIB expeditiously
and submit the same to the Committee alongwith
a copy of the special audit report submitted by
CDA (Navy).
In respect of corrective and remedial action taken
to obviate recurrence of such cases, the Ministry
stated that a comprehensive defence procurement
procedure has been promulgated with effect from
June 2003, which is periodically reviewed for high
value/high technology procurements. According
to the Ministry, these procedures have been
implemented to bring transparency in defence
procurement. The Committee welcome the
measures taken in the direction of structural and
systematic refinements in the defence procurement
management and trust that the envisaged objective
behind this rejuvenated procedure will be observed
and implemented in letter and spirit in the best
interest of defence preparedness and supreme
concern of national security.
12 3 4
128

The Committee have been informed that a similar
procedure covering shipbuilding activities was
also being examined in the Ministry of Defence.
The Committee desire that a copy of the approved
procedure may be furnished to them in due
course.
12 3 4
MGIPMRND—2732LS—8-12-2004.
129