78
ALLOTMENT OF LAND TO EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS BY DELHI DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-2009)
SEVENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW DELHI

SEVENTY-EIGHTH REPORT
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-2009)
(FOURTEENTH  LOK  SABHA)
ALLOTMENT OF LAND TO EDUCATIONAL
INSTITUTIONS BY DELHI DEVELOPMENT
AUTHORITY
MINISTRY OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
[Action Taken on 42nd Report of Public Accounts Committee (14th Lok Sabha) ]
Presented to Lok Sabha on 17 December, 2008
Laid in Rajya Sabha on 17 December, 2008
LOK  SABHA  SECRETARIAT
NEW  DELHI
December, 2008/Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka)

P.A.C. No. 1880
Price: Rs. 44.00
©2008 BY LOK SABHA SECRETARIAT
Published under Rule 382 of the Rules of Procedure and Conduct of Business in
Lok Sabha (Twelfth Edition) and Printed by the General Manager, Government of India
Press, Minto Road, New Delhi - 110 002.

CONTENTS
PAGE
COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE  (2008-2009) .................. (iii)
INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................. (v)
CHAPTER I            Report .............................................................................. 1
(i) Extension of  Time for Construction of  School Buildings 2
(ii) Enhancement of Composition Fee .................................. 3
(iii) Amendment  of  Delhi  School  Education  Act,  1973
for taking action against the defaulting schools ............ 4
(iv) Appointment of Government Representatives ............... 6
(v) Lapses in inspection of schools by the Directorate of
Education, Government of  NCT of  Delhi ...................... 6
(vi) Measures for increasing public awareness of Reservation/
Freeship for poor students .............................................. 8
CHAPTER II Recommendations/Observations, which have been
accepted by the Government .......................................... 9
CHAPTER III Recommendations/Observations which the Committee
do not desire to pursue in view of the replies received
from the Government ....................................................... 16
C
HAPTER IV Recommendations/Observations in respect of which
replies of the Government have not been accepted by the
Committee and which require reiteration ......................... 20
C
HAPTER V Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the
Government have furnished interim replies .................... 25
ANNEXURES
ANNEXURE - A Circular No. F1. (EOT)05/LSB(I)/I dated 4.1.2007, governing
the rates of composition fee for the year 2007-08 as approved
by the Ministry of Urban Development .......................... 31
A
NNEXURE - B Specimen copy of allotment letter ................................... 34
PART- II
Minutes of the sitting of Public Accounts Committee
(2008-2009) held on 1st December, 2008.......................... 37

COMPOSITION OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-2009)
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra—Chairman
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Furkan Ansari
3. Shri Vijay Bahuguna
4. Shri Khagen Das
5. Shri Sandeep Dikshit
6. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
7. Shri Shailendra Kumar
8. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
*9. Shri Brajesh Pathak
10. Prof. M. Ramadass
#11. Shri Rajiv Ranjan 'Lalan' Singh
12. Shri Sita Ram Singh
13. Shri Kharabela Swain
14. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
15. Shri Arun Yadav
Rajya Sabha
16. Shri Raashid Alvi
17. Shri Prasanta Chatterjee
18. Shri B.K. Hariprasad
19. Shri Shanta Kumar
20. Prof. P. J. Kurien
21. Dr. K. Malaisamy
22. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1. Shri S.K. Sharma — Secretary
2. Shri A. Mukhopadhyay — Joint Secretary
3. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
4. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
5. Shri S.L. Singh — Committee Officer
*Ceased to be Member of Lok Sabha w.e.f. 14th November, 2008, consequent upon his election
to Rajya Sabha.
#Resigned from membership of Lok Sabha w.e.f. 11th November, 2008.
(iii)

INTRODUCTION
I, the Chairman, Public Accounts Committee, as authorised by the Committee, do
present this Seventy-eighth Report on action taken by Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their
42nd Report (14th Lok Sabha) on "Allotment of Land to Educational Institutions by
Delhi Development Authority".
2. This Report was considered and adopted by the Public Accounts Committee
at their sitting held on 1st December, 2008. Minutes of the sitting form Part II of the
Report.
3. For facility of reference and convenience, the Observations and
Recommendations of the Committee have been printed in thick type in the body of the
Report.
4. The Committee place on record their appreciation of the assistance rendered
to them in the matter by the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
5. The Committee also place on record their appreciation for the invaluable
assistance rendered to them by the officials of Lok Sabha Secretariat attached with the
Committee.
N
EW DELHI; PROF.  VIJAY  KUMAR  MALHOTRA,
3 December, 2008 Chairman,
12 Agrahayana, 1930 (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.
(v)

CHAPTER I
REPORT
This Report of the Committee deals with action taken by the Government on the
Recommendations/Observations of the Public Accounts Committee contained in their
Forty-second Report (14th Lok Sabha) on Paragraph 4.1 of the Report of the Comptroller
and Auditor General of India for the year ended March, 2004 (No. 4 of 2005), Union
Government (Civil-Autonomous Bodies) relating to "Allotment of Land to Educational
Institutions by Delhi Development Authority".
2. The Forty-second Report of the Public Accounts Committee, which was
presented to Lok Sabha on 28th April, 2007, contained 18 Recommendations/
Observations. The Action Taken Notes on all the Recommendations/Observations
have been received from the Ministry of Urban Development and are categorized as
under:
(i) Recommendations/Observations which have been accepted by the
Government :
Paragraph Nos. 105, 106, 112, 117, 118 and 121
[Sl. Nos. 1, 2, 8, 13, 14 and 17]
(ii) Recommendations/Observations which the Committee do not desire to
pursue in view of the replies received from the Government:
Paragraph Nos. 107, 110 and 111
[Sl. Nos. 3, 6 and 7]
(iii) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which replies of the
Government have not been accepted by the Committee and which require
reiteration:
Paragraph Nos. 108, 114, 115, 119 and 120
[Sl. Nos. 4, 10, 11 15 and 16]
(iv) Recommendations/Observations in respect of which the Government have
furnished interim replies:
Paragraph Nos. 109, 113, 116 and 122
[Sl. Nos. 5, 9, 12 and 18]
3. The Committee desire that the Government should furnish final/conclusive
Action Taken replies to the Recommendations/Observations for which interim replies
have been furnished.
4. In their Forty-second Report, the Committee had examined Delhi Development
Authority's policy of allotment of land to educational institutions at concessional
rates, its implementation/enforcement by both Delhi Development authority (DDA)

2
and the Government of NCT of Delhi and compliance of the stipulated Reservation/
Freeship conditions for poor students by the beneficiary schools etc. From the year
1990 onwards, such allotments were made subject to certain terms and conditions
which stipulate that the beneficiary schools will ensure admission to students belonging
to the economically weaker sections of society residing in Delhi to the extent of 25 per
cent and grant freeships from the tuition fees in accordance with the rules prescribed
by the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi from time to time. During the
period 1990-91 to 2003-2004, DDA allotted land at concessional rates to 381 registered
societies for establishing schools on such quantified terms and conditions. The
Committee in their examination had noted that 46 out of 90 test selected schools were
yet to be functional despite lapse of the stipulated period of two years while as many
as 133 out of the 381 beneficiary societies failed to provide the stipulated 25 per cent
reservation for children from the weaker sections as of March 2004. As many as 343
schools hiked their tuition fees by 5 per cent to 44 per cent without the requisite
approval of the Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi in violation of
the terms of allotment. Further, there was no established mechanism for ascertaining
breaches of terms of allotment and consequently remedial action for ensuring adherence
to the freeship norms was conspicuously non-existent. The Committee had observed
that though the policy of land allotment at concessional rates to educational societies
by DDA was introduced with the primary objective of providing quality education to
the underprivileged children through private schools, the scheme has not been able to
achieve the intended social objectives due to failure in its implementation in right
earnest, both by DDA as the implementing agency and the Government of NCT of
Delhi as the sponsoring agency.
5. The Action Taken Notes furnished by the Ministry of Urban Development
have been reproduced in the relevant Chapters of this Report. In the succeeding
paragraphs, the Committee have dealt with the action taken by the Government on
some of their Recommendations/Observations, made in the Original Report, which
need reiteration or merit comments.
(i).  Extension of Time for Construction of School Buildings
[Para No. 108 of the 42nd Report (14th Lok Sabha)]
6. In their 42nd Report, the Committee had observed that even though the
beneficiary societies, as per allotment order, were required to complete the construction
of the school buildings and operationalise them within a period of two years from the
date of taking possession of the land, DDA had granted extension of time for
construction of the school buildings to 27 societies on the grounds of inadequacy of
funds and 17 Societies were given permission to mortgage the allotted land to raise
loans to meet the cost of construction. Further, in 11 cases, the extension of time was
permitted beyond normally permissible 5 years. The Committee had been informed by
the Ministry that the maximum period allowed for construction of school buildings on
payment of composition fee had been reduced from 20 years to 10 years for new
allotments and for all surviving leases where construction had not been undertaken
even after ten-years period, the allottees were given time upto 31.12.2007 to complete
the construction. Expressing the view that a period of 10 years is still too long  a period

3
for construction of school buildings which would lead to a huge time lag between the
demand and supply as well as misuse of the allotted land, the Committee had, therefore,
inter-alia recommended that the Ministry of Urban Development should examine the
feasibility of further reducing the maximum period allowed for construction of school
buildings under the Concessional Land Allotment Policy to six years and cancel the
allotment of land to those societies which fail to complete construction of school
buildings and make them functional within this period.
7. In their Action Note, the Ministry of Urban Development have inter-alia
stated that the period of construction for institutional plots has only recently been
reduced from 20 years to 10 years. further, rate of composition fee has been recently
increased, which is likely to act as deterrent for non-construction. In view of the above
factors, it is considered that the time frame for construction may not be reduced further
from 10 to 6 years.
8. The Committee do not accept the plea taken by the Ministry of Urban
Development for not reducing the maximum period of construction of school buildings
from 10 years to a more sensible 6 years time as recommended by them in their 42nd
Report. The Committee are of the considered opinion that the maximum period of
10 years allowed for construction of schools buildings by the beneficiary societies is
too long and hence, would not encourage early construction and operationalisation of
the schools but may even unwittingly  serve as an incentive for misuse of the land.
Further, in view of the ever increasing demand for admissions in schools and growth
in number of admission seekers in Delhi due to population boom and migration, the
Committee feel that there is an urgent need for new capacity addition/creation to
reduce the demand and supply gap between the number of admission seekers and the
number of seats available. This can be achieved to some extent if the maximum
permissible period for construction of schools is reduced. Hence, the Committee
reiterate their earlier recommendation that the maximum permissible period for
operationalisation of school by a beneficiary society after taking possession of the
allotted land should not be more than 6 years. This is necessary for ensuring that the
social objective of concessional land allotment policy of DDA is achieved within a
reasonable time frame. The Committee would also like to be apprised of the action
taken by DDA against those institutions/societies, which were given deadline for
construction of school buildings and their operationalisation until 31st December, 2007.
(ii)  Enhancement of Composition Fee
[Para No. 109 of the 42nd Report (14th Lok Sabha)]
9. The Committee in their 42nd Report had found that the rate of composition fee
levied for non-construction of buildings by the beneficiary societies within the
stipulated time limit of two years hitherto @ Rs. 5 per cent square metre for plots
measuring upto 500 square in the fourth year and Rs. 10 per square meter in the fifth
year, was very nominal and had failed to serve as an effective deterrent for delayed
construction of buildings by the beneficiary societies. In respect of plots measuring
above 500 square metres, the Committee found that no penal fee was charged even
after elapse of stipulated time  i.e. in the fourth and fifth years of allotment thereby
providing ample scope to certain societies for delayed construction of buildings. After

4
taking up the matter by the Committee, the composition rates had since been revised to
@ Rs. 10 and Rs. 20 respectively in the 4th and 5th years. the Committee had considered
that even the revised rates were still very low and would not act as a deterrent for
delayed construction of school buildings by the erring societies. With a view to ensure
that all the beneficiaries societies operationalise the schools at the earliest, the Committee
had, therefore, recommended that DDA should also impose composition fee in respect
of institutional plots measuring above 500 square metres  after the elapse of the
stipulated time i.e. in the 4th and the 5th years of allotment. They had also desired that
the composition fee should be further increased so that it can act as a disincentive and
effective deterrent compelling the land allottees to expedite construction of school
building at the earliest.
10. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Urban Development stated that
the issue of further increase of composition fee would be considered in the next
financial year i.e. 2008-09. Further the issue of charging of composition fee for the 4th
and 5th year for plots measuring above 500 sq. mtrs. will also be considered at the time
of considering the proposal for enhancing composition fee from 2008-09.
11. The Committee note with satisfaction that the Ministry of Urban Development
have set in motion the process for effecting increase in the rate of composition fee for
plots measuring upto 500 sq. mtrs. and also for charging of composition fee from the
4th and the 5th year onwards for plots measuring above 500 sq. mtrs. from the
financial year 2008-09. The Committee hope that the Ministry would pursue the
matter in the right earnest for arriving at an early and favourable decision for
charging the revised/new rates from the current financial year i.e. 2008-09 onwards
uniformly in respect of all concessional land allotments made by DDA to the beneficiary
societies so that the plots of land are prevented from languishing without use or
misuse and thus, compelling land allottees to expedite construction of school buildings
at the earliest. The Committee would await for the precise actions taken by DDA in
this regard.
(iii) Amendment of Delhi School Education Act, 1973, for taking action against the
defaulting schools
[Para  Nos. 114 and 120 of the 42nd Report (14th Lok Sabha)]
12. The Committee in their Forty-second Report had observed that pursuant to
the Writ Petition filed in the Delhi High Court, the Government of NCT of Delhi provided
a list of 178 defaulters to DDA to whom land was allotted by DDA under the concessional
land allotment policy. Subsequently, the Directorate of Education had identified 33
schools where it had found zero compliance of the freeship norm. Out of these, DDA
had cancelled the land lease of Bal Bharti School, Rukmani Devi, Gyan Mandir and
Pinnacle School, which were the biggest defaulters and accordingly initiated
proceedings for eviction under Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants)
Act. While taking note of the adverse impact of large-scale cancellation of land allotment
to the defaulting schools on the careers of thousands of children, the Committee had
felt that this inexcusable act of breach of the freeship norms by the defaulting schools
warranted imposing of penalties by DDA and the Directorate of Education, Government
of NCT of Delhi. The Committee, had, therefore, desired that the Ministry of Urban

5
Development/DDA in coordination with the Directorate of Education, Government of
NCT of Delhi should find ways and means to penalize the defaulting schools which
may include taking over of their management so that it will act as a deterrent to the
other shools from violating the terms and conditions of the concessional land allotment.
13.  In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry of Urban Development stated that
they have made a suggestion to the Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of
Delhi for amending the Delhi School Education Act and Rules, 1973 to incorporate a
provision stipulating adherence to the condition of freeship as a necessary pre-
condition for grant of recognition and if any school fails to comply with the same, it
would attract de-recognition and/or taking over of the management of the school. This
would provide legal backing to the enforcement of the condition of freeship in addition
to taking action in terms of the lease conditions.
14. Further, in Para 120 of their 42nd Report, the Committee had noted that the
Ministry of Urban Development had made a proposal to the Directorate of Education,
Government of NCT of Delhi suggesting amendment to the Delhi School Education
Act, 1973 and Rules framed thereunder for   incorporating a provision stipulating
adherence to the condition of freeship as a necessary pre-condition for grant of
recognition and any school that fails to comply with the same, would attract de-
recognition and/or taking over of the management of the school. As per this proposed
amendment, any violation of terms and conditions of allotment of land would constitute
a violation under the Delhi School Education Act, 1973 and would provide legal backing
to the enforcement of the condition of freeship in addition to taking action in terms of
the lease conditions. The Committee had urged upon the Government of National
Capital Territory of Delhi to take necessary steps for carrying out amendment to the
Delhi School Education Act, 1973 expeditiously so that enformcement of freeship
norms and other conditions of concessional land allotment are implemented in the
right earnest.
15. In their reply, the Ministry of Urban Development in their Action Taken Note
stated that as the issue is sub-judice, necessary amendment in the Delhi School
Education Act, 1973 could not be made. However all efforts are being made for the
early hearing and disposal of the cases.
16. The Committee are constrained to note that no follow-up action seems to
have been taken by the Ministry of Urban Development and DDA to prevail upon the
Government of NCT of Delhi in carrying out the amendments to the Delhi School
Education Act, 1973 with a view to enforce compliance of the stipulated terms and the
conditions of the concessional land allotment by the beneficiary societies. This shows
the lackadaisical attitude of the Ministry to the issue, which is inexcusable. The
Committee also deplore the callous attitude displayed by the Government of NCT of
Delhi is not taking necessary action for amendment of Delhi School Education Act,
1973 so as to rein in and penalize the defaulting schools so that it would serve as
deterrent for other schools. The Committee do not accept the plea of the Ministry that
the Act could not be amended due to the matter being sub-judice. The Committee are
of the considered view that amendment to the Delhi School Education Act, 1973 in no
way materially affects the court case as it falls in the domain of the Legislature. The

6
Committee reiterate their earlier recommendation that the Ministry of Urban
Development should pursue the matter vigorously with the Government of NCT of
Delhi so that amendment to the Delhi School Education Act, 1973 is carried out
within a period of two months from the Presentation of the Report. They would also
like to be apprised of the conclusive action taken in this regard.
(iv) Appointment of Government Representatives
[Para  No. 115 of the 42nd Report (14th Lok Sabha)]
17. In their 42nd Report, the Committee were informed that DDA had made a
request to the Government of Delhi for appointing two Government representatives on
the Governing Bodies of the beneficiary societies with a view to ensuring compliance
of the freeship condition. The Committee had welcomed this initiative and expressed
the hope that the Ministry of Urban Development would pursue the matter with the
Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi so that they taken necessary
steps for implementing the same.
18. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry submitted that the amendment to
incorporate the suggestion made by DDA has not been made in the Delhi School
Education Act, 1973 as the issue of freeship to economically weaker students is
sub-judice.
19. The Committee are dismayed to note that the Ministry of Urban Development
have not pursued the matter regarding appointment of Government representatives
on the governing bodies of the beneficiary societies on the ground that the issue of
providing freeship is sub-judice. The Committee do not consider the Ministry's
explanation as a plausible justification for their inaction since this aspect pertains to
administrative action which merely involves amendment to Delhi School Education
Act, 2007 and thus, in no way is directly related to or affects or influences the
implementation of the freeship condition per se. The Committee cannot but regret the
lack of seriousness on the part of the Ministry of Urban Development and DDA as also
the non-cooperative stance and apathy of the Government of NCT of Delhi to this
important issue. The Committee, therefore, reiterate their earlier recommendation
that requisite action for appointment of Government representatives, on Governing
bodies of all beneficiary societies should be taken without any further delay as this
would help in exerting pressure on the school management in ensuring compliance
of the Government directives including freeship norm. The Committee would like to
be apprised of the conclusive action taken in this regard.
(v) Lapses in Inspection of Schools by the Directorate of Education Government of
NCT of Delhi
[Para No. 119 of the 42nd Report (14th Lok Sabha)]
20. The Committee in their 42nd Report had observed that inspection of the
schools had not been carried out properly by the Directorate of Education, Govt. of
NCT of Delhi so much so that the Directorate even could not furnish the details of
number of inspections carried out to check the deviations/non-compliance of schools
to the condition of providing freeship to poor children as well as to oversee the overall
functioning of the schools under its governance. As informed by the Ministry, during

7
the academic session 2005-06,panel inspection were carried out in respect of nearly
126 schools under Rule 190 read with Section 24(2) and the main irregularities observed
in these inspection pertained to improper maintenance of service records of employees
and employment of over-aged staff in violation of Recruitment Rules. However, there
was no reference in the inspection report about the status of compliance of schools to
the freeship/reservation condition, thereby revealing a serious deficiency in the
inspection carried out by the Directorate. The Committee had, therefore, recommended
that the Ministry of Urban Development should impress upon the Directorate of
Education Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi to revamp their inspection
machinery so that inspection of schools are carried out regular intervals by the
Directorate with a view to enforcing the strict adherence to the freeship norms by the
beneficiary schools. The Committee had further recommended that DDA in consultation
with the Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi should examine the
feasibility of setting up a mechanism where under inspections can be jointly carried
out by DDA and the Directorate of Education in so far as implementation of terms and
conditions of concessional land allotment is concerned.
21. In their Action Taken Note, the Ministry stated that a Mechanism has
already been put in place, where Directorate of Education will forward the list of
defaulter schools that are not complying with prescribed freeship condition. For
their purpose, necessary inspection of schools will be made by the Government of
NCT of Delhi.
22. The Committee were dismayed to find that the Ministry have not taken any
concrete steps for implementation of their recommendation for revamping the
inspection machinery of the Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi
so that inspections are carried out at regular intervals with a view to enforcing
strict adherence to freeship norms by the beneficiary schools. The Ministry have
merely stated that inspection of schools will be done by the Government of NCT of
Delhi and there is no mention in their reply about the periodicity as well as the
modalities of conducting the inspections. Further, there is no evidence to suggest
whether the Government of NCT of Delhi have initiated any action for revamping
their inspection machinery. The Action Taken Reply is also silent with regard to
the proposal for setting up a mechanism for conducting joint inspection by DDA
and Government of NCT of Delhi, as recommended by the Committee in their 42nd
Report. While taking a serious note of the lackadaisical approach on the part of
both the Ministry of Urban Development and the Government of NCT of Delhi, the
Committee reiterate their recommendation that specific measures should be taken
for revamping and strengthening of inspection machinery so that the inspection
are conducted at periodic intervals for enforcing strict adherence of schools to
freeship condition. They also reiterate that the feasibility of conducting joint
inspection both by DDA and the Government of NCT of Delhi should be examined
afresh so that this will instill fear among the defaulting schools. The Committee
would also like to be apprised of the number of inspections conducted by the
Government of NCT of Delhi during the academic years 2007-08 and 2008-09; the
number of schools found defaulting on this account and the action taken against the
defaulting schools.

8
(vi) Measures for Increasing Public Awareness of Reservation/Freeship for Poor
Students
[Para No. 121 of the 42nd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)]
23. In their 42nd Report, the Committee had observed that there had been very
little or no publicity  in the media informing the general public about the availability of
freeship for students belonging to economically weaker sections in the schools set up
under the concession land allotment policy of DDA. As a result, many a time parents
are not aware of freeship facilities available in these schools, thereby defeating the
very purpose of the objective for which the policy has been laid down. The Committee
had desired that wide publicity should be given by DDA/the Directorate of Education,
Government of NCT of Delhi about the availability of freeships in schools in different
newspapers/media so that economically weaker sections of the society come to know
about availability of the freeships in the beneficiary schools. The Committee had also
recommended that the beneficiary schools should also be instructed to clearly specify
their social obligation of providing freeship to the underprivileged children while
notifying admission procedure to public for which a mention should be made in the
brochure/prospectus for admission about the availability of freeships and reservation
for wards of the weaker sections.
24. The Ministry of Urban Development in their Action Taken Note stated that
the Education Department, Government of NCT of Delhi issued an order vide
notification dated 25.01.2007 titled Delhi School Education (Free seats for students
belonging to Economically Weaker Sections) Order, 2006, which set out conditions for
providing free seats not less than twenty per cent to students belonging to the
economically weaker sections. This was given publicity by placing advertisements in
leading newspapers. As per sub-clause 1 and 3 of clause 5 of the above notification,
school management is required to display the number of total seats and the free seats
available in each class on the notice board in the school and their web sites.
25. The Committee are constrained to state that both the Ministry of Urban
Development/DDA and the Government of NCT of Delhi have not taken adequate
action for giving wide publicity regarding the availability of freeships in the education
institutions under the concessional land allotment policy. The Committee find that
publicizing of the notification issued by the Education Department, Government of
NCT of Delhi 25.01.2007 in leading newspapers was only a one-time affair and no
protracted or sustained campaign appears to have been launched thereafter. Further,
mere displaying of freeships on the notice boards and web-sites of the beneficiary
schools alone would not be adequate for creating awareness among the public of the
facilities being provided to the economically weaker sections unless it is backed by
administrative action by the Government of NCT of Delhi checking/cross verification
as to whether the same have been actually provided. The Committee, therefore, reiterate
that wide publicity of the scheme should be given both by DDA and the Government of
NCT of Delhi in electronic and print media at regular intervals so that the poor
families are made aware of the facility being offered under the policy. The Committee
desire that with a view to reach out to the targeted sections, linkages may be forged
with the Social Welfare Department and reputed NGOs so that coordinated efforts
can be launched to put in place a massive public awareness campaign of the scheme.

CHAPTER  II
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH HAVE BEEN ACCEPTED
BY THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation/Observation
The Delhi Development Authority (Disposal of Development Nazul Land) Rules,
1981 popularly known as the Nazul Rules provide for allotment of Nazul lands to
educational Institutions, i.e., schools, colleges and universities at concessional rates
with the primary objective of serving a public purpose of facilitating establishment of
or extending educational facilities particularly for the weaker sections of society. Rule
20 stipulates inter-alia that allotment of land at concessional rates may be made to a
society, which is registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1860, is of a non-
profit making character and is sponsored or recommended by a Department of the
Delhi Government or a Ministry of the Central Government. From the year 1990 onwards
such allotments have been made subject to certain terms and conditions which stipulate
that the beneficiary schools will ensure admission to students belonging to weaker
sections of society to the extent of 25 per cent and grant freeships from the tuition fees
in accordance with the rules prescribed by the Government of National Capital Territory
of Delhi from time. During the period 1990-91 to 2003-04, DDA allotted land at
concessional rates to 381 registered societies for establishing on such quantified
terms and conditions.
[S. No. 1, Para 105 of 42nd Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The above para relates to facts of the matter and needs no action.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India
Recommendation/Observation
Audit conducted a review between April to July 2004 with a view to assess the extent
to which the stated public objective of the allotment of land at concessional rates to educational
institutions was achieved and to review compliance of schools with the terms and conditions
of concessional land allotment. For this Audit scrutinized the records of the Institutional Land
Branch of DDA relating to allotment of land to educational institutions during the period
1990-91 to 2003-04 and relevant linked records from Directorate of Education, Government of
NCT of Delhi, which was the sponsoring department for the allotment of land at concessional
rates. Audit selected 90 cases for detailed scrutiny out of 381 beneficiary societies, which
were provided land at concessional rates during the aforesaid period. Test check by Audit
revealed that 46 out of 90 schools were yet to be functional despite lapse of the stipulated
9

10
period of two years, while as many as 133 out of the 381 beneficiary societies failed to
provide the stipulated 25 per cent reservation for children from the weaker sections as
of March, 2004. Worse still 343 schools hiked their tuition fees by 5 percent to 44 per
cent without the requisite approval of the Directorate of Education in violation of the
terms of allotment. Further, there was no established mechanism for ascertaining breaches
of terms of allotment and consequently remedial action for ensuring adherence to the
freeship norms was conspicuously non-existent. The Committee are constrained to
observe that though the policy of land allotment at cocnessional rates to educational
society by DDA was introduced with the primary objective of spreading out quality
education to underprivileged children through private schools, however, the scheme
has not been able to achieve the intended objective due to failure in its implementation
in the right earnest, both by DDA as the implementing agency and Government of NCT
of Delhi as the sponsoring agency. This will be amply corroborated by the Committees
findings dealt with at length in the succeeding paras.
[Sl. No. 2, Para 106 of 42nd Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
It is true that many of the societies have failed to comply with the freeship condition
of 25% in spite of stipulation to this effect. For its effective implementation, it is considered
that Delhi School Education Act and Rules need to be amended to incorporate a provision
stipulating adherence to the condition of freeship as a necessary pre-condition for grant
of recognition and if any school fails to comply with the same, it would attract de-
recognition and/or taken over of the management of the school by the Govt.
Further Comments of Audit
What is the current status of evaluation prior to allotment of land to those
societies with the freeship condition of 25% reservation for children from the weaker
section?
Reply
According to latest orders of Hon'ble High Court dated 30.5.2007 in WP(C) 3156/
2002, taking note of various factors including factor of allotment of land on concessional
rates with a stipulation in the allotment of letter, educational institutions shall be
bound to give seats to the weaker section of the society to the extent of 15%. It also
appears that the schools have agreed and consented to the aforesaid interim
arrangement as recorded in the said order. The said order is an interim order as the
Court has explicitly stated that the directions contained in the said orders would be of
the nature of an interim arrangement commencing from the academic session 2008-09
to last till the matters come up for final hearing. The 15% of the seats are divided into
two categories—10% for weaker section of the society and 5% for the wards of the
teaching and non-teaching staff, with the condition that if the wards of teaching and
non teaching staff are not available, these remaining seats would be allotted to the
students of weaker section of the society.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India

11
Recommendation/Observation
Another area of concern relates to non-existence of an established
mechanism in DDA for identifying breaches of terms of allotment so as to enable
timely remedial action and proper demarcation of responsibilities between DDA
and the Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi for enforcement
of the terms of allotment at concessional rates. While the Ministry were of the
view that the schools being under administrative jurisdiction of Directorate of
Education Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi, the freeship
conditions can be best monitored by that department for ensuing compliance.
The Directorate of Education GNCTD maintained that the instances of violations
of terms and conditions, by the societies has to be checked through inspections
etc. conducted by the organization responsible for allotment or lease conditions.
The Committee regret to observe that the replies of both DDA and Government
of National Capital Territory of Delhi (GNCTD) were evasive and try to cover up
their short comings/failures in performing their respective roles. While DDA had
tried to pass the buck to the Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi
obviously to cover up its failure in setting up an institutional mechanism for
monitoring the compliance of schools to the terms of allotment, on the other
hand, the Directorate of Education as the sponsoring agency of societies and
having been empowered by the Delhi School Education Act, 1973 which enable
de-recognition of schools and taking over of their management in certain
circumstances, have sought to abdicate its responsibility and shift the blame
entirely on DDA. As a result of this, the objectives of Nazul Land Rules and the
purpose for which the same have been formulated could not be achieved. This
situation could have been avoided had DDA shown foresightedness and
incorporated necessary provision in the allotment letters issued to the beneficiary
societies making the Directorate of Education, GNCTD, as the nodal agency
responsible for enforcing the terms and conditions of concessional land allotment.
The Committee find this highly regrettable. The Committeeal note that Hon'ble
Delhi High Court in its order dated 20th January, 2004 had directed that it is the
responsibility of the Government of NCT of Delhi to frame the required rules, if
any, for ensuring/monitoring compliance of condition of freeship and that it
would be the duty of DDA to take action against any society committing breach
of the condition after receiving intimation to this effect from GNCTD of such
violations. The Committee expect that both DDA and the Directorate of Education
would take necessary steps in this regard and put in place a suitable joint
mechanism for identifying the breaches of freeship norms by beneficiary schools
and take appropriate action against the delinquent schools.
[Sl. No. 8, Para 112 of 42nd Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
A mechanism has already been put in place, where Directorate of Education will
forward to DDA the list of defaulter schools who are not complying with prescribed
freeship condition. Thereafter, DDA will take action against them under terms of
allotment/lease. DDA and GNCTD are regularly interacting for coordinated action for
enforcement of terms and conditions of allotment including freeship.

12
Further Comments of Audit
Whether Directorate of Education could identify the breaches of freeship norms
by beneficiary schools in the academic year 2005-06 and 2006-07 and send the list of
those to DDA, if yes, what appropriate action taken against the delinquent schools?
Reply
The case CWP 3156/02 is still pending in the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi
which has granted stay against punitive action to be taken against the schools
which did not fulfil freeship norms. The details of freeship granted during the year
2005-06 was collected by the Education Department of GNCTD in pursuance to the
directions of the Court but no action could be taken against delinquent schools in
view of orders of Hon'ble Court.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee note that as on 31 March, 2004, an amount of Rs. 1.88 crore
(Rs. 1.70 crores as ground rent and license fee and Rs. 18.05 lakh as interest accrued
thereon) was outstanding against 89 societies for the period 1997-98 to 2003-04. The
Ministry have informed the Committee that as on 31.12.2006, an amount of Rs. 22.17
lakh was outstanding from the 89 beneficiary societies. What is surprising to the
Committee is the fact that even after the work of recovery of dues was assigned to
M/s Induslnd Bank, the total amount of ground rent and license fees outstanding
against all the 566 beenficiary societies to which concessional land had been allotted
still remained at Rs. 11.25 crore as on 31.12.2006. The Committee are not convinced
with the reply of the Ministry that recovery of dues is a continuous process and
depends on the response of the allottees. The Committee are of the opinion that
despite having adequate powers to recover the dues as arrears of land revenue under
the DDA Act, 1957 and the Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887, no urgent and appropriate/
effective action had been initiated by DDA for collecting/recovering the ground rent
and license fee in time from the defaulting schools leading to accumulation of huge
outstanding arrears. The Committee desire that DDA should take immediate measures
where by all the pending dues are recovered within 3 months from presentation of the
report failing which compound interest should be charged against the defaulters. With
the ongoing updation and computerization D&C Ledgers in respect of institutional
property and outsourcing of the work of recovery of Ground Rent, the Committee hope
that DDA would not let accumulation of outstanding dues on account of ground rent
and license fee, if future.
[Sl. No. 13, Para 117 of 42nd Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
A sum of Rs. 11.25 crore was outstanding as on 31.12.2006 on account of ground
rent and license fee against 566 beneficiary societies to whom land was allotted at
concessional rates. As a result of issue of defaulter notices to them in the month of

13
December, 2006, a sum  of Rs. 5.41 crore could be realized from 323 societies during the
period  from January, 2007  to May, 2007, leaving outstanding balance of Rs. 5.84 crore.
In the month of June, 2007, defaulter notices were further issued 243  defaulting societies
giving them 15 day’s time to make payment arrears. Thereafter, Non Recovery Certificates
under Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887  were issued in August, 2007  to 112  defaulting
societies who had not cleared their arrears in spite of notices issued in June, 2007. As
a result of efforts so made, arrears to the tune of Rs. 3.15 crore have  been recovered
upto 31.10.2007,  out of total outstanding amount of Rs. 5.84 crore as on 1.6.2007.  The
amount of outstanding arrears as on 31.10.2007, out of total arrears of Rs. 11.25 crore
outstanding on 31.12.2006, is only Rs. 2.69 crore for which N.R.Cs have been issued
under Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887.
Further Comments of Audit
What is the current status of outstanding amount? Whether the Non Recovery
Certificates under Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887, issued for Rs. 2.69 crore effective
or Ministry of going to taking  some other effective action against defaulter, please
elaborate.
Reply
A sum of Rs. 11.25 crore was outstanding as on 31.12.06 on account of ground
rent and license fee against all the 566  beneficiary societies to whom land has been
allotted at concessional rates. The balance outstanding amount as on 31.5.2007  was
Rs. 5.84 crore. Defaulter Notices were issued to 243 defaulting societies in the month of
June, 2007 and  thereafter N.R.Cs under Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887  were issued
in August, 2007 to 112  defaulting societies. As a result  the outstanding arrears as on
31.12.2007 were Rs. 2.69 crore only. N.R.Cs  under Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887
have been issued to all 112  defaulting societies in the  month of August, 2007, who did
not clear the arrears in spite of notices issued in the month of June, 2007. As a result,
a sum of Rs. 1.23 crores has been received from November, 2007 to March, 2008 against
the arrears. The balance amount of arrears as on 31.3.2008 is Rs. 1.46 crores only for
which N.R.Cs under Punjab Land Revenue Act, 1887  have already been issued and
further action to recover the arrears is being taken.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee were informed that keeping in view the fact that existing
provisions under the Nazul Rules are prone  to exploitation by the unscrupulous
societies DDA  had initiated steps for a shift in the policy of land allotment to
Educational institutions from the present concessional mode to the auction system
of disposal, which is stated  to be more transparent and prevent circumvention of the
allotment conditions and also  rules of possible collusion in allotment of plots for a
particular society etc. It has been stated that this policy had already been applied in
respect of land allotment for hospital, higher/technical education institutes, clubs
and partly for community halls. In respect of schools, the  proposal for changing the

14
mode of disposal from allotment  to auction is stated to be pending for consideration
in the DDA and as a consequence, allotment of land  to schools had been put on hold
till a final decision in the matter of mode of allotment is taken in consultation with the
Government of Delhi. The Committee express their apprehension that the proposed
policy  of allotment of land to schools through auction would result in total
commercialization of education as this would enable only commercially oriented
socities/corporate houses with profit motive to purchase the land outbidding the
genuine charitable societies with limited  financial resources. This would not only
make the already expensive school education totally unaffordable and beyond  the
reach of common people, but will also result in deprivation of quality education the
poor children belonging  economically weaker section. The Committee are of the
considered view that the exploitation of the loopholes in the existing Nazul Rules by
the unscrupulous societies  could be eliminated by carrying out necessary amendment
therein, besides revamping the existing selection process to ensure selection of genune
charitable societies. The Committee are of the consideration opinion that providing
education to socially disadvantaged and weaker sections of the society is one of the
primary responsibilities  of the State, which cannot be let to the market forces. They,
therefore, recommended that Government should shelve their proposal to allot Nazul
land to schools  through auction.
[Sl. No. 14, Para 118 of 42nd  Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The whole issue of allotment of land to schools was duly  considered DDA in its
meeting held in January, 2006. It  was decided that primary school sites should be
offered to MCD  and 50% of the Sr. Secondary School sites in every neighbourhood
should  be offered to Delhi Government and remaining 50%  be disposed of by way of
auction. Accordingly, DDA (Disposal  of Development Nazul Land)  Rules, 1981  have
been amended  by the Government and Notification was issued by MOUD  on 19.4.06
to give effect to the above decision. The interest of the weaker section has already
been taken care in the above  amendment as 50% of the Sr. Secondary School sites
shall be offered to Government of Delhi at the token rate of Re. 1/- per Ha.
Further Comments of Audit
PAC recommended that Government should shelve their proposal to allot Nazul land
to schools through auction, under such a condition how did the Ministry allow DDA to
dispose of remanining 50 per cent of the schools to be disposed of by way of auction.
Reply
The Government had considered this aspect but considering the past experience
of allotment which had clearly manifested that the very purpose of allotment at
concessional rate has not been achieved and hence it was decided to continue with
the system of auction of school sites.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M.Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India.

15
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee are perturbed to note that there is very little or no publicity in the
media informing the general public about the availability of freeship for students
belonging to  economically weaker sections in the schools set up under the concession
land allotment policy of DDA. As a result many a time parents do not come to know
about freeships available in these schools, thereby defeating the very purpose of the
objective for which the policy has been laid down. The Committee, desire that wide
publicity should be given by  DDA/ the Directorate of Education GNCTD of Delhi
about the availability of freeships in schools in different newspapers/media so that
economically weaker sections of the society come to know about availability of the
freeships in the beneficiary schools. The beneficiary schools should also be  instructed
to clearly  specify their social  obligation of providing freeship to underprivileged
children while notifying admission  procedure to public. A mention should  be made in
the  broucher/prospectus for admission about the availability of freeships and
reservation to wards of weaker sections. Signboards  clearly stating that they are  the
beneficiaries of concessional land allotment policy of DDA for the purpose of providing
25 per cent freeship to under privileged children along with the total number of seats
available in each class along with number of seats reserved/earmarked for freeship to
economically weaker section.
[Sl. No. 17, Para 121 of 42nd Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Education Department, GNCTD issued  an order vide notification dated
25.01.2007  titled as Delhi School Education (Free seats for students belonging  to
Economically Weaker Sections) Order, 2006, which set out conditions for providing
free seats not less than twenty per cent to students  belonging to the economically
weaker sections. This was given publicity by placing advertisements in leading news
papers. As per sub-clause 1 and 3  of clause 5  and of the above notification, school
management is required to display the number of total seats and the free seats available
in each class on the notice board in the school and their web sites.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary  to the Govt. of India.

CHAPTER  III
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS WHICH THE COMMITTEE
DO NOT DESIRE TO PURSUE IN VIEW OF THE REPLIES
RECEIVED FROM THE GOVERNMENT
Recommendation/Observation
Rule 20(d) of the Delhi Development Authority (Disposal of Developed Nazul
Land) Rules, 1981 stipulates that no allotment shall  be made unless the institution is in
possession of sufficient funds to meet the cost of land the construction of buildings.
This provision  was made to ensure that construction of building by the institutions is
completed within a reasonable time so that the purpose of the allotment is achieved.
The Committee regret to note that despite this clear stipulation, DDA failed to ensure
the financial status  in respect of 27 societies to meet the cost of land and construction
of buildings, before alloting the land to these societies whose declared financial
resources were not enough to even meet the cost of land. Thus, it is evident that DDA
had allotted land at concessional rate to 27 societies  which were otherwise ineligible.
The Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development have contended that there is a dichotomy
between Sub Rules (c) and (d)  of Nazul Rules. While  Sub Rule (c)  says that  allotment
has  to be made to non-profit making i.e. charitable societies, Sub Rule (d)  says that
the society should be in possession of sufficient fund to meet the cost of land and
construction of school building. According to him, to expect that a society should
ab-initio have in its bank balance not only sufficient funds to met the cost of land
which is substantive but also substantial funds for meeting the cost of construction
would be expecting too much from a charitable society. The Committee do not accept
the contention  of the Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development. They are of the view
that going by the spirit of the  Nazul Rules, it  is clear that only those societies which
have sufficient financial resources and whose motive is not to make profit should be
given land at concessional rates. What is surprising is the fact that even assuming that
there is a contradiction between Sub Rules (c)  and (d) of Nazul Rules, it is evident that
the Ministry of Urban Development have not taken any action to amend the Nazul
Rules with a view to remove the contradiction therein. What is intriguing is the fact
that it is only after the Committee have taken up the subject for examination that the
Ministry  have woken up  and realized that there is a contradiction in Nazul Rules.
Obviously there did not  exist  any mechanism in DDA to verify or cross check the
financial credentials  of the society that has been sponsored by Delhi Government,
which is anything but regrettable.  The Committee can not but deprecate  the casualness
and the lackadaisical approach displayed  by DDA to such an importance aspect,
which in the ultimate analysis  had led to failure of the scheme. The Committee
recommended  that necessary guidelines should be laid down by the Ministry of
Urban  Development/DDA so that  land at concessional rate could  be allotted to only
such societies after ensuring that  they have sufficient financial resources of their own
16

17
or have tide up  with Banks other financial institutions for securing loans so that construction
of schools building and their functioning is done within the reasonable period.
[Sl. No. 3, Para 107 of 42nd Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Policy of allotment of land at concessional rates has since  been amended
and as per the revised policy  all the primary schools sites shall be offered  to MCD and
50%  of the senior secondary schools in every neighbourhood will be offered to Delhi
Government and remaining 50% will be disposed of through auction.
Further Comments of Audit
Kindly confirm whether the  amended policy of allotment of land at concessional
rates are strictly earmarked to those societies that  have  sufficient financial resources
of their own or have a tie with banks etc.
Reply
As per the amendment brought out in the Delhi  Development Authority (Disposal
of Developed Nazul Land) Rules, 1981 notified vide Gazette notification dated 19.4.2006,
mode of disposal of land to schools  is by auction only and not allotment of land on
concessional rate is being made since 2003.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secrtary to the Govt. of India.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee note that 15 societies have been allotted more than one plot of
land by DDA at concessional rates for setting up of schools on the ground that these
societies have proven track record and experience in running schools. However the
Committee regret to note that out of these 15 societies, 13 societies were found not
adhering to the stipulated conditions of providing freeship to the  student from weaker
section. Obviously DDA had failed to verify  the credential  of these societies and their
compliance of the terms and conditions of concessional  land allotment, which shows
the utter callousness  shown by the concerned DDA  officials in implementing the
policy of concessional land allotment. The Committee recommended that DDA should
now  evolve a policy to restrict allotment of more  than one plot strictly to those
societies which not only have proven track record of being genuine charitable
institution but also found adhering to the stipulated conditions including freeship
condition. Needless to point out that the Government agencies should enforce strict
compliance of the stipulated conditions.
[Sl. No. 6, Para 110 of 42nd Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The policy of allotment of schools has undergone change  from allotment to
auction mode. As per revised policy all primary schools sites shall be  offered to MCD

18
and 50%  of the senior school sities in every neighbourhood will be offered to Delhi
Government for government schools and remaining 50% will be disposed of through
auction.
Further Comments of Audit
Does the policy now contain the requirement of restricted allotment of not more
than one plot strictly to those genuine charitable institutions including freeship
condition.
Reply
The allotment is governed by Nazul Rules. A specimen copy of allotment letter is
attached herewith as Annexure 'B'. The terms and conditions of allotment have to be
enforced by DDA, the land owning agency. For any violations of terms and conditions
of allotment, action is initiated for cancellation of allotment by competent authority.
Subsequently, the eviction proceedings are initiated under P.P. Act.
Sd/-
(Dr. M. M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee are concerned to note that out of 381 societies to which land at
concessional rates had been allotted by DDA, as many as 133 societies had  failed to
fulfil their obligation of providing the stipulated reservation/freeship for children
belonging to weaker section as of March, 2004. Out of these societies, 88 schools i.e.
66 per cent were not at all adhering to the condition of providing reservation to the
children of weaker sections, thereby defeating the primary objective of the concessional
land allotment policy. The number of defaulting societies rose to 178 as per an analysis
jointly carried out by DDA and Directorate of Education, Government of National
Capital Territory of Delhi. The Ministry of Urban Development have attributed their
failure in monitoring the compliance of the schools to the terms and conditions of
allotment, to the organizational constraint and lack of administrative resources. The
Secretary, Ministry of Urban Development also submitted before the Committee that
there would be limitations in monitoring the operational aspects of functioning of a
large number of schools in view of the existing organizational structure and expertise
of DDA. The Committee find the explanation given by the Ministry of Urban
Development as totally untenable since DDA being the nodal agency for implementation
of the scheme was supposed to have anticipated their organizational constraints and
taken measures for removal of the same well before introducing the policy of
concessional land allotment to education institutions. That this had not been done is
inexplicable. What is more surprising is that DDA had woken up to fact that they did
not possess the necessary mechanism to enforce the conditions of land allotment only
after a writ petition was filed in the Delhi High Court in the matter. The Secretary,
(Urban Development) was can did in his admission that violation of terms and
conditions of concessional land allotment came to their notice only after a case was
filed in the Delhi High Court in 2004. This only shows the degree of apathy and

19
lackadaisical attitude exhibited by the DDA in discharging its duties as well as failure
of the administrative Ministry in monitoring the functioning of DDA. Thus in the
absence of proper supervision and effective remedial action in monitoring the
compliance of schools to the reservation and  freeship conditions, either by DDA or by
the Delhi Government, the social objective  of providing quality education to children
of weaker sections of the society through private schools could not be achieved. The
Committee recommend that Ministry of Urban Development should constitute an
expert Committee to examine the implementation of concessional Land Allotment Policy
of DDA in its entirety, with a view to analyze the reasons for the failure of the scheme
and to suggest corrective measures for its proper implementation.
[Sl. No. 7, Para 111 of 42nd Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The issue of concessional land allotment policy has been examined and Nazul
Rules amended. According to the revised Rules, concessional land is now allotted
only to religious, social and charitable institutions. Disposal of land for other
institutional category namely hospital/dispensary/nursing home, higher and technical
educational institutions, community halls, club and school is through auction mode.
In so far as implementation of freeship condition for earlier allotments are concerned,
Delhi Government is required to monitor the compliance for freeship and intimate the
list of defaulters to DDA for action under lease terms.
Further Comments of Audit
Whether Ministry of Urban Development followed up with Delhi Government
regarding monitoring the compliance for freeship, and whether Delhi Govt., intimated
the defaulters list to DDA for action under lease terms? Please elaborate.
Reply
The issue of freeship has been challenged by various school societies before
the High Court of Delhi in which Union of India represented through this Ministry is
also one of the respondents along with DDA and Education Department of GNCTD.
This Ministry is well aware of the action being taken by the DDA and GNCTD for
strictly implementing the freeship scheme. The process of identifying defaulters would
be initiated when admission process for the year 2008-09 is complete i.e., after
31st July, 2008. The list of defaulters would then be furnished to DDA.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India.

CHAPTER  IV
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH REPLIES
OF THE GOVERNMENT HA VE NOT BEEN ACCEPTED BY THE
COMMITTEE AND WHICH REQUIRE REITERATION
Recommendation/Observation
As per the allotment letters issued by the Institutional Branch of DDA the
beneficiary societies are required to complete the construction of the school buildings
and commence functioning of the schools within two years from the date of taking
possession of the land. The Committee are, however concerned to note that DDA
granted extension of time for construction of school building to 27 societies on the
grounds of inadequacy of funds and gave permission to 17 societies to mortgage the
allotted land to raise loans to meet the cost of construction. Further, in 11 cases
extension of time was permitted beyond normally permissible five-year period. This
clearly shows that there were deficiencies in the selection process of beneficiary
societies both at Institutional Allotment Committee (IAC) level of Delhi Government as
well as at the Land Allotment Advisory Committee (LAAC) of DDA, which had led to
selection of inadmissible societies. The Ministry have informed the Committee that
earlier the maximum period allowed for construction of buildings on payment of
composition fee was 20 years, which has now been reduced to 10 years, for all new
allotments. However, for all surviving leases where construction has not been undertaken
even after 10 years period, the allottees have been given time limit upto 31.12.2007 to
complete the construction. The Committee are of the view that 10 years is too long a
period for construction of school buildings which would not only lead to huge time lag
between the demand and supply of number of seats for admission, but also give
enough scope for misuse of land by the beneficiary societies. The Committee, therefore,
recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development should examine  the feasibility of
further reducing the maximum period allowed for construction of school building to six
years, so that social objective of concessional land allotment can be achieved in a
reasonable time period. They also recommend that the guidelines/norms for allotment
of land to societies needs to be made more stringent as well as friendly to the cause so
as to ensure selection of only genuine charitable institutions, with sound financial
resources and which can adhere to clear cut time limit in the construction of school
buildings as well as operationalization of schools. They also desire that DDA should
carry out necessary amendment to the Nazul Rules so that societies which fail to
complete construction of school buildings and make schools functional within a
maximum period of six years of allotment, their allotment of land should be cancelled .
Provision for prohibiting transfer or resale of the allotted land to a third party should
also be made to help prevent commercial oriented societies from applying for
institutional land at concessional rates.
[Sl. No. 4, Para 108 of 42nd Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
20

21
Action Taken
As per the revised policy plots are now not allotted at concessional/zonal rates
to societies. Period of construction was reduced from 20 to 10 years. As regards the
recommendation of the Committee for reducing the period of construction from 10 to 6
years, it may be mentioned that period of construction for institutional plots has only
recently been reduced from 20 years to 10 years. Further rate of composition fee has
been recently increased, which is likely to act as deterrent for non-construction. In
view of the above factors, it is considered that the time frame for construction may not
be reduced further from 10 to 6 years. A provision prohibiting sale, transfer, assign or
otherwise part with possession of the whole or any part of the said land without
previous consent of DDA has already been incorporated in its lease terms.
Further Comments of Audit
The non-reduction of period of construction to 6 years is unacceptable because
the Committee considered the revised rate was still low and would not act as an
effective deterrent against the erring societies.
Reply
As per policy decision, period of construction has been reduced from 20 years
to 10 years, and rates of composition fee have been increased by approx. 10 times.
Sd/-
(Dr. M. M.  Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India.
Recommendation/Observation
Pursuant to the Writ Petition filed in the Delhi High Court, Delhi Government
provided a list of 178 defaulters to DDA to whom land was allotted by the DDA.
Subsequently, Directorate of Education had identified 33 schools where it had found
zero compliance of freeship norm. Out of these, DDA has cancelled the land lease of
Bal Bharti School, Rukmani Devi, Gyan Mandir, and Pinnacle School which were the
biggest defaulters with zero percent compliance to the freeship condition had
accordingly initiated proceedings for eviction under Public Premises (Eviction of
Unauthorized Occupants) Act. The Ministry, however, expressed a view that large-
scale cancellation of land allotment to the defaulting schools may not be desirable or
appropriate as it  may jeopardize the carrers of numerous children by not allowing them
to appear in the examinations. The Ministry suggested that a more practical approach
for taking action would be taking over of the management of schools by the Directorate
of Education, GNCTD in terms of Delhi School Education Act, 1973. While taking note
of the adverse impact of large-scale cancellation of land allotment to the defaulting
schools on the careers of thousands of children, nevertheless the Committee felt that
this inexcusable act of breach of freeship norms by defaulting schools warrants imposing
of penalties by DDA and the Directorate of Education GNCTD. The Committee,
therefore, desire that the Ministry of Urban Development/DDA in coordination with
the Directorate of Education, GNCTD should find ways and means to penalize the

22
defaulting schools including taking over of their management so that this will act as a
deterrent to the other schools from violating terms and conditions of concessional
land allotment.
[Sl. No. 10, Para 114 of 42nd Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Ministry of Urban Development have made a suggestion to Directorate of
Education, Government of NCT of Delhi for amending the Delhi Education Act and
Rules, 1973 to incorporate a provision stipulating adherence to the condition of freeship
as a necessary pre-condition for grant of recognition and if any school fails to comply
with the same, it would attract de-recognition and/or taking over of the management of
the school. This would provide legal backing to the enforcement of the condition of
freeship in addition to taking action in terms of the lease conditions.
Sd/-
(Dr. M. M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India.
Recommendation/Observation
The Committee have been informed that DDA had made a request to the
Government of Delhi for appointing two Government representatives on the Governing
Bodies of the beneficiary societies with a view to ensuring compliance of freeship
condition. The Committee welcome this initiative, which if properly implemented, would
help in exerting pressure on the school management in ensuring compliance of the
Government directives including freeship norm. The Committee express the hope that
the Ministry of Urban Development would pursue the matter with the Directorate of
Education, GNCTD so that they take necessary steps for amending the Delhi School
Education Act, 1973 enabling the appointment of Government representatives in the
Governing bodies of all the beneficiaries societies. The Committee also desire that
they should be apprised of the progress made in this regard.
[Sl. No. 11, para 115 of 42nd Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The amendment to incorporate the suggestion made by the Delhi Development
Authority has not been made in the Delhi School Education Act, 1973 as the issue of
freeship to economically weaker students is sub-judice.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India.
Recommendation\Observation
Under  Delhi School Education Act, 1973 inspection of schools are carried out by
the  Directorate of Education and breaches of conditions of land allotment by beneficiary
schools if  any detected, are reported to DDA for taking action. The Committee are

23
however concerned to  note that inspection of the schools had not been carried out
properly by the Directorate of  Education, Govt. of NCT of Delhi so much so that the
Directorate even could not furnish the  number of details of inspections carried out to
check the deviations/non-compliance of schools  to the condition of providing freeship
to poor children as well as to oversee the overall  functioning of the schools under its
governance. The Committee have been  informed that  during the academic session
2005-06, panel inspections were carried out in respect of nearly  126 schools under Rule
190 read with Section 24(2). The main irregularities observed in these  inspections pertained
to improper maintenance of service records of employees, employing  over-aged staff in
violation of Recruitment Rules. However, there was no reference in the  inspection report
about the status of compliance of schools to the freeship/reservation  condition, thereby
revealing a serious deficiency in the inspections carried out by the  Directorate. This
shows that the inspection reports were not properly appraised in the  Department, which
only points to the casualness and lackadaisical attitude displayed by the  Directorate of
Education, Government of NCT of Delhi to such an important aspect. The Committee
recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development should impress upon the Directorate
of Education, Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi completely revamp  their
inspection machinery so that inspection of schools are carried out at regular intervals by
the Directorate with a view to enforcing the strict adherence to the freeship norms by the
beneficiary schools. They further recommend that DDA  in consultation with the
Directorate of  Education, Government of National Capital Territory of Delhi should
examine the feasibility of  setting up a mechanism where under inspections can be jointly
carried out by DDA and the Directorate of Education in  so far as implementation of terms
and conditions of concessional  land allotment is concerned.
[Sl. No.15 Para 119 of 42nd Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
A Mechanism has already been put in place, where Directorate of Education will
forward the list of defaulter schools who are not complying with prescribed freeship
condition. For this  purpose, necessary inspection of schools will be made by GNCTD.
Further  Comments of Audit
It may  be apprised to the Committee as to how many inspections have been conducted
by GNCTD on identifying the compliance of freeship condition by defaulting schools.
Reply
The  Education  Department, GNCTD conducts inspections on regular basis
under Rule  190 of the Delhi School Education Act to ascertain whether was/is  providing
freeship to  Economically Weaker Sections. However,  the Education  Department,
GNCTD could not make  any headway in enforcing this as it was challenged and is still
pending before the High Court.  Once the matter is decided  by the  Hon'ble Court, the
monitoring of the freeship in coordination with DDA would be initiated.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint  Secretary to the Govt. of India.

24
Recommendation/Observation
The  Committee are happy to note  that the Ministry of Urban Development had
made a  proposal to the Directorate of Education, Government of NCT of Delhi
suggesting amendment  to the Delhi School Education Act, 1973 and Rules framed
thereunder   for incorporating a provision stipulating adherence to the condition of
freeship as a necessary pre-condition for  grant of recognition and any school that
fails to comply with the same, would attract derecognition and/or taking over of the
management of the school. As per this proposed amendment, any violation of terms
and conditions of allotment of land would constitute a  violation under the DSE Act
and Rules framed thereunder and  would provide legal backing to  the enforcement of
the condition of freeship in addition to taking action in terms of the lease  conditions.
The Committee welcome the proposed amendment and urge upon the  Government of
National Capital Territory of Delhi to take necessary steps for carrying out  amendment
to the  Delhi School Education Act, 1973 expeditiously so that enforcement of  freeship
norms and other conditions of concessional land allotment are implemented in  the
right earnest.
[Sl. No. 16, Para 120 of 42nd Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
As the  issue is sub-judice, necessary amendment  in the Delhi School Education
Act, 1973 could not be made. However, all efforts are being made for the early hearing
and disposal of the cases.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India.

CHAPTER V
RECOMMENDATIONS/OBSERV ATIONS IN RESPECT OF WHICH THE
GOVERNMENT HA VE FURNISHED INTERIM REPLIES
Recommendation/Obervation
The rate of composition fee levied for non-construction of buildings by the
societies within the stipulated time limit was hitherto @ Rs. 5 per square metre for plots
measuring upto 500 square in the fourth year and Rs. 10 per square metre in the fifth
year. The Committee find that the composition fee being very nominal, the same could
have been easily paid by the societies. Thus the low rate of composition fee hitherto
levied had failed to serve as an effective deterrent for delayed construction of buildings
by societies. After taking up the matter by the Committee, the composition rates have
since been revised to @ Rs. 10 and Rs. 20 respectively in the 4th and 5th years. The
Committee consider that even the revised rates are still very low and would not act as
a deterrent against the erring societies. What is surprising is the fact that in respect of
plots measuring above 500 square metres, no penal fee is charged after elapse of
stipulated time i.e. in the fourth and fifth years of allotment thereby giving
encouragement to the societies for delayed construction of buildings. This loophole
provides ample scope to certain societies to misuse their vacant plots by way of
subletting etc. by repeatedly obtaining extension of time for constructing school
buildings from DDA. With a view to ensure that Societies operationalise the schools at
the earliest and do not put the plots for misuse, the Committee recommend that DDA
should also impose composition fee in respect of institutional plots measuring above
500 square metres after elapse of stipulated time i.e. in 4th and 5th years of allotment.
The composition fee should be further increased so that it can act as a disincentive
and effective deterrent compelling the land allottees to expedite construction of school
building at the earliest. The Committee would also like DDA to apprise them of the
measures taken to identify those societies, which have misused their vacant plots after
obtaining extension of time.
[Sl. No. 5, Para 109 of 42nd Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The rate of composition fee has been increased recently vide order dated
4-1-2007. The issue of further increase of composition fee will be considered in
the next financial year i.e. 2008-09. Further the issue of charging of composition
fee for the 4th and 5th year for plots measuring above 500 sq. mts. will also be
considered at the time of considering the proposal for enhancing composition
fee from 2008-09.
As far as construction of schools within stipulated period is concerned, it may
be mentioned that out of 27 schools, only 2 school sites allotted to Laxmichand
Charitable Society (Date of possession is November, 2000) and New Krishna Education
25

26
Society  (Date of possession is September, 2004) have not been constructed. In
addition, two cases of allotment i.e. Kailash Memorial Education Society and Virendra
Ghai Education Society are under litigation, and the matter is sub-judice. The remaining
23 schools have been constructed. There was no report of misuse of vacant plots.
Further Comments of Audit
(i) Why the Ministry fails to issue direction to DDA in compliance of PAC
recommendation to further increase the composition fee in 2007-08 and impose
composition fee in respect of institutional plots measuring above 500 sq. mtrs. after
elapse of stipulated time i.e. 4th and 5th year of allotment.
Reply
The Ministry has noted that DDA enhanced the composition fee vide its order
dated 04-01-2007. Further enhancement is due from the financial year 2008-09 and
imposition of composition fee for the 4th and 5th year for plots measuring above
500 sq. mtrs. will also be considered by DDA at the time. Therefore, it is felt that any
direction from the Ministry in this regard may not be necessary.
Further Comments of Audit
(ii) The details of composition fee revised on 4th January, 2007 may kindly be
presented to the Committee for its review.
Reply
A copy of Circular No. F. (EOT)05/(I)/I dated 4-1-2007, governing the rates of
composition fee for the year 2007-08 as approved by the Ministry is attached herewith
as Annexure 'A'. As regards rates for 2008-09, the same have not yet been conveyed by
the Ministry.
Further Comments of Audit
(iii) Whether Ministry of Urban Development identify the reasons for non-
construction of two school sites allotted to Laxmichand Charitable Society (Date of
possession November, 2000) and New Krishna Education Society (Date of possession
September, 2000), please elaborate reasons alongwith action taken for non-compliance
with terms of allotment.
Reply
In the case of Laxmi Chand Charitable Society, allotment was made in
November, 2000 for construction of Sr. Secondary school at Sector-10, Dwarka. The
school is under construction which has been undertaken within the permitted time
limit of 10 years. Extension of time has been granted to the Society upto 16-11-2008 for
completion of construction.
As regards New Krishna Education Society, physical possession was handed
over in September 2004 and the Society has been granted extension of time for completion
of construction upto March 2008. The construction of school is in progress.

27
Further Comments of Audit
(iv) What mechanism has been set up by the Ministry to monitor the compliance
as per the recommendation of PAC to identify those societies, which have misused
their vacant plots after obtaining extension of time?
Reply
The allotment is governed by Nazul Rules. A specimen copy of allotment
letter is attached herewith as Annexure'B'. The terms and conditions of allotment
have to be enforced by DDA, the land owning agency. For any violations of terms
and conditions of allotment, action is initiated for cancellation of allotment by
competent authority. Subsequently, the eviction proceedings are initiated under
P.P. Act.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India.
Recommendation/Observation
The Commitee have also been informed that the Directorate of Education
Government of NCT of Delhi had issued an order dated 27th April, 2004 making it
necessary for all recognized unaided schools in Delhi to provide 20% freeship to
the students belonging to economically weaker sections irrespective of whether
the land has been allotted at concessional rate or not. Based on this order, 601
schools, which were allotted land at concessional rates by land owning agencies
as well as those, which are on the private land, were found to be defaulting for
the academic year 2004-2005. Show cause notices were issued to 81 schools with
a stipulation and their recognition will be withdrawn on account of this default.
However, further action could not be taken against the defaulting schools under
Delhi School Education Act, 1973 by the Departments as the Hon'ble High Court
of Delhi issued stay order on 04.02.05 restraining the Department to take any
punitive action against these schools for their default. In respons, the Directorate
of Education had filed a Leave Petition Appeal (LPA) against the stay order in
August, 2005. The matter is stated to be still pending before the Hon'ble High
Court. The Committee expect the Ministry of Urban Development and DDA to
approach the Court for early hearing and disposal in the matter. They would
await conclusive action in the matter.
[Sl. No.9, Para 113 of 42nd Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The Department of Education, GNCTD, pursuant to the direction of the Hon'ble
High Court, issued an order vide notification dated 25.01.2007 in supersession of the
earlier order dated 27.04.2004 and also placed advertisements in leading newspapers
informing the public about freeship and the nodal agencies to be contacted in case of
violation of orders. However, the Education Department could not enforce the order as

28
the order was again challenged before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi and the case is
still pending before the Court.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India.
Recommendation/Observation
According to the terms and conditions of allotment of land at concessional
rates, no increase in the rates of tuition fees would be effected without the prior
approval of Director of Education, Government of Delhi. The institutes were also to
follow the provisions of the Delhi School Education (DSE) Act 1973 and the rules
framed there under in this regard. The Committee are concerned to note that as of
March, 2004, as many as 343 out of 381 schools. had hiked tuition fees and other
charges without the prior approval of the Directorate of Education, GNCTD in violation
of provisions of the DSE Act, 1973. The quantum of hike ranged from 5 per cent to
44 per cent. However, show cause notices could be issued to only 185 defaulting
schools by the Directorate of Education in May, 2004 and their further reply was
awaited as of December, 2004. While no action had been taken against the remaining
158 erring schools, the so-called action taken in the cases of 42 defaulting schools,
which have responded to the show cause notice, were limited to directing the District
authorities to take action against the defaulting schools, which in turn issued reminder
notices to them and no compliance report could be compiled. What is surprising is the
fact that even after receiving information from Delhi Government for non-compliance
of terms and conditions of land allotment by beneficiary schools DDA did not take any
effective action, which is anything but inexplicable. The Committee fail to understand
as to why DDA and the Directorate of Education, GNCTD chose to remain mute
spectators and did not take action against those schools which have unauthorisedly
hiked their tuition fees till Delhi High Court took cognizance of the matter through a
writ petition. The Directorate of Education, GNCTD have informed the Committee that
under section 17(3) of Delhi School Education Act, 1973, the manager of every recognized
school shall, before the commencement of  each academic session, file with the Director
a full statement of the fees to be levied by such school during the ensuing academic
session, and except with the prior approval of the Director, no such school shall
charge, during the  academic session, any fee in excess of the fee specified by its
manager in the said statement. The Directorate of Education can take action against
the schools only if it increases the fee during the academic session in excess of the fee
structure submitted under section 17(3). What is intriguing is the fact that the reply of
the Directorate of Education is conspicuously silent with respect to the action taken
against the schools that have enhanced tuition fee without prior approval of the
Directorate of Education as pointed by Audit. The Committee cannot but conclude
that the Directorate of Education have miserably failed to implement the Delhi School
Education Act, 1973 in so far as tuition fee charged by private school is concerned.
The Committee recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development/DDA in
consultation with the Directorate of Education should analyse the reasons for this
criminal negligence and apathy dispalyed by the concerned officials in the matter and

29
also fix responsibility on the officers found responsible for this grave lapse. The
Committee hope that Ministry of Urban Development/DDA and GNCTD would draw
lessons from this episode and take suitable effective remedial measures to prevent
such grave lapses from recurring.
The Committee note that, though Section 17(3) stipulates that the private schools
cannot enhance the schools fee except with the prior approval of the Director during
an academic session, however, no guidelines/norms appears to have been laid down
for deciding the quantum of increase of tuition fees as well as justification for the same.
The Committee, therefore, recommend that the Ministry of Urban Development should
impress upon the GNCTD to formulate guidelines/parameters for permitting extent of
hike in the tuition fee by the schools and this should be reviewed and approved by a
Committee set up for this purpose, so that schools does not resort to hike in tuition
fees every years a matter of routine.
[Sl. No. 12, Para 116 of 42nd Report of PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The matter regarding freeship quota for schools built on land allotted on
concessional terms is currently sub-judice before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi. The
Govt. will issue suitable guidelines indicating the extent of increase that can be made
by private schools functioning on land allotted at concessional rates by Govt., on
disposal of all the cases pending in the Court.
Further Comments of Audit
(i) Whether Ministry of Urban Development in consultation with the Directorate
of  Education analyse the reasons for negligence to implement the Delhi School Education
Act 1973 in so far as tuition fee charge by private schools is concerned, please elaborate.
(ii)What is the precise mechanism instituted now to ensure monitoring of the
term of allotment? Who would be responsible for any failures in monitoring or initiating
action in future?
Reply
As per Section 17(3) of Delhi School Education Act, 1973, "the Manager of every
recognized school shall, before the commencement of each academic session, file with
the Director a full statement of the fees to be levied by such during the ensuring
academic session, and except with the prior approval of the Director, no such school
shall charge, during that academic session any fee in excess of the fee specified by its
manager in the said statement".
The issue regarding enforcement of terms of allotment is still pending in Hon'ble
High Court of Delhi. Monitoring mechanism for enforcement of these conditions would
be initiated only after the matter is decided by Hon'ble Court.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India.

30
Recommendation/Observeration
The obnoxious practice of charging huge money from  admission seekers as
'donation' fee on one pretext or the  other is widely  prevalent amongst  the private
schools in Delhi leading  to widespread  commercialization of education in the capital.
The Committee are of the  considered view that these  schools are  not supposed to be
run on commercial lines and collect  hefty 'donation' fee in the guise of various  forms
of Development Charges etc. but act as a  charitable societies with the social obligation
to help less privileged sections of the society in   the form of providing  a reasonable
freeships.  The Committee recommend that Government should take necessary  step in
consultation and cooperation of GNCTD to prohibit private  schools  especially  the
ones  which  were allotted  land  at concessional  rates  by DDA from  accepting
donation fee from admission seekers and take  stringent action against those schools
indulging  in such  malignant practice. The Committee  also recommended  that
Government in  coordination  with GNCTD should  lay down criteria/norms specifying
clearly the limits of  development charges  and other  charges that can be collected by
the various schools form  the parents.
[Sl. No. 18 Para 122  of 42nd Report PAC (Fourteenth Lok Sabha)]
Action Taken
The recommendation of the Committee has been brought to the notice of the
Education Department of Government of Delhi and Delhi Development Authority.
However, the matter regarding freeships  quota in schools built on land allotted at
concessional terms is currently sub-judice before the Hon'ble High Court of Delhi.
Sd/-
(Dr. M.M. Kutty)
Joint Secretary to the Govt. of India.
N
EW DELHI; PROF. VIJAY KUMAR MALHOTRA,
December, 2008  Chairman,
Agrahayana, 1930  (Saka) Public Accounts Committee.

ANNEXURE  A
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
LAND COSTING WING
No. F1(EOT)/05/LSB(I)/I Dated 4.1.2007
CIRCULAR
SUBJECT: Rates of Composition Fee for delay in construction on Residential, Industrial
  Commercial, Institutional and Cooperative Group  Housing Societies Plots.
In supersession to all previous orders/instructions on the subject, Lt. Governor,
Delhi is pleased to revise the existing rates of composition fee for extension of time for
period of construction on plots as annexed herewith.
2. In cases where demand has been raised but the payment has not been received
as per the terms  of demand letter the composition fee shall be reworked as per the
latest policy.
4. With effect from 18.6.2006, as per press notice already issued by DDA, the
maximum  permissible period for construction of various categories of plots allotted or
auctioned by DDA shall be limited to 10 years. In addition, in all surviving leases, as
already circulated vide circular of even No. dated 21.7.2006 of OSD(Lands), where   the
construction has not been undertaken even  after the lapse of 10 years from the date of
possession, last opportunity has been given to complete the construction by 31.12.2007.
Failure to complete construction by 31.12.2007 will result in determination of lease/
resumption of plot by DDA without any further notice.
5. Others terms and conditions as contained in Circular No. AO (Proj)/ Misc/
Composition/Pt-I/36 dated 31.10.1995, 24.7.2001 and No. F2(2)/2005/Cordn/LD/99 dated
22.3.2005 shall remain the same.
6. The revised rate of composition fee will come into force from the date of issue
of this circular.
Sd/-
[PRAHLAD SINGH]
Director (Land Costing)
Encl: As above.
Copy to:
1. Commissioner (LD)/Commissioner(LM)
2. Director (CL)/Director(Lands)/Director (RL), OSD(Lands)/Director(Building)/
Director (Audit)/Director(Vigilance)
3. DD(LABR)/DD(LSB)/(LAB)Rohini/DD(CL)/DD(IL)/DD(Indtl)DD(GH&CS)
4. All Sr. AOs/AOs in Land Costing Wing.
31

32
Copy for kind information to:
1. Secretary to LG
2. Vice Chairman, DDA
3. Finance Member, DDA
4. Principal Commissioner, DDA
5. Principal Commissioner-cum-Secretary, DDA
6. Commissioner (Planning), DDA
7. Chief Legal Advisor, DDA
8. CAO, DDA
9. Director (Delhi Division), MoUD
RATES OF COMPOSITION FEE FOR DELAY IN CONSTURCTION ON
RESIDENTIAL, INDUSTRIAL COMMERCIAL, INSTITUTIONAL AND
COOPERA TIVE GROUP  HOUSING SOCIETIES PLOTS
Rates in Rs. per sqm
Years Resi. Industrial Commercial
Low Turn Over High Turn Over
LSC/CSC CC/DC/FC
1. Nil Nil Nil Nil
2. Nil Nil Nil Nil
3. Nil Nil Nil Nil
4. 10 10 10 10
5. 20 20 20 20
6. 100 120 180 360
7. 110 130 190 380
8. 120 140 200 400
9. 130 150 220 440
10. 140 160 240 480
11. 160 180 270 540
12. 170 190 280 560
13. 180 200 300 600
14 190 210 310 620
15. 200 220 330 660
16. 250 290 440 880
17. 260 300 450 900
18. 270 310 460 920
19. 280 320 480 960
20. 290 330 500 1000
21. 380 440 660 1320
22. 390 450 680 1360
23. 400 460 690 1380
24. 410 470 700 1400
25. 420 480 720 1440

33
Institutional CGHS
Upto 500 sqm Above 500 sqm
1. Nil Nil Nil
2. Nil Nil Nil
3. Nil Nil Nil
4. 10 Nil 10
5. 20 Nil 20
6. 100 100 100
7. 110 110 110
8. 120 120 120
9. 130 130 130
10. 140 140 140
11. 160 160 160
12. 170 170 170
13. 180 180 180
14. 190 190 190
15. 200 200 200
16. No Exten. 250 250
17. No Exten. 260 260
18. No Exten. 270 270
19. No Exten. 280 280
20. No Exten. 290 290
Sd/-
Sr. AO (Projects)

ANNEXURE B
DELHI DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY
INSTITUTIONAL BRANCH I.N.A.
 VIKAS SADAN,
No. F.18(62) 95/IL/374 IIND FLOOR,
BLOCK 'A'
To,
The President,
Arihant Civic Services Society (Regd.),
14/105, Rani Jhansi Road,
New Delhi-110055.
Sub: Allotment of land to Arihant Civic Services Society  for Construction of a Senior
Secondary School
Dear Sir,
I am directed to inform you that it has been decided to allot on perpetual lease
hold basis a plot of land measuring  1.6 Hect. One point Six Hect. (16000 Sqmtrs) for
running a Nursery/`Middle Sr. Sec. School at Dwarka, Sector-9 on usual terms and
conditions which shall also included the Following:—
1. The Arihant Civic Services Society (Regd.) shall be required  to pay the cost
of land measuring 6400 Sqmtr. per acre alongwith annual ground  rent @ 50
Lacs + 69% P.A. provisionally of the total premium 2
2  The land  measuring 9600 Sqmtr acres/Sq.Mtrs/Hect is allotted to the society
for play field on temporary basis on payment of nominal ground rent @
5000/ + 69% enhanced per acre per anunum.
3. The ground rent of the land  shall be paid by the said society from the date
of handing over the possession of the plot/land.
4. The area allotted for play ground shall  be kept open and no structure of
even temporary nature shall be raised on the land.
5. The Arihant Civic Services Society (Regd.) shall use the land to running a
Senior Secondary School failing which the  land alongwith the structure
raised thereon will be resumed by the Govt./D.D.A.
6. The cost of land as demanded is provisional. The Society shall given an
undertaking on Rs. 2/- stamp paper duly attested from 1st Class Magistrate/
Notary Public  to the  effect that the difference as cost of  land as and when
decided by the Govt. of India and DDA shall be payable by the Society.
6 A—The land meant for play field would be allowed to be use  in non  school
hours by the local children.
34
1
2 .

35
B—The entry to the field would be from  out side and not in side the school.
C—5% of the total strength of the students would be given admission to if
 recommended by the Govt. of Delhi and subject to normal test. Such
 students should be allowed freeship  admission based on income
 criterion as decided by the Govt. of Delhi.
7. The society shall shift the present existing school within two years from the
date of handing over the possession of the plot.
8. The D.D.A. reserve its right to alter any terms and conditions on its direction.
9. The land shall be used by the Society for the construction of Nursery/Sr.
Sec./Middle School and for no other purpose whatever. No residence is
permitted except a small hut for chowkidar.
10. The  Building plan should be got approved from the local body/s DDA
before undertaking any construction of the land.
11. The Society shall complete the construction of school building on the land
within a period of  two years from the date of handing over the possession
of the land.
12. The land shall not be transferred/subleased to any other organisation/deptt.
by the Society without prior permission of the D.D.A. obtained in writing.
13. The perp. Lease shall be executed by the Society in their own cost as and
when called upon to do so.
14. The society shall provide fencing and boundary wall immediately after taking
over the possession to prevent the encroachment.
15. The person attending the school shall be required to take part in any religion/
institution or to attend any religious worship without his/her consent and
no citizen shall be deprived of admission to the school on ground of religion,
face, caste, language or any of them.
16. In the even of derecognition of school by the Dte. of Education of Delhi
Admn. or any other competent authority the lessee shall be required to pay
premium for the land allotted at the market rate prevailing on the date of
de-recognition of the school or the land with superstructure fixtures, fitting
etc. shall revert to the Govt. of payment of compensation as may be decided
by the Govt.
17  The school shall not increase the rates of tuition fee without the prior
sanction of  the Dte. of Education Delhi Admn. and shall follow the provsions
of Delhi School Education Act/Rules, 1973 and other instructions issued
from time to time.
18. The Arihant Civic Services Society (Regd.) shall ensure that percentage of
freeship from the tuition fee as laid down under rules by the Delhi Admn.
from time to time strictly complied. They will ensure admission to the student
belonging to weaker sections to the extent 25% and grant freeship to them.

36
19.  The Delhi Admn. will have two nominees on the Governing body of the
society.
20. The Society shall not refuse admission to the resident of locality.
21. The Society shall follow the instructions of the Dte. of Education for minimum/
maximum enrolment of students in the school new building constructed on
land allotted by Govt./D.D.A.
22. If the allotment is cancelled for breach of and conditions of the allotment.
the possessions plot/land with building, if any will be handed the DDA by
the allotted  on the date and given cancellation letter/notice.
23.  If the above terms and conditions are acceptable you, the acceptance
thereof with attested under be sent to the undersigned alongwith in favour
of  D.D.A. for Rs. 1,37,17,104/- (premium Rs. 1,33,62,985/- Ground rent and
annual licence fee/ground rent of playground within 60 days from the date
of issue of allot demand letter. The said amt. can also be deposited in the
bank counter situated in INA office complete copy of the same may be sent
to this office for deposit the demand alongwith acceptance letter taking
within 60 days from the date of issue cum allotment letter.
24. In case the payment and acceptance letter with undertaking is not received
within the stipulated above, it will be presumed that you are interested in
the allotment of the land and offer of allotment will stand withdrawn.
Your faithfully
Sd/-
Director (DD)
Copy forwarded for information to:—
1. Dte. of Education (CW), Govt. of NCT. of Delhi Sectt., Delhi.
2. Sr. A.O. (IL).
Details of Demand.
Premium of the land measuring Rs. 1,33,62,985
6400 Sqmtr. Acres/Hect/Sq.Mtrs
@ Rs. 50 Lacs+69% Provisionally.
Ground rent @ 2     % P.A. of the Rs. 3,34,075
Total premium.
Annual licence fee for the land Rs. 20,044
measuring 9600 Swmtr. Acres/Hect./
Sq mtrs for play field @ 5000+69%
per annum
TOTAL Rs. 1,37,17,104
1
2

PART II
MINUTES OF THE TENTH SITTING OF THE PUBLIC ACCOUNTS COMMITTEE
(2008-2009) HELD ON 1ST DECEMBER, 2008
The Committee sat from 1130 hrs. to 1150 hrs. on 1st December, 2008 in Committee
Room "B" Parliament House Annexe, New Delhi.
PRESENT
Prof. Vijay Kumar Malhotra-Chairman
MEMBERS
Lok Sabha
2. Shri Khagen Das
3. Shri P.S. Gadhavi
4. Shri Shailendra Kumar
5. Shri Bhartruhari Mahtab
6. Prof. M. Ramadass
7. Shri Sita Ram Singh
8. Shri Kharabela Swain
9. Shri Tarit Baran Topdar
Rajya Sabha
10.  Shri Raashid Alvi
11. Dr. K. Malaisamy
12. Sardar Tarlochan Singh
S
ECRETARIA T
1.  Shri S.K. Sharma — Secretary
2. Shri Gopal Singh — Director
3. Shri M.K. Madhusudhan — Deputy Secretary-II
4. Shri Sanjeev Sharma — Deputy Secretary-II
Officers of the Office of the Comptroller and Auditor General of India
1. Ms. Malashri Prasad — DG (AB)
2. Shri Jayanti Prasad — Pr. Director (INDT)
37
37

38
2. At the outset, the Chairman PAC welcomed the members and Audit officers to
the sitting. The Committee then took up the following draft Action Taken Reports for
consideration and adoption:
(i) Draft Report on Action taken on 42nd Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)
relating to "Allotment of Land to Educational Institutions by Delhi
Development Authority", and
(ii) Draft Report on Action Taken on 57th Report of PAC (14th Lok Sabha)
relating to "Under Valuation due to Adoption of Lower Mutually Agreed
Price".
3. After some deliberation, the Committee adopted the same with some minor
changes and authorized the Chairman to finalise and present these Reports in the light
of factual verification done by the Audit.
4. The Committee decided to hold their next sitting on 8th December, 2008.
The Committee then adjourned.
GMGIPMRND-4520LS-20-3-2009.

PARLIAMENTARY PUBLICATIONS CAN ALSO BE OBTAINED FROM THE
FOLLOWING  AUTHORISED  AGENTS:—
Sl.No. Name of Agent Sl .No. Name of Agent
ANDHRA  PRADESH
1. M/s. Ashok Book Centre, Benz Circle,
V asavya Nagar, Vijaywada-520006.
(A.P)
BIHAR
2. M/s. Progressive Book Centre, Zila
School, Pani Tanki Chowk, Ramma,
Muzaffarpur-842002. (Bihar)
DELHI
3. M/s. Jain Book Agency, C-9, Prem
House, Connaught Place,
P .B. No. 1113, New Delhi-110001.
4. M/s. Bookwell, 2/72, Sant Nirankari
Colony, Kingsway Camp,
Delhi-110009.
5. M/s. Rajendra Book Agency,
IV-D-50, Lajpat Nagar, Old Double
Storey, New Delhi-110024.
(T. Nos. 26412362 & 26412131)
6. M/s. Central News Agency Pvt. Ltd.,
P-23, Connaught Circus,
New Delhi-110001.
7. The Manager, M/s. Books India
Corporation, Publishers, Importers &
Exporters, L-27, Shastri Nagar,
Delhi-110052.
8. M/s. Sangam Book Depot, LG-3,
Akarshan Bhawan, 23, Ansari Road,
Darya Ganj, New Delhi-110002.
9. M/s. Biblia Impex Pvt. Ltd., 2/18,
Ansari Road, New Delhi-110002.
(T.No. 23262515)
10. M/s. Universal Book Traders, 80,
Gokhale Market, Opp. New Courts,
Delhi-110054. (T. No. 23911966)
11. M/s. Seth & Co., Room No. 31 D,
Block-B, Delhi High Court, Sher Shah
Road, New Delhi-110003.
12. M/s. Dhanwantra Medical & Law
House, 592, Lajpat Rai Market,
Delhi-110006. (T. No. 23866768)
13. M/s. Jayna Book Depot, Chowk
Chhapparwala, Bank Street, Karol
Bagh, New  Delhi-110005.
14. M/s. Standard Book Co., 125,
Municipal Market, Connaught Place,
P.B. No. 708, New Delhi-110001.
(T. No. 23411919)
15. M/s. D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd., A/15-17,
Mohan Garden, Najafgarh Road,
New Delhi-110059.
16. M/s. Vijay Book Service, C-D/123/C,
Pitam Pura, New Delhi-110034.
MADHYA  PRADESH
17. M/s. Suvidha Law House, 28, Malviya
Nagar, Roshanpura, Bhopal-462003.
MAHARASHTRA
18. M/s. Usha Book Depot, 585/A, Chitra
Bazar, Khan House, P.B. No. 2621,
Mumbai-400002.
19. M/s. Jaina Book Agency (India),
649-A, Girgaum Road, Opp.
2nd Dhobi Talao Lane, Mumbai-400002.
PUDUCHERRY
20. Editor of Debates, Legislative
Assembly Department,
Puducherry-605001.
TAMIL NADU
21. M/s. M.M. Subscription Agencies,
123, Third Street, Tatabad,
Coimbatore-641012.
22. M/s. C. Sitaraman & Co., 73/37,
Royappettah High Road,
Chennai-600014.
UTTAR PRADESH
23. M/s. Law Publishers, Sardar Patel
Marg, P.B. No. 1077, Allahabad (U.P).
24. M/s. Ram Advani Bookseller, Mayfair
Building, Hazrat Ganj,  GPO Box
No. 154, Lucknow-226001.
PRINTED BY THE GENERAL MANAGER, GOVT. OF INDIA PRESS, MINTO ROAD, NEW DELHI.